Even what we call the perfectly consonant chord of C major, _e.g._,
[Music] would be slightly qualified and colored by the B-flat, and
this effect has actually been utilized by Chopin in the final cadence
of his Prelude in F major, No. 23, _e.g._

[Music]

In this example the E-flat must be very delicately accented and _both_
pedals freely used.

Let it be clearly understood, therefore, that the damper
pedal--popularly but erroneously called the "loud pedal"--has nothing
to do with "noise" as such. Its purpose is to amplify and color the
waves of sound and these waves may vary all the way from _pp_ to _ff_.
The dynamic gradation of pianoforte tone is caused by the amount of
force with which the hammer strikes the wires; and this power is
applied by the attack and pressure of the fingers. The damper pedal
will, to be sure, reinforce fortissimo effects, but logically it is
only a _means_ of _reinforcement_ and should never be used so that a
mere "roar of sound" is produced. The normal pianoforte tone, however,
is that brought forth in connection with the damper pedal, and only to
gain an effect of intentional coolness and dryness do we see in
pianoforte literature the direction "senza pedal"; passages so marked
being often most appropriate as a strong contrast to highly colored
ones.[219]

[Footnote 219: For a complete and illuminating treatise on the pedals
and their artistic use, see the aforesaid two volumes of _Pedal
Studies_ by Arthur Whiting (G. Schirmer, New York).]

An important adjunct of the instrument, though even less intelligently
used, is the pedal employed by the left foot; that popularly known as
the "soft pedal," but of which the technical name is the "una corda"
pedal. By this device on a grand pianoforte the whole key-board is
shifted from left to right, so that the hammers strike but _two_ wires
in each group of three, and the third wire of the set is left free to
vibrate sympathetically. Thus a very etherial, magical quality of tone
is produced, especially in the upper ranges of the instrument. In the
middle register, passages played forte or fortissimo will have a
richness comparable to the G string of a violin. The effect is
analogous to that of a viol d'amour which has, as is well known
(stretched underneath the strings, which produce the actual tone) a
set of additional strings, freely vibrating. Although this "una
corda"[220] pedal may be used in a dynamic sense to reduce, as it
were, the size of the instrument, its chief purpose is coloristic,
_i.e._, to make possible a _special quality_ of tone. This statement
is proved by directions in pianoforte literature as far back as
Beethoven, in whose Sonatas we find the dynamic marks of _f_ and _ff_
coupled with the proscribed use of the una corda pedal. In any case,
this left-foot pedal should not be abused; for, just because the tone
quality produced thereby is so beautiful and characteristic, it soon
becomes, if constantly employed, rather cloying. The dynamic gradation
of tone is primarily a matter for the control of the fingers, _i.e._,
the touch. The damper pedal is for sonority and color; the una corda
for special shades, and all three factors--touch and the two
pedals--are combined in pianistic effects which only a trained
technique and artistic judgment can regulate.[221]

[Footnote 220: The term dates from the period when this pedal
controlled three shifts: una corda, due corde and tre corde; the
hammer striking respectively one, two or three strings. The whole
mechanism is well implied in the German word _Verschiebung_, _i.e._,
the shoving along--so frequent in Schumann's works, _e.g._, the middle
part of his _Vogel als Prophet_ from the _Waldscenen_, op. 82, No. 7.]

[Footnote 221: American pianofortes also have a middle pedal called
the "sustaining pedal," by which tones in the lower register may be
prolonged. It has not proved to be of great value, though there are
occasional passages, _e.g._, the closing measures of the second
movement of César Franck's _Violin Sonata_, where it may be
effectively employed.]

Even a slight analysis of Chopin's style proves that it is based upon
logical inferences, drawn from the series of overtones as they are
generated and reinforced by the very nature of the pianoforte. From
the wide spacing of the lower tones of the series Chopin derived the
extended grouping of his arpeggios, _e.g._,

[Music]

[Music: Prelude, No. 19]

so that the _chord_ of the _10th_, instead of the former grouping
within the octave, may be considered the basis of his harmonic scheme.
By this means a great gain was made in richness and sonority. Another
striking feature of Chopin's style is found in those groups of
spray-like, superadded notes with which the melody is embellished. It
is evident, in many cases at least, that these tones are not merely
embroidery in the ordinary sense. Rather do they represent a
reinforcement of the overtones, ideally or actually present, in
connection with bass tones and chords used in the lower part of the
musical fabric. As a striking example[222] see the long series of
descending non-harmonic tones in the Coda of the _B major Nocturne_,
op. 9, No. 3, and note the delicate colors in the closing arpeggio
chord (to be played with a free use of both pedals).

[Footnote 222: For a commentary on this passage see D.G. Mason's essay
on Chopin in _The Romantic Composers_.]

[Music]

In general, Chopin's style is homophonic--wondrous lyric melodies
which seem to float on waves of richly colored sound. But there is
also much subtly used polyphony, _i.e._, delightful phrases in inner
voices and imitative effects between the different parts. In
comparison, however, with Schumann's style (which is largely on a
polyphonic basis) Chopin is a decidedly homophonic composer.[223] A
great deal of interesting and instructive reading on Chopin is
available and the following works are especially recommended: _Chopin,
the Man and his Music_ by Huneker; the _Life of Chopin_ by Niecks; the
essay on Chopin in Mason's _Romantic Composers_ and in Hadow's
_Studies in Modern Music_; the volume on Chopin by Elié Poirée in the
series _Les Musiciens Célèbres_; and the same by Louis Laloy in the
series _Les Maîtres de la Musique_; the _Life_ by Liszt (well known
and most valuable as coming from a contemporary and brother musician);
finally a somewhat rhapsodic essay by H.T. Finck in _Chopin and Other
Essays_.

[Footnote 223: For a detailed analysis of many special features of
style see the volume by Edgar Stillman Kelly, _Chopin the Composer_.]

We select, as being thoroughly representative, the following works for
comment: the first Prelude, the A-flat major Étude, the F-sharp minor
Mazurka, the E-flat minor Polonaise, the Barcarolle and the C-sharp
minor Scherzo.[224]

[Footnote 224: To save space, no one of these pieces except the
Barcarolle is given in the Supplement, since they are readily
accessible. The _Barcarolle_, however, is given in order to make it
better known; for although it is one of the most inspired and
beautifully expressed of all Chopin's works, it is heard comparatively
seldom. The best editions of the works are those of Kullak, Mikuli and
Klindworth.]


PRELUDE IN C MAJOR, OP. 28, NO. 1.

This Prelude, the first of the set of 24, is an excellent example of
the sonority Chopin gained from widely extended chords in the bass; by
the use--characteristically bold--of dissonances (measures 13-20), and
by the sensuous richness of the closing measures, in which a wonderful
wave of sound is produced through the damper pedal, in connection with
the blending of the tonic, dominant and subdominant chords. The
prelude is a kind of intensified Bach and may well be compared with
that prelude in the same key which begins the immortal well-tempered
Clavichord. All the Preludes, for their poetic import, finished style
and pianistic effect, are masterpieces of the first rank. Schumann
well says of them: "They are sketches, eagle's feathers, all strangely
intermingled. But in every piece we recognize the hand of Frédéric
Chopin; he is the boldest, the proudest poet-soul of his time."


ÉTUDE IN A-FLAT MAJOR, OP. 25, NO. 1.

This étude, deservedly popular, may be considered the example _par
excellence_ of Chopin's style. The lyric beauty of the melody, the
fascinating modulations, the shades of color alike justify the
following rhapsodic comments of Schumann, "Imagine that an Aeolian
harp possessed all the musical scales, and that the hand of an artist
were to cause them to intermingle in all sorts of fantastic
embellishments, yet in such a way as to leave everywhere audible a
deep fundamental tone and a soft, continuously singing upper voice,
and you will get about the right idea. But it would be an error to
think that Chopin, in playing this étude, permitted every one of the
small notes to be distinctly heard. It was rather an undulation of the
A-flat major chord, here and there thrown aloft by the pedal.
Throughout the harmonies one always heard in great tones a wondrous
melody, while once only, in the middle of the piece, besides that
chief song, a tenor voice became prominent. After the étude a feeling
came over one as of having seen in a dream a beatific picture which,
when already half awake, one would gladly once more recall."


MAZURKA IN F-SHARP MINOR, OP. 6, NO. 1.

As Franz Liszt says in his life of Chopin, "The Mazurka is not only a
dance, it is a national poem, and like all poems of conquered nations,
is shaped so as to let the blazing flames of patriotic feeling shimmer
out through the transparent veil of popular melody." The chief
peculiarity of the Mazurka (which is always in triple rhythm, with a
latitude in speed from Presto to Mesto) is the scheme of
accentuation--the normal accent on the first beat being systematically
transferred to the second and third beats. We also find in the Mazurka
frequent indications for the use of the so-called "tempo rubato," a
proper conception of which is so essential in the performance of
Chopin's music. Tempo rubato--so often abused!--literally meaning
borrowed time, is simply free rhythm emancipated from rigid,
scholastic bonds. As Huneker well says, "Chopin must be played in
curves" with emotional freedom; just as the heart, when excited,
increases the speed of its pulsations, and in moments of calm and
depression slows down. The jerky, really unrhythmical playing of
certain performers reminds us of a person suffering from _palpitation_
of the heart. Liszt's description of the rubato is most suggestive: "A
wind plays in the leaves, life unfolds and develops beneath them, but
the tree remains the same." In Chopin, accordingly, the ground rhythm
should always be preserved, though varied with subtle, and yet logical
fluctuations.


POLONAISE IN E-FLAT MINOR, OP. 26, NO. 11.

The Polonaise[225] is the great national dance of the Poles; an
impassioned and yet stately pageant in which, as Liszt says, "The
noblest traditional feelings of ancient Poland are represented." This
dance--or rather, processional march--is always in triple rhythm and
based on a definite rhythmic formula: either [Music] or [Music]. The
frequent feminine endings are also a characteristic feature, _e.g._,
the cadence in the well known military Polonaise in A major:

[Music]

To return to the example being considered,--it is in Three-part form
(A, B, A, with Coda) the first part in the minor mode; the second part
beautifully contrasted by being in B major--introduced by the implied
enharmonic change from E-flat to D-sharp. This first part, remarkable
for its passionate, headlong impetuosity, should dispel any idea that
Chopin was a weak sentimentalist. Although of a delicate constitution
he certainly had a fiery soul. The second part, sotto voce--note the
feminine endings--reminds us of the muffled music of a military band
as it passes by.

[Footnote 225: For an account of its origin see the chapter in
Huneker's book and the article on the Polonaise in Grove's
Dictionary.]


BARCAROLLE IN F-SHARP MAJOR, OP. 60.

This composition, in many ways the most wonderful single piece we have
from Chopin, is the quintessence of his genius. It seems, in fact, to
contain everything: appealing melodies, wealth of harmony, bold
dissonances (note in particular the 6th and 7th measures of the Coda),
brilliant embellishments; and withal, it is written in a pianistic
style which, for richness and warmth of color, is quite unsurpassed.
It is also most sincerely conceived, intensifying the suggestiveness
of the descriptive title. Would that objective program music were
always so true to life and to the real nature of music! It is in free
three-part form, the first part of a calm nature in which we are
rocked on gently undulating waves; a more rhythmic second part where,
as Kullak says, the bass seems to suggest the monotonous steadiness of
oar-strokes; an interlude, marked "dolce sfogato," introduced by some
delightful modulations, as if in a quiet nook the poet were dreaming
of the beauties of love and nature; an impassioned return to the chief
subject, together with a partial presentation of the middle portion;
and finally a long and brilliant coda. The composition is unique in
romantic literature for its power to arouse the imagination, or, as
Schumann so well says, "to set people romancing for themselves."


SCHERZO IN C-SHARP MINOR, OP. 39.

The four Scherzos, for passion and eloquence, rank among Chopin's most
characteristic works, though it seems impossible to trace a logical
correspondence between the former classic meaning of the term
"Scherzo" and the contents revealed to us in these poems; save that
they are all in triple rhythm, hence on a dance-form basis. As Niecks
well says, "There is in them neither frolicsomeness nor humor"--such,
for example, as we find in Beethoven's Scherzos--and he suggests that
"Capriccio" might be a less misleading designation. But, however
inexplicable the title which Huneker thinks Chopin may have applied in
serious jest, there is no doubt of the uncompromising dignity of the
utterance, and there is often a grim irony, a wayward scorn, which a
liberal interpretation might well consider attributes of humor. These
were marked traits in Chopin's nature, and the Scherzos are their
revelation in terms of music. Schumann's well-known comment is
apropos--"How is gravity to clothe itself if jest goes about in dark
veils?" This Scherzo (Presto con fuoco) is in extended three-part
form; the dominant note of the first part being one of feverish
agitation, which expresses itself in spasmodic outbursts. The second
part, with its broad cantabile melody of a hymn-like character,
reveals a calmer mood. The last note of each phrase is adorned
throughout with lovely coloristic embellishments. After a return to
the first theme, the second part is also repeated; this time with
striking modulatory changes which strongly resemble the mood of
Wotan's Farewell, in the third Act of Wagner's _Valkyrie_. A long and
fiery coda of new thematic material closes the work. The major ending
is like a shaft of light dispelling storm-tossed clouds.

Chopin's works are so instinct with genius and have proved to be so
immortal that they may well be considered as ideal witnesses to the
triumph of quality over mere quantity or sensational display. To-day,
when we suffer from musical bombast, their refined message is of
special significance.




CHAPTER XV

BERLIOZ AND LISZT. PROGRAMME MUSIC


There is no doubt that Hector Berlioz (1803-1869), however varied the
appeal of his music to different temperaments, is an artistic
personality to be reckoned with; one not to be ticketed and laid on
the shelf. Although a century and more has elapsed since his birth the
permanent value of his music is still debated, often amusingly enough,
by those who seem unaware that, whatever the theoretical rights of the
case, in practice his principles are the reigning ones in modern
music. As Berlioz stands as the foremost representative of program
music and never wrote anything without a title, it is certain that
before his music or influence can be appreciated, the mind must be
cleared of prejudice and we must recognize that modern program music
is a condition--an artistic fact, not a theory--and that the tendency
towards specific, subjective expression (whether manifested in song,
opera or symphonic poem) is a dominant one among present day
composers. It is true that all music is the expression in tones of the
imagination of the composer; true, also, that music must fulfil
certain conditions of its own being. But imaginations differ. That of
Berlioz, for example, was quite a new phenomenon; and as for the
working principles of musical composition, they are as much subject to
modification as any other form of human experimentation. Berlioz,
himself, says that he never intended to subvert the laws of music,
only to make a new and individual use of them. As he was no abstract
maker of music, his autobiography--one of the most fascinating in the
history of art, only to be compared with that of Benvenuto
Cellini--should be familiar to all who would penetrate the secrets of
his style. Berlioz's compositions, in fact, are more specifically
autobiographic than those of any other notable musician. Both in his
music and his literary works are the same notes of passionate
insistence on his own point of view, of radical dislike for accepting
conditions as they were (he says of himself that he loved to make the
barriers crack) and of fondness for brilliant outward effect. In
considering Berlioz, one is always reminded of Matthew Arnold's lines
on Byron, who resembles Berlioz so closely.

    "He taught us little; but our soul
    Had felt him, like the thunder's roll.
    With shivering heart the strife we saw
    Of passion with eternal law;
    And yet with reverential awe
    We watch'd the fount of fiery life
    Which served for that Titanic strife."

Only realize that Berlioz's _Fantastic Symphony_ was composed but
twenty-one years after Haydn's death, and compare the simple,
self-centered Haydn with the restless, wide-visioned Berlioz, of a
mentality positively omnivorous; who, in addition to his musical
achievements, was a brilliant critic and _littérateur_, a man of
travel and wide acquaintance with the world. Then indeed you will
appreciate what an enormous change had come over music. A mere mention
of the authors from whom Berlioz drew his subjects: Shakespeare,
Goethe, Byron, Scott, Virgil, Hugo, shows the wide range of his
reading and the difference in output which would inevitably result.
The previous impersonal attitude towards music is shown by the very
names of compositions which, broadly speaking (till the beginning of
the 19th century) were seldom more than Symphony, Sonata, or Quartet,
No. so and so; while the movements, in an equally mechanical way, were
known by the designations of tempo: allegro, adagio, andante,
etc.--those "senseless terms," as Beethoven himself says. Beginning
pre-eminently with Berlioz, composers have had more highly cultivated
imaginations, much more to say; and the wider range of emotion
resulting therefrom has necessitated differences of form and
treatment. A frequent misconception on the part of the layman is that
worthy music should be so constructed that the hearer be spared all
mental exertion. As long as it was certain that a composer would
present just so many themes in a prescribed order and treated in the
routine fashion, listening to music was a comparatively easy task.
Since Berlioz, music has made ever greater demands on the hearer; who
only when his receptivity is of an equal degree of cultivation with
the creative power of the composer, can grasp the full meaning of the
music. The first step, therefore, toward an appreciation of Berlioz is
to recognize the peculiar, picturesque power of his imagination,
which was of an entirely new order, and may be called musico-poetic in
distinction from purely musical activity. This form of double
consciousness is equally necessary on the part of the hearer. As
Debussy, the modern French composer, so well says, people often do not
understand or enjoy new music because it differs from "une musique"
_i.e._, from a conventional and unvarying type which they have in
their mind. The real effect of Berlioz's "_Carnaval Romain_" Overture,
to take a simple example, is to complement and intensify the mental
picture which any well-read person--or better still, any one who has
actually visited Rome--will have of this characteristic incident in
Italian life. If the work be considered merely as abstract music,
notwithstanding the stimulation and delight caused by the rhythmic
vitality and by the orchestral effects, the real poetic purpose of the
composer remains unfulfilled. This peculiar quality of Berlioz was
partly the result of his fiery excitable temperament and partly the
reactive effect of the environment in which he found himself. What an
amazing group in Paris (beginning about 1830) was that with which he
was associated! De Musset, de Vigny, Liszt, Rossini, Meyerbeer,
Balzac, Dumas, Chopin, Heine, Delacroix, Géricault: young men
representing every art and several nationalities, all under the lead
of Hugo, that prince of Romanticists; their object being--revolt from
conventional standards and a complete expression of their own
personalities. Hugo, as he says in the famous preface to Cromwell, was
tearing down the plaster which hides the facade of the fair temple of
art; Dumas had just demolished Racine; Géricault and Delacroix, by
their daring conceptions, were founding our modern school of painting.
Into this maelstrom of revolution, Berlioz--he of the flaming locks,
"that hairy Romantic" as Thackeray calls him--flung himself with
temperamental ardor; for he was a born fighter and always in
opposition to someone. The audacity and dramatic energy of his
compositions are but the natural result of the tendencies of the
period. Berlioz's early career is of extreme interest to us
English-speaking people, because the first strong stimulus to his
imagination came from his acquaintance with the dramas of Shakespeare.
In 1827, some of the dramas, (such as Hamlet, and Romeo and Juliet)
were played in Paris by an English company, and their effect upon
Berlioz was overwhelming. He would wander about the streets raving of
Shakespeare; he promptly fell in love with the most beautiful actress
in the troupe--Henrietta Smithson, whom he later married[226]--and
then began the frenzied period of composing and concert giving, which
came to a climax in the _Fantastic Symphony_ first performed in 1830.
Berlioz's courage and perseverance are shown by his winning the Prix
de Rome, after four failures! His two years in Italy (his picture may
still be seen at the Villa Medici), replete with amusing and thrilling
incidents, were, on the whole the happiest period of his stormy life.

[Footnote 226: For a convincing account of this tragic marriage see
the volume of _Recollections_ by Ernest Legouvé.]

But we must pass to some brief comments upon the characteristics, pro
and con, of his style. In the first place it was extremely original;
showed little or no connection with former composers; has had no
imitators, and cannot be parodied. Berlioz likewise possessed great
range of emotion--though he rarely touched the sublime; a power of
laying out works on a vast scale, and, in general, of achieving with
unerring certainty the effects desired. The poet Heine said that much
of Berlioz's music reminded him of "primeval monsters and fabulous
empires." And what a master he was of rhythm!--one of the greatest in
music! Prior to his work, and that of Schumann among the Germans, the
classic rhythms were becoming rather stereotyped; and the vigorous
elasticity introduced by these two composers has widened incalculably
the range of dramatic effect. But his indisputable claim to lasting
recognition is his genius in the treatment of the orchestra. Berlioz
had an inborn instinct for sensuous tonal effect for its own sake, and
not as the clothing of an abstract idea. With him the art of making
that composite instrument, the orchestra, give forth the greatest
beauty and variety of sound became an end in itself; and from his
ingenious and innovating effects has been evolved the orchestra as we
hear it to-day. Berlioz thought, so to speak, in terms of orchestral
color. In his melodies we do not feel that the drawing, the contour of
the pure line, is the chief thing; but that the assignment of the
melody to just the right instrument, and the color-effect thereby
produced, are integral parts of the conception. Notwithstanding the
fact that some of his effects are extravagant or at times bizarre, he
must be credited with revealing possibilities in orchestral shading
and color which, still further developed by Wagner, Strauss and
Tchaikowsky, have become conventional means of expression. Some of his
most celebrated and satisfying works, in addition to those mentioned,
are the _Harold in Italy_ Symphony, with its personification by a solo
viola of the chief character; the _Romeo and Juliet_ Symphony, for
both vocal and instrumental forces (of which the ball-scene with its
wondrous love-melody and the _Queen Mab_ Scherzo--unequalled for
daintiness--represent his highest attainments as a tone-poet) and,
most popular of all, the _Damnation of Faust_ based on scenes from
Goethe's poem. The bewitching incidental pieces for orchestra alone,
such as the _Ballet of Sylphs_ and the _Rakoczy March_, are often
played at symphony concerts, and are familiar to everyone. Certain
blemishes in Berlioz's music are obvious and need not be
over-emphasized. There is often more style and outward effect than
real substance. His works excite, but how seldom do they exalt! For he
was frequently deficient in depth of emotion and in latent
warmth--qualities quite different from the hectic glow and the
feverish passion which his French admirers, Tiersot and Boschot, claim
to be genuine attributes of musical inspiration, of power to compel
universal attention. We of other nations can only firmly dissent.
Without question his work has never succeeded in calling forth the
spontaneous love of a large body of admirers.[227] In an eloquent
passage the conductor and critic Weingartner sums up the case:
"Berlioz will always represent a milestone in the development of
music, for he is the real founder of the modern school. He did not
approach that ethical depth, that ideal purity which surround
Beethoven's name with such unspeakable glory, but no composer since
Beethoven, except Wagner, has enriched music with so many new means of
expression as this great Frenchman. Berlioz, Liszt and Wagner are the
heroes of the last half of the 19th century, just as Haydn, Mozart,
Beethoven, Weber and Schubert were of the first."

[Footnote 227: It is understood that this is merely a personal opinion
of the writer and might well have been prefaced by the Socratic "it
seems to me." Too much criticism reminds us of wine-tasting--Mr.
So-and-So likes port, Mr. So-and-So sherry. The object of fair-minded
appreciation is to understand clearly just what each composer set out
to do, _i.e._, what was the natural tendency of his individual genius;
then the only question is: did or did he not do this well? It is
futile to blame him because he was not someone else or did not achieve
what he never set out to do.]

As Berlioz is, if possible, even more idiomatic for the orchestra than
Chopin for the pianoforte, no conception of the real quality of his
message can be gained from transcriptions, however good. His
works[228] must be studied at first hand in the orchestral score and
then heard in performance by an excellent orchestra. Some preliminary
acquaintance and appreciation, however, of characteristic features in
his style is possible from arrangements and so we select for comment
the following works and movements: The _Fantastic Symphony_, the
_Carnaval Romain_ Overture, the _Ballet des Sylphes_ and the _Feux
Follets_ from the _Damnation of Faust_, the _Pilgrim's March_ from the
_Childe Harold_ Symphony and the Slow Movement from the _Romeo and
Juliet_ Symphony.[229] There is much valuable and stimulating
reading[230] about Berlioz and his influence; for, as Théophile
Gautier acutely remarks, "S'il fut un grand génie, on peut le discuter
encore, le monde est livré aux controverses; mais nul ne penserait à
nier qu'il fut un grand caractère." The _Symphonie_[231]
_fantastique_, op. 14, _épisode de la vie d'un artiste_, in five
movements is significant for being the first manifestation of
Berlioz's conviction that music should be yet more specifically
expressive, since it is founded on a characteristic theme, called
l'idée fixe which typifies the heroine, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 228: The best edition is the complete one, beautifully
engraved and with critical comments, by Malherbe and Weingartner. This
is expensive, but should be found in any large library.]

[Footnote 229: The only citations possible in the Supplement are the
Overture and portions of a few of the others.]

[Footnote 230: Particularly to be recommended are the following: the
essay in _Musical Studies_ by Newman; that by R. Rolland in _Musiciens
d'aujourd'hui_ (in French and in English); _Berlioz et la société de
son temps_ by J. Tiersot; the essay in _Studies in Modern Music_ by
Hadow; Berlioz's own _Mémoires_ (in French and in English) and his
entertaining essays, _A Travers Chants_, _Grotesques de la Musique_
and _Soirées d'Orchestre_; the excellent résumé of Berlioz's writings
in the _Amateur Series_ by W.F. Apthorp; the _Symphony since
Beethoven_ by Weingartner; and, above all, the monumental work by
Boschot in three parts--_La Jeunesse d'un Romantique_, _Un Romantique
sous Louis Philippe_, _Le Crépuscule d'un Romantique_. There is an
amusing but far from convincing assault against Berlioz as a programme
composer and, to a certain extent, against Romanticism in general, in
the _New Laocoön_ by Professor Irving Babbitt.]

[Footnote 231: On the title page of the autograph copy of the full
score is inscribed the following quotation from King Lear: "As flies
to wanton boys are we to the Gods; they kill us for their sport."]

This theme, with modifications appropriate to the changes in the
character and the environment, is repeated in each movement. As for
the theme itself, frankly it does not amount to much; it certainly
fails to take our emotions by storm or sing itself into our hearts.
Berlioz's harmonization is very bald, and as to his attempts at
development,[232] the less said the better. Of course whatever Berlioz
writes for the orchestra _sounds_ well; of that there is no doubt. But
this is not enough; any more than we are convinced by a person's
statements or arguments merely because he happens to have a beautiful
speaking voice. This dramatization of a musical theme was, after all,
nothing iconoclastically new and Berlioz is perfectly right in
claiming that he was merely extending the possibilities of that same
type of theme as is found in Beethoven himself, _e.g._, in the
_Coriolanus_ Overture and to a certain extent in the Fifth Symphony.
If, furthermore, we look back from the dramatic and highly personified
use made of themes in modern music, in the works of Strauss,
Tchaikowsky, Franck and even Brahms (_e.g._, his First Symphony with
its motto-theme) we can see that this symphony of Berlioz is an
important link in a perfectly logical chain of development. This
melody, then, l'idée fixe, appears in each of the five movements;
undergoing, however, but slight purely thematic development, being
introduced and modified primarily for dramatic purposes. In the second
movement,[233] _Un Bal_, two phrases drawn from it are sung _pp_ by
the clarinet as an indication that, amid the gaieties of the dance,
the vision of the beloved one is ever present. In the _Scène aux
Champs_ it is modified and eloquently declaimed by the flute and oboe,
_e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 232: Dannreuther, in his essay in the Sixth Volume of the
_Oxford History of Music_, speaks of the peculiar process of
"rabbeting" which serves Berlioz in the place of counterpoint, and the
criticism, though caustic, holds much truth.]

[Footnote 233: This movement is also of interest as an early example
of the Waltz among the conventional symphonic moods. The example has
been followed by Tchaikowsky in the third movement of his Fifth
Symphony.]

At the close of the movement occurs one of Berlioz's most novel and
realistic effects--the imitation of the rumbles of distant thunder
produced by four kettle-drums tuned in a very peculiar way (see page
75 of the orchestral score, Breitkopf and Härtel edition). In the
fourth movement, _Marche au Supplice_, four measures of l'idée fixe
are introduced just at the moment when the head of the hero is to be
chopped off. This is done for purely theatric purposes and certainly
makes our flesh creep--as Berlioz no doubt intended. The most
spectacular effect, however, is in the last movement, _Songe d'une
Nuit du Sabbat_, where the theme is parodied to typify the degraded
appearance which the beloved one takes in the distorted dreams of her
lover, _e.g._

[Music]

The impression made by the Symphony depends largely upon the attitude
of the hearer. In this work we are not to look for the sublimity and
emotional depth of a Bach or Beethoven any more than we expect a
whimsical comedy of Aristophanes to resemble an epic poem of Milton.
But for daring imagination, for rhythmic vitality and certainty of
orchestral effect, it was and remains a work[234] of genius.

[Footnote 234: For further comments on this Symphony see Mr. Mason's
essay in the _Romantic Composers_, an essay which, while thoughtful,
strikes the writer as somewhat biased.]


THE CARNAVAL ROMAIN OVERTURE

(SEE SUPPLEMENT NO. 57)

This work is one of Berlioz's most brilliant pieces, with an
orchestral life and color all its own. The material is taken from his
opera _Benvenuto Cellini_;[235] the checquered career of this artist
having made an irresistible appeal to Berlioz's love of the unusual
and the spectacular. The body of the work is based on the Italian
national dance, the Saltarello; and with this rhythm as a steadying
background Berlioz achieves a continuity sometimes lacking in his
work. The mere thought of the sights, sounds and colors of that
important event in the life of Rome would be enough to inflame his
susceptible imagination, and so here we have Berlioz at his very best.
The overture begins, allegro assai con fuoco, with a partial
announcement of the saltarello theme by the violins and violas, freely
imitated by the wood-wind instruments, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 235: For an entertaining account of the subject matter of
the opera see Chapter VII of Boschot's _Un Romantique sous Louis
Philippe_.]

After a sudden prolonged silence and some crescendo trills the first
periodic melody is introduced, sung by the English horn--the tune
taken from an aria of Benvenuto in the first act. The melody is soon
repeated in the dominant key by the violas and then, treated
canonically, by the 'cellos and violins. The canon really tells and
shows that Berlioz, as is often alleged, was not _altogether_ lacking
in polyphonic skill. The rhythm is now gradually quickened and leads
to the main body of the work, in 6/8 time, based on the Italian
folk-dance--the Saltarello which, as its name implies, is of a
"skipping" nature. The music is freely developed from the two
following themes; there is no second theme proper, _e.g._

[Music: (_a_)]

[Music: (_b_)]

Toward the close there is a return to the introductory melody which is
treated contrapuntally by the bassoons and other wind-instruments. The
saltarello resumes its sway and is worked up to a fiery ending;
especially brilliant are the closing chords scored for full brass with
trills on the cornets.

Two of Berlioz's most poetically conceived descriptive pieces are the
_Menuet des Feux-Follets_ and the _Ballet des Sylphes_, incidental
orchestral numbers from the _Damnation of Faust_; for they illustrate
convincingly what one means by the claim that Berlioz thought in terms
of orchestral color and suggestion. To give a musical picture of such
airy and fantastic imaginings by the mere repetition of conventional
formulae would obviously be of no avail. Berlioz's genius is equal to
the situation; and as we listen to the music we can really see the
flickering of the Will o' the Wisps and feel the graceful swaying of
the Sylphs as they hover about the sleeping Faust. To suggest the
Feux-Follets Berlioz ingeniously gives the theme to two piccolos in
thirds, which are supported by a rich but subdued mass of wind
instruments, horns and trumpets, _e.g._

[Music]

With equal felicity does he create the picture of the delicate,
graceful Sylphs. Any boisterous rhythmic activity would be quite out
of place; and so, above a sustained ground tone on muted 'cellos and
basses (which continues through the piece), and the slightest
suspicion of motion on the second violins and violas, there floats in
the first violins one of the most perfectly rounded and exquisite
melodies in existence, _e.g._

[Music]

In the closing measures there is a charming shadowy dialogue between
kettle-drums (struck with sponge-headed sticks) and harps, in
harmonics, carrying out Berlioz's stage directions--"Les esprits de
l'air se balancent quelque temps autour de Faust endormi et
disparaissent peu à peu." The piece ends with a chord barely whispered
on the clarinets, _pppp_, which, as Hadow aptly suggests, reminds us
of vanishing soap bubbles.

Berlioz's most sustained and perfect work, both in content and
treatment, is universally acknowledged to be the _Harold en Italie_
Symphony[236] in four movements for full orchestra and solo viola.
There is little actual correspondence between the scenes of Byron's
poem and the musical portrayal; and in fact, as Liszt says, "The title
clearly shows that the composer wished to render the impression which
the magnificent nature of Italy could not fail to make on a soul such
as that of Harold languishing in sorrow." The significant features of
the work are the melody for solo viola, recurring[237] in each
movement, which typifies Harold--that "melancholy dreamer," _e.g._,

[Music]

and the dazzling sensationalism of the Finale (Orgy of Brigands)
which, when it was once played "con amore" by a fine orchestra, called
forth from Berlioz the following eulogy,--"Sublime! I thank you,
gentlemen, and I wonder at you; you are perfect brigands." The finale
is also notable in that the opening portion is a reminiscence, a
passing in review, of the chief themes of the preceding movements.
Berlioz, we may surmise, was following the precedent established by
Beethoven in the finale of the _Ninth Symphony_, and, although his
treatment is rather mechanical and lacking in any such dramatic logic
as justified Beethoven, a certain organic connection between the
movements is undoubtedly secured. A portion of the second movement,
_March of Pilgrims_ singing the evening prayer, is cited in the
Supplement (See No. 58) chiefly because it is one of Berlioz's noblest
inspirations, giving an eloquent picture of a procession approaching,
passing by and losing itself in the distance--a long crescendo and
diminuendo. At every eighth measure the March melody is interrupted by
the muffled chant of the pilgrims, very effectively scored for brass
instruments, pianissimo. In the middle of the piece a contrast is
gained by the introduction of a religious chant. The closing measures
of this movement are of haunting beauty--a mysterious effect being
produced by an intentional mixture of tonalities (the sustained B in
the flute and oboe being answered by a C on the horns and harp, while
beneath are heard fragments of the March theme in the main key on the
pizzicato double basses).[238] Berlioz's most pretentious orchestral
composition is that called in the full title "Romeo and Juliet,
dramatic symphony, with choruses, vocal solos, and a prologue in
choral recitative, composed after Shakespeare's tragedy."
Notwithstanding many touches of genius, it is a very uneven work and
is too much a conglomerate of styles--narrative, lyrical, dramatic,
theatric and symphonic--for the constructive ability of the author to
weld into a living whole. There are several portions which, however
noble and glorious may have been Berlioz's conception,[239] and
however inspired by Shakespeare's genius, do not "come off." Two of
the numbers, on the other hand, are worthy of the highest praise--the
_Love Scene_ and the _Queen Mab Scherzo_. Of the latter Saint-Saëns
writes--"The famous Scherzo is worth even more than its reputation. It
is a miracle of lightness and gracefulness. Beside such delicacies and
transparencies the _finesses_ of Mendelssohn in the _Midsummer Night's
Dream_ seem heavy." The main theme is fascinating in its daintiness
and sparkle, _e.g._

[Music]

Berlioz considered the _Love Scene_ his finest inspiration and there
are few pieces comparable with it for passionate utterance. The
orchestration is wonderful for richness and variety.[240]

[Footnote 236: For an extended analysis of the work and also for an
account of the alleged connection of the virtuoso Paganini with its
composition, see the essay in Niecks' _Program Music_. There are, in
addition, interesting comments in _Stories of Symphonic Music_ by
Lawrence Gilman.]

[Footnote 237: An early example of the modern principle of
transformation and transference by theme.]

[Footnote 238: A striking illustration of "association of ideas" may
be gained from a comparison of the end of this movement with the
closing measures of Strauss's _Thus Spake Zarathustra_; it seems
incredible that Strauss did not have Berlioz's effect in his mind.]

[Footnote 239: See the _Mémoires_ for a rhapsodic account of his state
of mind at this time--"basking in the warm rays of Shakespeare's
imagination and believing it in his power to arrive at the marvellous
island where rises the temple of pure Art."]

[Footnote 240: For extended comments and a long citation of the actual
music see the Sixth Volume of the _Oxford History of Music_.]

After a careful study of the foregoing examples the reader, we hope,
is in a position to make a fair estimate of Berlioz's power and to
realize his great significance. It should be understood that this
music is intensely subjective and so requires a sympathetic and
cultivated attitude on the part of the listener. To the writer at
least, there remains one vital lack in Berlioz's music,--that of the
_dissonant element_. It often seems as if his conceptions could not be
fully realized for want of sheer musical equipment, largely due to
insufficient early training. For what is music without dissonance?
Surely "flat, stale and unprofitable" even if, in Berlioz's case, this
deficiency is offset by great rhythmic vitality and gorgeous color.
Yet in his best works[241] there is such a strong note of
individuality, indeed such real character, that they are deserving of
sincere respect and admiration, although by everybody they may not be
deeply loved. We should, furthermore, always remember that, if
Berlioz's poverty of harmonic effect is sometimes annoying, he never
falls into the humdrum ruts of those who have had a stereotyped
academic training. His genius was unhampered by any conventional
harmonic vocabulary, and hence it could always express itself freely.
That he was a real genius no one can fairly doubt.

[Footnote 241: For valuable analytical comments on Berlioz's
orchestral style see Vol. VIII, Chapter X, of the _Art of Music_
(César Saerchinger, N.Y.), and for biographical details and matters of
general import, Vol. II, Chap. IX.]

All the qualities which have been enumerated as typical of the
romantic temperament: warmth of sentiment, broad culture, love of
color and the sensuous side of music, freedom of form, and stress laid
on the orchestra as the most eloquent means of expression, reach their
climax in Franz Liszt (1811-1886). Born near Vienna of a Hungarian
father and a German mother, but chiefly associated with Paris, Weimar,
Budapest and Rome, he is certainly the most picturesque and versatile
figure in the music of the 19th century; for he worked and won fame as
a pianoforte virtuoso--probably the greatest the world has known--as a
prolific composer for pianoforte, orchestra and voice, as a teacher,
conductor and man of letters, and withal spent a large part of his
time, strength and fortune in helping young artists and in producing
works which otherwise might never have seen the light. His life is of
constant and varied interest, so spectacular at times that it seems
like a fairy tale.[242] As a mere boy he began to receive adulation
for his precocity; at the height of his career he was loaded with
honors and wealth; in his old age he was a favorite with everyone of
distinction and influence in France, Germany, England and Italy.
Nevertheless he preserved, throughout, the integrity of his character
and the nobility of his disposition. Whatever may be the final
estimate of his powers as a creative artist, as a man he has earned
nothing but eulogy;[243] for seldom has any one been freer from the
faults of vanity, petty jealousy and envy which so often mar the
artistic temperament. Liszt's generous encouragement and financial
support of Wagner in the struggling days of his unpopularity have
never been surpassed in the brotherhood of art.

[Footnote 242: The best biographies in English are the one by Huneker
and that in Vol. 2 of Grove's Dictionary.]

[Footnote 243: For a lively description of his influence as a
pianoforte teacher see _Music Study in Germany_ by Amy Fay.]

Liszt is akin to Berlioz in many respects; we feel the same natural
tendency to derive musical inspiration from external sources, poetic,
pictorial or from the realm of Nature. Purely as a musician, however,
Liszt was far greater, with a wider vocabulary and more power in
thematic development. His work also is somewhat uneven; moments of
real beauty alternating with passages which are trivial, bombastic or
mere lifeless padding. When we bear in mind Liszt's unparalleled
versatility, his output in quantity and variety is so amazing--there
being well over 1,000 works of about every kind--that it is unfair to
expect the style to be as finely wrought as the original conception is
noble. A serious and unbiased study of his best compositions will
convince one that Liszt is entitled to high rank as a musician of
genuine poetic inspiration. The average music-lover is prone to dwell
upon him as the composer of _Les Préludes_, the _Hungarian
Rhapsodies_, and as the somewhat flashy transcriber of operatic
potpourris, such as the _Rigoletto Fantasie_. But _Les Préludes_,
notwithstanding a certain charm and the clever manner in which the
music (without becoming minutely descriptive) supplements the poem of
Lamartine, is yet barred from the first rank by its mawkishness of
sentiment and by its cloying harmonies. The most significant among the
symphonic poems are _Orpheus_ with its characteristic crescendos and
diminuendos; _Tasso_ of great nobility and pathos, and _Mazeppa_, a
veritable tour de force of descriptive writing. To hear any one of
these masterpieces can not fail to alter the opinion of those who may
have considered Liszt as exclusively given over to sensational
effects. As for the _Hungarian Rhapsodies_, which Liszt intended as a
kind of national ballade and so, for the basic themes and rhythms,
drew largely on Hungarian Folk music, here again the public, with its
fondness for being dazzled, has laid exclusive stress on the flashy
ones to the detriment of those containing much that is noble and of
enduring worth. In his transcriptions of standard songs Liszt did as
valuable a public service as any popularizer, and has thereby made
familiar the melodies of Schubert and Schumann to hundreds who
otherwise would know nothing of them. In considering Liszt's
pianoforte works we must remember that he was a born virtuoso with a
natural fondness for exploiting the possibilities of his instrument,
and with an amazing technique as a performer. When the sincerity of a
composer is in question there is a great difference as to what should
be the standard of judgment, whether the work be for orchestra or for
pianoforte. In writing for orchestra the composer naturally centres
himself on the pure ideas and their treatment, as the execution is
something entirely external to himself. In works for pianoforte,
however, the composer who is also a virtuoso will often, and quite
justifiably, introduce passages of purely pianistic effect which in
other circumstances would amount to a confession of deficient
imagination. That Liszt at times abused his facility in decoration
need not be gainsaid, and yet how poetic and eloquent are his best
pianoforte compositions!--the _Études_, the _Waldesrauschen_, the
_Ballade_ and, above all, the _Sonata in B minor_.[244] Much unjust
criticism has been expended upon Liszt for treating the pianoforte
like an orchestra. As a matter of fact he widened, in a perfectly
legitimate way, the possibilities of the instrument as to sonority,
wealth and variety of color-effect. According to the testimony of
contemporary colleagues, Rubinstein, Taussig and von Bülow who, had
they not been convinced of his supremacy, might well have been
jealous, Liszt was incontestably the greatest interpreter of Bach,
Beethoven and Chopin; and his power as a Beethoven scholar is attested
by the poetically annotated edition of the Sonatas. It is often
asserted that Liszt lacked spontaneous melodic invention. This is a
hard saying unless taken in a relative sense. We may grant that Liszt
was neither a Schubert nor a Mozart, and yet recognize in his works
some extremely haunting melodies. His creative power was acknowledged
by Wagner and in a very practical manner. In fact, after a comparative
study of their works, one is amazed at the number of melodies which
Wagner borrowed from Liszt and at the generous complaisance of the
latter. The reactive influence of Liszt and Wagner, each upon the
other, is an interesting chapter in the development of modern art.
Liszt was undoubtedly encouraged in his revolutionary aims by Wagner's
fiery courage. Wagner, on his side, owed much to Liszt's unselfish
generosity; and with his more powerful constructive gifts worked up
into enduring form motives which, internal evidence clearly shows,
came from Liszt himself.

[Footnote 244: For a most entertaining description of this work see
the Huneker Biography, pp. 64-70.]

Just a few closing words as to Liszt's specific contributions to the
expansion of musical structure. He was an advanced leader in the
"program school," being endowed with considerably more constructive
power than Berlioz, who often fell between two stools: in that while
his subject demanded the freest treatment, he lacked the vigor to
break away from the formal routine of his classic models. In Liszt's
orchestral works, however, the term "Symphonic Poem"--one of his own
invention--is fully justified, _i.e._, they are _symphonic_ in that
they have organic unity, although this is not attained by preserving
the classic number and arrangement of themes; and they are also
_poetic_, being not a presentation of abstract tone patterns, but
illustrative of some external idea which shapes the course of the
music entirely to its own needs.[245] The distinguishing quality of
the Symphonic Poem is its unbroken continuity. Although objective
points are reached, and while there are broad lines of demarcation
with reference to the varied moods of the poem to be illustrated,
there are _no rigid stops_--everything is fused together into a
continuous whole. Liszt was an advocate of persistent development,
_i.e._, the music going out into space like a straight line instead of
returning on itself. Inner evidence shows, however, that although he
avoided many needless and conventional repetitions, he could not
entirely throw overboard the cyclical law of restatement; for there is
not one of his _Symphonic Poems_ which does not repeat, at the end,
thematic material already heard. Liszt carried the principle of theme
transformation still further than Berlioz; and, as a German, tended to
lay stress rather on the psychological aspects of character than on
those outward theatric events which appeal to French taste. The
difference is well shown by a comparison of the _Damnation of Faust_
with Liszt's _Faust_ Symphony, considered his most inspired orchestral
work. Liszt must not be forgotten as a song-writer, especially for his
settings to Goethe's poems; which, as Huneker says, are masterpieces
and contain, in essence, all the dramatic lyricism of modern writers,
Strauss included. In these songs the instrumental part is of special
import; Liszt in pianistic treatment anticipating Hugo Wolf with his
"Songs for Voice and Pianoforte," _i.e._, the voice and the instrument
are treated as coequal factors.

[Footnote 245: For stimulating comments see _The Symphony since
Beethoven_ by Weingartner, pp. 71-86.]

The works of Liszt selected for analytical comment are the Symphonic
Poem _Orpheus_, the _Faust_ Symphony and the Pianoforte Étude,
_Waldesrauschen_. The student, however, should become familiar with
several others[246] of the Symphonic Poems, notably _Tasso_, _Les
Préludes_ and _Mazeppa_; with the Pianoforte Sonata in B minor in one
movement, in which Liszt works on the same plan as Schumann in the
Fourth Symphony; with the descriptive pianoforte pieces and études;
and with the songs, of which _Kennst du das Land_, _Die Lorelei_ and
_Du bist wie eine Blume_ are beautiful examples.

[Footnote 246: An enlightening and comprehensive account of each of
these may be found in Niecks's _Programme Music_ already referred to.
See also Chapter VII, pp. 141-155 in Vol. VI of the _Oxford History_
for what is perhaps a rather biased point of view. There is an
excellent tabulation of the themes from _Les Préludes_ in Mason's
_Romantic Composers_.]


SYMPHONIC POEM, ORPHEUS

In this work, as must always be the case in poetically suggestive
music, the composer trusts to the general intelligence and insight of
the listener. For a mere mention of the name Orpheus may well call up
the vision of a majestic, godlike youth proclaiming his message of joy
and peace to soften the unruly passions of men and animals.

It is said that Liszt's imagination was kindled by a beautiful
representation of Orpheus playing on the lyre, which decorates an
Etruscan vase in the Louvre. The aim of the music was thus to
intensify and supplement the visual effect. The Poem begins with soft,
sustained calls on the horns, creating a mood of expectancy,
interspersed with modulatory arpeggios on the harp serving to complete
the legendary picture. In these Symphonic Poems, we must always
observe how closely the nature of the themes and the whole import of
the music are involved with the orchestral dress. For Liszt, though
not perhaps so brilliant and sensational as Berlioz, was equally a
great master of orchestral coloring and poetic suggestion by means of
appropriate instruments; often, too, more delicate and refined. In
measure 15 begins for sustained strings the stately march which
typifies the gradual approach of Orpheus. The second phrase of the
march, beginning in measure 38, has received the compliment of being
appropriated, almost literally, by Wagner in the second act of the
_Valkyrie_ for the march motive with which Wotan is ushered in. Some
beautiful modulatory developments of the march theme, with which the
original horn calls are united, lead to the impassioned theme in E
major, sung by an English horn, which is the message of Orpheus to the
sons of men, _e.g._

[Music]

The theme is expanded by means of striking modulations until, in
measure 102, it is presented by the full orchestra. Some rather
meaningless repetitions, in detached phrases, of the Orpheus theme
bring us, in measure 130, to a return of the original march which is
finally proclaimed _ff_ with great power and sonority. It seems to
typify the triumphant justification of Orpheus's appearance. The
dissonant modulations in the following passage, beginning measure 155,
(in which the double basses take a dramatic part) have been thought by
some to represent realistically the uncouth roars of forest monsters.
These outcries finally subside and in the Coda, beginning at measure
180, we have first a beautiful reminiscence of Orpheus's message and
then a last announcement of the march theme, which is now presented in
the form of a long diminuendo, as if the God-like apparition were
slowly withdrawing from our sight. A series of shifting modulations
(adagio and pianissimo) seems to bring a cloud before our enraptured
senses, and the work closes with a long sustained chord in C major,
_ppp_, giving an elemental idea of peace and satisfaction. From the
standpoint of musical structure the work is a crescendo followed by a
diminuendo and, poetically considered, is a convincing picture in
terms of music of the effect made upon Liszt's imagination by the
legend of Orpheus. Observe that, although the composition is free in
form, it is _not_ formless.[247] The main lines are the familiar ones
of statement, contrast and restatement, _i.e._, three-part form, and
the key-relationship is clear and carefully planned.

[Footnote 247: An allegation often brought against Liszt's work by
those whose conception of "form" is that of a cast-iron mould.]


THE FAUST SYMPHONY

This work, although embodying Liszt's favorite ideas of dramatic
characterization and transformation of theme as found in the Symphonic
Poems, more nearly resembles the ordinary symphony in that it is in
three distinct movements--with pauses between--which stand,
respectively, for the three chief characters in Goethe's drama: Faust,
Gretchen and Mephistopheles. In the _Faust_ Symphony the principle of
transformation or metamorphosis of themes is of such importance that
it may be defined as their rhythmic, melodic and harmonic modification
for the purpose of changing the meaning to correspond with a
modification in the characters for which they stand. The first
movement sets before us five themes illustrative of the most prominent
traits in the complex nature of Faust; the three most important being
(_a_) typical of brooding, speculative inquiry, (_b_) the longing of
love, (_c_) the enthusiasm and chivalry of Faust, _e.g._

[Music: (_a_)]

[Music: (_b_)]

[Music: (_c_)]

The development of these themes is entirely free, the musical texture
being held together by a general application of the principle of
contrast and by a logical key-scheme. The second movement has two main
themes, _e.g._

[Music: (_a_)]

[Music: (_b_)]

which portray eloquently the sweetness and dreamy ecstacy of
Gretchen's nature. In the course of this portrayal there appear
several themes from the first movement showing, by their
transformation, the effect upon the introspective Faust of the
awakening influence of love. Thus the love theme appears as--

[Music]

and also later in this form--

[Music]

Towards the close of the movement there is a subtle reference to the
chivalrous theme, as follows--

[Music]

Much of the appeal of the music depends upon the orchestration which
throughout is of remarkable beauty.

In the final movement, entitled Mephistopheles, there are a few
independent themes which portray the malign influence of the spirit of
Evil--the movement is marked Allegro vivace ironico!--but most of the
material is a transformation of the Faust themes which are here
burlesqued, parodied; as if all the noble aspirations of Faust were
being mocked and set at naught. This treatment is a perfectly logical
result of the correspondence, for which Liszt was striving, between
the music and the spirit of the underlying drama. As for the final
impressiveness of his artistic message, the composer may well have
felt that the effect would be indefinite without the specific meaning
which words alone can give. For the style is very subjective
throughout; that is, if the hearer is in a responsive condition, an
effect is produced on his imagination--otherwise, not. To close the
work, therefore, in the most moving and dignified manner, Liszt, with
unerring instinct and following the precedent of Beethoven in the
Ninth Symphony, introduces a chorus of men's voices--marked Andante
Mistico--which intones the famous stanza "Alles Vergängliche"[248] at
the close of the second part of Faust; while, above this chorus, a
solo tenor proclaims the motto of the redeeming love of woman, "Das
ewig Weibliche"--a sentiment so dear to the German[249] mind and one
that plays such an important part in the music dramas of Wagner. A
dramatic and musical connection between the movements is established
by using, for this solo part, the melody (intensified by augmentation)
which in the second movement typified the love and charm of Gretchen,
_e.g._

[Music: Das ewig Weibliche]

[Footnote 248: Translated as follows by Bayard Taylor:--

    Chorus Misticus

    All things transitory
    But as symbols are sent;
    Earth's insufficiency
    Here grows to Event;
    The Indescribable,
    Here it is done:
    The Woman-Soul leadeth us
    Upward and on!]

[Footnote 249: The way in which the Germans in the recent war have
applied this doctrine raises, we must say, many searching questions.]

Notwithstanding the ultra sensationalism in some of Liszt's works
there is no doubt that, in the closing pages of Faust, he has produced
an effect of genuine power and of inspired musical beauty.[250]
_Faust_, in fact, may be called a great work because of the character
of its leading melodies, its freedom of structure and expression and
its wealth of appropriate orchestral color. For these merits we may
overlook certain dreary passages where it would surely seem as if the
imagination of the composer were not able to translate into tones all
the phases of Goethe's stupendous drama.[251]

[Footnote 250: That this is the verdict of the public is shown by the
fact that, whenever of late years _Faust_ has been given by the Boston
Symphony Orchestra, it has had to be repeated by popular request.]

[Footnote 251: For further comments on the work see Huneker's _Franz
Liszt_, pp. 141-146 and the third part (on Program Music) of Finck's
_R. Strauss, The Man and His Works_. Also Chap. VII passim in Vol. VI
of the Oxford History.]

In a book such as this, chiefly concerned with broad principles of
structure and style, it would be out of place to attempt a detailed
account of Liszt's numerous and varied pianoforte compositions. But
they can by no means be left out of consideration by anyone who wishes
to gain a comprehensive estimate of his influence. For although the
fundamental principles of pianoforte style, both in writing for the
instrument and in playing upon it, are derived from Chopin and
Schumann,[252] Liszt so amplified the work of these men and added so
many novel features of his own in pianistic effect and especially in
execution that he is rightly considered a genius of the instrument. He
certainly brought out of the pianoforte a sonority and wealth of color
which heretofore had been associated only with the orchestra. The
chief groups of the pianoforte works are (1) the transcriptions of
songs, notably of Schubert and Schumann, and of operas, particularly
of Wagner. In this group should also be included the remarkable
arrangement for solo-pianoforte of all the Beethoven Symphonies. (2)
The Études, especially the set entitled "_Études d'exécution
transcendante_"--a description which clearly shows the idea Liszt set
before himself and indubitably attained; of this set the one in F
minor is particularly fine. (3) The world-famed _Hungarian
Rhapsodies_, fifteen in number, based on national melodies and
rhythms. In these Liszt aspired to be the poet of his nation, and they
are still among the most important manifestations of the national
spirit so prominent in our modern music. Perhaps the most eloquent and
celebrated are the 2d, the 12th and the 14th. Even if at times they
are overencrusted with effects meant primarily for display, the
rhythmic vitality and color of the melodies cannot be withstood.

[Footnote 252: Weber and Schubert had, of course, done valuable
pioneer work.]


CONCERT ÉTUDE, _Waldesrauschen_

(SEE SUPPLEMENT NO. 59)

This composition begins with a swaying, cantabile theme for the left
hand very characteristic of Liszt, which stands out in relief against
some beautifully placed arabesque figures in the upper register of the
instrument--the whole to be played una corda, dolce con grazia. It
really is a poetic picture, in terms of music, of the delicious murmur
of the woods. In the 15th measure the theme is transferred to the
right hand, in octaves, over sonorous, widely extended groups below.
The theme is expanded through a series of striking modulations and
then returns, in measure 30, to the left hand in a single melodic
line. This middle portion, measures 30-50, is very beautiful in its
genuine atmospheric treatment. Towards its close, however, Liszt's
fondness for sensational effect rather runs away with him and there is
a good deal, in measures 50-60 (marked martellato, strepitoso and
_fff_), which is rather difficult to reconcile with the poetic
subject. Perhaps a mighty wind is roaring through the trees! In
measure 61 the theme is once more presented in amplified form by the
right hand, più mosso and molto appassionata, and worked up to a
brilliant climax--ending with an interlocking trill and a long,
descending passage of delightful sensuous effect. The closing
measures, una corda and dolcissimo, afford a reminiscence of the
haunting appeal of the chief melody. All in all, in spite of a certain
admixture of alloy, here is a poetic composition, a real tone-picture
of the woods and of the effects implied by the title. Certainly a
piece which, in its picturesque suggestiveness and pianistic
treatment, may fairly be called the ancestor of much that is beautiful
in such modern composers as Debussy and Ravel.

As a final estimate of Liszt and as a suggestion for the student's
attitude we cite from Niecks the following quotation, since, in our
opinion, it is true and forcibly expressed:

"Liszt's works are too full of originality and striking expressiveness
to deserve permanently the neglect that has been their lot. Be,
however, the ultimate fate of these works what it may, there will
always remain to Liszt the fame of a daring striver, a fruitful
originator and a wide-ranging quickener."




CHAPTER XVI

BRAHMS


After the novel and brilliant work of the Romanticists had reached its
height in the compositions just studied, it seemed as if there were
nothing more for music to do. Wagner, with his special dramatic aims
and gorgeous coloring, loomed so large on the horizon that for a time
all other music was dwarfed. It is, therefore of real significance
that just in this interregnum two men, born in the early years of the
19th century, were quietly laying the foundations for eloquent works
in absolute or symphonic music. These men were Johannes Brahms
(1833-1897) and César Franck (1822-1890). Following a few preliminary
remarks about the significance of symphonic style in general, the next
chapters will be devoted to an account of their works and influence.

A striking feature in the development of music since 1850 is the
number of symphonies produced by the representative composers of the
various nations; and the manner in which these works embody certain
phases of style and manifest national tendencies is a subject of great
interest. Ever since Beethoven, there has been a universal feeling
that the symphony is the form in which a composer should express his
highest thoughts. If Wagner and Richard Strauss seem to be exceptions,
we must remember that their work for orchestra is thoroughly symphonic
both in material and in scope. The difference is chiefly one of terms.
Wagner claimed that he merely applied to dramatic purposes Beethoven's
thematic development; and the tone-poems of Strauss are symphonies in
essence though on a free poetic basis. Every composer has taken up the
writing of a symphony with a serious purpose and often comparatively
late in life. To be sure, Beethoven's first Symphony, op. 21, was
composed in his thirtieth year; but for the works which manifest most
strongly his personality, such as the Third, Fifth and Ninth, we have
to wait until a later period. Schumann essayed symphonic composition
only after his technique had been developed in every other field.
Brahms's first Symphony, on which he is said to have worked ten years,
is op. 68. César Franck looked forward to a Symphony as the climax of
his career. The day has passed when a composer could dash off
symphonies by the dozen; quality and genuine personality in each work
are the modern requirements. Thus from Brahms we have four symphonies,
from Tchaikowsky six, from Bruckner nine--a dangerously large
number!--from Sibelius five, from Elgar two, from d'Indy three; and,
even if a composer write but a single really inspired and noble
symphony--as for example, César Franck--he is in so far immortal. For
the symphonic form is the product of too much intense striving (think
of Beethoven's agonies of conception!) to be treated lightly.
Beginning with the operatic overture of Lully and Scarlatti, called
"Sinfonia avanti l'opera," down through the labors of Stamitz, Gossec,
Emmanuel Bach, Haydn and Mozart, this form, as we know it to-day, is
the result of at least a century and a half of sustained, constructive
work. A musician who wishes to compose a symphony is brought face to
face with the formidable question, "Have I a real message to utter and
the technical skill to present it in communicable form?" There are no
accessory appeals to the other senses in the way of a dramatic story,
scenic effect, dancing and costumes--as in opera--to cloak poverty of
invention and to mollify the judgment of the listener. I grant that
the composition of an original opera is a high achievement, but we
know how many composers have won success in the operatic field from
whom we should never expect a symphony. From comparatively few have we
great works in both forms. Consider, furthermore, how complicated a
tool is the present orchestra, _as_ a tool, to say nothing of the
invention of ideas. Many years of study are required to attain a
certainty of calculation in sonority and _nuance_, and the mere
writing out the score of a symphony requires unremitting toil. We all
pay homage to life: human life in men, women and children, and the
life of nature in animals, birds, trees and flowers. Let us ever
remember that the imagination also has its products and the themes of
a symphony may certainly be considered _its_ children. The public
often seems to have slight idea of the sanctity and mystery of a
musical idea. Composers are considered people with a kind of "knack"
in writing down notes. In reality, a musical idea is as wonderful a
thing as we can conceive--a miracle of life and yet intangible,
ethereal. The composer apparently creates something out of nothing,
pure fancy being wrought into terms of communication. Since the close
of the Romantic period proper, the Symphonic composers of universal
recognition have been Brahms, Franck, Tchaikowsky, d'Indy, Sibelius,
Bruckner, Mahler, Dvo[vr]ák, Elgar, and a few lesser men of the
Russian and French schools. Their works carry still further the
principles which can be traced from Beethoven down through the
Romantic School, _i.e._, the chief themes are of a highly subjective
nature, often in fact being treated like actual characters in a drama;
and great freedom is shown in regard to mood and order of the usual
symphonic movements--this being particularly true of Mahler and
Bruckner. A distinct feature of interest in the work of Tchaikowsky,
Dvo[vr]ák and Sibelius is the introduction of exotic types of melody
and rhythm, drawn from national sources. Thus Tchaikowsky, who said
that he wished all his instrumental music to sound like a glorified
Russian folk-song, uses rhythms of 5 and (in his chamber music) 7
beats a measure, with frequent touches of old modal harmony. Dvo[vr]ák
founds his harmony and modulations on the exceedingly chromatic scale
of the Bohemians; and his piquant and dashing rhythms could come only
from a nation which has no less than forty national dances. In
listening to Sibelius, we are conscious of the wild sweep of the wind,
of unchained forces of nature; and there are the same traits of virile
strength and grim dignity which have made the Kalevala, Finland's
national poem, one of the great epics of the world. Although Brahms
never lets us forget that he is a Teuton, there are frequent traces in
his compositions of the Hungarian element--so dear to all the Viennese
composers--as well as of German folk-songs; and the most artistic
treatment we have of Hungarian rhythms is found in his two sets of
Hungarian dances.

It is manifestly beyond the scope of a single book to treat
comprehensively each of the symphonists in the list just cited, so I
shall dwell chiefly upon the characteristics of Brahms, Franck,
Tchaikowsky and d'Indy as probably the greatest, and touch only
incidentally upon the others, as of somewhat lesser import; though if
anyone take issue with this preference in regard to Mahler and
Bruckner I shall not combat him. For I believe Mahler to be a real
genius; feeling, however, that his wonderful conceptions are sometimes
not expressed in the most convincing manner. There is no doubt that
Mahler has not yet received his bigger part in due valuation, but his
time will surely come. As for Bruckner, we have from him some of the
most elemental and powerful ideas in modern music--witness the dirge
in the _Seventh Symphony_ with its impressive scoring for trombones
and Bayreuth tubas, a movement Beethoven might have signed; although
with the virgin gold there is mixed, it must be confessed, a large
amount of crude alloy, and there are dreary stretches of waste sand.

Johannes Brahms, like Beethoven, with whom his style has many
affinities, was a North-German, born in 1833 in the historic seaport
town of Hamburg.[253] Brahms came of lowly though respectable and
intelligent parents, his father being a double-bass player in one of
the theatre orchestras. That the positiveness of character, so
conspicuous in his famous son, was an inherited trait may be seen from
the following anecdote. The director of the theatre orchestra once
asked father Brahms not to play so loud; whereupon he replied with
dignity, "Herr Kapellmeister, this is my double-bass, I want you to
understand, and I shall play it as loud as I please." The music of
Brahms in its bracing vigor has been appropriately compared to a
mixture of sea air and the timbre of this instrument.

[Footnote 253: Noted as being the original centre of national German
opera and for its associations with the early career of Handel.]

Brahms's mother was a deeply religious woman who imbued her son with a
seriousness of purpose which runs through all his work. From his
earliest years he was trained for music, as a matter of course, and
showed marked precocity as a pianist, though it soon became evident
that he also was endowed with rare creative gifts. The young student
made such progress under Marxsen, a famous teacher of the period, that
at the age of fifteen he gave a public concert, on the program of
which stood some original pieces of his own. The next few years were
spent in diligent study and in the composition of some of his early
works, of which the Scherzo op. 4 is the most significant. Brahms was
extraordinarily precocious and during these formative years manifested
a trait which is noticeable throughout his career--that of knowing
exactly what end he had in view and of setting to work quickly and
steadily to attain it. Finally in 1853, when he was twenty, he was
invited to participate in the memorable concert-tour with the
Hungarian Violinist Remenyi, which was the cause of his being brought
before the public under the auspices of three such sponsors as
Schumann, Liszt and Joachim. It seems that, at one of the concerts in
a small town, the pianoforte was a semitone too low, whereupon young
Brahms transposed at sight a difficult Beethoven Sonata into the
requisite higher key. This remarkable feat of musicianship so
impressed Joachim, who was in the audience, that he gave Brahms two
letters of introduction--one to Liszt at Weimar and one to Schumann at
Düsseldorf on the Rhine. Following up these letters, Brahms now spent
six weeks at Weimar with Liszt, assimilating important points of
method and style. Although the two natures were somewhat
unsympathetic, Liszt was so impressed with the creative power and
character of Brahms's first compositions, that he tried to adopt him
as an adherent of the advanced school of modern music; while Brahms
was led, as some would claim, through Liszt's influence to an
appreciation of the artistic effects to be found in Hungarian music.
Brahms's visit to Schumann in the autumn of 1853 was in its
consequences a significant incident. After hearing Brahms's music,
Schumann wrote for the "Neue Zeitschrift" an article entitled "Neue
Bahnen" ("New Paths") in which the young composer was heralded as the
master for whom the world had been waiting, the successor of Beethoven
in the symphonic style. Through Schumann's influence, the publishers
Breitkopf and Härtel at once brought out Brahms's first works, which
were by no means received by the public with general favor; in fact
they provoked as bitter discussion as those of Wagner, and made
headway slowly. For four years--from 1854 to 1858--Brahms was in the
service of the Prince of Lippe-Detmold, a small principality near
Hanover, where the court was a quiet one, thus affording ample time
for composition and private study. Brahms's strength of purpose and
unusual power of self-criticism are shown by the way in which this
period was spent. Although he had made a brilliant début, Brahms now
imposed upon himself a course of rigorous technical training, appeared
seldom before the public and published no compositions; his object
being to free himself from a narrow subjectivity and to give scope to
his wide human sympathies and to his passion for perfection of
utterance. It seemed to him that a plausible originality might
degenerate into mere idiosyncrasy, and that universality of appeal
should be a musician's highest goal. When he resigned his post and
came before the public with his first large work, a concerto for
pianoforte and orchestra, the gain made in increased power and
resources was evident. The greatest tribute which can be paid Brahms
is that he has summed up and united the classic principles of
clearness and solidity of workmanship with the warmth and spontaneity
of the Romantic School. In 1862 Brahms settled in Vienna where, for
thirty-five years, his career was entirely free from external
incidents of note; his time spent in quiet steady work and in the
attainment of artistic ideals. His slow logical development is like
that of Beethoven, due to the fact that his works were far from
numerous, but finished with the greatest care. The standard of
creative quality is also very high; comparatively few of Brahms's
works are not altogether alive. Matthew Arnold's beautiful lines on
labor are applicable to Brahms. "Work which in lasting fruit outgrows
far noisier schemes; accomplished in repose; too great for haste; too
high for rivalry." Brahms thus described to Mr. Henschel, a former
conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, his ideals concerning
composing: "There is no real creating without hard work; that which
you call invention is simply an inspiration from above, for which I am
not responsible, which is no merit of mine." And again, "Whether a
composition is beautiful is one consideration, but perfect it must
be." The few of his compositions which show connection with outward
events are the _Deutsches Requiem_, his best-known choral work (in
commemoration of his mother's death) and the _Academic Overture_,
composed in place of the conventional thesis, when--in 1880--the
University of Breslau conferred on him a doctor's degree. This
Overture, based on several convivial student songs, is on the whole
his most genial composition for orchestra and has won a deserved
popularity the world over.[254] For sustained fancy his most beautiful
work for chorus and orchestra is the _Schicksalslied_ (_Song of
Destiny_). Symphonic composition, as has been said, came in the latter
part of Brahms's career, his first work in that form being op. 68.
After that, within a few years, three other symphonies were composed.
His last works include the significant pianoforte pieces called
_Intermezzi_--not all equally inspired, but many representing the
finest flower of Brahms's genius; four serious songs for bass voice,
and one posthumous work, _Eleven Choral Preludes for Organ_. Brahms
died in 1897 and lies buried in Vienna not far from Beethoven and
Schubert.

[Footnote 254: Another very fine work in this class is the _Tragic
Overture_, worthy of the deepest study.]

From Brahms we have beautiful works in every branch of composition
save the opera and symphonic poem. (He once said he would risk neither
an opera nor getting married!) Very few of his works have titles, and
in this respect he stood somewhat aloof from that strong tendency in
modern times--the connection between music and poetic and literary
sources of inspiration. But he had a right to choose his own line of
effort; it is for us to become familiar with his works as they are.
They comprise about two hundred songs, three pianoforte sonatas and
many lesser pieces, two concertos for pianoforte and orchestra, a
wonderfully fine violin concerto, four symphonies--each with a
character of its own--and a large group of chamber compositions:
string quartets, sonatas for violin and pianoforte, trios, and a
number of works for unusual ensemble combinations--the Trio for
Violin, Horn and Pianoforte being the best known.

As to the nature of Brahms's music the following comments are
submitted for consideration. He was not a colorist or a stylist in the
broad sense of those terms, _i.e._, color and style were not the prime
ingredients in his music. There is light and shade in Brahms but
seldom that rich and varied glow found, for example, in
Rimsky-Korsakoff--that supreme master of orchestral coloring. As for
style, it may be said that his work fulfils Matthew Arnold's
definition of that desirable quality, "To have something to say and to
say it in the most simple and direct manner possible." We sometimes
feel, however, that he is thinking more of what he has to say than of
outward eloquence of expression. But when there are so many
composers[255] in whom there is far more style than substance, we
should not carp at Brahms for the "stuff" in his work. The matter
might be put in a nut-shell by saying that Brahms is Brahms; you
accept him or leave him, as you see fit. The bulk of his music not
only has stood the test of time but becomes more potent each year;
surely this is the highest possible endorsement. He is rightly
considered a great master of pure melodic line and a consummate
architect, especially in the conciseness and concentration of certain
compositions, _e.g._, the Third Symphony, and in his superb mastery of
the Variation form which is the basis of some of his most famous works
for orchestra and for pianoforte. His texture is of marked richness
and variety; seldom do we find verbiage or lifeless padding. He has
been called the Browning of music--a deep thinker in tones. Genuine
appreciation of Brahms presupposes work on the part of the
music-lover; and the recognition should be more general that the
imaginative stimulation gained only through work is one of the
blessings music has to bestow.

[Footnote 255: We cite Saint-Saëns, as one instance.]

It is often alleged, indeed, that to enjoy Brahms one _has_ to work.
Of course, but what repaying work! This may be said equally of
Shakespeare, of Dante, of Browning, of Bach and of every poet with a
serious message. The vitality of Brahms's creative power, like that of
Beethoven, is seen in his rhythm. He had a highly developed rhythmic
sense, and in his fondness for syncopations, for contrasted accents
and for complicated metric groups he is the logical successor of
Schumann. One of his favorite devices is the altered grouping of the
notes in a measure, so that there is a contrast between duple and
triple rhythm, _e.g._, the following passage in the Second Symphony,
where an effect of great vigor is produced.

[Music]

There are never in Brahms weak or conventional rhythms. He is also one
of the great modern song-composers, representing with Strauss, Wolf
and Mahler the culmination of the German Lied. In his songs there is a
warmth and depth of sentiment as yet unsurpassed, and the
accompaniment is always a highly wrought factor in the work. In
estimating the value of Brahms's compositions as a whole, it is
difficult to hold the balance true. Those to whom he is sympathetic
through an affinity of temperament revere him as one of the great
geniuses for all time, while to others his message is not of such
convincing power. The effect of inborn temperament in the personal
appeal made by any composer is vividly shown by the estimate which
Tchaikowsky and Brahms had for one another. Each felt respect for the
sincerity and artistic skill of his contemporary, at the same time
regretfully acknowledging that the essence of the music meant little
to him. To Tchaikowsky Brahms seemed cold and lacking in melodic
spontaneity; to Brahms, on the other hand, Tchaikowsky seemed
superficial, sensational. The gist of the matter is that Brahms was a
Teuton and wrote with characteristic Teutonic reserve and dignity.
Tchaikowsky, being a Slav, wrote with the impassioned lack of
restraint and volatility of mood associated with that people. How
could it be otherwise? Each was a genuine artist, expressing his
natural feelings with clearness and conviction; and each should be
respected for what he did: _not_ one at the expense of the other. In
Brahms, however, the question does arise of facility of expression
versus worthiness of expression. He had an unparalleled technique in
the manipulation of notes but whether there was always an emotional
impulse behind what he wrote is debatable. For there are these two
contrasting types in every art: works which come from the heart
(remember Beethoven's significant inscription at the end of his
Mass),[256] and those which come from the head. This brings us face to
face with the perplexing question as to the essence of music. To some
it is a record of intellectual activity tinged with emotion; to
others, an emotional outpouring controlled by intellect. These two
types of music will always exist, being the natural expression of the
corresponding classes in human nature.

[Footnote 256: "From the heart it has come, to the heart it shall
go."]

Brahms's music is sometimes called dry, but this is a misuse of terms.
To draw an analogy from another sense, we might rejoin that the best
champagne is "sec," all the superfluous, cloying sugar being removed.
There is plenty of saccharine music in the world for those who like
it. In Brahms, however, we find a potential energy and a manly
tenderness which cannot be ignored even by those who are not
profoundly thrilled by his message. He was a sincere idealist and
composed to please his own high standards, never thinking of outward
effect nor testing the pulse of the fickle public. As a man there is
no doubt that he was warm-hearted and vigorous, but his was not the
nature to come forward with captivating geniality. On the contrary he
expects the hearer to come to him, and is too reserved to meet you
more than half-way. That this austerity has proved a bar in the way of
a wide-spread fame, while to be regretted, is unavoidable; remove
these characteristics from Brahms and he ceases to be Brahms. Those,
however, who may think that Brahms is always austere and grim, holding
himself aloof from broad human emotion, should remember that he has
done more than any other modern composer to idealize the Waltz; and,
if the atmosphere of his symphonic style be too rarified, they may
well begin their effort in appreciation with those charming Waltzes
op. 39 (both for solo pianoforte and for a four-hand arrangement); the
_Hungarian Dances_, and--most beautiful of all--the _Liebeslieder
Walzer_ for chorus and pianoforte (four-hands). Anyone who knows these
works cannot fail to become a genuine lover of Brahms. To be of the
earth and yet to strike the note of sublimity is a paradox. For, in
Brahms at his best, we surely find more of the sublime, of true
exalted aspiration, than in any other modern composer save César
Franck. To strike this note of sublimity is the highest achievement of
music--its proper function; a return, as it were, to the abode whence
it came. Such music is far beyond that which is merely sensuous,
brilliantly descriptive, or even dramatically characteristic. Much of
present day music excites and thrills but does not exalt. Brahms, in
his great moments, lifts us high above the earth. His universal
acceptance is alike hindered by a deficiency which, though as natural
as his reserve, may yet justly be cited against him--the occasional
monotony of his color scheme. In the symphonies, notwithstanding the
dignity and sincerity of thought, we find pages in the style of an
engraving which would be more effective as a glowing canvas, _e.g._,
in the slow movement of the Second Symphony and in the last two
movements of the Fourth. Many consider, however, that Brahms's
orchestral treatment is exactly suited to the seriousness of his
ideas; so it comes down to a question of individual taste. That he had
his own delicate feeling for color and sensuous effect is shown in
many pages of the chamber music, especially in those works for unusual
combinations, _e.g._, the Clarinet Quintet, and the Trio for Violin,
Horn and Pianoforte. No one in modern times has used more eloquently
that romantic instrument, the horn. See, for example, the Coda to the
first movement of the D major Symphony and the slow movement of the
Third Symphony. We must gratefully acknowledge the lasting quality of
his music--without question it wears well. In fact, difficult though
it be to comprehend at a first hearing, the more it is heard, the more
it is enjoyed. Brahms's[257] music is steadily growing in popularity.
His orchestral works and chamber music are applauded to-day, although
twenty-five years ago they were received with apathy and scornful
indifference.

[Footnote 257: For literature on Brahms the following works are
recommended: the comprehensive _Life_ by Fuller-Maitland; the essay in
Hadow's _Studies in Modern Music_; that in Mason's _From Grieg to
Brahms_; that by Spitta in _Studies in Music_ by Robin Grey; the first
essay in _Mezzotints in Modern Music_ by Huneker; the biographical and
critical article in Grove's Dictionary; Chapter IX in Volume 8 of the
_Art of Music_, and Chapter XIII in Volume 2. There are also some
stimulating remarks on Brahms's style in general, and on the attitude
of a past generation towards his work, in those delightful essays, in
2 volumes, _By the Way, About Music_ by the late well-known critic,
W.F. Apthorp.]

As a representative work in each of the four fields in which Brahms
created such masterpieces we have selected, for detailed analysis, the
_First Symphony_, the _Sonata for Violin and Pianoforte in A major_,
the _Ballade in G minor_ and the _Song_, _Meine Liebe ist grün wie der
Fliederbusch_. All four of Brahms's symphonies may justly be
considered great, each in its own way. For Brahms is not a man with a
single message and has not written one large symphony in different
sections, as, in a broad sense, may be said of Tchaikowsky. The
Second, on account of the spontaneity and direct appeal of its themes,
is undoubtedly the most popular. It contains a first movement of a
quasi-Mendelssohnian suavity and lyric charm; a slow movement which is
a meditation of the profundity of Bach himself; a third movement,
allegretto, based on a delightful waltz of the Viennese Ländler type
and a Finale of a Mozartian freshness and vigor--the second theme
being specially notable for its broad sweep. The whole work is a
convincing example of Brahms's vitality and "joie de vivre." The Third
symphony is a marvel of conciseness and virile life. The Fourth,
though not in all respects so inspired as the others, is famous for
its beautiful slow movement--with an impressive introduction in the
Phrygian mode (Brahms often showing a marked fondness for old modal
harmony)--and for the Finale, which is an illustration of his
polyphonic skill in modernizing the variation form, the Passacaglia or
ground bass. But the First,[258] it seems to us, is the greatest, in
scope, in wealth of material, in its remarkable combination of
dramatic, epic and lyric elements and in an intensity of feeling and
sublimity of thought peculiar to Brahms. It is extremely subjective,
of deep ethical value, and sets forth a message of optimism and
undying hope. The structural basis is a motto, often recurring in the
work, which (whatever it may mean) is evidently--like the theme of the
C minor symphony--some fierce protest against fate. The symphony, as a
whole, represents a triumphant progress from darkness to light; and
this meaning is made evident by the ever-brightening mood of the
successive movements, the tone of which is strengthened by the scheme
of key-relationship--based on an ascending series of major thirds,
_e.g._

[Music: C Minor, E major, A-flat major, C major.]

[Footnote 258: The eloquence of the work is so integrally involved
with its orchestral dress that it should always be studied, if
possible, in the full score. For class-room work excellent editions
are available for two and four hands.]

The work is somewhat uneven--never weak--but at times a bit labored;
as if the composer were consciously wrestling with great thoughts.
This, however, is nothing against it, because equally true of large
works in other fields of art, _e.g._, the Agamemnon of Aeschylus or
Wagner's Tetralogy. It cannot be understood, much less appreciated,
without close attention and earnest thought, for it presents the
struggles and aspirations of mankind and is not meant solely to
delight or entertain. When the hearer has made it his own it is a
priceless possession for all time. The Prelude to the first movement,
un poco sostenuto, is of impressive solemnity, developed from the
motto, and based on the almost persistent iteration of the pedal notes
C and G--the tonic and dominant. It proclaims that a serious meaning
is to be revealed, and this meaning is accentuated by the
orchestration which with its stratified grouping of melodic lines has
a grim strength characteristic of Brahms.

[Music]

The first movement proper, Allegro, in complete sonata-form, begins
with a _ff_ announcement of the impassioned, chromatic motto, _e.g._

[Music]

Note the cutting effect of the dissonant tones F-sharp and A-flat!
From this motto grows the melodic part of the first theme in two
balancing phrases, _e.g._

[Music]

Then follow some stormy measures of dissonant chords and warring
rhythms until the theme rages itself out, in measure 52. The
transition begins with some sharp staccato chords, as if summoning to
further attention. It gradually cools down through a series of
beautiful modulations and, in measure 84, the second theme--introduced
by calls on the horn and sung by the oboe--enters in the relative
major key of E-flat. This also is based on the ascending, chromatic
line of the _motto_; still further organic unity being gained by the
bass, which has the same melodic figure as the second phrase of the
first theme, _e.g._

[Music]

Much of the previous fierceness, however, has abated and the remainder
of the second theme is of a rare loveliness, with mysterious answering
calls between oboes, clarinets and horns. The _pp_ dominant ninth
chords at the beginning of the closing portion (measures 120-122) give
a positively shuddering effect and then the combat of clashing rhythms
is renewed. The development begins with a series of shifting
harmonies, at first _ff_ and then _pp_--a lull before the storm--as if
preparing the way for a still more terrific assault upon our emotions.
It is tempestuous throughout; based at first on material taken from
the preceding codetta and ending with an extended presentation of the
motto over an iterated pedal note on the dominant, _e.g._

[Music]

The fusion of the development with the recapitulation is skillfully
handled, and the motto is proclaimed, beginning at measure 298, in a
series of ascending strata, with overwhelming force. The third part,
with slight abridgment and necessary adjustment of key-relationship,
conforms exactly to the exposition. There is the same agitato closing
portion as before, and then the Coda proper, beginning at measure 421,
emphasizes with fiery accents the mood of storm and stress
characteristic of the movement as a whole. After the fury has
subsided, the dramatic motto asserts itself in the closing measures,
poco sostenuto; the problem is still unsolved and the last C major
chord is but a ray of light cast on troubled waters.

The second movement, andante sostenuto--in three-part form--begins
with a tender melody expressing a mood of deep resignation and
religious hope. No sooner has it started, however, than there creeps
in the sinister motto, as if to remind us that life is undeniably
stern and grim, _e.g._

[Music]

In measure 17 there enters a closing theme, sung by the oboe, of
ineffable beauty which is used in the third part as the climax of the
movement. It surely seems to come from another world and is one of the
most sublime melodies by Brahms or any one else. Its climax is
impressively united with the main theme in the bass, _e.g._

[Music]

The middle portion, beginning in measure 38, is a meditation--in
dialogue form--for solo oboe and clarinet, worked up to an eloquent
climax in the key of the relative minor, C-sharp. The third part,
beginning measure 66, with the addition of some lovely modulatory
changes, corresponds to part one; save that the melody is varied by
Brahms's favorite device of three notes to a beat in one voice against
two in another. Beginning in measure 90, the wondrous closing theme of
the first part is sung by a solo violin, reinforced by oboe and horn.
It is finally entrusted, in the home key, to the horn alone, above
which the solo violin soars in ecstacy, _e.g._

[Music]

Some diminuendo, descending passages lead to a reminiscent portion of
the first theme and then, in measure 116, the grim motto enters, but
this time without prevailing; for, in measures 122-124, it is finally
exorcised and the movement closes with the seraphic calm of a soft,
rich chord in E major, above which is heard a star-like note on the
solo violin.

The third movement is an Allegretto; it being Brahms's custom in
each[259] of his symphonies to substitute a movement of this type in
place of the conventional Scherzo or Minuet. This movement clearly in
three-part form, is thrown in to furnish relief after the emotional
tension of the movement preceding. It has no obvious organic
connection with the other movements, but is just the right thing in
its surroundings, with a note of vitality which does much to brighten
the scene and to prepare the way for the Finale. The opening theme in
A-flat major is in two phrases of _five_ measures each--a favorite
rhythm with Brahms--given out by the clarinet over a pizzicato bass in
the 'cellos. The melodic formation is unusual in that the latter
phrase is an inversion of the first, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 259: The only slight exception is the third movement of the
Fourth Symphony which, being marked Allegro giocoso, partakes somewhat
of the nature of a Scherzo.]

After some descending passages in thirds and sixths--one of the
characteristic[260] effects in Brahms's style--the theme is repeated
in the violins with richer scoring. The descending passage returns and
this time leads to the entrance of a subsidiary theme in F minor. In
measures 50-51 occurs one of those cases of melodic germination which
entitles Brahms to be called a genuine _creative_ artist. The melody
with its dashing, Hungarian zest sounds like something brand-new and
yet is logically derived from the main theme by diminution, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 260: "Those eternal sixths and thirds." Weingartner later
publicly recanted and became a whole-souled convert to Brahms. (See
_The Symphony since Beethoven_, latest edition.)]

This is real poetic creation, it being the prime object of a poet to
create in music something out of apparent nothing. After these
vivacious developments the first part ends with a slight repetition
of the main theme. The middle part, beginning measure 71, in 6/8 time
and in the enharmonic key of B major (E-flat = D-sharp) is noteworthy
for its rhythmic swing, bold syncopations and contrasted accents; see
especially measures 97-107. At the beginning of the third part there
is an effective blending of the rhythm which has just prevailed with
the graceful lines of the first theme. The fabric is made up of
effective changes, modulatory and rhythmic, in the material from the
first part. At the Coda, più tranquillo, there is a delightful
reminiscence of the rhythm of the middle portion carried out to the
very end by the double basses.[261]

[Footnote 261: A similar effect may be found in the closing measures
of the first movement of Beethoven's Eighth Symphony.]

The Finale is one of the most thrilling perorations in music; not a
perfunctory close, but a veritable Apotheosis of victorious
aspiration, giving an irresistible contrast to the first movement.
Whereas, before, there was nothing but conflict, now all is triumphant
joy. This movement is laid out on a vast scale, with a wealth of
material, including a long Prelude with a distinct theme of its own
and an extended Coda. The body of the movement is in abridged sonata
form, _i.e._, there is a complete Exposition with first, second and
closing themes, and the usual Recapitulation, but _no_ Development
proper. This lack is made good by considerable variation and expansion
in the first part of the Résumé. The Prelude begins Adagio with some
strains which, like smouldering embers, remind us of the sinister
motto of the first movement--note the same dissonant tones A-flat and
F-sharp. The following measures are of indefinite nature, beginning
piano and pizzicato as if a great body were gathering headway slowly.
The pace gradually quickens and we are led through a series of
impetuous stringendo runs to a _ff_ chord which, accompanied by a _ff_
roll on the kettle-drums, sounds like a clap of thunder and which, as
the reverberations die away, ushers in a most moving theme[262]--given
out forte and sempre passionato on the horn over a _pp_ muted tremolo
on the strings with a background of _pp_ trombones, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 262: There is a striking analogy between the intervals of
this theme and those of a well-known peal in a cathedral chime, _e.g._

[Music]

In both the same elemental effect is produced by using the natural
tones of the harmonic series (see page 193).]

This inspired passage[263] has been eloquently described by W.F.
Apthorp as follows:

"Amid hushed, tremulous harmonies in the strings, the horn and
afterward the flute pour forth an utterly original melody, the
character of which ranges from passionate pleading to a sort of wild
exultation according to the instrument that plays it. The coloring is
enriched by the solemn tones of the trombones, which appear for the
first time in this movement. It is ticklish work trying to dive down
into a composer's brain, and surmise what special outside source his
inspiration may have had; but one cannot help feeling that this whole
wonderful episode may have been suggested to Brahms by the tones of
the Alpine horn, as it awakens the echoes from mountain after mountain
on some of the high passes in the Bernese Oberland. This is certainly
what the episode recalls to any one who has ever heard those poetic
tones and their echoes. A short, solemn, even ecclesiastical
interruption by the trombones and bassoons is of more thematic
importance. As the horn-tones gradually die away, and the cloud-like
harmonies in the strings sink lower and lower--like mist veiling the
landscape--an impressive pause ushers in the Allegro."

[Footnote 263: See also a similar eulogy by Weingartner in his _The
Symphony since Beethoven_.]

After the flute has repeated this theme there is an interpolation of
an important choral-like phrase (referred to above), _e.g._

[Music]

for it is later used as the climax of the Finale--in fact, of the
whole work--and its tone of religious fervor, accentuated by the
scoring for trombones and bassoons, is a clear indication of the ideal
message which Brahms meant to convey. The body of the movement,
Allegro non troppo ma con brio, begins with a majestic, sweeping
theme[264] of great rhythmic vitality and elasticity announced by the
strings, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 264: There is a statement in many books that this is a
reminiscence of the theme in the Finale of the Ninth Symphony. How
such a legend started it is difficult to say; it must be due to what
the late W.F. Apthorp called "purblind criticism." For my part I see a
resemblance in only one measure--save that both melodies are in
quadruple rhythm--between the theme of Brahms and the following:--

[Music]]

It is at once repeated with richer scoring and then some exciting
transitional passages lead, after a slight phrase taken from the chief
theme of the prelude, to the second theme, animato, in G major, _e.g._

[Music]

This has some rhythmical expansion and then a quieter part, dolce e
piano, beginning measure 71. Some rushing _ff_ passages bring us, in
measure 107, to the brilliant closing theme with its staccato, triplet
rhythm. The Exposition ends in E minor, in measure 122, after a series
of forte, staccato chords. The Recapitulation begins at once after two
modulatory chords, and though sufficient stress is laid on the _first
theme_, there is so much development of previous material that it
serves for both the customary second and third parts. A good deal of
adverse criticism has been expended on this portion of the movement
and it is possible that Brahms's remarkable technique in handling his
material ran away with him. But the music is always striving toward
some goal, and even if it has to plough through desperate seas, there
is no weakness or faltering. This part of the work is not beautiful in
the popular sense of the term, but no one can fail to be impressed
with its character. A climax is finally reached, in measure 224, with
a fortissimo statement of the chief theme of the prelude, and then,
after this has cooled down, diminuendo e calando, the second theme
enters in the home key. The rest of the recapitulation corresponds
closely with the exposition. The Coda begins, in measure 306, with a
shadowy outline of modulatory chords, as if slumbering forces were
slowly awakening; and, becoming more crescendo and stringendo, reveals
its full glory at the Più Allegro. This portion, based on quickened
phrases of the first theme, seems charged with superhuman energy, and
mounting higher and higher culminates in a majestic proclamation of
the choral-like motto of the prelude, _e.g._

[Music]

On hearing this it always seems as if the heavens above us really
opened. The rest of the Coda is a scene of jubilation with ever more
life and light. The dissonant tones of F-sharp and A-flat try to lift
their heads but this time are crushed forever by the triumphant
fundamental chords of C major, _e.g._

[Music]

The movement, in keeping with its serious message, ends with a
prolonged and brilliant Plagal Cadence in which the double basses and
the trombone surge upward with elemental power.


SONATA FOR VIOLIN AND PIANOFORTE

Of Brahms's three Sonatas for violin and pianoforte, respectively, in
D minor, A major and G major, that in A major has been selected to
give some idea of his chamber music, on account of the spontaneous
appeal of its melodies and because its performance is possible for
fairly well equipped executants. In many respects the D minor Sonata
is the greatest of the three, but it is a work exceedingly difficult
of execution and interpretation. The A major Sonata needs few
comments, as the music speaks for itself. The work is in three
movements, the first in complete sonata-form with the two customary
themes, each of distinct lyric charm and hence eminently suited to the
singing qualities of the violin; the second movement a fusion of the
two normal middle ones, and the Finale a Rondo, freely treated. The
first movement, Allegro amabile, begins with a suave theme, _e.g._,

[Music]

the first interval of which, a descending leap from the third to the
leading tone, always seems to make a distinct appeal.[265] After the
customary transition appears the second theme, announced by the
pianoforte in measure 50, _e.g._,

[Music]

showing Brahms's fondness for contrasted rhythms--three notes to a
beat in one hand against two in the other. After a repetition by the
violin there is a spirited closing theme in measure 75, of great
importance later. The Development, one of Brahms's best, manifests
real organic growth; there is nothing labored or perfunctory. It is
based on the first theme and the closing theme of the Exposition,
_e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 265: It is used at the beginning of three other well-known
melodies, _e.g._, the slow movement of Beethoven's _Ninth Symphony_,
in the middle part of Schumann's _Aufschwung_ and in the first phrase
of Wagner's _Preislied_.]

The Reprise beginning in measure 158, shows the usual treatment. The
Coda, from measure 219, is long and, like codas of Beethoven, has
features of a second development. The movement ends with brilliant
arpeggios in the pianoforte against octaves and double stops in the
violin. In the second movement, Andante tranquillo, in F major, Brahms
fuses[266] together the moods usually associated with the slow
movement and the scherzo, playing one off against the other; the slow
theme appearing three times--at its final appearance with eloquent
modulations--and the rapid one twice, with contrast gained the second
time through pizzicato effects on the violin. The two themes are as
follows:--

[Music]

[Music]

[Footnote 266: This practice he has adopted in several other works and
it is also the structural feature in the slow movement of César
Franck's D minor Symphony.]

The short, dashing Coda is based on the vivace theme, with sonorous
chords on the violin, both pizzicato and arco.

The Finale, Allegretto grazioso, is a convincing example of how such
a rigid form as the Older Rondo can be freshened up and revitalized by
the hand of a master, for the main theme, _e.g._

[Music]

has such genuine melodic life that we always recur to it with pleasure
and yet at each appearance it is so deftly varied that no monotony is
felt. The two episodes afford stimulating contrasts and need no
comment. The main theme at its third appearance is in the subdominant
key, with effective rhythmic modifications. The movement is a
remarkable illustration of idiomatic style for each of the
instruments: the violin part, sustained and cantabile; the pianoforte
part, broken up and of remarkable color and sonority. The last page of
the Coda, almost exclusively in double stops for the violin, brings a
rousing close to a masterpiece.


BALLADE IN G MINOR FOR PIANOFORTE

(SEE SUPPLEMENT NO. 60)

Although the most important factor in Brahms's pianoforte pieces is
Brahms himself, a careful examination of his works in this field shows
that his style is fashioned from an intelligent, and by no means
slavish assimilation of important features in the works of his great
predecessors. Thus we find the same melodic warmth as in Schubert, the
rhythmic vitality and massive harmony so prominent in Schumann and the
extended arpeggios and chords, the color and richness, peculiar to
Chopin. From among the numerous and beautiful compositions of Brahms
for solo pianoforte we have selected the Ballade in G minor because it
represents a somewhat unusual and hence seldom recognized side of his
genius--the specifically dramatic. When a composer calls his piece a
Ballade, as in the case of compositions so entitled by Chopin and
Liszt, we may assume that there is some dramatic or subjective meaning
behind the notes; and the hearer is at liberty to give play to his own
imagination and to receive the message as something more than music in
the ordinary abstract or absolute sense. From the inner evidence of
this Ballade of Brahms it seems to the writer[267] not too fanciful to
consider it a picture of a knight-errant in medieval times setting out
on his adventures. Observe the vigorous swing of the opening theme in
that five-measure rhythm so dear to Brahms. But in the middle portion,
in the romantic key of B major,[268] the woman appears--perhaps some
maiden imprisoned in a tower--and she sings to the knight a song of
such sweetness that he would fain forsake duty, battle, everything!
The contrast of opposing wills[269] is dramatically indicated by an
interpolation, after the maiden's first appeal, of the martial theme
of the knight, as if he felt he should be off instead of lingering,
enchanted by her song. Notwithstanding a still more impassioned
repetition of the song, the Knight is firm, tears himself away and
continues on his course; how great the wrench, being clearly indicated
by the unusual modulations in measures 72-76. The enchanting song,
however, still lingers with him and he dwells with fond regret upon
bygone scenes and dreams which were unattainable. In this piece is
seen Brahms's aristocratic distinction in the treatment of program
music. The subject is portrayed broadly--there are no petty
details--and the music itself, to anyone with a sensitive imagination,
tells the story clearly. Hence a detailed poetic interpretation is out
of place, since only to the suggester would it have meaning.

[Footnote 267: It is to be understood that this is a purely personal
interpretation and if any one wishes to consider the piece merely as
absolute music with a strong masculine theme in the minor, a lyric
melody in the major for the natural contrast, and a coda referring in
a general way to the first theme, there is no way to disprove the
contention. That Brahms, however, was not entirely averse to out and
out programmistic treatment is seen from his two pieces on specific
poetic texts, _i.e._, the first number in op. 10 on the _Scottish
Ballads of Edward_ and the _Lullaby_ in op. 117 on the Scottish
Folk-song _Sleep Soft, My Child_.]

[Footnote 268: The same key that Wagner uses for the end of _Tristan
and Isolde_ and César Franck for the gorgeous Finale of the _Prelude,
Chorale and Fugue_.]

[Footnote 269: The subject is the same as the story of the Sirens in
the _Odyssey_ or of the _Lorelei_ in German Legend.]

So many of Brahms's pianoforte compositions are of great beauty and
significance that, although space is lacking for further comment on
definite examples, we urge the music-lover to study the following: the
second Intermezzo[270] in B-flat minor of op. 117, perhaps the most
beautiful single piece Brahms has written--remarkable for its rhythmic
texture and for the equalization of both hands, which was one of his
chief contributions to pianoforte style; the second Intermezzo of op.
119, the middle part of which is significant for the extended arpeggio
grouping for the left hand (Brahms following Chopin's lead in this
respect); the sixth Intermezzo of op. 118, a superb piece for sonority
and color; the third Intermezzo in op. 119, (grazioso e giocoso) and
the B minor Capriccio op. 76--both in Brahms's happiest vein of
exuberant vitality; the sixth Intermezzo in op. 116, a beautiful
example, in its polyphonic texture, of modernized Schumann; and, above
all, the mighty Rhapsodies in E-flat major, op. 112 No. 4 and the one
in G minor op. 79--this latter, one of Brahms's most dramatic
conceptions, and an example, as well, of complete sonata-form used for
an independent composition.

[Footnote 270: For further comments on the phraseology see _The Rhythm
of Modern Music_ by Abdy Williams, pp. 75-77. We may add that the
pieces called _Intermezzi_, are generally of a meditative, somber
nature; whereas the _Capriccios_ are more sprightly, even whimsical in
spirit.]


SONG--_Meine Liebe ist grün wie der Fliederbusch_

(SEE SUPPLEMENT NO. 61)

Whatever Brahms is or is not, he is universally recognized as an
inspired song-composer and those who do not know his songs are cut off
from one of the greatest joys music has to offer. As Huneker so well
says, "Although his topmost peaks are tremendously remote, and glitter
and gleam in an atmosphere almost too thin for dwellers of the plains,
in his songs he was as simple, as manly, as tender as Robert Burns."
In Brahms's songs we cannot say which is the most significant factor:
the words, the vocal part or the accompaniment; all go together to
make up a perfect whole. Brahms had discernment in the selection of
texts suited to inspire poetic creation. His melodies are always
appropriate to the spirit of the words, yet truly lyric and singable,
and the accompaniment catches and intensifies every subtle shade of
meaning. If any one factor is of special beauty, however, it is the
instrumental part; for here Brahms's great genius in pianoforte style
came to the fore and in utilizing every resource of the instrument to
glorify the spirit of the text, he is a worthy successor of Schubert,
Schumann and Franz. Note how in this song the passionate glow of the
poem is reflected in the gorgeous modulations and sonority of the
pianoforte part. Especially remarkable is the interlude between the
stanzas, with its wealth of dissonances and waves of flashing color.
After this surely no one can say that Brahms had no feeling for
sensuous effect, at any rate on the pianoforte. Other famous songs of
Brahms which should be familiar to the student are the following:
_Wie Melodien zieht es mir_, _Feldeinsamkeit_, _Minnelied_, _Von
ewiger Liebe_, _Immer leiser wird mein Schlummer_, _Sapphische Ode_,
_Vergebliches Ständchen_. An excellent essay on Brahms as a song
composer will be found in the preface to the _Forty Songs of Brahms_
in the Musician's Library (The Oliver Ditson Company).

The foregoing illustrations have made clear, we trust, the inspiration
and power of Brahms's varied message. His music, therefore, must be
approached reverently, sympathetically and with an earnest desire for
a better understanding, for Brahms is veritably a giant.




CHAPTER XVII

CÉSAR FRANCK


Before an appreciation of the significant works and influence of César
Franck can be gained, it is necessary to have a broad historical
perspective of what had been the trend and the limitations of French
music prior to his career. Since the time of Couperin and Rameau,
musical composition in France had been devoted almost exclusively to
opera--with its two types of grand opera and opéra-comique--and in
this field there had been some French musicians of real, though
possibly rather slight, genius: Philidor, Méhul, Grétry, Boieldieu,
Hérold and Auber. One searches in vain through French literature for
great symphonies, string-quartets, violin sonatas or pianoforte
compositions of significance. Berlioz, as we have seen, had composed a
number of orchestral works; but, from the standpoint of absolute
music, even these rather beg the question as they are so extremely
programmistic, dramatic or even theatric. This one-sided development
of French music was chiefly caused by the people's innate fondness for
the drama, and by the national genius for acting, mimicry and dancing.

Prior to the advent of Franck there were two important pioneers in the
broadening tendency which finally became noticeable, Saint-Saëns and
Lalo. For great assimilative power, for versatility, for clarity of
expression and a finish and finesse peculiarly French, Camille
Saint-Saëns (1835-still living) is certainly one of the most
remarkable musicians of the nineteenth century. His works are
numerous, always "well-made" and, though lacking in emotional depth,
by no means without charm and grace. They comprise ensemble works:
trios, etc., several concertos and symphonies and four symphonic
poems. Of these, the third concerto for pianoforte, with its Bach-like
introduction, the third violin concerto, the two symphonic poems, _Le
Rouet d'Omphale_ and _Phaëton_ and, in particular, the third symphony
in C minor, still hold their own. Whatever Saint-Saëns has to say is
well said; and if the French have modified their previous opinion that
the only vehicle for musical expression was the opera, it is largely
through the influence of his compositions. This C minor symphony,
first performed in London in 1886, shares with Lalo's symphony in G
minor (1887) the claim to be, in all French literature, the first
instrumental work of large scope free from programmistic tendencies.
Saint-Saëns[271] and Lalo fairly popularized the Sonata form and their
works are worthy of great respect; since, through them, the public
became accustomed to symphonic style and was prepared for the
subsequent greater works of Franck, d'Indy and Chausson. Although not
so versatile as Saint-Saëns nor so varied in output, Eduard Lalo
(1823-1892) should decidedly not be overlooked. He was of Spanish
origin and this racial strain is noticeable in the vivacity of his
rhythm, in the piquant individuality of his melodies and in his
brilliant and picturesque orchestration. His characteristic work is
represented by a series of Concertos and Rhapsodies in which he
employs Spanish, Russian and Norwegian themes. He did not escape the
French predilection for operatic fame and his best work is probably
the well-known opera _Le Roi d'Ys_, from which the dramatic overture
is often played separately. His G minor symphony, however, will always
be considered an important landmark in the development of French
instrumental music.[272]

[Footnote 271: For further comments on the style and influence of
Saint-Saëns see the essay Mason's _From Grieg to Brahms_; the article
by Professor E.B. Hill in the third volume of the _Art of Music_; and,
for some pungent and witty remarks, the Program Book of the Boston
Symphony Orchestra (edited by Philip Hale) for Nov. 22, 1918.]

[Footnote 272: For a comprehensive and discriminating account of his
style see the Boston Symphony Orchestra Program Book, for January 17,
1919.]

César Franck (1822-1890) was a composer of such innate spirituality
that to analyze and classify him in a formal manner seems well-nigh
irreverent. His music once heard is never forgotten, and when
thoroughly known is loved for all time. Nor is an elaborate
biographical account necessary; for Franck, more than any other modern
composer, has been fortunate in that his life and works have been
sympathetically presented to the world by a distinguished
contemporary, his most famous pupil d'Indy--himself a gifted composer
and a man of rare literary powers. His biography of César Franck (in
French and in English) should certainly be read by all who would keep
abreast of modern tendencies. Franck's message, however, is so
remarkable and his style so individual, that a few definite comments
may be made concerning the structural features of his work and the
essential attributes, thereby expressed, of his inspiring personality.
Franck was a Belgian born at Liège--one of that long line of musicians
who, though born elsewhere, have become thoroughly identified with
French thought and standards; and there is much in his music which
finds a parallel in the literary qualities of another Belgian artist,
Maeterlinck, for in both is that same haunting indefiniteness, that
same symbolic aspiration. Nothing in Franck is rigid, square-toed; his
music is suggestive of a mystic idealism, the full expression of
which, from its very nature is unattainable. Franck's outward life was
simple, without excitement or diversion of any kind. When he was not
giving lessons or composing, he was active in the service of the Roman
Catholic Church, in which he was a devout believer. For a number of
years he was organist at Sainte Clotilde, and his style thereby was
influenced strongly. A distinct note of religious exaltation runs
through much of his music; for Franck was a fine character, of
spotless purity of life and of such generosity and elevation of soul
that his pupils looked upon him as a real father and always called him
"Pater Seraphicus." He was universally acknowledged to be the greatest
improviser on the organ since Bach himself. Even Liszt, who heard him
in 1866, left the church, lost in amazement; evoking the name of the
great Sebastian as the only possible comparison.

Franck's services to the development of music are twofold: 1st, as an
inspired composer of varied works, which are more and more becoming
understood and loved; 2d, as a truly great teacher, among his notable
pupils being d'Indy, Chausson, Duparc, Ropartz, and the gifted but
short-lived Lekeu. In Franck's music, fully as remarkable as the
content--the worthy expression of his poetic nature--is its organic
structure. He was the first composer of the French School to use
adequately the great forms of symphonic and chamber music which had
been worked out hitherto by the Germans: Bach, Haydn, Mozart,
Beethoven, etc. If during the last thirty years, composers of the
modern French School have put forth a number of instrumental works of
large dimensions (chamber music, symphonies, symphonic poems and
pianoforte sonatas), it is to Franck more than to any other man, by
reason of his own achievements in these fields and his stimulating
influence on others, that this significant fact is due. A striking
feature of Franck's music is the individual harmonic scheme,
fascinating because so elusive. He was a daring innovator in
modulations and in chromatic effect; and has, perhaps, added more
genuinely new words to our vocabulary than any one since Wagner. The
basis of Franck's harmony is the novel use of the so-called augmented
harmonies which, in their derivation, are chromatically altered
chords. These are resolved by Franck in a manner remarkably free, and
are often submitted to still further chromatic change. In revealing
new possibilities he has, in fact, done for these chords what Wagner
did for the chord of the ninth. Any page of Franck's music will
exemplify this statement, and as an illustration we have cited, in the
Supplement, the first part of the Prelude in E major. A life-long
student of Bach and Beethoven, Franck believed--as a cardinal
principle--that great ideas were not enough; they must be welded
together with inexorable logic. And so his chief glory as a musical
architect is the free use he makes of such organic forms as the Canon,
the Fugue and the Varied Air. Franck was likewise a pioneer in
establishing in a sonata or symphony a new conception as to the
relationship of the movements. This he effected by the use of what may
be called "generative motives" which, announced in the first movement
of a work, are found with organic growth, modulatory and rhythmic, in
all the succeeding portions. Such a method of gaining unity had been
hinted at by Beethoven in his Fifth Symphony, was further developed by
Schumann and Liszt and, since the example of Franck, has become a
recognized principle in all large cyclic works. The following estimate
of his music by F. Baldensperger is worthy of citation. "The
contemplative character of Franck's music which explains his entire
technique is rare at the epoch in which his life was cast, an epoch of
realism, generally inspired by a taste for the picturesque and the
dramatic. Posterity will place César Franck in a niche similar to that
of Puvis de Chavannes, whose inspiration, indifferent to all worldly
solicitations, flowed willingly, like that of Franck, into the paths
of reverie, and pursued its way like a beautiful river of quiet
waters, undisturbed by waves or rapids, and reflecting the eternal
calm of the sky."

As representative works[273] we have chosen, for analytical comments
the _D minor Symphony_ (Franck's only work in this field), the
_Sonata_ for violin and pianoforte and the _Symphonic Variations_ for
pianoforte and orchestra. Franck has also composed a very beautiful
Quintet for strings and pianoforte--considered by some the most
sublime chamber work of recent times; a String Quartet, notable for
its interrelationship of themes and movements; two elaborate
compositions for pianoforte solo, the _Prelude, Chorale and Fugue_
(the fugue showing a masterly combination of strict fugal style and
free form) and the _Prelude, Aria and Finale_; a wealth of organ
works--the three _Chorales_ being of special beauty--and several
Symphonic Poems of lesser importance. His purely vocal works,
oratorios and church music lie outside the province of this book.

[Footnote 273: On account of the length of these works it is
impossible to include any of them in the Supplement.]

The Symphony[274] in D minor is in three movements; the first in
complete and elaborate sonata-form, the second a fusion of the two
customary middle movements, and the Finale (though fundamentally on a
sonata-form basis) an organic summing-up of the chief themes of the
entire work. The first movement begins, Lento, with the main theme
proper (thesis) the motive[275] of which is the foundation of the
whole work, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 274: Study, if possible, the orchestral score. For
class-room work there is an excellent four-hand arrangement by the
composer, and one for two hands by Ernest Alder.]

[Footnote 275: This terse phrase is identical with motives from
several other works, _e.g._, the beginning of Liszt's _Les Préludes_,
the motive "Muss es sein?" in Beethoven's quartet, opus 135, and the
Fate motive in Wagner's _Valkyrie_.]

The phraseology of the theme is noticeable for its flexibility; since
the first phrase is expanded to five measures and the second phrase
(antithesis), with a descending motive, to seven, _e.g._

[Music]

The harmony of this second phrase illustrates a striking feature in
Franck's style, namely the fact that his resolutions seldom come out
as expected but, instead, drift imperceptibly into other channels. In
measure 13 there begins a long series of modulatory developments of
the main theme--of a preludial nature--but _not_ a mere prelude in the
ordinary sense. That this entire opening portion is the _main body_
of the work is seen by a comparison with what takes place at the
beginning of the recapitulation. In measure 29, allegro non troppo, we
begin with a presentation of the motive in the usual first-movement
mood. The answering phrase, antithesis, is now quite different; and,
in measure 48, is developed--with some new contrapuntal voices--to a
half cadence in F minor. This whole portion, both the Lento and the
Allegro, is now repeated almost literally (the one slight change being
in measures 56-57) in this new key, a minor third higher than the
original. To begin a first movement in this way, _i.e._, with such a
strong contrast of moods is very novel and striking, but as Franck was
a devoted student of Beethoven, it would seem that, by presenting his
theme in different strata, he was simply expanding the practise[276]
of that master in order to impress his message upon the listener's
memory. The repetition of the Allegro part now leads through some rich
modulations to the entrance of the second theme, in measure 99. This
lovely melody, characteristic of Franck's tenderness,

[Music]

is noteworthy for the imitations between the violins and the 'cellos
and basses. It shows, furthermore, that peculiar quality in Franck's
style which comes from his elusive modulations. In measures 109-110 we
are at a loss to tell just what direction the music will take when
almost miraculously, in measure 111, we find ourselves in D-flat
major--in which key the whole theme is now repeated. Some stimulating
modulations bring us, in measure 129, to a most energetic and aspiring
melody, considered by some another part of the second theme, but which
certainly has the note of a closing theme and also the structural
position of a closing theme, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 276: See for example the opening measures of the _Waldstein_
and of the _Appassionata_ Sonata.]

It is developed with great brilliancy through a series of mediant
modulations, in which the originality of Franck's harmonic scheme is
very apparent. The exposition ends with some dreamy, pianissimo
reminiscences of the closing theme in the mediant keys of F, D and B
major, delicately scored for the wood-wind instruments and horns. The
development begins, in measure 191, with the motive of the closing
theme which, combined with other phrases from the exposition, is used
persistently in the bass for a number of measures. The material is
developed climactically until, in measure 229, we find an impressive
treatment of the second descending phrase of the first theme--originally
in augmentation and later in diminution, _e.g._

[Music]

and

[Music]

The rest of the development is clearly derivable from material already
presented. After a final _ff_ climax there begins, in measure 287, a
series of beautiful entries _pp_ of the closing theme for the
clarinet, oboe and flute. This is the spot in a sonata-form movement
where appears the hand of the master; for the excitement of the free
fantasy must cool down without entirely dying out, and there must also
be a fresh crescendo of energy for the restatement of themes in the
part following. Franck handles the situation with convincing skill;
and some climactic measures, in which the main theme hints at the
return, lead us, in measure 333, to the recapitulation. This is one of
the most powerful and eloquent parts of the movement, for the whole
first theme is presented canonically--the announcement in the
trombones, tuba and basses being answered, a half measure later, by
trumpets and cornets. The rest of the recapitulation, with necessary
modulations and slight expansion, corresponds closely to the first
portion. The coda, beginning after the same echo-effects heard at the
close of the exposition, is founded on one of the counterpoints of the
first subject, _e.g._

[Music]

Gathering headway it leads to an imposing assertion _fff_, in canon
form, of the main motto which concludes, with a widely spaced chord,
in the brilliant[277] orchestral key of D major.

[Footnote 277: Brilliant by reason of the fact that the four principal
tones in D major, D, A, G, E are _open_ strings on the violin.]

The second movement begins with a series of subdued, pizzicato chords
(for strings and harp) which establish the mood and later furnish the
harmonic background for the main theme. This haunting melody,
announced--in measure 16--by the English horn and afterwards
strengthened by the clarinet and flute, is clearly derived from the
motto of the first movement, _e.g._

[Music]

and is a notable example of the free phraseology and long sweep
peculiar to Franck. Although extending 32 measures it never loses its
continuity, for every measure grows inevitably from what has preceded.
It begins with two identical eight-measure phrases; the second of
which, with a different harmonic ending, is varied by a cantabile
counter theme in the violas--causing thereby, with the upper voice,
some delightful dissonant effects. The last eight-measure phrase, also
varied by a counterpoint in the 'cellos, ends with a characteristic,
Franckian modulation; keeping us in suspense until the last moment,
and then debouching unexpectedly into B-flat major. In this key there
follows a long-breathed, cantabile melody--at first for strings alone,
but scored with increasing richness. It abounds in modulatory changes
and expresses, throughout, the note of mystical exaltation so
prominent in Franck's nature. It ends in measures 81-86 with an
eloquent cadence, largamente and pianissimo, in B-flat major and is
followed by a partial restatement of the first theme; thus giving, to
this portion of the movement, a feeling of three-part form. Then,
after some preliminary phrases, begins the piquant theme in G minor,
in triplet rhythm, which takes the place of the conventional Scherzo,
_e.g._,

[Music]

for, as we have stated, the structural feature of this movement is the
fusion of the two customary middle movements. This theme, mostly _pp_
(con sordini and vibrato)--daintily scored for strings and light
wood-wind chords--closes, in measures 131-134, with a cadence in G
minor. The following portion, beginning in E-flat major, but often
modulating--its graceful theme sung by the clarinets, dolce
espressivo, answered by flutes and oboes--_e.g._,

[Music]

evidently takes the place of a trio and is one of the most poetic
parts of the movement. After some effective development there is a
return, in measure 175, to the G minor scherzo-theme in the strings;
soon joined, in measure 183, by the slow theme on the English
horn--the structural union of the two moods being thus established,
_e.g._

[Music]

The rest of the movement is a free but perfectly organic improvisation
on the chief melodies already presented. It is richly scored, with
dialogue effects between the several orchestral choirs; especially
beautiful are the two passages in B major, poco più lento, scored _pp_
for the complete wood-wind group and horns. The closing measures have
lovely echoes between wood-wind and strings, and the final cadence is
one of the most magical in all Franck; holding us off to the very last
from our goal and finally reaching it in a chord of unforgettable
peace and satisfaction, _e.g._

[Music]

The Finale in D major, allegro non troppo, is a remarkable example in
modern literature of that tendency, growing since Beethoven, not to
treat the last movement as an unrelated independent portion but,
instead, as an organic summing up of all the leading themes. This
cyclic use of themes--transferring them from one movement to
another--is one of Franck's important contributions to musical
architecture. The movement has two themes of its own, _e.g._

[Music: 1st theme]

[Music: 2d theme]

and at first proceeds along regular sonata-form lines, _i.e._, with an
exposition, development and recapitulation. After vigorous summons to
attention the first theme is given out by the 'cellos and bassoons. It
is expanded at some length, repeated _ff_ by the full orchestra, and
then after bold modulations leads, in measure 72, to the second theme
in B major, happily called by Ropartz the "theme of triumph."[278]
After a quieter portion of sombre tone in B minor we reach, in measure
124, an interpolation of the slow movement theme, _e.g._,

[Music]

sung by the English horn against a triplet accompaniment in the
strings; the fundamental beat--the time now changed from 2/2 to
3/4--preserving the same value. Now we begin to foresee that this
theme is to be the climax of the whole work. In measure 140 the
development proper is resumed; based, at first, on some modulatory and
imitative treatment of the first theme and followed by two _ff_
sostenuto announcements of the jubilant second theme. After these have
subsided there are a number of measures (più lento) of a shadowy
outline, developed from preceding melodic phrases. The pace gradually
quickens, the volume of sound increases and we are brought, through a
series of pungent dissonances and stimulating syncopations, to a
brilliant assertion of the first theme in D major. This again waxes
more and more eloquent until it bursts into a truly apocalyptic
proclamation of the slow movement theme for full orchestra which,
closing in D major, is the real climax of the movement and indeed of
the work. Franck, however, still wishes to impress upon us some of his
other thoughts--they are really too lovely not to be heard once
more--and so, after an intermediary passage consisting entirely of
successive ninth chords,[279] there is a reminiscence of the whole
closing theme of the first movement now for low strings alone--the
violins playing on the G string--later for the wood-wind and finally
echoed by the high strings _ppp_. As this fades away we reach one of
the most inspired passages of the whole work--in its mood of
mysterious suggestion truly indescribable. Over a slow elemental kind
of _basso ostinato_ there appear first the dramatic motto and then
other portions of preceding themes, as if struggling to come to the
light. A long exciting crescendo leads to a complete statement of the
main theme of the Finale, with a canonic treatment of which the work
ends, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 278: The scoring of this theme for trumpets, cornets and
trombones has been severely criticized and it is true that the cornet
is an instrument to be employed and played with discretion. The
writer, however, has heard performances of this work in which the
cornets seemed to give just that ringing note evidently desired by
Franck.]

[Footnote 279: The harmony of this passage is most characteristic of
Franck and should be carefully studied.]

That both the first and last movements end with canons is indeed
noteworthy; Franck thus clearly showing his belief that in no other
way than by polyphonic imitation could such intensity of utterance be
gained.


SONATA FOR VIOLIN AND PIANOFORTE IN A MAJOR

This Sonata ranks with those of Brahms as being among the great works
in its class. Some of its lovers, in fact, would risk an unqualified
superlative and call it the greatest. It certainly is remarkable for
its inspired themes, its bold harmonies, its free and yet organic
structure and for that sublime fervor which was the basis of Franck's
genius. It is, in two respects, at least, a highly original work: in
the unusual moods of the several movements, and in the relationship
between the two instruments. For although it is a violin sonata, the
emphasis in many respects is laid on the pianoforte part which
requires great virtuoso power of performance,--the violin, at times,
having the nature more of an obligato. There are four movements, the
first in abridged sonata form, _i.e._, there is no development; the
second in complete and elaborate sonata form; the third, a kind of
free rhapsody, supplying an intermezzo between the third and fourth
movements and organically connected with the Finale. This, in free
rondo-form, with a main theme of its own treated canonically, sums up
the chief themes which have preceded. The work exemplifies Franck's
practise of generative themes; for d'Indy claims[280] that the whole
structure is based on three motives, _e.g._,

[Music]

the rising and falling inflexion of which he typifies by what is
called a "torculus" ([torculus symbol])! Whether such minute analysis
is necessary for the listener may be open to question; but it is true
that in hearing the work one is struck by the homogeneity of the
material. The first movement is an impassioned kind of revery--in a
mood more often associated with the slow movement, in character
somewhat like the beginning of Beethoven's C-sharp minor Sonata. After
some preludial ninth chords the dreamy first theme is given out, molto
dolce, by the violin, supported by rich harmonies on the pianoforte,
the use of the augmented chords being prominent, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 280: See his _Course in Composition_, book II, pp. 423-426.]

Some natural expansion and development lead, in measure 31, to the
broad and vigorous second theme, sempre forte e largamente, announced
by the pianoforte, _e.g._

[Music]

This ends in F-sharp minor and is at once followed by a closing
portion, _i.e._, a repetition of the second theme with an elaborate
arpeggio accompaniment and some fragmentary phrases of the first theme
on the violin. Its last measures[281] are striking for the bold use of
augmented chords and for the wide spacing which gives an organ-like
sonority. The recapitulation, beginning in measure 63 with still
richer harmonization, is almost identical with the exposition; the
second theme appearing logically in the home key. The closing measures
of the coda, which starts in measure 97, illustrate Franck's genius in
the chromatic alteration of chords.

[Footnote 281: Note the correspondence between these measures in the
first part and the measures just before the end in the second part.]

The second movement, in a structural sense the most normal of the
four, speaks for itself. It is stormy and dramatic, with a number of
passages marked passionato and molto fuoco, and presents a rather
unusual side of Franck's quiet nature. The two themes are strong and
well contrasted: the first for the pianoforte, the second for the
violin, _e.g._

[Music: 1st theme]

[Music: 2d theme]

The development begins at the quasi lento, measure 80, with the second
(_b_) of the generative motives which is to play an important role in
the Fantasia and the Finale. It is rather broken up into sections, but
holds the interest through its unflagging rhythmic vigor and daring
dissonances. Franck's contrapuntal skill is shown here in the closing
measures (130-134) where a phrase from the second theme on the violin,
dolcissimo espressivo, is united with a phrase of the first theme on
the pianoforte, hinting at the return. The recapitulation, beginning
in measure 138, is perfectly normal and leads to a coda which,
becoming more and more animated, ends with brilliant bravura effects
for each instrument.

The third movement, entitled _Recitative-Fantasia_, is notable for its
long declamations for the violin alone, and for its introduction of a
theme from the preceding movement and of one to be repeated in the
Finale. Thus the organic relationship between the various movements is
shown and is still further emphasized in the Finale. The mood is often
very impassioned (once _fff_) and dramatic, with several passages
specifically marked. This music alone, which sounds like nothing
before or since, would stamp Franck as an absolutely original genius.
In measure 53 appears a long pianissimo meditation by the violin on a
phrase--the second generative motive (_b_)--from the preceding
movement, supported by beautifully spaced arpeggio chords on the
pianoforte, _e.g._

[Music]

In measure 71 occurs the first appearance of the bold theme which is
to be twice used for episodes in the Finale, _e.g._

[Music]

The closing cadence[282] of the movement, one of the most original and
truly beautiful in all literature as it seems to the writer, furnishes
a marvellous contrast to the stormy measures immediately preceding.

[Footnote 282: Already cited on page 57, Chapter IV.]

The Finale is perhaps the most spontaneous canon in existence, an
imitative dialogue between the two instruments; this form (which is
often rigid and mechanical) being used so easily that it seems as if
each instrument were naturally commenting upon the message of the
other. Observe also the sonorous background provided for the violin
melody by the widely spaced chords on the pianoforte, _e.g._

[Music]

The first episode, beginning in F-sharp minor at measure 38, is based
on the third generative phrase (_c_) brought over from the Fantasia
and embroidered by running passages (delicato) on the violin. This
leads to a return of the canonic first theme which, with an
interchange of statement and answer and with free modulations, is
developed to a brilliant climax--the canon still persisting--in the
dominant key of E major. Some transitional modulations, in which the
excitement cools down, bring us to the second episode, in B-flat
minor. This at first develops the phrase (_b_) from the middle part of
the second movement, _e.g._

[Music]

and later, also in the bass, a phrase from the main theme, _e.g._

[Music]

It is soon followed by a bold entrance of the dramatic theme from the
Fantasia which, twice presented--the second time grandioso--leads to a
thrilling cadence in C major. The third and last refrain is a complete
restatement of the original canon and closes in A major with a still
more brilliant imitative treatment of the passage formerly in the
dominant. The last measures--with the high trill on the violin and
cutting dissonances on the pianoforte--are far too exciting for mere
verbal description.


SYMPHONIC VARIATIONS FOR PIANOFORTE AND ORCHESTRA

This is one of Franck's most significant works, containing all his
individual characteristics: melodic intensity, novel chromatic harmony
and freedom of form combined with coherence. Franck always claimed
that the variation form, rightly treated, was a perfect medium for
free, imaginative expression; surely this work is a manifestation of
his belief. A careful study will justify the statement that his style
is founded on that of Bach and Beethoven; for the naturalness of these
melodic variations can be compared only with the _Passacaglia in C
minor_, and the general structure of the work finds its prototype in
the Finale of the _Heroic Symphony_. It is a set of free variations,
or rather organic transformations of two themes; the first sombre,
entirely in the minor, the second brighter, with some passing emphasis
on the major. The variations are not numbered and there are no rigid
stops; though, of course, when objective points are reached, there is
natural punctuation. The two themes, as follows--a striking example of
Franck's peculiar harmonic scheme--should be carefully studied, _e.g._

[Music: 1st theme]

[Music: 2d theme]

The work opens with a series of restless dotted notes for the strings
_ff_ which diminish and retard to an entrance of the first theme, più
lento, for the pianoforte; the two phrases of which are interrupted by
a passage, somewhat modified, from the introduction. Some preludial
measures, expanding the material presented, bring us at B[283] to a
premonitory statement of the second theme _pp_ (in wood-wind and
pizzicato strings) over a muffled roll of the kettle-drums on C-sharp,
_e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 283: The indication by letters is the same in the full score
as in the version for two pianofortes.]

Then follows a long rhapsodic presentation of the first theme for
pianoforte solo--the melody in octaves and the accompaniment in the
widest arpeggios possible. This passage is one of great sonority and
reveals clearly the influence of the organ upon Franck's style. Some
further measures of general development, containing at E a
reminiscence of the first theme, bring us (after an elaborate
half-cadence on the dominant of F-sharp minor) to the entrance of the
second theme. Now that all the melodic material has been presented,
Franck allows it to grow and blossom. In the first variation at F we
have phrases of the second theme broken up into a dialogue between
strings, wood-wind and pianoforte; and in the second at G the violas
and 'cellos sing the whole second theme accompanied by some ingenious
figuration on the pianoforte. This is followed at H by a brilliant
amplification for the solo instrument, lightly accompanied on the
orchestra, of phrases already heard and leads at I to a fortissimo
orchestral tutti in D major--the next variation--which proclaims a
portion of the second theme. This is developed with great power on
both instruments and is combined, nine measures after J, with a
variant of the first theme. At K there is a bold treatment of the
second theme (sostenuto) for oboes and clarinets against rushing
octaves on the pianoforte.

At L we have some further development of the second theme, the melody
being in the strings with a background of broken triplet chords on the
pianoforte. We now reach at M--molto più lento--the most poetic
variation of the work. All the 'cellos, dolce e sostenuto, sing the
second theme in the rich key of F-sharp major, the closing phrases
answered by the wood-wind; while the pianoforte supports them with
coloristic, arabesque-like broken chords containing a melodic pattern
of their own. At N the 'cellos continue with phrases from the first
theme, the accompaniment being in extended arpeggios against a
background of sustained strings (_ppp_ con sordino). A climax is
gradually reached which ends, smorzando, with a descending chromatic
run on the pianoforte, followed by a long trill on C-sharp which
ushers in the closing portion of the work. The structure, as a whole,
is divided into three main portions: the first preludial, the second
sombre and often meditative--largely in the minor--the third entirely
in the major and of extraordinary brilliance and vivacity. At the
Allegro non troppo after the trill, we find a variant of the first
theme for the 'cellos and basses in F-sharp major, _e.g._,

[Music]

accompanied by broken chords on the pianoforte and wood-wind. This is
followed at P by a free treatment for pianoforte, con fuoco, of the
first theme which develops at Q into a most pianistic presentation (in
the upper register of the instrument) of the phrase just announced by
the 'cellos. In the fifth measure after R the basses begin, pizzicato
but forte, a modified statement of the second theme, accompanied by a
new counter melody on the pianoforte, dolce ma marcato, _e.g._

[Music]

This leads into a brilliant climax for orchestra alone based on the
first theme which, at the very end, modulates to E-flat major. Then
follows an episodical portion of unusual beauty--a long, dreamy
passage, dolce rubato, for solo pianoforte, in which the first theme
is merely hinted at in shadowy outlines, _e.g._

[Music]

Abounding in fascinating modulations and coloristic effects it shows
Franck's genius equally for real melodic germination with an avoidance
of all perfunctory manipulation of his material. This leads, four
measures after T, to an entrance _pp_ in the wood-wind, of a variant
of the first theme. Due to the effect of contrasted accents the
passage is most exciting--two rhythms being treated at once. A climax
for full orchestra brings us at V to a repetition of the former
pianoforte presentation of the first theme, followed as before, at W
by the counter-melody against the second theme, forte, in the basses.
The first theme, now in complete control, is here proclaimed most
eloquently in antiphonal form between the full orchestra and
pianoforte, _e.g._

[Music]

The work ends with a rapid iteration, molto crescendo, of the first
motive--in diminution. Now that we have reviewed the entire
composition, there is one feature worthy of special emphasis. The
structure as a whole (as we have stated) is clearly divided into three
main parts; but when we examine the third part by itself, we find that
it follows the lines of the sonata-form. For there is a first portion,
with a main theme in F-sharp major, and a second theme--the new
melody--in D major; the passage for pianoforte in E-flats major stands
for the development, and the movement concludes with a distinct third
portion, both first and second theme being in the home key. Thus the
structure represents a carefully planned union of the variation form
and the sonata-form which were special favorites of Franck. The work,
which, after earnest study, will surely be enjoyed and loved, ranks
with the _Istar Symphonic Variations_ by d'Indy and the two sets on
themes from Paganini by Brahms as the acme of what the variation form
may indeed be when treated by a master.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE MODERN FRENCH SCHOOL--D'INDY AND DEBUSSY


Not only as the most distinguished of César Franck's pupils, but by
reason of his undoubted musicianship and marked versatility--his works
being in well nigh every form--Vincent d'Indy (1851-still living) is
rightly considered to be the most representative composer of his
branch of the modern French school.[284] Whether history will accord
to him the rank of an inspired genius it is as yet too early to
decide; but for the sincerity and nobility of his ideas, for his
finished workmanship and the influence he has exerted, through his
many-sided personality, in elevating public taste and in the education
of young musicians, he is worthy of our gratitude. D'Indy is a
patriotic Frenchman believing profoundly that French music has an
important _rôle_ to bear; who has incarnated this belief in a series
of works of such distinction that, if not unqualifiedly loved, they
at least compel recognition. If he swings a bit too far in his
insistence upon the exclusive glories of French genius, let us
remember that the modern Germans[285] have been just as one-sided from
their point of view--and with even less tangible proof of attainment.
For it seems incontestable that, since the era of Wagner and Brahms,
the modern French and Russian Schools have contributed to the
development of music more than all the other nations combined. It is
for us in America who, free from national prejudice, can stand off and
take an impartial view, to appreciate the good points in _all_
schools. A detailed account of d'Indy's life and works will not be
necessary, for the subject has been admirably and comprehensively
treated by D.G. Mason in his set of _Essays on Contemporary Composers_
and in the article by E.B. Hill in the _Art of Music_, Vol. 3.

[Footnote 284: This school may be said to contain two groups: one, the
pupils of César Franck--d'Indy, Chausson, Duparc, Rousseau, Augusta
Holmès and Ropartz, the chief feature in whose style is a
modernization of classic practice; a second consisting of Debussy,
Ravel, Dukas and Florent Schmitt, whose works manifest more extreme
individualistic tendencies.]

[Footnote 285: The well-known German scholar and editor Max
Friedländer, who visited this country in 1910, acknowledged--in a
conversation with the writer--that he had never even heard of
Chabrier!]

D'Indy's compositions, as in the case of Franck, are not numerous, but
finely wrought and of distinct and varied individuality. His chief
instrumental[286] works comprise a _Wallenstein Trilogy_ (three
symphonic poems based on Schiller's drama) notable for descriptive
power and orchestral effect; a Symphony for orchestra and pianoforte
on a mountain air[287]--one of his best works, because the folk-song
basis furnishes a melodic warmth which elsewhere is sometimes lacking;
a set of Symphonic Variations on the Assyrian legend of Istar; a
remarkable Sonata for violin and pianoforte; a String-Quartet, all the
movements of which are based on a motto of four notes, and lastly the
Symphony in B-flat major--considered his masterpiece--in which the
same process of development from generative motives is followed as in
César Franck. All these works contain certain salient characteristics
proceeding directly from d'Indy's imagination and intellect. There is
always an ideal and noble purpose, a stoutly knit musical fabric and
melodies--d'Indy's own melodies, sincerely felt and beautifully
presented. Whether they have abounding power to move the heart of the
listener is, indeed, the point at issue. Since d'Indy is on record as
saying, "There is in art, truly, nothing but the heart that can
produce beauty," it is evident that he believes in the emotional
element in music. That there is a difference of opinion however, as to
what makes emotional power is shown by his estimate of Brahms (set
forth in his _Cours de Composition Musicale_, pp. 415-416) in the
statement that, though Brahms is a fine workman, his music lacks the
power to touch the heart (faire vibrer le coeur). There is no doubt
that, in any question of Brahms versus d'Indy, such has not been the
verdict of outside opinion. D'Indy is admired and respected, whereas
Brahms has won the love of those who know him; and the truth in the
saying, "Securus judicat orbis terrarum" is surely difficult to
contravene. D'Indy's melodies can always be minutely analysed[288] and
they justify the test; but we submit that the great melodies of the
world speak to us in more direct fashion. For there is, in his music,
a seriousness which at times becomes somewhat austere. He seems so
afraid of writing pretty tunes or ear-tickling music, that we often
miss a sensuous, emotional warmth. He hates the commonplace,
cultivating the ideal and religion of beauty. Bruneau, himself a noted
French critic and composer, says, "No one will deny his surprising
technique or his unsurpassed gifts as an orchestral writer, but we
might easily wish him more spontaneity and less dryness." We cannot,
however, miss the dignity and elevation of style found in d'Indy's
works or fail to be impressed by their wonderfully planned musical
architecture. His music demands study and familiarity and well repays
such effort. D'Indy's work, as a teacher, centres about the "Schola
Cantorum" so-called, in which several talented American students from
Harvard and other Universities have already worked. Here all schools
of composition are thoroughly studied, and the rigid and formal
methods of the Conservatoire abandoned. D'Indy believes that the
materials for the structure of modern music are to be found in the
Fugue of Bach, and in the cyclical Sonata Form and the free Air with
Variations of Beethoven--these forms, by reason of their inherent
logic and simplicity, allowing scope for infinite freedom of
treatment. D'Indy is also a thoroughly modern composer in that he is
an artist in words as well as in notes. His life of César Franck is a
model of biographical style, and he has recently published a life of
Beethoven refreshingly different from the stock narratives. In fine,
d'Indy is a genius, in whom the intellectual aspects of the art,
rather than purely emotional appeal, are clearly in the ascendant.

[Footnote 286: D'Indy's significant contributions to operatic and
choral literature, such as _Fervaal_, _L'étranger_, _Le Chant de la
Cloche_ and _La Légende de St. Christophe_, lie without our province.]

[Footnote 287: From the Cévennes region whence d'Indy's family
originally came.]

[Footnote 288: See the elaborate analysis by Mr. Mason in the essay
above referred to.]

We shall now comment briefly on one, only, of d'Indy's compositions,
the Symphonic Poem, _Istar_, which is a set of variations[289] treated
in a manner as novel as it is convincing; the work beginning with
variations which gradually become less elaborate until finally only
the theme itself is heard in its simple beauty. This reversal of
customary treatment is sanctioned by the nature of the subject, and
the correspondence between dramatic logic and musical procedure is
admirably planned. The story of the work is that portion of the
Assyrian epic Izdubar which describes, to quote Apthorp's translation
of the French version, "how Istar, daughter of Sin, bent her steps
toward the immutable land, towards the abode of the dead, towards the
seven-gated abode where He entered, toward the abode whence there is
no return." Then follows a description of the raiment and the jewels
of which she is stripped at the entrance to each of the gates. "Istar
went into the immutable land, she took and received the waters of
life. She presented the sublime Waters, and thus, in the presence of
all, set free the Son of Life, her young lover." The structural
novelty of the work is that, beginning with complexity--typifying the
gorgeously robed Istar--the theme discloses itself little by little,
as she is stripped of her jewels, until at last, when she stands forth
in the full splendor of nudity, the theme is heard unaccompanied, like
Isis unveiled or, to change the figure, like a scientific law which
has been disclosed. The work is based on three generative themes; the
second, derived from the first and of subsidiary importance, called by
d'Indy the motif d'appel. It plays its part, however, since it
introduces the work and serves as a connection between the variations,
seven in all. These themes are as follows:

1. Principal theme:

[Music]

2. Motif d'appel.

[Music]

3. Subsidiary theme, in form of a march.

[Music]

[Footnote 289: For a detailed analysis the student is referred to the
account by the composer himself in his _Cours de Composition
Musicale_, part II, pp. 484-486; to Gilman's _Studies in Symphonic
Music_ and to Vol. 3 of Mason's _Short Studies of Great
Masterpieces_.]

By following the poem the imaginative listener can readily appreciate
the picturesque suggestiveness of the composer. The work opens with a
mysterious intoning, by a muted horn, of the motif d'appel, and then
follows a triple presentation of the march theme in F minor, scored
for wood-wind and low strings--the melody sung at first by the violas
and clarinets and later by the bass clarinet and 'cellos. This
original scoring establishes just the appropriate atmosphere for an
entrance to the abode of captivity.

[Music]

The first variation, in F major, employing all the tone-color of the
full orchestra, is a gorgeous picture of the Oriental splendor of
Istar. It is noteworthy that each variation contains a modulation to a
key a semitone higher, thus affording a factor of unity amid the
elaborate flowerings of the musical thought. The second variation, in
E major scored for strings and wood-wind, is significant for the way
in which the original theme is expanded into a flowing melody. The
logical derivation of the fabric from the first intervals of the main
theme is obvious, _e.g._

[Music]

The fourth variation, in F-sharp major, scored for pizzicato strings
and staccato wood-wind, with light touches on horns, trumpets,
cymbals, triangle and harps, introduces the scherzo mood into the work
and with its persistent 5/4 rhythm is of fascinating effect.

[Music]

The loveliest variation for warmth and emotional appeal is the sixth,
in A-flat major (at O in the orchestral score) for strings with the
gradual addition of the wood-wind and harps. Its climax certainly does
much to atone for any dryness found in d'Indy's other works.

[Music]

In the next variation, at P, the trend of the work becomes
increasingly manifest for it is written in only two voices, scored for
flute and violins and is a dramatic preparation for the announcement
of the complete main theme which is now proclaimed in unison by the
full orchestra. The work closes with a transformation of the opening
march into F major, its majestic rhythm symbolizing the successful
result of Istar's quest (See Supplement No. 62.)

Debussy, Claude Achille, (1862-1918) is certainly the embodiment, as a
composer, of Pater's saying that "Romanticism[290] is the addition of
strangeness to beauty"; for when we listen to his music we are
conscious of material and of forms of treatment which we have never
heard before. Debussy has listened to the promptings of his own subtle
imagination and has evolved a style as novel as it is beautiful. As
with all real originators, Debussy at the outset was fiercely
challenged, and his music even to-day calls forth intolerant remarks
on the part of those who are suspicious of all artistic progress and
evolution. In this connection it is worthy of note that the French,
notwithstanding their national doctrine of liberty, have been chary of
applying this to composers who were departing from the beaten path.
Berlioz, whom now they acclaim as one of their greatest artists, was
welcomed as he deserved only after his fame had been established among
the Germans. Bizet was but slightly appreciated during his life.
Franck met with fierce opposition from the routine members of the
profession; and Debussy, although the work by which he won the "Prix
de Rome" in 1884 was acknowledged to be one of the most interesting
which had been heard at the Institute for years, was afterwards
severely criticized for the setting made in Rome to Rossetti's
_Blessed Damozel_ because, forsooth, he had strayed too far from
established and revered tradition. We Americans may have a distinct
feeling of pride in the knowledge that the music of Debussy, the
strongest note of which is personal freedom--the inherent right of the
artist to express in his own way the promptings of his imagination--was
widely studied and appreciated in this land of the free before it had
begun to have anything like a universal acceptance among the French
themselves.

[Footnote 290: From this comparison we should not wish it to be
understood that Debussy is merely an addition to the standard Romantic
group of Schumann, Chopin, Liszt, etc.; his style, however, is surely
Romantic in the broad sense of the term, _i.e._, highly imaginative
and individual.]

But can any connection with the past be traced in the style of this
remarkable[291] composer, and can we discover any sources, in the
world of nature, from which he has derived the materials for his novel
and fascinating harmonies? When we definitely analyze Debussy's
harmonic scheme, we see that he looks both forward and back. Much of
his original tone coloring is derived from the old church modes such
as the Lydian, the Dorian and the Phrygian; for example, the
mysterious opening chords of his opera, and the following passage from
_La Cathédrale engloutie_.

[Footnote 291: The _très exceptionnel, très curieux, très solitaire
Claude Debussy_ as he has been aptly characterized.]

[Music]

He is also extremely fond of a scale of whole tones, which had been
somewhat anticipated by Liszt and members of the Russian[292] school.
In this the normal perfect 4th and 5th and the major 6th become
augmented, thus producing a very peculiar but alluring harmonic basis.

[Music]

[Footnote 292: The first authentic use being probably by Dargomijsky
in his opera the _Stone Guest_.]

[Music]

[Music: _Reflets dans l'eau_]

Modern composers have been feeling for some time that harmonic scope
was needlessly limited by clinging too closely to the major and minor
diatonic scales; and Brahms, Tchaikowsky and Franck have all
introduced the old modes for special contrasts of color. But no one
has used them so subtly as Debussy. In his music they often take the
place of our customary scales with their deep-rooted harmonic
tendencies and perpetual suggestion of traditional cadences. This
return to the greater flexibility and variety of the old modes is a
significant feature in modern music and Debussy's example in this
respect has been highly beneficial. As to his alleged use of new
material, an astute French critic has observed that "a revolution is
merely an evolution rendered apparent." By no means all of music can
be found in nature, but the basis is there, and it remains for the
artistic imagination to select and to amplify. Already many years ago
the scientist Helmholtz said, "Our system of scales and of harmonic
tissues does not rest upon unalterable natural laws, but is partly at
least the result of aesthetic principles of selection, which have
already changed, and will change still further with the progressive
development of humanity."[293] In other words the limits of
receptivity of the human ear cannot be foreseen nor can the workings
of the artistic imagination be prescribed. The so-called Chord of
Nature,[294] consisting of the overtones struck off by any sounding
body, and re-enforced on the pianoforte with its large sounding board,
contains in epitome this basic material of music; and the several
octaves represent in a striking manner the harmonic combinations used
at different periods of development. Thus during the early centuries
nothing but triads were in use; only gradually were 7th chords--those
of four factors--introduced. Wagner was the first to realize the
possibilities of chords of the 9th, 11th, and 13th. In Debussy these
combinations are used as freely as triads, _e.g._

[Music: _Pelléas et Mélisande_]

[Music: _La fille aux cheveux de lin_]

[Music: _Reflets dans l'eau_]

and he has gone far beyond anything known before in a subtle use of
the extreme dissonant elements, his sensitive imagination evidently
hearing sounds hitherto unrealized. This surmise is corroborated by
Debussy's own statement that, while serving as a young man on garrison
duty, he took great delight in listening to the overtones of bugles
and of the bells from a nearby convent. This chromatic style had been
anticipated by Chopin whose use of the harmonic series in those
prismatic, spray-like groups of superadded tones is such a striking
feature in his pianoforte works. There is, therefore, nothing outré or
bizarre in Debussy's idiom; it is but a logical continuation of former
tendencies. His works show great variety and comprise pianoforte
pieces, many songs, a remarkable string quartet, some daringly
original tone-poems for full orchestra, several cantatas, and--most
unique of all--his opera of _Pelléas et Mélisande_, based on the
well-known play by Maeterlinck. A few comments may profitably be made
on each of these types. With few exceptions all his pianoforte pieces
have suggestive titles, _e.g._, _Reflets dans l'eau_, _Jardins sous la
pluie_, _La soirée dans Grenade_, _Poissons d'or_, _Voiles_, _Le vent
dans la plaine_, _Bruyères_. They are mood-pictures in which the
composer has tried to imprison certain elusive states of mind--or the
impressions made on his susceptible imagination by the phenomena of
Nature: the subtly blended hues of a sunset, the changing rhythm of
drifting clouds, the indefinite murmur of the sea, the dripping of
rain. For Debussy, like Beethoven before him, is a passionate lover of
Nature. To quote his own words, he finds his great object lessons of
artistic liberty in "the unfolding of the leaves in Spring, in the
wavering winds and changing clouds." Again, "It benefits me more to
watch a sunrise than to listen to a symphony. Go not to others for
advice, but take counsel from the passing breezes, which relate the
history of the world to those who listen." Thus we see that Debussy
submits himself to the spells of Nature and tries to transmute them
into sound. The only analogies to use in a verbal description of his
music must be drawn from nature, for in each are the same shadowy
pictures, the same melting outlines.[295] Debussy has a close affinity
with that school of painters known as impressionists or
symbolists--Manet, Monet, Dégas, Whistler--and is doing with novel
combinations of sound, with delicate effects of light and shade, what
they have done for modern freedom in color. His music has been called
a "sonorous impressionism." It might equally well be phrased "rhythmic
sound." To those conservatives who find it difficult to think in terms
of musical color, and wish _their_ imagination rather than that of
genius to be the standard, the retort of the artist Whistler is
applicable: To a lady who viewing one of his sunsets remarked, "But,
Mr. Whistler, I have never seen a sunset like that" came the reply
"Yes, Madam, but don't you wish you had?" In his songs Debussy has
been most fastidious as to choice of texts, his favorite poets being
Verlaine, Baudelaire and Mallarmé, called "symbolists," since the aim
of their art is to resemble music and to leave for the reader a wide
margin for symbolic interpretation. His songs throughout are
imaginative and fanciful in the highest degree, and the instrumental
part a beautiful background of color. Of Debussy's compositions for
orchestra the one to win--and possibly to deserve--the most lasting
popularity is _L'après-midi d'un Faune_, which is an extraordinary
translation into music of the veiled visions and the shadowy beings of
an eclogue of Mallarmé in which, as Edmund Gosse says, "Words are
used in harmonious combinations merely to suggest moods or conditions,
never to state them definitely."[296] By perfect rhythmic freedom, and
by delicately-colored waves of sound Debussy has expressed in a manner
most felicitous just the atmosphere of remoteness, and of primeval
simplicity. By many this work is considered the most hypnotic
composition in existence, and the writer trusts that his readers have
heard a poetic interpretation of it by a fine orchestra. The salient
features of Debussy's style are found in _Pelléas et Mélisande_--by
far the most important operatic work since Wagner. Maeterlinck's play
deals with legendary, mysterious, symbolic beings, and the entire
subject-matter was admirably suited to Debussy's genius. As
Maeterlinck says, "The theatre should be the reflex of life, not this
external life of outward show, but the true inner life which is
entirely one of contemplation." This opera is quite different from any
previously written, in that the characters sing throughout in
_recitative_ now calm, now impassioned, but never in set, periodic
arias. In fact, here we have at last a true musical _speech_, which is
indeed another thing from music set to words. Debussy has defended
this peculiar style in the following words: "Melody is, if I may say
so, almost anti-lyric, and powerless to express the constant change of
emotion or life. Melody is suitable only for the song (_chanson_),
which confirms a fixed sentiment. I have never been willing that my
music should hinder, through technical exigencies, the changes of
sentiment and passion felt by my characters. It is effaced as soon as
it is necessary that these should have perfect liberty in their
gestures as in their cries, in their joy as in their sorrow."

[Footnote 293: For an enlightening amplification of this point see the
first chapter of Wallace's _The Threshold of Music_.]

[Footnote 294: See page 193.]

[Footnote 295: For further suggestive comments on Debussy's style
consult the _Essay on Pelléas et Mélisande_ by Lawrence Gilman (G.
Schirmer, New York) and in particular an article by the same author in
the Century Magazine for August, 1918.]

[Footnote 296: Gosse also calls it a _famous miracle of
intelligibility_.]

Now that we may look forward to no more compositions from
Debussy[297]--he died in March, 1918--it is certainly fitting to
attempt a forecast as to the permanent worth of his achievements and
his influence upon future development. Like all music his compositions
may be judged from several points of view: the worth of the content,
the perfection or inadequacy of style and the manner in which the media
of presentation are used. To begin with the last characteristic--there
is no doubt that Debussy has enlarged the resources of our two chief
modern instruments, the pianoforte and the orchestra. By him the
pianoforte is always treated according to its true nature, _i.e._, as
an intimate, coloristic instrument and, in amplifying all its
resources of tone-color, flexible rhythm and descriptive power he is
the worthy successor of Chopin. In his orchestral compositions such as
the _Nocturnes_ (_Clouds_, _Festivals_ and _Sirens_), the _Sea Pieces_
and _Images_, of which the _Rondes de Printemps_ and _Ibéria_ are the
most significant, there is a union of warmth and delicacy as
individual as it is rare. _Ibéria_, in fact, for vitality of
imagination and flawless workmanship may be considered the acme of
Debussy's orchestral style. The great resources of the modern
orchestra are often abused. Compositions are rich and gorgeous but at
the same time inflated, turgid and bombastic. Certain works of Richard
Strauss and Mahler are examples in point. Debussy's treatment,
however, of the varied modern orchestra is remarkable for its economy.
The melodic lines stand out clearly, there is always a rich supporting
background and we are convinced that everything sounds just as the
composer meant. As to the structure and style of his music, these are
more subtle matters to estimate. We may acknowledge at once that
Debussy's style is free and individual, for he has written his music
his own way, with slight regard for academic models. But a thorough
examination of his works shows no evidence of carelessness or
uncertainty of aim. There is, to be sure, nothing of that routine
development of musical material which we associate with classic
practice--instead a free, imaginative growth. But there is always a
definite structural foundation to support the freedom of expression.
This coherence is sometimes gained by a single dominating note about
which everything is grouped, as, in the _Soirée dans Grenade_, the
C-sharp and in the _Reflets dans l'eau_, an F. Most of Debussy's
compositions imply the principles, albeit freely used, of Two- and
Three-part form and the fundamental laws of key-relationship and of
artistic contrast.

[Footnote 297: The best books yet written on Debussy and his style are
those by Mrs. Liebich and Louis Laloy. Consult also the comprehensive
essay by E.B. Hill in Vol. III of the _Art of Music_.]

In considering the value of Debussy's message, _i.e._, the content of
his music, the animus and predilection of the hearer have to be taken
into account. For his music is so intensely subjective and intimate
that you like it or not, as the case may be. Many persons, however,
become very fond of it, when they have accustomed themselves to its
peculiar idiom. The charge that there is in Debussy no melody of a
purely musical nature, as some critics have asserted,[298] seems to
the writer too sweeping and not supported by the inner evidence. It
may be granted that Debussy's melodic line is very fluid and elastic,
like Wagner's "continuous melody," not definitely sectionalized by
balanced phrases or set cadences. But it surely has its own right to
existence--music being pre-eminently the art of freedom--and let us
remember that Nature herself has melting outlines, shadowy vistas and
subtle rhythms. Debussy, in fact, is the poet of the "indefinite" and
the "suggestive" and his music has had a great influence in freeing
expression from scholastic bonds. Even from the standpoint of the
popular conception of "tune" it is difficult to see what objection can
be made to the following melodies:

[Music: _L'isle joyeuse_]

[Music: _Poissons d'or_]

[Music: _Cortège_]

[Footnote 298: See the 2d volume of _Great Composers_ by D.G. Mason
and also the essay on Debussy in _Contemporary Composers_ by the same
author.]

It cannot be denied that such an individual style as Debussy's is
liable to manneristic treatment, though whether he should be called
"the prince of mannerists"[299] is decidedly open to debate. Some
critics feel that he has over-used the whole-tone scale and it must be
confessed, he has a rather affected fondness for a formula of
block-like chords, _e.g._

[Music: _Danse sacrée_]

[Footnote 299: According to Ernest Newman in a well-known article in
the Musical Times (London).]

But these, after all, are but "spots on the sun." To sum up our
conclusions: the following merits in Debussy's music, it seems to me,
cannot be gainsaid. He has widened incalculably the vocabulary of
music and has expressed in poetic and convincing fashion moods which
never before had been attempted. In his work are new revelations of
the power of the imagination. As Lawrence Gilman keenly remarks, "He
has known how to find music (in _Pelléas et Mélisande_) for the
sublime reflection of Arkel, 'If I were God, I should pity the hearts
of men.'" Debussy was also gifted with rare critical ability and many
of his observations are worthy of deep consideration. For
example--"Music should be cleared of all scientific apparatus. Music
should seek humbly to give pleasure; great beauty is possible between
these limits. Extreme complexity is the opposite of art. Beauty should
be perceptible; it should impose itself on us, or insinuate itself,
without any effort on our part to grasp it. Look at Leonardo da Vinci,
Mozart! These are great artists."

No account of modern French music would be satisfactory which omitted
to mention several composers who, though of somewhat lesser importance
than d'Indy and Debussy, have nevertheless achieved works of
distinction and charm. These are Chabrier, Fauré, Duparc, Chausson and
Ravel. Chabrier (1841-1894) is noted for a bold exuberance and
vividness of expression, for a sense of humor and for a power of
orchestral color and brilliance which have not been duplicated. His
style is entirely his own and he is a veritable incarnation of "vis
Gallica." Born in the South of France, the hot blood of that magic
land seems to throb in his music. We have from him several pianoforte
compositions of marked originality, in particular the _Bourrée
Fantasque_, some inimitable songs, _e.g._, _Les Cigales_ and _La
Villanelle des petits Canards_ and, most famous of all, his Rhapsody
for orchestra entitled _España_, based on Spanish themes. This work
has proved to be a landmark in descriptive power and shares with
Rimsky-Korsakoff's _Scheherazade_ the claim of being the most
brilliant piece of orchestral writing in modern times. Some of
Chabrier's best work is in his opera of _Gwendoline_, especially the
Prelude to the second act which is often played by itself.

Although Fauré (1845-still living) is more versatile and prolific than
Chabrier, his fame rests upon his achievements in two fields--the song
and pianoforte composition. Some of his pianoforte pieces are, to be
sure, of a light, _salon_ type; yet in many we find a true, poetic
sentiment and they are all written in a thoroughly pianistic idiom. In
fact, prior to Debussy Fauré was the only Frenchman worthy to compare
in mastery of pianoforte style with Chopin, Schumann and Liszt. As a
song composer Fauré ranks with the highest in modern times. The exotic
charm and finesse of workmanship in such songs as _Clair de Lune_,
_Les Roses d'Ispahan_ cannot be denied and the instrumental part is
always worthy of the composer's genius for pianoforte style, _e.g._,
the accompaniment to _Nell_ being a model in its free polyphony and
richness of effect. Fauré has been fastidious in his selection of
texts and he is fortunate to have been able to avail himself of the
genius of such lyric poets as Leconte de Lisle, Baudelaire, Verlaine,
Sully-Prudhomme and others. Indeed as a song-composer Fauré may fairly
be grouped with the great German masters. His songs are not German
songs, but they are just as subtle in expressing all that is fine in
French spirit as those of Schumann and Brahms in their Teutonic
sentiment. For this reason alone Fauré is a commanding figure in
modern French music. He is also the author of a violin sonata which
has enjoyed a popularity second only to that of Franck and a Quintet
for pianoforte and strings of distinct originality.

Duparc (1848-still living) one of the earliest of César Franck's
pupils--though working in practically but a single field and though by
reason of ill health he has written nothing since 1885--will always
hold high rank for the beauty and breadth of his songs, especially
_L'invitation au Voyage_, _Extase_ and _Phydilé_. This last is
considered by the writer the most exquisite song in modern literature;
its melody, its modulations, its accompaniment alike are
flawless.[300]

[Footnote 300: An excellent collection of modern French songs may be
found in the two volumes published by the Oliver Ditson Co. in the
Musicians Library.]

Chausson (1855-1899) the most gifted of Franck's pupils, though
without d'Indy's strength of character, was killed by an unfortunate
accident[301] just as he was ready for an adequate self-expression. He
had a sensitive imagination, an individual harmonic style; and in
those works which he has left--notably several songs, a Quartet for
pianoforte and strings and the Symphony in B-flat major, op. 20--there
is found a spirit of genuine romantic inspiration.

[Footnote 301: While he was riding a bicycle.]

Although Ravel (1875-still living) cannot claim to be a pioneer like
Debussy--since in his music there are frequent traces of the
exuberance of Chabrier, the suavity of Fauré, the atmosphere and
impressionistic tendencies of Debussy and the exoticism of the
Neo-Russians--yet he is indeed no empty reflection of these men, for
he has his own bold, fantastic style and has been a daring
experimenter in freedom of harmony and structure. One finds a power of
ironic brilliance and of unexpected harmonic transformations certainly
new in modern literature. Ravel[302] is one of the most versatile and
prolific of all the younger Frenchmen having composed significant
works in at least four fields: songs, particularly the set entitled
_Histoires Naturelles_, which reveal an unusual instinct for delicate
description; and pianoforte pieces of which _Miroirs_, the dazzling
tour de force _Jeux d'eau_, the _Valses nobles et sentimentales_, the
_Sonatine_, the _Pavane_ and, above all, the Poems, _Gaspard de la
Nuit_ (_Ondine_, _Le Gibbet_[303] and _Scarbo_) are conspicuous
examples of his style. Furthermore in the field of chamber music are
found a String Quartet, remarkable for inspiration and for certainty
of workmanship, and a Trio (for pianoforte, violin and 'cello) which
is one of the most brilliant modern works, of convincing originality
in its freedom of rhythm, _e.g._, the opening measures of the first
movement.

[Music]

[Footnote 302: The best account of his works and style is to be found
in the volume _Maurice Ravel et son oeuvre_ by Roland Manuel.]

[Footnote 303: _Le Gibbet_ is without doubt the most realistic piece
of musical description in our time.]

Finally, for orchestra his _Spanish Rhapsody_ ranks with Chabrier's
_España_ and Debussy's _Ibéria_ as the acme of descriptive power and
of orchestral color. His _Mother Goose Suite_ (originally a set of
four-hand pieces but since orchestrated with incomparable finesse)
illustrates his humor and play of fancy. It has become a truly popular
concert number. Ravel's chef d'oeuvre the "choreographic symphony"
_Daphnis et Chloé_ displays an extraordinary synthetic grasp, for all
the factors--plot, action, the musical fabric, a large orchestra and a
chorus of mixed voices behind the scenes--are held together with a
master hand. This work ranks with Debussy's _Pelléas et Mélisande_ as
the most significant dramatic work of recent years.

It is evident, we trust, from the foregoing somewhat condensed
estimates that the modern French school is very much alive, that it
has to its credit numerous distinct achievements and that it contains
the promise of still further growth. The French nature, which is
highly emotional and yet, at its best, always controlled[304] by a
regard for fitness and clarity of thought, is particularly suited to
express itself worthily in music, for in no other form of artistic
endeavor is this balance more requisite. Music without emotion is, to
be sure, like "sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal" and dies in short
order. On the other hand, music which is a mere display of crude
emotion soon palls. The works of modern French composers deserve
enthusiastic study for their charm, their finish and their refined
emotional power.

[Footnote 304: Witness the wonderful manifestation of these qualities
by the French in the recent war.]




CHAPTER XIX

NATIONAL SCHOOLS--RUSSIAN, BOHEMIAN AND SCANDINAVIAN


Before beginning an account of Tchaikowsky, the most noted though not
necessarily the greatest of the Russian composers, a few words may be
said concerning nationalism in music, the chief representatives of
which are the Russians, the Bohemians, the Scandinavians and the
Hungarians. Of these, however, the present-day Russian School is the
most active and contributes constantly new factors to musical
evolution. This grafting of forms of expression derived from the
outlying nations on to the parent-stock of music--which for some
three hundred years had been in the exclusive control of Italy,
Germany and France--has been a stimulating factor in the development
of the last half-century. For the idiom of music was becoming somewhat
stereotyped, and it has been noticeably revitalized by the
incorporation of certain "exotic" traits, of which there run through
all national music these three: (1) the use, in their folk-songs, of
other forms of scale and mode than are habitual with ourselves; (2)
the preference given to the minor mode and the free commingling of
major and minor; (3) the great rhythmic variety and especially the use
of groups foreign to our musical sense, such as measures of 5 and 7
beats, and the intentional placing of the accent on parts of the
measure which with us are ordinarily unaccented. Every country has its
folk-songs--the product of national rather than individual genius--but
Russia, in the number and variety of these original melodies is most
exceptional. The Russian expresses himself spontaneously in song, and
so we find appropriate music for every activity or incident in daily
life: planting songs, reaping songs, boating songs, wedding songs,
funeral songs; Russian soldiers sing on the march and even enter upon
a desperate charge with songs on their lips. In certain battles of the
Crimean War this fact caused much comment from the English officers.
For many centuries the bulk of the Russian people has been
downtrodden; and the country, with its endless steppes and gloomy
climate, is hardly such as to call forth the sparkling vivacity found
in the Scandinavian and Hungarian songs. The prevalent mood in Russian
folk-songs is one of melancholy or of brooding, wistful
tenderness--very often in the old Greek modes, the Aeolian, Dorian and
Phrygian. From this we see the close connection existing between the
Russian and Greek Churches. The Russian liturgy is exceedingly old,
and Russian church music, always unaccompanied, has long been
celebrated for its dignified character, especially those portions
rendered by men's voices, which are capable of unusually low
notes,[305] as majestic as those of an organ.

[Footnote 305: In Grove's Dictionary, under Bass, occurs this
statement: This voice, found, or at least cultivated, only in Russia
is by special training made to descend to FF [Music].]

During the entire 18th century the development of music in Russia was
in the hands of imported Italians; the beginnings of a national type
being first made in the works of Glinka, born 1804. By the middle of
the 19th century two schools had arisen, the Neo-Russian group of
Balakireff, Borodin, Cui, Rimsky-Korsakoff and Moussorgsky, who
believed in the extreme development of national traits in melody,
rhythm and color; and a second group which was more cosmopolitan in
its tastes and believed that Russian music, without abandoning its
national flavor, could be written in a style of universal appeal. The
chief members of this group were Rubinstein and Tchaikowsky, and
distinguished pupils of the latter, in particular Rachmaninoff and
Glazounoff. To the world at large Tchaikowsky, of them all, has made
the strongest appeal; though he himself said that Rimsky-Korsakoff as
an orchestral colorist was more able, and certainly Moussorgsky has a
more strongly marked individuality. Tchaikowsky (1840-1893) like so
many of the Russian composers, began as a cultivated amateur who
showed no special musical gifts, save a sensitive nature and a general
fondness for the art. He studied in the school of jurisprudence and
won a post in the Ministry of Justice. In 1861, however, his musical
nature awaking with a bound, he gave up all official work and for the
sake of art faced a life of poverty. Under the teaching of Nicholas
Rubinstein at the Petrograd Conservatory he made such amazing progress
that in five years he himself was Professor of Harmony at Moscow and
had begun his long series of compositions--at first operas of merely
local fame. There now followed years of great activity spent in
teaching and composing--well-known works being the first String
Quartet and the Pianoforte Concerto in B-flat minor, first performed
by von Bülow at Boston in '88. At this period his health completely
broke down, the immediate cause being an unhappy marriage. He finally
rallied but had to travel abroad for a year, and for the rest of his
life his temper, never bright, was overcast with gloom. There now
entered Tchaikowsky's life Frau von Meck, the woman who played the
part of fairy godmother. She greatly admired his music, was wealthy
and generous and, that he might have entire leisure for composition,
settled upon him a liberal annuity. Their relationship is one of the
most remarkable in the annals of art; for, fearing that the ideal
would be shattered, they met but once, quite by accident, and
Tchaikowsky was "acutely embarrassed." We have a lengthy and
impassioned correspondence, and Tchaikowsky's 4th Symphony, dedicated
"à mon meilleur ami," is the result of this friendship. In 1891,
invited to New York for the dedication of Carnegie Hall, he made his
memorable American tour. His success was genuine, and was the
beginning of the popularity his music has always enjoyed in this
country. For several years Tchaikowsky had been working at his Sixth
Symphony, to which he himself gave the distinctive title "Pathetic."
This work ends with one of the saddest dirges in all literature,
although Tchaikowsky, during its composition, as we know from his
letters, had never been in a happier state of mind or worked more
passionately and freely. He himself says, "I consider it the best,
especially the most open-hearted of all my works." When, however, he
suddenly died in 1893, there were rumors of suicide, but it is now
definitely settled that his death was caused by cholera.[306]

[Footnote 306: The writer had this statement from the lips of
Tchaikowsky's own brother, Modeste.]

To turn now to his achievements, it may be asserted that Tchaikowsky
was marvellously versatile, composing in every form save for the
organ; for productiveness, only Mozart, Schubert and Liszt can be
compared with him. His works comprise eight operas, six symphonies,
six symphonic poems, three overtures, four orchestral suites, two
pianoforte concertos, a violin concerto, three string quartets, a
wonderful trio, about one hundred songs and a large number of
pianoforte pieces. In addition he made several settings of the Russian
liturgy and edited many volumes of church music. Whatever may be the
final estimate of his music, it assuredly has great vogue at present,
for it is an intense expression of that mental and spiritual unrest so
characteristic of our times. As Byron was said to have but one
subject, himself, so all Tchaikowsky's music is the message of his
highly emotional and feverish sensibility. He is invariably eloquent
in the presentation of his material, although the thoughts are often
slight and the impression made not lasting. He pours out his emotions
with the impulsiveness and abandon so characteristic of his race, and
this lack of serenity, of restraint, is surely his gravest weakness.
We are reminded by his music of a fire which either glows fitfully or
bursts forth into a fierce uncontrolled blaze, but where a steady
white heat is too often missing. His style has been concisely
described as fiery exultation on a basis of languid melancholy. To all
this we may retort that what he lacks in profundity and firm control,
he makes up in spontaneity, wealth of imagination and, above all,
warmth of color. It is illogical to expect his music to be different
from what it is. He expressed himself sincerely and his style is the
direct outcome of his own temperament plus his nationality.
Tchaikowsky was widely read in modern literature--Dickens and
Thackeray being favorite authors--and had travelled much. The breadth
of his cultivation is shown in the subjects of his symphonic poems and
the texts of his songs, which are from Shakespeare, Dante, Goethe and
Bryon. However much estimates may differ as to the import of
Tchaikowsky's message, he is universally recognized as a superb
"colorist," one of the masters of modern orchestral treatment; who, by
his subtle feeling for richness and variety of tone, has enlarged the
means of musical expression. This is especially shown in the
characteristic use he makes of the orchestra in its lower ranges. As
Brahms, for depth of thought, was compared with Browning, so
Tchaikowsky may well be likened to such poets as Shelley and
Swinburne, so exquisite is his instinct for tonal beauty and for
delicacy of shading. At times, to be sure, he fairly riots in gorgeous
colors--this being the result of his Slavic blood--but few composers
have been able to achieve such brilliancy without becoming vulgar.

As to the charge of pessimism often made against Tchaikowsky, he was a
thinker, an explorer into the mysteries of human aspiration and
disappointment,[307] and his music seems weighted down with the riddle
of the universe. This introspective dejection, however, is a natural
result of his temperament and his nationality. If to us of a more
hopeful outlook upon life it seems morbid, we should simply remember
that our conditions have been different. A distinction must likewise
be made between the expression of such feelings in art and their
influence in actual life. As a man Tchaikowsky was practical,
conscientious, and did not in the least allow his feelings to
emasculate him. He was a prodigious worker and throughout his career,
in the face of ill health and many adverse circumstances, showed
immense courage. His creed was no ignoble one--"To regret the past, to
hope in the future, and never to be satisfied with the present; this
is my life." And to a gushing patroness of art who asked him what were
his ideals, his simple reply was "My ideal is to become a good
composer." Certain English critics in their fault-finding have been
particularly boresome, because, forsooth, Tchaikowsky's music does not
show the serenity of Brahms or the solidity or stolidity of their own
composers. To the well-fed and prosperous Briton "God's in his Heaven,
all's right with the world" is hardly an expression of faith, but a
certainty of existence. Not so with the Russian, upon whom the
oppression of centuries has left its stamp. This same note of gloomy
or even morbid introspection is found in some of the great literature
of the world--in the Bible, the Greek Tragedies and in Shakespeare.
Granted that optimism is the only working creed for every-day life,
until the millenium arrives a sincere and artistic expression of the
sorrows of humanity will always strike a note in oppressed souls.

[Footnote 307: See the passage from his diary (quoted on page 504 of
the _Biography_ by his brother) in which he writes--"What touching
love and compassion for mankind lie in these words: 'Come unto me, all
ye that labor and are heavy laden!' In comparison with these simple
words all the Psalms of David are as nothing."]

Each of Tchaikowsky's last three symphonies is a remarkable work. The
Fourth is most characteristically Russian and certainly the most
striking in its uncompromising directness of expression. The first
movement announces a recurrent, intensely subjective motto typical of
that impending Fate which would not allow Tchaikowsky happiness.[308]
The slow movement is based upon a Russian folk song of a melancholy
beauty, sung by the oboe, and another, already cited (see Chapter II,
p. 33), is incorporated in the Finale. The Scherzo is unique as an
orchestral _tour de force_; for, with the exception of a short middle
portion for wood-wind and brass, it is for the string orchestra
playing pizzicato throughout. The effect is extremely fantastic and
resembles that of ghosts flitting about in their stocking-feet or of
sleep-chasings, to use Whitman's expression.[309] The Finale is a riot
of natural, primitive joy, a picture--as the composer says--of a
popular festivity. "When you find no joy within you, go among the
people, see how fully they give themselves up to joyous feelings."
Fate sounds its warning, but in vain; nothing can repress the
exultation of the composer. "Enjoy the joy of others and--you still
can live." The work is sensational, even trivial in places; but it
reveals sincerity and elemental life. The composer lays himself bare
and we see a real man--not a masked hypocrite--with all his joys and
sorrows, caught, as Henley would say, "in the fell clutch of
circumstance," bludgeoned by Fate.

[Footnote 308: See the detailed program by the composer himself, cited
in Nieck's _Program Music_.]

[Footnote 309: For this simile I am indebted to Mr. Philip Hale.]

The Sixth Symphony, the Pathetic, is the most popular and, on the
whole, Tchaikowsky's most sustained work. It owes its hold upon public
esteem to the eloquent way in which it presents that "maladie du
siècle" which, in all modern art,[310] is such a prominent note. The
mood may be a morbid one but we cannot mistake the conviction with
which it is treated. The work is likewise significant because of the
novel grouping of movements. The first is in complete sonata form and
for finished architecture will stand comparison with any use of that
form. The themes are eloquent, well contrasted and organically
developed. The orchestration is a masterpiece.[311] The second
movement is the one famous for its use of five beats a measure
throughout; and its trio, on a persistent pedal note D, is a striking
example of the Russian tendency to become fairly obsessed with one
rhythm. It is an intentional, artistic use of monotony and may be
compared to the limitless Russian Steppes. If it seem strange to
Western Europeans, it should be remembered that the music is Russian
and portrays a mood perfectly natural to that people. The third
movement is a combination of a scherzo and a march--of a most
unbridled fury. The Finale is a threnody, one of overpowering grief,
the motto of which might be "vanity of vanities, all is vanity." It
abounds in soul-stirring orchestral eloquence and invariably makes a
deep impression.

[Footnote 310: For further comment see the Life of Tchaikowsky by Rosa
Newmarch.]

[Footnote 311: As may be seen by the number of illustrations from it
in text books!]

For special comment we have selected Tchaikowsky's[312] Fifth Symphony
in E minor since, being a union of Russian and Italian characteristics,
it reveals that eclecticism so prominent in his style. It is also an
admirable example of organic relationship between the movements. This
symphony, like the Fourth, contains a recurrent motto of sombre nature
in the minor mode which, appearing in the first three movements with
some dramatic implication, is changed in the Finale to the major and
used as the basis for a march of rejoicing. The first and last
movements are in elaborate sonata-form; the second and third in
three-part form. The Finale is one of the most striking examples in
modern literature of a _résumé_ of preceding themes and hence a
convincing proof of the composer's constructive power. The symphony
begins with a long prelude announcing the motto. Scored for clarinets,
bassoons and low strings it shows vividly that peculiar impression
which Tchaikowsky secured by using the lower ranges of the orchestra.

[Footnote 312: The authoritative work on Tchaikowsky is _The Life and
Letters_ by his brother Modeste; the abridged biography by Rosa
Newmarch should also be read. There are excellent essays in
_Mezzotints in Modern Music_ by Huneker; in Streatfield's volume
_Modern Composers_ and in Mason's _From Grieg to Brahms_.]

[Music]

The melody itself seldom moves above middle C, and its effect is
enhanced by the quality of the clarinets in their chalumeau register.
The first theme of the movement proper (beginning at the Allegro con
anima), on the same harmonic basis as the motto and derived from it
rhythmically, is given out _pp_ by a solo clarinet and solo bassoon,
accompanied by very light detached chords in the strings, _e.g._

[Music]

This is elaborately and brilliantly developed until, in measure 79
(counting from the Allegro), we reach a transitional, subsidiary theme
in B minor. This is followed by some striking sequences, exquisitely
scored, and then (at un pochettino più animato) there is a quickened
presentation of the transitional theme, interspersed by syncopated
calls--on the horns and wood-wind--a presentation which introduces the
second theme in D major, marked molto più tranquillo. This melody,
sung by the violins against an obbligato in the wood-wind, is clearly
Italian in its grace and suavity and establishes that wonderful
contrast so prominent in Tchaikowsky--the warmth and exuberance of the
South set against the grim austerity of the North.

[Music]

This theme, expanded (stringendo and crescendo) into a series of
exciting climaxes _fff_ leads, after some modulatory phrases derived
from the transitional theme, to the Development which begins in B-flat
major. Throughout this is a fine piece of work--with real thematic
growth, bold modulations and no "padding." It should refute completely
any erroneous opinion that Tchaikowsky was lacking in power of organic
treatment. The connection between the Development and the
Recapitulation is skilfully managed and the third part does not bore
us but is welcomed as something we would gladly hear again. There is a
long and stormy Coda--a second development in true Beethoven
style--which finally ends _ppp_ in the lowest depths of the orchestra,
in the same mood as the opening measures.

The second movement, Andante cantabile, con alcuna licenza, with its
melting theme on the solo horn, _e.g._,

[Music]

--accompanied later by answering phrases on the clarinet--might seem a
bit too "luscious" were it not for the beauty and finish of the
orchestration. The movement is in rather loose three-part form--as the
title would imply--the joints being somewhat obvious in certain
places, _e.g._, measures 39-45. The themes, however, have that
intensity peculiar to Tchaikowsky, and the original orchestral
treatment, especially in the use of the horns, enhances their effect.
The middle contrasting portion, starting in F-sharp minor, shows some
very effective polyphonic imitations based on the following theme:

[Music]

At the climax of its development the motto is proclaimed _fff_ in a
most arresting manner--its effect being due to the unusual pedal point
which makes a chord of the second with the upper voices, _e.g._,

[Music]

The third part with slight expansions corresponds to the first. At its
close, just before the Coda, we have a second appearance of the
motto--this time, on account of the fierce dissonances, with even more
sinister effect.[313] The closing measures are of great beauty by
reason of the imitations on the strings and the dreamy, reminiscent
phrase on the clarinets, _e.g._

[Music]

[Footnote 313: The passage has already been cited in Chapter IV as an
example of a deceptive cadence.]

The third movement, a Waltz, with a graceful theme, in clear-cut
three-part form, needs little comment. If any one considers it too
light or even trivial for a place in a symphony he might study the
individual orchestration and then try to compose one like it! The
second and third parts are ingeniously fused together--Tchaikowsky
following the practise of Mozart, his favorite master, in the first
movement of the G minor Symphony. In the Russian philosophy of life,
however, there is no such thing as perpetual joy; so, even amid scenes
of festivity, the motto obtrudes itself as if to ask "What right have
you to be dancing when life is so stern and grim?" See measures 23-28
from end of movement.

[Music]

The Finale, in complete sonata-form and laid out on a large scale, for
several reasons is of distinct significance. It is a carefully planned
_résumé_ of preceding themes; it contains several examples of those
periods of depression or exultation (especially on a pedal-point) so
characteristic of the Slav, and lastly, there are pages of extreme
brilliancy. In fact, the orchestration throughout is of such
convincing power that it refutes any charge of sensationalism or mere
bombast. If to us the music seem unrestrained, unbridled, we are to
remember that the Russian temperament is prone to a reckless display
of emotion just as in their churches they like to "lay the colors on
thick." The movement begins with an extended prelude in which the
original sombre motto is transformed into a stately, march-like theme.
This is presented twice with continually richer scoring and more
rhythmic animation. The closing measures of the prelude are a specific
instance of that protracted mood of depression spoken of above. The
movement proper begins at the Allegro vivace with a fierce,
impassioned theme,

[Music]

which leads, in measure 25, to a subsidiary theme treated at first in
free double counterpoint[314] and later canonically.

[Music]

[Footnote 314: By double counterpoint is meant such a grouping of the
voices that they may be inverted (the upper voice becoming the lower
and vice versa) and sound equally well. For further comments, together
with illustrative examples, consult Chapter IX of Spalding's _Tonal
Counterpoint_.]

[Music]

This is developed with more and more animation until the announcement,
in measure 71, of the second theme in D major. Here we see the first
instance of that organic relationship for which the movement is noted;
for this theme

[Music]

is evidently derived by rhythmic modification from that of the
preceding slow movement. It is brilliantly expanded and leads
directly--there being no double bar and repeat--to the development in
measure 115. This part of the movement evades description; it is
throughout most eloquent and exciting. In measures 153-160 all the
bells of Russia seem to be pealing! With measure 177 begins (marcato
largamente) an impressive treatment in the bass of the second theme,
answered shortly after in the upper voice. This is developed to a
climax which, in turn, is followed by one of those long periods of
"cooling down" which prepare us for the Recapitulation in measure
239. This corresponds exactly with the Exposition, ending with two
passages (poco meno mosso and molto vivace),--based upon the rhythm of
the motto--which usher in the long, elaborate Coda. This begins,
maestoso, with an impressive statement of the march theme, scored in
brilliant fashion, with rushing figures in the wood-wind instruments.
It seems to portray some ceremonial in a vast cathedral with trumpets
blaring and banners flying. A still more gorgeous treatment (marziale,
energico, con tutta forza) leads to the Presto based on the subsidiary
theme (cited on page 312), which fairly carries us off our feet. The
last portion of the Coda (molto meno mosso) is an animated yet
dignified proclamation of the main theme of the first movement--the
work thus concluding with an unmistakable effect of unity.

[Music]

The subject of Russian music[315] is too vast for any adequate
treatment within the limits of a single book, but there are several
other composers in addition to Tchaikowsky of such individuality and
remarkable achievement as to warrant some notice. These men,
Balakireff, Borodin, Rimsky-Korsakoff and Moussorgsky, have done for
the free expression of the Russian temperament in music what Pushkin,
Gogol and Dostoyevsky represent in literature. "To understand fully
the tendencies of Neo-Russian music, and above all to sympathize with
the spirit in which this music is written, the incredible history of
Holy Russia, the history of its rulers and people--the mad caprices
and horrid deeds of the Romanoffs, who, in centuries gone by,
surpassed in restless melancholy and atrocity the insane Caesars, and
were more to be pitied, as well as detested, than Tiberius or
Nero--the nature of the landscape, the waste of steppes, the
dreariness of winter, and the loneliness of summer--the barbaric
extravagance of aristocratic life--the red tape, extortion, and
cruelty of officers--the sublime patience of the common people--the
devotion of the enduring, starving multitude to the Tsar--all this
should be as familiar as a twice-told tale. There should also be a
knowledge of Russian literature, from the passion of Pushkin and the
irony of Gogol, to Turgenieff's tales of life among the serfs, and the
novels of Tolstoi, in which mysticism and realism are strangely
blended. Inasmuch as Neo-Russian music is founded upon the folk-songs
of that country, one should know first of all the conditions that made
such songs possible, and one should breathe the atmosphere in which
musicians who have used such songs have worked."[316]

[Footnote 315: The most authoritative work in English is the _History
of Russian Music_ by Montagu-Nathan; in French there are the Essays
_Musiques de Russie_ by Bruneau.]

[Footnote 316: Quoted from the chapter on Russian music in _Famous
Composers and Their Works_ (2d series).]

The first real leader after the wholesome beginnings made by Glinka
(with his operas, _A Life for the Czar_ and _Ludmilla_) was Balakireff
(1837-1910) who finding his country almost entirely under the dominion
of Italian and German music, proclaimed the doctrine that Russia, with
its wealth of folk-songs and its undoubted emotional power should
create its own music. Like many of the Russians Balakireff was an
amateur, but in the true sense of that term, _i.e._, he loved music
for its own sake. He therefore set to work vigorously to combat
foreign influences and to manifest in original works a spirit true to
his own genius and to the tendencies of his native land. Though
educated as a lawyer he had acquired through a study of Mozart,
Berlioz and Liszt a thorough technique and so was equipped to put into
practise his watchword which was individual liberty. "I believe in the
subjective, not in the objective power of music," he said to his
pupils. "Objective music may strike us with its brilliancy, but its
achievement remains the handiwork of a mediocre talent. Mediocre or
merely talented musicians are eager to produce effects, but the ideal
of a genius is to reproduce his very self, in unison with the object
of his art. There is no doubt that art requires technique, but it
must be absolutely unconscious and individual.... Often the greatest
pieces of art are rather rude technically, but they grip the soul and
command attention for intrinsic values. This is apparent in the works
of Michelangelo, of Shakespeare, of Turgenieff, and of Mozart. The
beauty that fascinates us most is that which is most individual. I
regard technique as a necessary but subservient element. It may,
however, become dangerous and kill individuality as it has done with
those favorites of our public, whose virtuosity I despise more than
mere crudities." Balakireff's actual works are few in number since he
spent most of his time in organizing schools of music and in teaching
others; but in those works which we have[317] there is a strong note
of freedom not to be missed. His Symphonic Poem _Tamara_ and his
fantasy for pianoforte _Islamey_ are remarkable for that semi-oriental
exotic spirit so prevalent in Russian music. Many of his songs also
are of genuine beauty.

[Footnote 317: Towards the end of his life he destroyed many of his
compositions.]

Borodin (1834-1887) is the ne plus ultra example of that versatility
in which the modern Russian School is unique. As a surgeon and doctor
he enjoyed a high position; as a chemist he made original researches
and wrote treatises which were recognized as distinct contributions to
science; he was one of the earliest scholars in the world to advocate
that women should have the same education as men and was one of the
founders (about 1870) of a medical school for women in Petrograd. So
tireless was he in these varied activities, it seems a miracle that he
could also become one of the best pianists of his time (he played well
also the violin and the flute) and according to Liszt,[318] one of the
most able orchestral masters of the nineteenth century. But as
evidence of this amazing fact are his works, comprising two symphonies
(the second in B minor often heard in this country) two string
quartets, the first strikingly original, thematically, harmonically
and in idiomatic use of the instruments; a small Suite for pianoforte,
of which the Serenade is cited in the Supplement; an opera, _Le Prince
Igor_--remarkable for its picturesque description and Oriental
coloring, of which the composer himself said "Prince Igor is
essentially a national opera, which can be of interest only to us
Russians who love to refresh our patriotism at the sources of our
history and to see the origins of our nationality live again upon the
stage;" a symphonic poem _Dans les Steppes de l'Asie centrale_
and--showing some of his most characteristic work--the _Paraphrases_
written in collaboration with Korsakoff, Liadoff and Cui as a kind of
musical joke. This composition,[319] a set of twenty-four variations
founded on the tune popularly known as "chop-sticks" is dedicated "to
little pianists capable of executing the theme with a finger of each
hand." For the paraphrases themselves a player of considerable
technique is required. In Borodin's style we always find a glowing
color-scheme of Slavic and Oriental elements. As a modern Russian
composer says, "It is individually descriptive and extremely
modern--so modern that the audience of to-day will not be able to
grasp all its intrinsic beauties."

[Footnote 318: For a delightful account of the friendship of these two
composers consult the volume _Borodin and Liszt_ by Alfred Habets
(translated by Rosa Newmarch).]

[Footnote 319: According to Liszt "a compendium of musical science in
the form of a jest."]

The most widely known and in many respects the most gifted of the
Neo-Russian group is Rimsky-Korsakoff (1844-1908). He has been aptly
characterized as the Dégas or Whistler of music, and for his
marvellous powers of description, especially of the sea, and for his
command of orchestral tone-painting he is considered the storyteller
par excellence in modern music. As in the case of Borodin we are
filled with amazement at the power of work and the versatility in
Korsakoff's nature. For many years he was an officer in the Russian
navy and throughout his life was involved with official duties. Yet he
found time for a number of compositions of originality and finished
workmanship. These comprise the symphonic poems _Antar_, _Sadko_ and
_Scheherazade_;[320] a _Spanish Caprice_ for full orchestra; twelve
operas of which the best known in this country is the fascinating _Le
Coq d'Or_; a concerto for pianoforte and orchestra; a large number of
songs and many choruses for men's and women's voices. His treatises on
harmony and orchestration are standard works, the latter being the
authority in modern treatment of the orchestra. His _Scheherazade_ is
undoubtedly the most brilliant descriptive work in modern literature,
for an account of which we quote the eloquent words of Philip Hale.

[Footnote 320: This work in structure is a Suite, _i.e._, there are
four distinct, separated movements.]

"_Scheherazade_ (Op. 35) is a suite inspired by the Arabian Nights.
The Sultan, persuaded of the falseness and faithlessness of woman, had
sworn to put every one of his wives to death in turn after the first
night. But Scheherazade saved her life by interesting him in the
stories she told him for a thousand and one nights. Many marvels were
told by her in Rimsky-Korsakoff's fantastic poem,--marvels and tales
of adventure: 'The Sea and Sinbad's Ship'; 'The Story of the Three
Kalandars'; 'The Young Prince and the Young Princess'; 'The Festival
at Bagdad'; 'The Ship that went to pieces against a rock surmounted by
a bronze warrior.' As in Berlioz's _Fantastic Symphony_, so in this
suite, there is a theme which keeps appearing in all four movements.
For the most part it is given to a solo violin. It is a free melodic
phrase in Oriental bravura, gently ending in a free cadenza. There is
no development of themes in this strange work. There is constant
repetition in different tonalities; there is an exceedingly skillful
blending of timbres; there is a keen sense of possible orchestral
effects. A glance at the score shows how sadly the pedagogue might go
astray in judgment of the work, without a hearing of it, and
furthermore, the imagination of the hearer must be in sympathy with
the imagination of the composer, if he would know full enjoyment: for
this symphonic poem provokes swooning thoughts, such as come to the
partakers of leaves and flowers of hemp; there are the stupefying
perfumes of charred frankincense and grated sandal-root. The music
comes to the listener of western birth and mind, as the Malay who
knocked among English mountains at De Quincey's door. You learn of
Sinbad, the explorer, who is nearer to us than Nansen; of the Kalandar
Prince who spent a mad evening with the porter and the three ladies of
Bagdad, and told of his incredible adventures; and Scheherazade, the
narrator, she too is merely a shape in a dream; she fades away, and
her soul dies on the high note exhaled by the wondering violin.

"The melody of this Russian is wild, melancholy, exotic; a droning
such as falls from the lips of white-bearded, turbaned, venerable men,
garrulous in the sun; and then again, there is the reckless chatter of
the babbler in the market-place, heated with unmixed wine."

The most boldly individual of all Russian composers is
Moussorgsky[321] (1831-1881). Although of intense inspiration and of
uncompromising ideals his musical education was so incomplete that his
technique was inadequate for the expression of his message. As the
French critic, Arthur Pougin well says, "His works bizarre though they
be, formless as they often are, have in them a force of expression and
a dramatic accent of which no one can deny the intensity. It would be
unjust to pretend that he spoke for the purpose of saying nothing;
unfortunately he is too often satisfied with merely stammering." As
Moussorgsky himself says: "Art is a means of talking with men; it is
not an end. Starting with the principle that human speech is subject
to musical laws, I see in music, not only the expression of sentiment
by means of sound, but especially the notation of a human language."
In fact the dominant idea of his music was to bring it into closer
relation with actual life.

[Footnote 321: For biographical information consult the volume by
Montagu-Nathan.]

"In order to understand Moussorgsky's work and his attitude towards
art, it is necessary to realise the social conditions under which he
lived. He was a true child of the sixties, of that period of moral and
intellectual ferment which followed the accession of Alexander II and
the emancipation of the serfs. Of the little group of composers then
striving to give musical expression to their newly awakened
nationality, none was so entirely carried away by the literary and
political movements of the time as Moussorgsky. Every man was asking
himself and his comrades the question posed by the most popular novel
of the day: 'What shall we do?' The answer was: 'Throw aside social
and artistic conventions. Make art the hand-maiden of humanity. Seek
not for beauty but for truth. Go to the people. Hold out the hand of
fellowship to the liberated masses and learn from them the true
purpose of life.' To this democratic and utilitarian spirit, to this
deep compassion for the people, to this contempt for the dandyism and
dilettantism of an earlier generation Moussorgsky strove to give
expression in his music, as Perov expressed it in painting, as
Tchernichevsky, Dostoyevsky, and Tolstoi expressed it in fiction. We
may disagree with his aesthetic principles, but we must confess that
he carried out with logical sequence and conviction a considerable
portion of his programme. In his sincere efforts to attain great ends
he undoubtedly overlooked the means. He could never submit to the
discipline of a thorough musical training as Tchaikowsky and
Rimsky-Korsakoff. He preserved his originality intact, but at a heavy
cost. The weakness of his technique has been exaggerated by those who
put down all his peculiarities to ignorance; but in some
respects--particularly as regards orchestration--his craftsmanship was
certainly unequal to the demands of his inspiration, for his aims were
very lofty. Had this been otherwise, Moussorgsky's name would have
been more closely linked with those of Berlioz and Richard
Strauss."[322]

[Footnote 322: Quoted from the article in Grove's Dictionary.]

His acknowledged masterpieces are first, the songs, especially the
series the _Nursery_ and the _Songs and Dances of Death_, in which we
see mirrored with extraordinary fidelity the complex nature of the
Russian people. Rosa Newmarch has called him the Juvenal of musicians.
Second, his national music drama, _Boris Godounoff_--dealing with one
of the most sensational episodes in Russian history--which, for the
gripping vividness of its descriptions, is quite unparalleled.

"_Boris Godounoff_, finished in 1870, was performed four years later
in the Imperial Opera House. The libretto of this opera he took from
the poetic drama of Pushkin, but he changed it, eliminating much and
adding new scenes here and there, so that as a whole it is his own
creation. In this work Moussorgsky went against the foreign classic
opera in conception as well as in construction. It is a typically
Russian music-drama, with all the richness of Slavic colors, true
Byzantine atmosphere and characters of the medieval ages. Based on
Russian history of about the middle of the seventeenth century, when
an adventurous regent ascends the throne and when the court is full of
intrigues, its theme stands apart from all other operas. The music is
more or less, like many of Moussorgsky's songs, written in imitation
of the old folk-songs, folk dances, ceremonial chants, and festival
tunes. Foreign critics have considered the opera as a piece
constructed of folk melodies. But this is not the case. There is not a
single folk melody in Boris Godounoff, every phrase is the original
creation of Moussorgsky."[323]

[Footnote 323: Quoted from the _Art of Music_, Vol. III.]

In concluding this account of Russian music let the statement be
repeated that only by a thorough knowledge of the life and character
of this strange yet gifted people can their music be understood. It is
necessary therefore to become acquainted with Russian literature and
pictorial art--with the works of Gogol, Tolstoi and Dostoyevsky and
the paintings of Perov and Veretschagin. In this way only will be made
clear what is otherwise inexplicable--the depth and sincerity of the
Russian soul.

The other two prominent national schools in modern times are the
Bohemian and Scandinavian. Although from neither of these have we
products at all comparable in breadth; or depth of meaning with those
of the Russian school, yet each has its note of exotic individuality
and hence deserves recognition. The Bohemian School centres about the
achievements of Fibich, Smetana[324] and Dvo[vr]ák, and its prevalent
characteristics are the variety of dance rhythms (Bohemia having no
less than forty national dances) together with the peculiarly novel
harmonic and modulatory scheme. The dances best known outside of
Bohemia are the _Polka_[325] and the _Furiant_; the former being used
so frequently by Smetana and Dvo[vr]ák that it has attained an
international status. The first of the above group, Fibich
(1850-1900), was a composer of marked versatility--there being extant
over seven hundred works in every form--and no little originality.
Many of his pianoforte pieces have distinct charm and atmosphere and
should be better known. Fibich was strongly influenced by Schumann,
and there is found in his music the same note of fantastic freedom
prominent in the German master. But the first impression of Bohemian
music upon the world in general was made by Smetana (1824-1884). An
ardent follower of Liszt, he definitely succeeded in the incorporation
of Bohemian traits with the current musical idiom just as Liszt had
done with Hungarian folk-music. Smetana's style is thoroughly
original, his form is free yet coherent and he has a color sense and
power of orchestral description peculiar to his race. Bohemia is one
of the most picturesque countries in the world and the spirit of its
woodlands, streams and mountains is always plainly felt in Bohemian
music. The Bohemians are an out-of-door people with an inborn instinct
for music (with its basic factors of rhythm and sound) by which they
express the vigorous exuberance of their temperament.[326] Smetana's
significant work lies in his numerous operas, his symphonic poems and
in the remarkable String Quartet in E minor entitled "Aus meinem
Leben." The operas deal with subjects so strongly national that they
can have but little vogue outside their own country. However, _Prodana
Nevesta_--_The Bartered Bride_--has been universally recognized as one
of the genuine comic operas in modern times and its spirited Overture
(the first theme on a fugal basis) is played the world over. His six
Symphonic Poems, comprised under the title _Mein Vaterland_, are works
of considerable power and brilliant orchestral treatment. Perhaps the
finest sections are _Vltava_ (Moldau), celebrating the beauties of
Bohemia's sacred river, and _Vy[vs]ehrad_, a realistic description of
the national fortress at Prague.[327] The Quartet in E minor, noted
for its freedom and intimacy of style, has become a classic. Whenever
it was performed Smetana wished the sub-title "Aus Meinem Leben" to be
printed on the program; for, as he says in a letter to a friend, "My
quartet is no mere juggling with tones; instead I have wished to
present the hearer with pictures of my life. I have studied theory; I
know what style means and I am master of it. But I prefer to have
circumstances determine form and so have written this quartet in the
form which it itself demanded." In the first and last of the four
movements there is a long sustained high E, symbolic of the buzzing
sound which the composer constantly heard as his congenital deafness
increased. This malady finally affected his mind and was the cause of
his tragic death in an asylum at Prague.

[Footnote 324: His surname is to be accented on the first syllable--a
fact which may be remembered from the story attributed to Liszt who,
once asking Smetana how his name was to be pronounced received this
reply: My name is always

[Music: _Overture to Fidelio_

Smétana, Smétana, Smétana]

but never

[Music: _Overture to Leonora, No. 3_

Friedrich Smetána Friedrich Smetána.]]

[Footnote 325: For example in the second movement of Smetana's Quartet
and in Dvo[vr]ák's Suite for small orchestra, op. 39.]

[Footnote 326: For a graphic description of the country and the
customs of its people consult the essay on Dvo[vr]ák in Hadow's
_Studies in Modern Music_.]

[Footnote 327: A detailed account of these works may be found in the
article on Smetana in _Famous Composers and their Works_ (2d series).]

Although in some respects not so characteristic as Smetana,
Dvo[vr]ák[328] (1841-1904), by reason of his greater breadth and more
cosmopolitan style, is considered the representative Bohemian
composer. Dvo[vr]ák's music in its simplicity and in its spontaneity
of treatment is a reincarnation of Schubert's spirit; we feel the same
overflowing musical life and we must make the same allowances for
looseness of structure. Dvo[vr]ák, however, has made one contribution
thoroughly his own--his skill in handling the orchestra. He was a born
colorist and his scores in their clarity, in the subtle distinctions
between richness and delicacy, are recognized masterpieces. As a
sensuous delight to the ear they may be compared to the fine glow of
certain Dutch canvases--those for example of Vermeer. Dvo[vr]ák's
compositions are varied and fairly numerous (some 111 opus numbers)
comprising operas, cantatas, chamber music, symphonies, overtures,
pianoforte pieces and songs. From 1892 to 1895 he was in this country
as director of the National Conservatory in New York. Three works
composed during this period, a _Quartet_, a _Quintet_ and _The New
World Symphony_, are of special interest to us since they were meant
as a compliment to the possibilities of American music and also
reflect Dvo[vr]ák's attitude toward the sources of musical
inspiration. A true child of the people, and the embodiment of
folk-music, he naturally searched for native material when he wished
to compose something characteristically American. But folk-music in
our country, as has been stated in Chapter II, is (or was at
Dvo[vr]ák's time) practically limited to that of the Indians and the
Negroes. It is often stated, in fact, that the New World Symphony is
founded upon Negro tunes. This, however, is a sweeping assertion.
There is no doubt that Dvo[vr]ák found a strong affinity between
certain of the Southern plantation melodies and the songs of his
native land, _e.g._, the following melody (the second theme of the
first movement) which is similar to "Swing low, sweet chariot."

[Music]

[Footnote 328: For his biography, consult the Hadow essay (referred to
above) and the chapter on Dvo[vr]ák in Mason's _From Grieg to
Brahms_.]

But the individual tone of the melodies could come only from a
Bohemian and if they seem both Negro and Bohemian it simply proves the
common bond existing in all folk-music.[329] This _New World Symphony_
has had a great vogue and by reason of the warmth of its melodies and
the rich, colorful scoring is indisputably a work full of charm.[330]
Two prevalent traits of Dvo[vr]ák's music are noticeable in this
symphony--the unexpectedness of the modulations and the unusual
harmonic scheme.[331] The structure is at times rather loose,
particularly in the Finale where the joints often crack wide open.
But, as an offset, there is great rhythmic vitality--observe in
particular the swing of the Trio from the Scherzo--and that sensuous
tone-color peculiar to the composer. In fact, the scoring of the slow
movement with its magical theme for English horn would alone
compensate for many structural blemishes. This movement closes with a
mysterious chord for divided double basses (four solo instruments)
which is one of many touches in individual treatment. The Finale, in
accordance with modern practise, although containing themes of its
own, finally becomes a _résumé_ of preceding material. The two main
themes are striking and well contrasted; but Dvo[vr]ák was a mediocre
architect and the movement, in comparison with the Finales of Franck
and Tchaikowsky, is more of a potpourri than a firmly knit organic
whole. The final page is stimulating in its bold use of dissonances.
But we must take Dvo[vr]ák as he is. There is no question of his
genius, for his music is spontaneous, never labored, and he has
expressed with convincing artistic skill the emotions and ideals of
his gifted race.

[Footnote 329: The author has heard this symphony played in Prague and
other continental cities under Bohemian conductors. It is always
welcomed as being thoroughly characteristic of Bohemia.]

[Footnote 330: For detailed analytical comment consult Vol. III of
_Short Studies in Great Masterpieces_ by D.G. Mason.]

[Footnote 331: Note for example the chords at the opening of the slow
movement.]

Scandinavian music, ethnologically considered, would comprise that of
the three related nations, the Swedes, the Danes and the Norwegians;
some would include even the Finns, with their eloquent spokesman
Sibelius. Although the Danes have considerable folk-music, and as a
people love music, they have produced no composer of distinction save
Niels Gade (1817-1890), who was so encrusted with German habits of
thought that his music is neither one thing or the other--certainly it
is not characteristically Danish. The best known of the Swedish
composers is Sjögren from whom we have some poetic songs. He also
attempted the larger instrumental forms but without notable success.

Scandinavian music, as far as the outside world is concerned,
practically centres about the Norwegian composer Grieg[332]
(1843-1907) just as its dramatic art centres about Ibsen. The names,
however, of four other Norwegian composers deserve mention: the
pioneers Kjerulf (1815-1868) noted for his melodious songs; Svendsen
(1840-1911) endowed with a fine sense for orchestral color; and
Nordraak (1842-1866) the first self-conscious representative of the
Norwegian spirit: a talented musician who exerted a marked influence
upon Grieg--his promise cut short by an early death. In modern times
the mantle of Grieg has fallen upon Sinding (1856-still living) whose
songs and poetic pieces for the pianoforte have become household
favorites. In Norwegian music we find the exuberant rhythmic vitality
typical of a people living in the bold and highly colored scenery of
that sun-lit land.[333] Grieg, a born lyric poet saturated with
folk-music, has embodied this spirit in his works. His fame rests upon
his songs and descriptive pianoforte pieces; though in his Pianoforte
Concerto, in his Peer Gynt Suite, in the Violin Sonatas and String
Quartet he proved that he was not lacking in power to handle larger
forms. But most of his work is in miniature--the expression, like the
music of Schubert and Chopin,[334] of moods short and intense. While
Grieg's music is patterned upon Norwegian folk-dances and
folk-melodies it is something far more. He has evoked from the
characteristics of his native land a bold, original harmony and a
power of color and description thoroughly his own. He might say with
de Musset "Mon verre n'est pas grand, mais je bois dans mon verre." In
his music we feel the sparkling sunshine and the breezes of the North.
In fact, Grieg was the first popular impressionist and for his
influence in humanizing music and freeing it from academic routine his
fame will endure. We have cited in the Supplement (Nos. 68, 69) one of
his most original songs--the melody of which was used also for the
work _Im Frühling_ for string orchestra--and a pianoforte piece which
illustrates his rhythmic life and also in certain measures that
melodic line typical of all Norwegian music: the descent from the
leading tone, _i.e._, G, F-sharp, D.

[Footnote 332: The best biography in English is that by H.T. Finck;
the work, however, is somewhat marred by fulsome praise.]

[Footnote 333: During the summer solstice it is dark for only a few
hours; and further north, in the land, so-called, of the Midnight Sun,
for a few weeks there is perpetual daylight.]

[Footnote 334: He was called by Bülow the Chopin of the North.]

For a complete appreciation therefore of national music, we must
always take into consideration the traits and environment of the
people from which it sprung. Music, to be sure, is a universal
language, but each nation has used this language in its own way. The
most striking fact in present-day music is the variety gained from a
free expression of nationalism[335] without infringing upon
universality of appeal.

[Footnote 335: An admirable treatment of the whole subject may be
found in Vol. III of _The Art of Music_.]




CHAPTER XX

THE VARIED TENDENCIES OF MODERN MUSIC


Modern music--broadly speaking, music since the beginning of the
twentieth century--is certainly manifesting the characteristics which
the preceding survey has shown to be inherent in its nature: that is,
it has grown by a course of free experimentation, it is the youngest
of the arts, and it is a human language as well as a fine art. Hence
we find that modern composers are making daring experiments in
dissonance, in rhythmic variety, in subtle blends of color and, above
all, in the treatment of the orchestra. In comparison with
achievements in the other arts music often seems in its infancy; being
limited by no practical or utilitarian considerations, and employing
the boundless possibilities of sound and rhythm, there is so much
still before it. The truth contained in the saying, that music is the
youngest as well as the oldest of the arts, becomes more apparent year
by year; for although a work which originally had imaginative life can
never die, yet many former works have passed out of recognition simply
because they have been superseded by more inspired ones, composed
since their day. We can no longer listen with whole-hearted enthusiasm
to many of the older symphonies, songs and pianoforte pieces, because
Brahms, Franck, Debussy and d'Indy have given us better ones.

These experiments, just referred to, have been particularly notable on
the part of two composers of the neo-Russian group, Stravinsky and
Scryabin. Stravinsky,[336] in his brilliant pantomime ballets,
_L'Oiseau du Feu_, _Petroushka_, and _Le Sacre du Printemps_, has
proved incontestably that he is a genius--it being of the essence of
genius to create something absolutely new. These works, in their
expressive melody, harmonic originality and picturesque orchestration,
have widened the bounds of musical characterization. Scryabin[337]
(1871-1915) is noted for his esoteric harmonic scheme, shown in a
series of pianoforte preludes, sonatas and, above all, in his
orchestral works, the _Divine Poem_, the _Poem of Ecstacy_ and
_Prometheus_ or _Poem of Fire_. The effect of Scryabin's harmonies is
one of great power, and, as previously said of Debussy in his earlier
days, his imagination has undoubtedly heard sounds hitherto
unrealized. The sensational style of _Prometheus_ is augmented by the
use of a color machine which flashes upon a screen hues supposed to
supplement the various moods of the music. How many of these
experiments will be incorporated into the accepted idiom of music,
time alone will tell; but they prove conclusively that modern music is
thoroughly awake and is proving true to that spirit of freedom which
is the breath of its being.

[Footnote 336: For a detailed account of his life and works consult
the essay in _Contemporary Russian Composers_ by Montagu-Nathan and
Vol. III of _The Art of Music_.]

[Footnote 337: For a comprehensive estimate of his style and
achievements the following works will prove useful: the _Biography_,
by Eaglefield Hull; the Essay, by Montagu-Nathan in the volume
referred to, and an article by W.H. Hadow in the Musical Quarterly for
Jan. 1915.]

Music is, furthermore, not only a fine art in which have worked and
are working some of the best intellects of our race, but is inevitably
becoming a universal language. We see this clearly in the rapid growth
of music among peoples and nations which, comparatively a short time
ago, were thought to be quite outside the pale of modern artistic
development. No longer is music confined exclusively to the Italians,
French and Germans. A national spokesman for the Finns is the gifted
Sibelius, the composer of five symphonies, several Symphonic poems,
numerous songs and pianoforte pieces; his second Symphony in E minor
being a work of haunting beauty, and the Fourth noted for its bold use
of the dissonant element. The Roumanians have come to the fore in
Enesco, who has written several characteristic works for orchestra.
The Spaniards are endeavoring to restore their former glories--for we
must not forget that, in past centuries, the Spanish composers Morales
and Vittoria ranked with the great painters which that nation has
produced. Three Spanish composers, indeed, are worthy of distinct
recognition: Albeniz for his pianoforte pieces, _tangos_,
_malagueñas_, etc., in which there is such a fascinating treatment of
national dance rhythms; Granados,[338] with several operas to his
credit, and Laparra, the composer of a fantastic suite recently played
by the Boston Symphony Orchestra. Spanish rhythms, melodies and local
color have been frequently incorporated in the works of other
composers, _e.g._, by Bizet in _Carmen_, by Debussy in _Ibéria_, and
in the pianoforte piece _Soirée dans Granade_, by Chabrier in
_España_, by Lalo in several works, and by the Russians, Glinka and
Rimsky-Korsakoff, in brilliant orchestral works. The Spanish
influence,[339] in fact, may be called one of the most potent in
modern music.

[Footnote 338: Who lost his life on the Sussex when it was torpedoed
by the Germans.]

[Footnote 339: For a comprehensive account, historical and critical,
of this influence consult the volume by Carl Van Vechten _The Music of
Spain_.]

Although there is no doubt of the strong musical instinct inherent in
the Hungarians--witness the prevalence of Hungarian rhythms in
Schubert, Liszt, Brahms and others--their country has always been so
torn with political dissensions that the lack of a national artistic
culture is not to be wondered at. Recently however three Hungarian
composers, Dohnányi, Moor and Béla Bartok, have produced works
embodying racial tendencies and yet of such significant content and
sound workmanship as to attract the attention of the world outside.

Italy, also, is awakening from a long sleep, and there is now a group
of young men representing New Italy (of whom Malipiero and Casella are
the best known) which should accomplish results worthy of the glorious
musical traditions of that country.

England is shaking off her subserviency[340] to the influence of
Handel and Mendelssohn, and at last has made a promising start toward
the achievement of works which shall rank with her glories in poetry,
in fiction and in painting. Among the older group we have such names
as Sullivan, with his inimitable series of operas, the _Mikado_,
_Gondoliers_, _Iolanthe_, etc.; Parry, with some notable choral works,
and Stanford--a most versatile man--Irish by birth, and with the humor
and spontaneity natural to his race; his _Irish Symphony_ and his
opera _Shamus O'Brien_ would give lustre to any period. The only
genius of the first rank however which England has produced since the
days of Purcell is Edward Elgar (1857-still living). Practically
self-educated and spending his early life in his native country he
escaped the influences of German training which so deadened the
efforts of former composers, such as Pierson and Bennett. Elgar's
music is thoroughly English in its sturdy vigor[341] and wholesome
emotion. With something first-hand to say he has acquired such a
technique in musical expression that his compositions rank in
workmanship with those of the great continental masters. In his use of
the modern orchestra Elgar need be considered second to none. His
overtures _In the South_ and _Cockaigne_, his two Symphonies and his
_Enigma Variations_ are universally acknowledged to be models of
richly-colored and varied scoring. Although his music is English it is
never parochial but has that note of universal import always found in
the work of a real genius. Among the younger men there are Wallace,
both composer and writer on musical subjects (his Threshold of music
being particularly stimulating), Holbrook, Vaughan Williams, Roger
Quilter, Arthur Hinton, Balfour Gardiner and John Ireland, a composer
of genuine individuality, as is evident from his Violin Sonata in D
Minor.

[Footnote 340: Some pithy remarks on the habitual English attitude
toward music may be found in the history of Stanford and Forsyth, page
313, _seq._]

[Footnote 341: See for example the broad theme in the middle portion
of the March, _Pomp and Circumstance_.]

Even such outlying parts of the world as Australia and South America
have contributed executive artists of great ability though, to our
knowledge, as yet no composer.

What, now, in this connection can be said of America? This much at
least: when we consider that, beyond the most rudimentary attempts,
music in our land is not yet a century old, a start has been made
which promises great things. Such pioneers as Paine, Chadwick,
MacDowell, Foote, Parker, Osgood, Whiting and Mrs. H.H.A. Beach have
written works, often in the larger forms, showing genuine inspiration
and fine workmanship, many of which have won permanent recognition
outside of their own country. Of late years a younger group has
arisen, the chief members[342] of which are Converse, Carpenter,
Gilbert, Hadley, Hill, Mason, Atherton, Stanley Smith, Brockway, Blair
Fairchild, Heilman, Shepherd, Clapp, John Powell, Margaret Ruthven
Lang, Gena Branscombe and Mabel Daniels. These composers all have
strong natural gifts, have been broadly educated, and, above all, in
their music is reflected a freedom, a humor and an individuality which
may fairly be called American; that is, it is not music which
slavishly follows the "made-in-Germany" model.[343] The composer of
greatest genius and scope in America is undoubtedly Charles Martin
Loeffler; but, although he has become a loyal American, and although
his best works have been composed in this country, we can hardly claim
him as an American composer, for his music vividly reflects French
taste and ideals. His inspired works--in particular _La Mort de
Tintagiles_, _The Pagan Poem_ and a Symphony (in one movement)--are of
peculiar importance for their connection with works of literature and
for consummate power in orchestration. Not even Debussy has expressed
more subtly the tragic spirit of Maeterlinck than has Loeffler in _La
Mort de Tintagiles_; and _The Pagan Poem_, founded on an Eclogue of
Virgil portrays most eloquently the romance of those pastoral days.
Loeffler's latest work, a String Quartet[344] dedicated to the memory
of Victor Chapman, the Harvard aviator, is remarkable for the
heart-felt beauty of its themes and for advanced technique in treating
the four solo instruments.

[Footnote 342: This valuation of American composers is made solely on
the basis of published compositions.]

[Footnote 343: For additional comments on this point see an article by
the author in the Musical Quarterly for January, 1918.]

[Footnote 344: Performed recently several times by the Flonzaley
Quartet.]

Let us now indulge in a few closing remarks of advice to the young
student faced with all this perplexing novelty. Our studies should
have made plain two definite facts: first, that the real message of
music is contained in its melody--that part of the fabric which we can
carry with us and sing to ourselves. Harmony and color are factors
closely involved with melodic inspiration, but their impression is
more fleeting; and in general, no work lacking in melody, however
colorful or filled with daring harmonic effects, can long endure. But
we must be judicious and fair in estimating exactly what constitutes a
real melody. The genius is always ahead of his time; if he thought
just as other men, he would be no genius. New types of melody are
continually being worked out; all we can say is that the creative
composer hears sounds in his imagination, the result of his emotional
and spiritual experiences and of his sympathy with the world. He
recreates these sounds in terms of notation, hoping that, as they mean
so much to him, they may be a delight and inspiration to his
fellowmen. If enough people like these works for a long enough time,
they _are_; that is, they live--no matter how much they differ from _a
priori_ standards as to what music should be.

The second fact concerns the structure of music; that is, the way in
which the thought is presented. We have seen that music always has a
carefully planned architecture--that being necessary by reason of the
indefiniteness of the material. But let us always remember that
without abandoning the fundamental principles of all organic life,
form may be--and should be--free and elastic. Every work which lives
reveals a perfect balance between the emotional and imaginative
factors and their logical presentation. If we are puzzled by the
structure of a new work the assumption should be, not that it is
formless but that, when we know the work, it will be seen to employ
simply a new use of old and accepted principles; for the works
analyzed must have convinced us that the principles of unity,
contrast, balance and symmetry are eternal; and, however modified, can
never be abandoned. The normal imagination must express itself
logically, and can no more put forth incoherent works than the human
body would give birth to misshapen offspring. Musical compositions,
which after study prove to be incoherent, diffuse and flabby, are to
be considered exceptional and not worth condemning; they are only to
be pitied. The chief aim of the music-lover should be to become an
intelligent and enthusiastic appreciator of the great works already
composed, and to train himself liberally for the welcome of new works.
Towards such an end we hope that this book may offer a helpful
contribution.




Index


A

_Academic Overture_ of Brahms, 233.

Aeolian mode, 24.

Aeschylus, compared with Brahms, 239.

Albeniz, pianoforte pieces, 327.

answer (to a fugue), 42.

Apthorp, W.F., comments on Brahms, 238;
  eulogy on Brahms's _First Symphony_, 246;
  comments on _Istar_, 283.

arabesque, 83.

Aristophanes, his humor compared with Beethoven's, 150.

Arnold, Matthew, lines on Byron apropos of Berlioz, 203;
  stanza applicable to Brahms, 233;
  definition of style, 234.

Atherton, Percy Lee, 329.

Auber, 255.

augmentation, definition of, 44.


B

Babbitt, Irving, book on Romanticism, 161;
  _The New Laocoön_, 207.

Bach, Emmanuel, use of two themes, 93;
  contributions to the Sonata-form, 100.

Bach, J.S., _Well-tempered Clavichord_, 23;
  choral (Phrygian mode), 25;
  polyphonic style, 34;
  _Goldberg Variations_, 37;
  celebrated organ fugues, 41;
  analysis of _Fugue in E-flat major_, 42-43.

_Bagatelles_, of Beethoven, 166.

Balakireff, works and features of style, 315-316.

Baldensperger, F., eulogy of Franck, 258.

Ballet music to _Prometheus_, 140.

Balzac, comment on Chopin, 189.

_Barcarolle_, of Chopin, color effect therein, 193;
  analysis of, 200-201.

_Bartered Bride Overture_, 121, 322.

basso ostinato, 86.

Baudelaire, 293.

Beach, Mrs., _Menuet Italien_, 78, 329.

Beethoven, 2, 5, 8:
  motive of _Fifth Symphony_, 12;
  _Waldstein Sonata_, 15;
  String Quartet (Lydian mode), 26;
  fugal passages in symphonies, 41;
  sentences from sonatas, 58-61;
  _Egmont Overture_, 77;
  _Rondo Capriccio_, 82;
  sets of Variations, 88;
  biography, 122-126;
  love of Nature, 125;
  features of style, 126-129;
  development of the Sonata-form, 126-127;
  treatment of the Coda, 127;
  variety of rhythm, 127-128;
  use of dissonances, 128;
  humor, 128-129;
  development of Program music, 129;
  development of varied air, 129;
  characterization of the Symphonies, 130-132;
  estimate of the Pianoforte Sonatas, 140;
  pianistic effect in Sonatas, 145;
  as a programmistic composer, 153-154;
  quality of themes, 156;
  dramatic use of single notes, 156-157;
  theme of _Ninth Symphony_ compared with theme from Brahms's _First
    Symphony_, 247.

Béla Bartok, 328.

Berlioz, quotation from _Grotesques de la Musique_, 21;
  canon in _Carnaval Romain_ Overture, 37;
  comment on Trio of _Fifth Symphony_, 150;
  biography, 202-205;
  names of his Parisian friends, 204;
  features of style, 205-206;
  _Fantastic Symphony_, analysis of, 207-211;
  _Carnaval Romain_ Overture, analysis of, 211-212;
  _Damnation of Faust_, instrumental numbers from, 213-214;
  _Harold in Italy_ Symphony, analysis of, 214-215;
  _Romeo and Juliet_ Symphony, comments on, 215-216.

Bie, Oscar, 74;
  on the style of Couperin and Rameau, 152.

Bizet, _L'Arlésienne Suites_, 80.

Bohemian School, 320-321.

Boieldieu, comment on Beethoven, 134, 255.

_bolero_, 75.

Boris Godounoff, description of, 320.

Borodin, works and features of style, 316-317.

Boschot, work, in three parts, on Berlioz, 207.

_bourrée_, 75.

Brahms, _First Symphony_, 8, 14, 21, 44;
  modal expression in works, 23;
  _Fourth Symphony_ (Phrygian mode), 25;
  canonic style, 36;
  _C minor Trio_, 67;
  sets of variations, 88;
  biography, 231-233;
  features of style, 233-238;
  analysis of _First Symphony_, 239-249;
  of _Violin Sonata_, 250-252;
  of _G minor Ballade for Pianoforte_, 252-253;
  attitude toward program music, 253;
  the nature of his _Intermezzi_, 253;
  of the _Capriccios_, 253;
  his _Rhapsodies_, 254;
  analysis of song _Meine Liebe ist grün_, 254;
  other songs, 255.

branle (brawl), 75.

Branscombe, Gena, 329.

Brenet, M., _Life of Haydn_, 104.

Brockway, H., on American folk-songs, 33, 329.

Browning, 1;
  quotation apropos of the fugue, 49;
  quotations apropos of the _Fifth Symphony_, 146, 150.

Bruckner, movement from _Seventh Symphony_, 231.

Bruneau, _History of Russian Music_, 314.

Bull, John, 79, 85.

Bülow, _Sonatas_ of E. Bach, 100;
  comment on Grieg, 325.

Burney, on the 18th Century, 103.

Buxtehude, 34.

Byrd, William, 12, 79, 85.

Byron, influence on Schumann's style, 177.


C

_C minor Symphony_ (Beethoven), analysis of, 145-151.

_C minor Symphony_ (Brahms), analysis of, 239-249.

cadences, 55-57.

Calvacoressi, on dominant relationship, 52.

canon, 11;
  account of, 36-37.

canzona, 69.

_Carnaval Romain_ Overture, analysis of, 211-212.

Carpenter, John Alden, _Adventures in a Perambulator_, 80, 329.

Casella, 328.

_Casse-Noisette Suite_, 80.

Cellini, Benvenuto, compared with Berlioz, 202;
  opera by Berlioz, 211.

Chabrier, _Bourrée Fantasque_, 80, 297;
  _España_, 80, 297;
  Overture to _Gwendoline_, 99, 297;
  account of style, 297.

_chaconne_, 86;
  Bach's for violin solo, 87.

Chadwick, _Canonic Studies_, 36;
  fugal passage in _Vagrom Ballad_, 41, 329.

Chamisso, texts for Schumann's songs, 170.

Chantavoine, Life of Beethoven, 159.

Charpentier, _Impressions of Italy_, 80.

Chausson, Ernest, account of style, 298.

Chavannes, Puvis de, compared with Franck, 258.

Chopin, type of melody, 10, 21;
  _Sonata in C minor_, 67;
  biography and features of style, 188-189;
  analysis of _Prelude in C major_, 198;
  _Étude in A-flat major_, 199;
  _Mazurka in F-sharp minor_, 199;
  analysis of _Polonaise in E-flat minor_, 200;
  of _Barcarolle_, 200-201;
  of _Scherzo in C-sharp minor_, 201.

chromatic changes, 51.

Clapp, P.G., 48, 329.

coda, definition and examples of, 99.

color, in different keys, 51.

Combarieu, Jules, 2.

Converse, F.S., Dramatic Poem, _Job_ (Phrygian mode), 26;
  _String Quartet_, 99, 329.

Corelli, 70, 74.

_Coriolanus_ Overture, analysis of, 152-156.

counterpoint, definition of, 11.

counter-subject (of a fugue), 42.

Couperin, 70, 74, 81, 85;
  descriptive pieces, 152, 255.

_courante_ (_corrente_), 75.

Croatian Folk-songs (in Haydn), 101-102.

_csárdás_, 76.


D

_D major Sonata_ of Beethoven, analysis of, 140-145.

_D Minor Symphony_ of Schumann, 179-184.

d'Albert, _Suite for Pianoforte_, 78.

_Damnation of Faust_, instrumental numbers from, 213-214.

Daniels, Mabel, 329.

Dannreuther, eulogy on Beethoven, 159;
  comment on Berlioz's counterpoint, 209.

Dargomijsky, use of whole-tone scale, 289.

Debussy, modal expression in works, 23, 288-289;
  _Pelléas et Mélisande_ (Dorian mode), 24;
  comments upon, 294;
  _Minstrels_ (cadence in), 55-56;
  _Sarabande_ for pianoforte, 77;
  comment on development, 97;
  compared with Mendelssohn, 185;
  apropos of new music, 204;
  features of style, 287-297;
  whole-tone scale, 289-290;
  titles of pianoforte pieces, 292-293;
  on his pianoforte style, 295-296.

de Musset, quotation apropos of Grieg, 325.

deceptive cadence, 56.

Dent, E.J., _Mozart's Operas_, 112.

De Pachman, playing of Mendelssohn's pieces, 185.

De Quincey, quotation from the _Dream Fugue_, 49.

_Deutsches Requiem_, 233.

development section of Sonata-form, 93-94, 97-98.

Dickinson, Edward, estimate of Haydn, 101.

diminution, definition of, 44.

d'Indy, modal expression in works, 23;
  canonic style, 36;
  Symphonic Variations, _Istar_, 67;
  comments on the Sonata-form, 95, 100;
  comment on Beethoven's _Seventh Symphony_, 131;
  comment on _Sonata Pathétique_, 142;
  comments on D major Sonata, 145;
  comments on _Fifth Symphony_, 145;
  Life of Beethoven, 159;
  comments on Franck's themes, 268;
  biography and features of style, 280-282;
  _Istar_, analysis of, 283-287.

dissonance, discord, distinction between terms, 143.

Dohnányi, 328.

Dominant, acoustical and harmonic importance of, 22-23, 52.

_Don Giovanni_, 111, 119.

_Don Juan_, 85.

_Don Quixote_, 89.

Dorian mode, 24.

Dostoyevsky, 314, 319, 320.

Doumic, René, essay on George Sand, 189.

Dowland, John, his _Pavans_, 80.

Duparc, Henri, account of his style, 298.

Dvo[vr]ák, _New World Symphony_, 9, 21;
  modal expression in works, 23;
  _New World Symphony_ (Aeolian mode), 26;
  _Suite for Orchestra_, 79;
  works and features of style, 322-324.


E

Eichendorff, texts for Schumann's songs, 176.

_Eighth Symphony_ of Beethoven, Finale, 157.

Elgar, Edward, works and features of style, 328-329.

Ellis, W.A., translation of Wagner's Essays, 154.

Enesco, 327.

enharmonic, modulation, 52-53.

episode, definition of, 39-40.

exposition of Sonata-form, 96.

extended cadences, 62-63.


F

_F major Sonata_ of Mozart, analysis of, 113-115.

Fairchild, Blair, 329.

_Fantastic Symphony_, analysis of, 207-211;
  quotation from, 207-209.

Farwell, Arthur, on folk-music, 33.

Fauré, Gabriel, account of style, 297-298.

_Faust_ Symphony, analysis of, 223-226.

Fay, Amy, account of Liszt, 217.

feminine ending, 57.

Fibich, 321.

Finck, H.T., _Songs and Song Writers_, 265;
  _Chopin and Other Essays_, 198;
  comments on Program Music, 226;
  biography of Grieg, 324.

Fitzwilliam Virginal Book, 79, 152.

five-bar rhythm, 63-64.

Flonzaley Quartet, 105.

folk-songs, principle of restatement in, 16;
  origin and importance of, 19-33.

Foote, Arthur, fugal Finale to _Suite_, 41, 329.

Forsyth, Cecil, eulogy of Mendelssohn, 185.

_Francesca da Rimini_, 154.

Franck, _Symphony_, 8, 15;
  polyphonic structure, 13;
  canonic style, 36;
  canon in _Symphony_, 37;
  in _Violin Sonata_, 37;
  _Fugue in B minor for Pianoforte_, 41;
  comparison of his scoring with that of Schumann, 181;
  limitations of his pianoforte style, 190;
  his fusion of movements compared with that of Brahms, 251;
  biography, 256-257;
  features of style, 257-258;
  analysis of _D minor Symphony_, 259-268;
  of _Sonata for Violin_, 268-274;
  use of generative themes, 268;
  _Symphonic Variations_, 274-280;
  comparison of his style with that of Bach and Beethoven, 274;
  his group of pupils, 280.

French folk-song, 29.

French Overture, 119.

Frescobaldi, 34.

Friedländer, Max, apropos of Chabrier, 281.

fugue, 11;
  definition of, 39.

Fuller-Maitland, life of Brahms, 238.

_furiant_, 75, 321.


G

_G major Pianoforte Concerto_ of Beethoven, 152-158.

_G minor Symphony_, analysis of, 115-119.

Gade, Neils, 324.

_galliard_, 75, 80.

Galuppi, as a pioneer in Sonata-form, 93.

Gardiner, Balfour, 329.

Gautier, Théophile, eulogy of Berlioz, 207.

_gavotte_, 75;
  account of, and examples, 78-79.

Gilbert, H.F., on folk-songs, 20, 33, 329.

Gilman, Lawrence, essay on Berlioz, 214;
  comments on _Istar_, 283;
  essay on Debussy, 293;
  comments on _Pelléas el Mélisande_, 297.

Glinka, 301, 315.

Gluck, Ballet music, 87;
  Operatic Overtures, 119.

Goethe, eulogy on Mozart, 112.

Gogol, 314, 320.

Gosse, Edmund, comment on Mallarmé's eclogue, 293.

Gossec, as a pioneer in Sonata-form, 93.

Granados, Spanish folk-dance, 167;
  works, 327.

Gregorian Chant, 10.

Gregorian modes in folk-songs, 20.

Grétry, comments on Sonata-form, 98, 255.

Grieg, 21;
  Canon for Pianoforte, 37;
  _Peer Gynt Suite_, 80;
  _Holberg Suite_, 80;
  works and features of style, 324-325.

ground bass, 86;
  from Bach's Mass, 86.

Grove, _Beethoven and his Nine Symphonies_, 130.

Grove's _Dictionary_, 70, 73, 79, 81, 86, 104, 119, 154, 161, 172, 200,
  217, 238.

Guilmant, March in Dorian Mode, 24;
  Canon for Organ, 36.

Gurney, _The Power of Sound_, 2.


H

_habañera_, 76.

Habets, Alfred, account of Borodin and Liszt, 316.

Hadley, Henry, 329.

Hadow, W.H., 72, 81, 92, 96;
  _Studies in Modern Music_, 184, 198, 207, 238;
  essay on Dvo[vr]ák, 321;
  article on Scryabin, 326.

Hale, Philip, comments on Saint-Saëns, 256;
  comments on Lalo, 256;
  essay on Mozart, 112;
  comments on _Scheherazade_, 317-318.

_halling_, 76.

Handel, fugue from the Messiah, 41;
  _Harpsichord Lessons_, 74;
  Air in Sarabande rhythm, 77;
  _Harmonious Blacksmith_, 86;
  Overture to _Messiah_, 119.

Harmonic Series, 51.

_Harold in Italy_ Symphony, analysis of, 214-215.

Haydn, 21, 81, 87;
  ancestry, 101;
  features of style, 101-105;
  his freedom of rhythm, 102;
  development of the String-Quartet and the Orchestra, 102-103;
  _Sonata in E-Flat major_, 105-106;
  _Surprise Symphony_, 106-108;
  comment on Minuet, 144;
  Prelude to the _Creation_, 152.

Hazlitt, comment on Mozart, 111.

_Hebrides_ Overture of Mendelssohn, 185.

Heilman, William C., 329.

Heine, texts for songs of Schubert and Schumann, 176;
  comment on Berlioz's music, 205.

Helmholtz, 193, 291.

Henderson, W.J., _Preludes and Studies_, 184.

Henschel, vocal canon, 37;
  conversation with Brahms, 233.

_Heroic Symphony_, analysis of, 132-140.

Hérold, 255.

Hill, Edward Burlingame, _Stevensoniana_, 80;
  comments on Saint-Saëns, 256;
  essay on d'Indy, 281, 329.

Hinton, Arthur, 329.

Hoffman, E.T.A., Essay on _Fifth Symphony_, 151.

_Holberg Suite_, 80.

Holbrook, 329.

Holmès, Augusta, 280.

homophonic, 10.

hornpipe, 75.

Hull, Eaglefield, Biography of Scryabin, 326.

Huneker, Life of Chopin, 198;
  on the playing of Chopin, 199;
  comment on Chopin's Scherzo, 201;
  Life of Liszt, 217;
  comment on Liszt's Songs, 220;
  essay on Brahms, 238;
  essay on Tchaikowsky, 306.

Hungarian folk-song, 30, 328.

_Hungarian Rhapsodies_, 227.

Hungarian rhythms in Schubert, Liszt and Brahms, 30;
  in Schubert's Symphonies, 166;
  in Brahms's First Symphony, 244.


I

_Impromptus_ of Schubert, 165-166.

_Indian Suite_, 80.

invention, 11.

_Invention in C major_, analysis of, 38-89.

inversion, definition of, 43-44.

Ionian mode, 24.

Ireland, John, 329.

Irish Folk-song, 29, 35.

_Istar_, Symphonic Poem of d'Indy, as example of a varied air, 89;
  analysis of, 283-287.

Italian Overture, 119.


J

Jadassohn, Canonic Pieces, 37.

James, Henry, essay on George Sand, 189.

Jannequin, descriptive pieces for voices, 152.

_jota_ (_aragonesa_), 76.


K

_Kaiser Quartet_, 87.

Keats, quotation apropos of _Fifth Symphony_, 148;
  quotation from, 163.

Kelly, E.S., _Chopin the Composer_, 198.

Kelly, Michael, _Reminiscences of Mozart_, 112.

_King Lear_, quotation from by Berlioz, 207.

Kjerulf, 324.

Korbay, F., _Hungarian Melodies_, 30.

Krehbiel, essay on Haydn, 103;
  _The Pianoforte and its Music_, 152.

_Kreisleriana_, 83.

Kuhnau, _Bible Sonatas_, 152.


L

Lalo, Eduard, works and features of style, 256.

Laloy, Louis, Life of Chopin, 198;
  essay on Debussy, 294.

Laparra, 327.

_L'apprenti Sorcier_, 154.

_L'après-midi d'un Faune_, 154, 293-294.

Lavoix, estimate of the _Fifth Symphony_, 127.

Legouvé, _Recollections_ of Berlioz, 205.

Lekeu, 257.

_L'idée fixe_, 207-210.

Liebich, Mrs., essay on Debussy, 294.

Liszt, 4, 21;
  characterization of Schubert, 164;
  _Faust_ Symphony (theme in augmentation), 45;
  Life of Chopin, 198;
  biography, 217-218;
  features of style, 218-219;
  analysis of Symphonic Poem, _Orpheus_, 221-222;
  of _Faust_ Symphony, 223-226;
  pianoforte compositions, 226-227;
  alleged influence on Brahms, 232;
  use of whole-tone scale, 289.

Locke, A.W., article in _Musical Quarterly_, 151.

Loeffler, Charles Martin, works and features of style, 329-330.

_Lonesome Tunes_, 33.

_loure_, 75;
  example of, from Bach, 79.

Lowell, J.R., definition of a classic, 161.

Lully, 70, 119.

Lydian mode, 24.


M

MacCunn, Hamish, _Scottish Melodies_, 28.

MacDowell, _Rigaudon_, 79;
  _Indian Suite_, 80, 329.

madrigal, 69.

Maeterlinck, compared with Franck, 257;
  comment on the theatre, 294;
  influence on Loeffler, 330.

_Magic Flute_ Overture, analysis of, 119-121.

Mahler, comments on his style, 231.

_malagueña_, 76.

Mallarmé, 293.

Malipiero, 328.

_Manfred_ Overture, 177-179.

Mannheim Orchestra, 102.

Manuel, Roland, life of Ravel, 299.

march, 75.

_Marriage of Figaro_, 111.

masculine ending, 57.

Mason, D.G., 7, 9;
  essay on Haydn, 102;
  on Mozart, 112;
  comment on Chopin's style, 196;
  essay on Berlioz, 211;
  on Saint-Saëns, 256;
  on d'Indy, 281;
  comments on _Istar_, 283;
  essay on Debussy, 295;
  on Tchaikowsky, 306;
  on Dvo[vr]ák, 322;
  as composer, 329.

_mazurka_, 75.

mediant relationship, 52, 96.

Méhul, 255.

_Melpomene_ Overture, 154.

_Melusine_ Overture of Mendelssohn, 185.

Mendelssohn, 89;
  biography and features of style, 184-186;
  Violin Concerto, comments on, 185-186.

Merkel, canon for organ, 36.

_Midsummer Night's Dream_ Overture, analysis of, 186-187.

Milton, quotation from _Paradise Lost_, 49.

minuet, 75;
  account of, and examples, 78.

Mixolydian mode, 24.

modal, chart of modes, 23-24.

modulation, 51-52.

_Moments Musicaux_ of Schubert, 165-166.

Montagu-Nathan, _History of Russian Music_, 314, 326.

Monteverde, 119.

Morales, 327.

Moor, 328.

_Mother Goose Suite_, 81.

Moussorgsky, works and features of style, 318-320.

Mozart, _Magic Flute_ Overture, 40;
  Finale of _Jupiter_ Symphony, 40, 81;
  biography, 108-110;
  features of style, 110-112;
  Mozart and Haydn, reactive influence, 110-111;
  polyphonic skill, 110, 112;
  dramatic power, 111;
  examples from works, 113-121.

Mundy, John, descriptive pianoforte piece, 152.

_musette_, 78.

_Mystic Trumpeter_, 154.


N

National Music, distinctive features of, 300-301.

Neefe, Beethoven's teacher, 124.

_Neue Zeitschrift für Musik_, founded by Schumann, 174.

_New World Symphony_, critical comments on, 323-324.

Newman, _Musical Studies_, 154, 178, 207;
  comment on Debussy, 296.

Newmarch, Rosa, _Life of Tchaikovsky_, 305.

Niecks, _Programme Music_, 152, 214, 221, 305;
  _Life of Chopin_, 198;
  eulogy of Liszt, 228.

Nordraak, 324.


O

Organ, the, its tone compared with that of pianoforte, 191.

organum, 10.

_Orpheus_, Symphonic Poem, analysis of, 221-222.

Osgood, George L., 329.

overtones, chart of, 193.

_Oxford History of Music_, 10, 12, 102, 103, 110, 119, 161, 165, 185,
  216, 221, 226.


P

Paderewski, 77;
  Minuet of, 78;
  playing of Mendelssohn's pieces, 185.

Paganini, connection with Berlioz, 214.

Paine, J.K., _Fuga Giocosa_, 46, 49;
  tribute to Beethoven, 129, 329.

Palestrina, 34.

Parker, H.W., fugue from _Hora Novissima_, 41, 329.

Parry, _Evolution of the Art of Music_, 9, 16, 21, 69, 70;
  choral works, 328.

_Passacaglia_, 86;
  of Brahms, 86;
  of Bach for organ, 87.

_passepied_, 75.

Pater, Walter, remark on Romanticism, 161.

_pavane_, 75;
  example from Ravel, 79.

pedals of the pianoforte, the damper and the una corda, 192-195.

_Peer Gynt_ Suite, 80.

period, definition of, 50.

Pérotin, 34.

Perry, Baxter, 90.

_Phaëton_, 256.

Philidor, 255.

Phrygian cadence, 24-25.

Phrygian mode, 23;
  Brahms's use of, 239.

pianoforte, the, account of its characteristics, 189-195.

plagal cadence, 55.

_polka_, 75, 321.

_polonaise_, 75.

polyphonic, 10.

polyphonic music, complete account of, 33-49.

Poirée, Elié, Life of Chopin, 198.

Pope, apropos of the jig, 80.

Pougin, Arthur, comments on Moussorgsky, 318-319.

Powell, John, 329.

Pratt, _History of Music_, 10, 93, 159, 161.

prelude (to Sonata-form), 99.

_Prix de Rome_, won by Berlioz, 205;
  by Debussy, 288.

Prout, 85.

Puccini, fugal prelude to _Madama Butterfly_, 41.

Purcell, 70;
  his Jig, 71.

Pushkin, 314.


Q

Quilter, Roger, 329.


R

Rabelais, his humor compared with Beethoven's, 150, 157.

Rameau, acoustical reforms of, 23, 70, 74, 81, 85;
  descriptive pieces, 152, 255.

Ravel, _Daphnis and Chloe_, 68;
  his Pavane, 79;
  _Mother Goose Suite_, 81;
  works and account of style, 299-300.

recapitulation (or _résumé_), 98-99.

Reinecke, Canonic Vocal Trios, 37.

Remenyi, Brahms's tour with, 232.

repetition, importance of, 12, 13;
  types of, 14-18.

Rheinberger, _Canonic Pieces_, 87;
  _Tarantelle_ for Pianoforte, 79.

rhythmic variety (five and seven beats a measure), 66-68.

Richter, Jean Paul, influence on Schumann, 172.

Riemann, 93.

_rigaudon_, 75;
  examples of, from Grieg, Rameau and MacDowell, 79, 81.

Rimsky-Korsakoff, works and features of style, 317.

_Roi d'Ys, Le_, 256.

Rolland, Romain, account of Beethoven in _Jean Christophe_, 125;
  _Life of Beethoven_, 159;
  essay on Berlioz, 207.

Romanticism and Romantic School, account of, 160-165.

_Romeo and Juliet_ Symphony, comments on, 215-216.

rondo, account of, 81-85.

rondo-sonata form, 144.

Ropartz, 257;
  characterization of a theme in Franck's Symphony, 266.

Rossetti, _Blessed Damozel_, set by Debussy, 288.

Rossini, "crescendo" in Overtures, 62;
  eulogy of Mozart, 121.

_Rouet d'Omphale, Le_, 256.

round, 11;
  _Old English Rounds_, 12.

rubato (tempo), definition of, 199.

Rubinstein, movements in _Ocean Symphony_, 95;
  estimate of Mozart, 111;
  characterization of the damper pedal, 191.

Runciman, quotation apropos of Weber from _Old Scores and New Readings_,
  169-170.

Russian folk-songs, 30-33.

Russian music, general tendencies of, 314-315.


S

Saint-Saëns, 1, 2;
  comment on Berlioz's _Romeo and Juliet Symphony_, 216;
  account of works and style, 255-256.

_Sakuntala_, 154.

_saltarello_, 75;
  Berlioz's use of the rhythm, 211.

Sammartini, as a pioneer in Sonata-form, 93.

Santayana, 5.

_sarabande_, 75, 76, 77.

Scandinavian Music, 324.

Scarlatti, Alessandro, Aria da capo, 14;
  operatic overture, 119.

Scarlatti, D., the _Cat-Fugue_, 48;
  as virtuoso, 74;
  anticipation of Sonata-form, 93;
  _Courante_ for pianoforte, 79;
  crossing of hands in Beethoven, 141, 144.

Schumann, 7;
  motive from the _Carnaval_, 13;
  from the _Kinderscenen_, 13;
  _Arabesque_, 14:
  saying about folk-songs, 20;
  Canon for organ, 36;
  Canonic Variations, 37;
  _Carnaval_, 68;
  _Phantasiestücke_, 68;
  his use of the Rondo, 82-83;
  Variations, 88;
  comment on Schubert, 166;
  biography and features of style, 172-174;
  analysis of _Des Abends_, 174-175;
  of _Warum_, 175-176;
  of _Novellette in E major_, 176;
  of Song, _Mondnacht_, 176-177;
  of _Manfred_ Overture, 177-179;
  characterization of the four Symphonies, 179;
  _Symphony in D minor_, analysis of, 179-184;
  eulogy of Brahms in the _Neue Zeitschrift_, 232.

Schola Cantorum, account of, 282.

Scottish folk-tune, 28.

Scryabin, as harmonic innovator, 143;
  works and features of style, 327.

_seguidilla_, 76, 79.

sentence, complete analysis of, 53, 54.

sequence, definition of, 38.

_Scheherazade Suite_, 81.

scherzo, of Beethoven, 128-129.

Schmitt, Florent, 280.

Schubert, 21;
  Variations, 88;
  account of style and works, 162-169;
  character of songs, 165;
  symphonic style, 166;
  chamber music, 166;
  pianoforte style, 167;
  as great colorist, 167-168;
  analysis of _Unfinished Symphony_, 167-169.

seven-bar rhythm, 66.

Shakespeare, 1;
  apropos of the galliard, 80.

Sharp, Cecil, _English Folk-Song_, 27;
  on American folk-songs, 33.

Shepherd, Arthur, 329.

Shedlock, J.S., 93, 100.

shifted rhythm, 46.

Sibelius, features of his style, 230, 324, 327.

_siciliano_, 76.

Sinding, 325.

Sinigaglia, Overture, 99.

Sjögren, 324.

Smetana, _Bartered Bride Overture_, 40, 121;
  works and features of style, 321-322.

Smith, Stanley, 329.

Smithson, Henrietta, her life with Berlioz, 204-205.

sonata and sonata-form, distinction between, 94-95.

sonata-form, account of 91-100;
  tabular view, 100.

_Song of Destiny_, Brahms, 233.

_Songs without Words_, Mendelssohn, 185.

Spanish music, its influence in modern times, 327-328.

Spitta, essay on Brahms, 238.

Stamitz, J., influence on Sonata-form, 93.

Stanford, Villiers, Irish folk-songs, 29;
  features of style, 328.

Stanford-Forsyth history, 121, 328.

Stendhal, remark on Romanticism, 161.

_Stevensoniana_, 80.

Strauss, R., motive from _Till's Merry Pranks_, 18;
  _Don Juan_, 85;
  _Till Eulenspiegel_, 85;
  estimate of Mozart, 111.

Stravinsky, as harmonic innovator, 143;
  works and features of style, 326-327.

Streatfield, essay on Tchaikowsky, 306.

stretto, 46.

string-quartet, definition of, 94.

subdominant, acoustical and harmonic importance, 22-23, 52.

subject (of a fugue), 42-43.

suite, the classical, 73-80;
  the modern, 80-81.

_Suites, French and English_, 74.

Sullivan, Arthur, operas, 328.

_Sumer is icumen in_ (Ionian mode) 27.

Surette, T.W., comments on Bach's style, 48, 72;
  _Development of Symphonic Music_, 159.

_Surprise Symphony_, analysis of, 106-108.

Svendsen, 324.

Sweelinck, 34.

Symonds, Arthur, _Studies in the Seven Arts_, 159.

_Symphonic Études_, 88.

symphonic poem, definition of, 149, 220.

symphonic style, development of, 228-231.


T

Tallys, Thomas, vocal canon, 37.

_tambourin_, 71.

_tango_, 76.

_tarantella_, 75.

Taylor, Bayard, translation of stanza from _Faust_, 225.

Tchaikowsky, Modeste, biography of his brother, 306.

Tchaikowsky, P., _Fifth Symphony_, 8, 21;
  analysis of, 306-314;
  modal expression in works, 23;
  _Legend_ (Aeolian mode), 26;
  _Fourth Symphony_, finale of, 33;
  analysis of, 305;
  _Sixth Symphony_, 67;
  analysis of, 305-306;
  _Quartet in F major_, 67-68;
  variations from Trio, 89;
  estimate of Mozart, 111, 121;
  biography, 302-303;
  features of style, 303-305.

Thackeray, W.M., characterization of Berlioz, 204.

Thayer, Alexander, _Life of Beethoven_, 159.

thematic development, 34.

three-bar rhythm, 65-66.

three-part form, complete account of, 72-73;
  examples of, 73.

Tiersot, J., on folk-melodies, 21;
  _Chansons Populaires_, 30;
  work on Berlioz, 207.

_Till Eulenspiegel_, 85.

Tolstoi, 315, 319, 320.

tonality, principles of, 50-51.

tonic, acoustical and harmonic importance of, 22-23.

_Tragic Overture_, Brahms, 233.

transformation of theme, its use in Schumann, 182.

Turgenieff, 315.

two-part form, definition of, 38;
  complete account of, 69-72.


V

Van Vechten, book on Spanish music, 328.

variation form, account of, 85-91.

_Variations, in F minor_ of Haydn, 87;
  on _Death and the Maiden_, 88;
  _Sérieuses_, 88;
  _on a Theme from Handel_, 88;
  on the _St. Anthony Choral_, 88;
  (_Enigma_) by Elgar, 89;
  _Symphoniques_, 89.

Verdi, Minuet from _Falstaff_, 78.

Veretschagin, 320.

Verlaine, 293.

_Violin Concerto_ of Beethoven, 156-157.

Vittoria, 327.

Vivaldi, 70.

von Breuning family, 125.


W

Wagner, comment on operas, 4;
  quality of themes, 8;
  motive from the _Valkyrie_, 12;
  polyphonic structure of operas, 13;
  motive from _Tristan and Isolde_, 17;
  fugal Prelude to third act of the _Mastersingers_, 41;
  comments on _Leonore_ Overture, 98;
  eulogy of Mendelssohn, 185.

_Waldesrauschen_, Étude of Lizst, 227.

Waldstein, friendship with Beethoven, 125.

_Waldstein_ Sonata, 83.

Walker, E., on English folk-music, 22.

Wallace, estimate of Haydn, 102;
  _Threshold of Music_, 291, 329.

Wallaschek, R., on primitive music, 21.

_Wallenstein Trilogy_ (d'Indy), 281.

_waltz_, 75.

Weber, _Moto Perpetuo_, 83;
  orchestral treatment in his Overtures, 164-165;
  account of style, 169-172;
  _Invitation to the Dance_, arrangement by Weingartner, 169;
  compared with that by Berlioz, 171;
  _Oberon_ Overture, analysis of, 170-171;
  compositions for pianoforte, 171.

Weckerlin, example from _Echos du Temps Passé_, 71.

Weingartner, eulogy of Berlioz, 206;
  comments on the Symphonic Poem, 220;
  comments on Brahms's _First Symphony_, 244, 246.

Whistler, compared with Debussy, 293.

Whiting, Arthur, _Scottish Melodies_, 28;
  _Irish Melodies_, 29;
  _Suite Moderne_, 80;
  _Pedal Studies_, 193, 194, 329.

Whitman, 1;
  quotation from _Mystic Trumpeter_, 146.

Widor, canon for organ, 36.

Willaert, harmonic basis of choruses, 23.

Williams, Abdy, on Brahms's rhythm, 253.

Williams, Vaughan, 329.

Wordsworth, quotation from, 163.

Wyman, Loraine, 33.




LIST OF COMPOSITIONS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK


I. _Sumer is icumen in._ Old English Round.

II. _To the Green Wood._ Round by Byrd.

III. Finale of Wagner's _Valkyrie_.

IV. _Reconnaissance_ from Schumann's _Carnaval_.

V. Irish Folk Song.

VI. Epilogue of Strauss's _Till's Merry Pranks_.

VII. _March in Dorian Mode._ Guilmant.

VIII. _Movement in Lydian Mode._ Beethoven.

IX. _Canon._ Thomas Tallys.

X. _Canon_ from _Études Symphoniques_. Schumann.

XI. No. VI of the _Goldberg Variations_. J.S. Bach.

XII. _Canon for Pianoforte._ Grieg.

XIII. _Canon for Pianoforte._ Jadassohn.

XIV. _Two-voiced Invention in C major._ J.S. Bach.

XV. _Three-voiced Fugue in E-flat major._ J.S. Bach.

XVI. Final portion of _Organ Fugue in G major_. J.S. Bach.

XVII. _Cat Fugue for Pianoforte._ D. Scarlatti.

XVIII. _Fuga Giocosa for Pianoforte._ J.K. Paine.

XIX. Song, _The Evening Star_. Schumann.

XX. _Gavotte in F major._ Corelli.

XXI. _Waltz in A-flat major._ Schubert.

XXII. _Träumerei._ Schumann.

XXIII. _Prelude in A major._ Chopin.

XXIV. _Lyric Piece in E-flat major._ Grieg.

XXV. _Nocturne in F major._ Chopin.

XXVI. _Berceuse in G major._ Grieg.

XXVII. _Intermezzo in E-flat minor._ Heilman.

XXVIII. _Sarabande in D major._ J.S. Bach.

XXIX. Gavotte from _Third English Suite_. J.S. Bach.

XXX. Minuet from _Don Giovanni_. Mozart.

XXXI. Two Minuets from _Castor and Pollux_. Rameau.

XXXII. _Gigue in G major._ J.S. Bach.

XXXIII. _Gigue in G major._ Mozart.

XXXIV. _Courante in F minor._ D. Scarlatti.

XXXV. _French Suite in E major._ J.S. Bach.

XXXVI. _Soeur Monique._ Rondo by Couperin.

XXXVII. _Romance in E major._ Rondo by Schumann.

XXXVIII. _Rondo à Capriccio in G major._ Beethoven.

XXXIX. Aria from _Dido and Aeneas_ (Ground bass). Purcell.

XL. _Sonata in C major._ D. Scarlatti.

XLI. Finale from _Sonata in E-flat major_. Haydn.

XLII. First Movement from the _Surprise Symphony_. Haydn.

XLIII. _Adagio in B minor._ Mozart.

XLIV. First Movement from the _Heroic Symphony_. Beethoven.

XLV. _Sonata in D Major._ Beethoven.

XLVI. Finale from _Sonata in A-flat major_. Beethoven.

XLVII. Portion of Slow Movement of _Seventh Symphony_. Beethoven.

XLVIII. Slow Movement of _Trio in B-flat major_. Beethoven.

XLIX. Theme of Slow Movement from _Sonata in E major_, Op. 109.
Beethoven.

L. _The Young Nun_. Song by Schubert.

LI. Intermezzo from the _Euryanthe Overture_. Weber.

LII. Portion of Fantasy Piece, _Grillen_. Schumann.

LIII. _Novellette in E major._ Schumann.

LIV. _Moonlight._ Song by Schumann.

LV. _Venetian Boat Song._ Mendelssohn.

LVI. _Barcarolle._ Chopin.

LVII. _The Carnaval Romain Overture._ Berlioz.

LVIII. _March of the Pilgrims_ from the _Harold in Italy Symphony_.
Berlioz.

LIX. _Forest Murmurs._ Étude by Liszt.

LX. _Ballade in G minor._ Brahms.

LXI. _My Love is Green as the Alder Bush._ Song by Brahms.

LXII. Finale of Symphonic Poem, _Istar_. D'Indy.

LXIII. _Chanson triste_ for Pianoforte. Tchaikowsky.

LXIV. _Invocation to Sleep._ Song by Tchaikowsky.

LXV. _Serenade._ Borodin.

LXVI. _Cradle Song of the Poor._ Moussorgsky.

LXVII. _Silhouette._ Dvo[vr]ák.

LXVIII. _Spring Song._ Grieg.

LXIX. _Dance of Spring._ Grieg.




CRITICAL and HISTORICAL ESSAYS

_By Edward MacDowell_

(_Lectures Delivered at Columbia University_)

Especially valuable to that circle of readers who desire to secure the
essential elements of a liberal culture in music. With this aim, Mr.
MacDowell outlines somewhat the technical side of music, and with it,
gives a general idea of the history and aesthetics of the art.

_Price $1.50_



TONAL COUNTERPOINT

Studies in Part-Writing

_By WALTER R. SPALDING_

Professor of Music in Harvard University

_Price $2.00_



MODERN HARMONY;

ITS THEORY AND PRACTICE

Arthur Foote, A.M. and Walter R. Spalding, A.M.

_Price $1.50_



JUST ISSUED

MODULATION and RELATED HARMONIC QUESTIONS

_By ARTHUR FOOTE_

_Price $1.25_

Scales and Key Relationship
Modulation in General
Change of Keys or Chords without Modulation
Change of Keys by moving to a New Tonic
Modulation by means of Various Chords
Diatonic, Chromatic, and Enharmonic Modulation
Harmonic Changes resulting from the Symmetrical Movement of Individual
  Voices
Harmonic Changes resulting from the Elision of Chords
A Table of Modulations



THE ARTHUR P. SCHMIDT CO.

BOSTON
120 Boylston Street

NEW YORK
8 West 40th Street