_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GROSVENOR STREET,
_Monday [November 1830]._

MY DEAREST THERESA, I was not at all in the mood to write, and was
almost glad you did not write to me because of that dreadful bore of an
answer which you would expect; and I have been so _very_ ill! Besides
that, I have been a fortnight at Eastcombe _tete-a-tete_ with Sister,
and forbidden to speak on account of my dear little lungs which had been
coughed to atoms, so conversation did not give me much help to a letter.
Moreover, they gave me all sorts of lowering medicines--hemlock and
henbane, or words to that effect (I never can remember the names of
drugs)--and made me so languid that the weight of a pen was a great deal
too much for my delicate frame. However, I believe they have nearly
cured me, and it does not signify now it is over, though I still think
that if there were an inflammation on the chest to be done, it would
have been more for the general good that O'Connell[364] should have it
instead of me. Anything to silence that dreadful tongue of his, which is
frightening the Isle from its propriety most rapidly. They say that he
said to Lord Anglesey[365] at one of his levees, "I shall give you some
trouble yet, My Lord," to which Lord A. answered, "Yes, I know you will,
but I shall hang you at last." It is a neat dialogue, and the story is a
good one, and certainly would have been true if O'Connell had been at a
levee. As he has not, there is of course no foundation for it, but we
can believe it all the same.

Barring Ireland, which I do not fret about, because we have been in the
habit of conquering it once in every thirty years and it is time now for
a fight, things are looking more prosperous. Our revenue they say is
good, and our manufactories are flourishing to the highest possible
degree. George saw some of the silk people on Saturday, who told him
that several of the great silk houses had refused to take any more
orders, having as much to do as they can this year. Birmingham is very
busy; the wool trade is in the greatest prosperity; in short, if
Parliament were never to meet again, if that were to be _the_ reform
Lord Grey would propose, we should do very well.

It is very unlucky that we never can have what we want all at once. If
corn is plentiful, there is not a morsel of loyalty to be had for love
or money, and when the market for wool is good, morals are at their
lowest pitch.

I was rather sorry to come home again, for when I am out of town I
forget all my party feelings; but I was obliged to come back as soon as
I was strong enough, for George has not a chance of getting out of town
even for a day.

Have you seen the 2nd Volume of _Lord Byron_? It is a wicked book, and
having made that avowal it is unlucky that I feel myself obliged to own
that it is much the most interesting book I ever read in my life--much.
I never was so amused, and the more wickeder he is in his actions, the
more cleverer he is in his writings. I am afraid I like him very
much--that is I cannot bear him really, only I am glad he lived, else we
should not have had his _Life_ to read, to say nothing of his poetry. He
had some good points; such extreme gratitude to anybody who ever showed
him kindness; and if he had lived I still think that he would have been
converted, and that once a Christian, there is nothing great or good he
would not have been equal to. He had such magnificent talents--an
archangel ruined--and I think he regretted the height from which he had
fallen. Still the book is a bad book. I was obliged to stop yesterday
and recall _mes grands principes_ before I could remember that it was
not wrong or ill-natured of Guiccioli to insist on his wife's[366]
separation from Lord Byron. Moore talks about it as an unprincipled
disturbance of Lord Byron's domestic felicity, and with such
earnestness, that he very nearly took me in.

I wish I had seen you act. Lord Castlereagh's epilogue was in the
papers, with a few lines added, _not_ with a view of pleasing him. Your
affectionate

E. E.




CHAPTER IX

1831-1835


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GREENWICH PARK,
[_October or November_] 1831.

MY DEAREST THERESA, I would take a larger sheet of paper, but it does so
happen that ever since we have nominally had stationery for nothing, I
have never been able to find anything in the nature of paper, pen, or
sealing-wax; indeed, for some time one pen served the whole house. It
never came to my turn to have it, as you perceived, and I scorned to buy
one. The country may yet afford a quarter of a hundred of pens, at least
I suppose so.

You were quite right, I really did look at the end of your letter for
your signature. The date, and your beginning, "You must have forgotten
who I am," and your writing such a simple hand, put me out, and I said
to George, "This must be some Carnegie or Elliot cousin, by the token of
Edinbro', whom I ought to remember." I was so pleased when I found it
was you; though your expecting an answer is odd, not to say troublesome.
However, anything to please you.

What a delicious tour you have had. I cannot imagine anything much
pleasanter. The two articles in your letter that disappoint me are, that
it does not appear you are intensely bored by the Scotch, considered as
members of society; nor that you are sufficiently mad about the beauty
of Edinbro'. I think the old town so much the most picturesque thing I
ever saw, and the scenery all about it so beautiful. In short, such a
slow drawly people have no right to such a romantic capital. They are
very tiresome, poor dears! but I suppose they cannot help it; else, if
they would speak a thought quicker, and even catch even the glimmer of a
joke, and give up all that old nonsense about Chiefs and plaids and
pretenders and so on, I should grudge them that town less.

I have been living here very quietly nearly three months, I think--that
is as quietly as is compatible with the times; but it has been an
eventful summer. What with the opening of bridges, crowning Kings and
Queens, and launching ships, I have seen more sights and greater masses
of human creatures than usual; and then there has been some talk of a
Reform in Parliament, a mere playful idea, which may not have reached
you, but which has occasionally been alluded to in conversation here.
What a business they all made of it last week.[367] They speak amazingly
well, those dear Lords, but they are not so happy at voting....

I could quite understand those Tories if I could find one who would say
the Bill is thrown out for good, but I have not seen one who does not
say it must pass in three months, so why refuse to consider it now?
London has been an ugly-looking sight. We drove up to it most days to
see George, and to take him down to the House, because I like to see him
safe thro' the crowd.

Women in London have made themselves so extremely ridiculous and
conspicuous, by their party violence, and I have no reason for thinking
I should have been wiser than others, if I had been in the same state
of excitement. Besides, it is such a bore to be very eager, it tires me
to death, and yet one catches it, if other people have the same
complaint.

The gardener has taken up all the geraniums. That is not a light
grievance, it portends frost and spoils the garden. I wish you had seen
it this year, I am certain there never were so many flowers in so small
a space.

Anne Robinson[368] came here for three days, and took a fancy for
gardening, but I am afraid it did not last. She paid us such a nice
visit I asked Lord Morpeth to meet her, thinking that a proper
_procede_. Then somebody who had been dining at Putney[369] told me I
was quite wrong, and that Mr. Villiers was the person to ask. So I
_driv_ up to town like mad and caught him before dinner-time. I thought
as he had a Dawkins-Pennant to look to, it was rather hard to interfere
with Lord Morpeth's chance, but I need not have had that delicacy about
a fair division of fortune.

Lord Morpeth came here for a longer visit the following week, and I do
not think he has the remotest intention of making up to Anne, or any
other person. He is absorbed in politics, and says it would bore him to
change his situation. Your ever affect.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

30 GROSVENOR STREET,
_Thursday_ [_January 1832_].

MY DEAREST THERESA, Not the least affronted. It never crosses my mind to
invent any other cause for anybody's silence, but the simple fact that
the bore of writing a letter is almost intolerable, and I never fancy
anything, either that they are affronted or ill, or _hurt_ (don't you
know how many people are delighted to feel hurt), or dead; but I simply
suppose they are not in a writing humour....

I am glad you liked Bowood. I saw her on Monday on her way through town,
quite enchanted with Paris and with the fuss that had been made with
them. She likes your brother Edward[370] very much, and seemed to have
seen a great deal of him. I have not seen Lord Lansdowne yet, but he is
to stay on in town some days longer. I wish there were any chance of our
meeting you at Bowood, but I fear it is not very likely. In the summer
they said they hoped we would come in the winter, but I never go there
without a renewed invitation for some special time, because it is always
a doubt, I think, whether she likes all the visitors he asks, and I hate
to go in uncertainty.

I have been passing a fortnight at Panshanger--went with George for
three days, and then Lady Cowper made me stay on. It is a most difficult
house to get away from, partly because it is so pleasant, and then that
her dawdling way of saying, "Oh no, you can't go, I always understood
you were to stay till we go to Brighton," is more unanswerable than all
the cordiality of half the boisterous friends, who beg and pray, and say
all the kind thoughts that they can think of.

We had heaps of people the first part of my visit: Lievens, Talleyrand,
Madame de Dino, Lady Stanhope, Palmerston[371] and Mahon, George, Lionel
Ashley, Fordwich, and William Cowper (who is a great dear), and heaps of
people who acted and danced, and it was all very pleasant.

People are wonderfully clever, I think, and as for Talleyrand I doat
upon him. I have been dining with him since at his own house, and
elsewhere, and could listen to him for any number of hours. There _are_
weak moments in which I think him handsome, just as it used to cross my
mind sometimes whether the Chancellor was not good-looking--decidedly
pleasanter to look at than that young Bagot, who walks up Regent Street
quite miserable that it is not wide enough for the crowds that he thinks
are looking at him.

My last week at Panshanger I was alone with the family, which is always
pleasant. I do like Lady Cowper's society so particularly; in short, I
like _her_. She may have a great many faults, but I do not see them, and
it is no business of mine anyhow; and so everybody may reproach me for
it if they please, but I am very fond of her.

As for your plan for me--kind of you, but it won't do at all. He was
there all the time, and I left him there, and he always honours me with
great attention, but by the blessing of Providence I do not take to him
at all. I am too old to marry,[372] and that is the truth. Lady Cowper
remained convinced of that fact, and told me one day that if I were
younger I should be less quick-sighted to Lord M.'s[373] faults, which
is true enough. I do not think him half so pleasant as Sir
Frederick,[374] whom I met the time before, and probably just as wicked,
and he frightens me and bewilders me, and he swears too much. However,
we ended by being very good friends, which is creditable under the
circumstances, and though I am sure it is very kind of my friends to
wish me married, and particularly kind that anybody should wish to marry
me, yet I think now they may give it up, and give me credit for knowing
my own happiness. "We know what we are, but not what we may be," as
somebody says, _Ophelia_ I believe; and I know that I am very happy
now, and have been so for some years, and that I had rather not change.
If I change my mind I shall say so without shame, but at present I am
quite contented with my position in life and only wish it may last. If I
were younger, or less spoiled than I have been at home, I daresay I
could put up with the difficulties of a new place; but not now. I cannot
be blind to the faults of the few men I know well, and though I know
many more faults in myself, yet I am used to those, you know, and George
is used to them, and it all does beautifully. But in a new scene it
might fail.

I can derive but little vanity from Lord Melbourne's admiration. I stand
very low in the list of his loves, and as for his thinking well of my
principles, it would be rather hard if he did not, considering the
society he lives in. And he has found out that I am not clever. I like
him for that, and for saying so.

Lord Alvanley is utterly ruined again, has given up everything, and his
creditors allow him L1200 a year. Poor Colonel Russell[375] leaves
L35,000 of debt. What horrid lives of difficulty those men must lead.

We settled in town a week ago, as the drives from Greenwich were
becoming cold and dark for George. There are several people in town I
know. Maria is looking very well and seems pleased and
contented--neither in great spirits, nor otherwise.

We have seen Colonel Arden very often lately; he and Mr. Warrender
having been kept in town for the hopeless purpose of arranging Lord
Alvanley's affairs. I suspect dear Alvanley is after all little better
than a swindler. He writes beautiful letters to Lord Skelmersdale, one
of his trustees, and says he feels he deserves all the misery he is
suffering, which misery consists in sitting in an arm-chair from
breakfast till dinner-time cracking his jokes without ceasing. He has
taught his servant to come into the room and ask what time his Lordship
would like the carriage, and what orders he has for his groom, because
he thinks it sounds cheerful, though he has neither carriage nor horses.
But it looks better. When Brooke Greville was describing to him the
beautiful gilding of his house in Hill Street, which is a wonderful
concern, Lord Alvanley said, "My dear Brooke, if you would carve a
little more, and gild a little less, it would be a more hospitable way
of going on." Yours ever

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GREENWICH PARK,
_Thursday evening, April 18, 1832._

MY DEAREST THERESA, I should not much wonder if you _were_ coming to the
crisis; that feeling so well is suspicious. Never mind; "all things must
have their end," as _Isabella_ says in the Tragedy, and "all things must
have their beginnings," as your child[376] will probably say if you will
give it an opportunity. I quite forgot to mention to you to let it be a
girl, I like girls best. I see Mrs. Keppel, to save all disputes, has
brought both a boy and girl into the world; but that is such an
expensive amusement, you would not like that. If it is a boy, you ought
to call it Arlington[377] as a delicate attention to Mr. Lister. I
mention these little elegant flatteries out of regard to your domestic
peace, as from various observations I have lately been driven to make
amongst my acquaintances, I do not think wives pay half enough attention
to their husbands, though this does not apply to you.

Yes, as you say, that division is satisfactory to Lord Grey,[378] but
still if there were a shadow of an excuse for making a dozen Peers
without affronting two dozen who _are_ made, I should be glad.

The division was a pleasing surprise to me. I had been awake since four
that night, and at last had settled that George must have come home and
gone to bed, and that nobody had voted for us but just the Cabinet
Ministers, and then I heard the house-door bang, and knew by the way in
which he rushed up stairs how it was. Now it is over, and that our
enemies have not triumphed, I am left with a sort of wish--that is, not
a wish, but an idea--that it might have ended (just for fun) the other
way. I should so like to know what would have come next. It is all so
like a game at chess, and I was anxious to know how Lord Grey would get
out of check. However, I am delighted with the game as it is; only it
_would_ have been a curious speculation, wouldn't it? I see we are to
have longer holidays, which makes me dote upon them all, both Greys and
Salisburys, for so arranging it, and George is enchanted with it. He
comes to-morrow, which is good for my gardening tastes and bad for my
church-going habits.

There are lectures at the church every evening by an excellent preacher,
and when George is in town, Fanny and I dine early and go to them. But I
behaved so ill last night. I was shown into a large pew, a _voiture a
huit places_, where there were seven old ladies, highly respectable and
attentive, and four of us sat opposite to the other four. The clergyman,
the curate of the parish, made a slight allusion to his superior
_officer_, the rector, who happens to be ill, and made a commonplace
remark on his own inferiority, etc., whereupon one of the old ladies
began to cry. The next, seeing that, began to cry too, and so it went
all round the pew, but so slowly that the last did not begin to cry
till a quarter of an hour _at least_ after she had heard of the rector's
illness, and till the sermon was fairly directed against some of the
difficulties of St. Paul. Their crying set me off laughing, and you know
what a horrid convulsion that sort of suppressed laughter, which one
feels to be wrong, turns into. I hope they thought I was crying.

Our hyacinths are too lovely; quite distressing to see how large and
double they are, because they will die soon. If they were only single,
poor little wretches, it would not signify their lasting so short a
time. I think the great fault of the garden is the constant flurry the
flowers are in. Perhaps you have not found that out, but fancied they
were quiet amusements; but that is an error. They either won't come up
at all, or they come at the wrong time, and the frost and the sun and
the rain and the drought all bother them. And then, the instant they
look beautiful, they die. I observe that a genuine fancier, like George,
does not care a straw for the flower itself, but merely for the cutting,
or the root, or the seed. However, I must say he contrives always to
have quantities of beautiful flowers, hurrying on one after the other.

God bless you, dearest. I have not much to say, but my sisters all tell
me to write just before they lie-in--that anything does for an amusement
then; so I suppose it is right. Shall I have "Arlington" to-morrow, do
you think? Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GREENWICH,
_Friday evening, 1832_.

DEAREST THERESA, I shall be charmed to see you any day you like, the
sooner the better. Two or three stray people have suggested themselves
for various days next week, but I am not sure who are the people, or
what days they mean to come. I do not mean anything _pert_ to George,
but if he has a fault, it happens to be a total disregard of all notes
and messages confided to him. However, I do not know of anybody coming
that you would think objectionable. I should have suggested Monday
because, as Caroline Montagu (Lord Rokeby's sister) is coming to pass
the day with Fanny, she might have brought you, and returned you, which
you would probably prefer; but then what is to become of Mr. Lister?
George cannot be here, and though you and I going one way, and Fanny and
her Caroline the other, and all meeting for dinner would do very nicely,
Mr. Lister would be bored out of his life. But any day you please will
suit me, so as you can let me know in time to cook a bit of vittals for
you.

I went to town yesterday to see Maria[379] and do my congratulations,
and I passed a long time with her, and am quite satisfied that she is
unfeignedly happy and that she really likes him. Sir Joseph[380] cannot
control his joy at all, and was very amusing with his account of his own
manner to Lord Grey and of Lord Grey's to him. That angel of a man
Charles Greville[381] (quite a new light to see him in) gave himself a
degree of trouble that astounded me to procure places for us to see
Taglioni[382] last night, and he succeeded in fixing us in Devon's box
with the Harrowbys and found us a carriage--in short, there never was
anything so good-natured. So we stayed and saw her, and drove down here
after it was over.

What a wonderful invention she is. I am satisfied now that she is not a
mere live woman; but probably she is, as she insinuated in the ballet
_La Sylphide_. Monsieur de Voisins sat next to us, and his ecstacies
and Bravos, and the rapturous soliloquies he indulged in, have left me
with a strong impression of his domestic felicity. To be sure, it is a
miracle in our favour, that there should be a man in the world, who is
enchanted to see his wife flying about a theatre with no cloathes on,
and that that individual should have married Taglioni! Your ever affect.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GREENWICH PARK,
_Thursday evening, July 2, 1832_.

DEAREST THERESA, I found your note when we came home late last night
from Richmond, where we had been to pass the day and dine with the G.
Lamb's; consequently your party was dispersed and you were in a sweet
sleep before I knew you had been "at home," and I was in a sweet sleep
too, five minutes after I got home, and shall be so again, I hope, as
soon as I have sealed this note. These days in the country are wholesome
in that respect. We came here very early this morning, did our Churches
like good Christians, and have given a dinner like Ditto, for we have a
highly conservative party down here, at least what would have been
conservative if, as my housekeeper justly observed about the
gooseberries, the season for conserving was not gone by.

We have had the Jerseys, Lord Villiers, Lord Carnarvon, and dear C.
Baring-Wall, besides the smart tassel of young Jersey children. George
was as happy as a King with all his old friends, so I am delighted they
came, and after all Lady Jersey is very good-humoured.

Lord Carnarvon[383] has a pouting-pigeon way of talking, which is rather
amusing, but upon the whole I find Tories rather less lively, or perhaps
a shade more dull, than Whigs. They growl more, and do not snap in that
lively way I should have expected. However, I am no judge: "man delights
not me nor woman either," as dear Hamlet had the candour to observe. He
had seen something of society. I daresay he longed to be left to his
flowers and his Chiswick, and a comfortable chair under the portico. To
be sure his father made a bad business of sleeping in the garden, but
then it could not have been so sweet or so full of flowers as ours.

We go back to town to-morrow afternoon, but I begin to see the time
coming when we shall settle here. I wish you would take to treat
yourself entirely as a sick person for a fortnight. But you won't, so
there is no use saying anything about it. Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Viscount Melbourne[384] to Miss Eden._

WHITEHALL,
_August 13, 1832_.

MY DEAR MISS EDEN, Many thanks for your kind enquiries. I have been laid
up for a day or two, but am much better, and in tearing spirits, which
is always the consequence of being laid up. Abstinence from wine and
regularity of diet does me much more good than the malady does me harm.

I hope I shall get into the country soon, for I quite pine for it.
Robert, I am told, is the only man in Hertingfordbury who has
registered. Has Lady Francis written to him for theological arguments? I
understand that she has been simply defeated in religious dispute by an
Atheist of the neighbourhood--a shoemaker, or something of that
sort--and has been seeking everywhere for assistance. The man argued for
Natural Philosophy for so long, that she was not prepared to
controvert.

Do not the Malignants pour somewhat less malignance, or are they more
irritated than ever? Adieu. Yours faithfully,

MELBOURNE.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

_Wednesday_ [_December 1832_].

DEAREST THERESA, I had meant to have written you a long letter, but have
been interrupted in a thousand ways till it is too late; but perhaps a
line will be better than nothing. I was so much obliged to you for
writing me that long letter. It told me exactly all I wanted to know
about you--your health, your feelings, and also the little particulars I
have no means of ascertaining. I never had courage to ask Mr. Villiers
even how you are. Don't you know the difficulty there is of approaching
even in the slightest degree _the_ subject that one is most anxious
about, and as the _surface_ with him is quite calm, I am always careful
not to venture even on a word that might disturb it. He and Mr. Edward
Villiers dined here yesterday. George is very anxious to have your
George here as much as possible, and thought they had better come for
their Christmas dinner as their own family is away, so he asked them
both, and I was very glad to renew my acquaintance with Edward, though
in some respects, from likeness of voice and manner, which probably you
would not be aware of, it was painful to see those two come into the
room together.

However, they must be a great comfort to each other. I never saw _my_
brother George so occupied with another person's grief as he is in this
instance. He is asking and thinking every day what can be done for Mr.
Villiers.[385] God knows there is nothing; but still I always recollect
that in those horrid times of trial, affection from anybody is soothing,
if it is nothing more, so I am glad when it is shown.

I was at Oatlands when your letter came, and Lady Charlotte [Greville],
who is a kind-hearted person I always think, was most anxious to know
all about you and Mrs. Villiers. I thought her very well, all things
considered. Lady F.[386] seemed to me particularly out of spirits, and
all her letters have been so since her father's death. I imagine, that
in addition to any other trials, they are in some trouble about their
affairs, or that Lord F. thinks so, and makes himself unhappy, which
troubles her.

The Gowers have taken Bridgewater House off their hands. Maria Howick is
come back from the North. Everybody talks of her low spirits and
constrained manner. Though I do not think her in high spirits, I do not
think _I_ see much difference in her. She is probably timid with her new
family and her new position, but whenever I see her alone I am quite
convinced she does not think herself unhappy, and when she is quite at
her ease again I think other people will think so too.

God bless you, my darling Theresa, I will write again in a few days.
Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GROSVENOR STREET,
_Thursday, December 1832_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, I fear that Lord Ribblesdale's[387] death must be to
you and Mr. Lister an additional grief, as I recollect you were fond of
her, and she seems to have had not the slightest warning of this
calamity. It was very kind of Mr. Lister to write to me, for I was in a
state of great anxiety about your health and with no near means of
hearing anything about you. What can I say to you, dearest? My love for
you and my deep, deep pity for your bereavement you cannot doubt, and as
for any attempt at consolation, who can be sure that even with the
kindest intentions, they may not aggravate the grief they wish to
soothe. I always felt in calamity that though I seemed to want kindness
from everybody, yet that all they did was like the work of surgeons, the
most skilful made the pain of the wound more evident; and I think I may
hurt you if I dwell on your loss, or seem neglectful if I do not, and
yet I know so well all you must be feeling.

I was reading yesterday a book of extracts, etc., that I wrote when I
lost my own darling brother.[388] As there were several things in it
that I thought you might like, and though I did not want anything to
remind me of feelings that seem as _true_ on that subject as they were
years ago, yet it made me better able to follow you in your present
hours of trial and to know what you are going through. With a mother,
husband, and child with you, and all the rest of your family, whom you
love so dearly, assembled about you, you have more earthly support than
many can have to look to; and the consolations of religion none are more
likely to find than yourself. Indeed, that is a subject on which I think
a stranger intermeddleth not, for God alone can comfort the heart He has
cast down, and He, I trust, forgives the repinings which He alone knows.

I wish you would make the exertion of writing one line to me. I love you
very dearly, and never feel it more than when you are in grief. Your
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Charlotte Greville._

(At OATLANDS, WEYBRIDGE),
_December 24, 1832_.

MY DEAR LADY CHARLOTTE, ...London is so particularly thick and sloppy
that it would not surprise me if I slipped out of it again soon.

I have got that invitation to Panshanger I wanted, but as I would rather
not go into Hertfordshire till the ball season is over, that will do
later, and Eastcombe is open again now.

I am broken-hearted about the Essex election, and the only gleam of
cheerfulness I have had has been occasioned by half a sheet of notepaper
which I filled with the beginning of my new novel. I wrote nearly a
sentence and a half which I composed in two days. Mr. Sale, the singer,
called here this morning, which he often does, and used to give me
lessons gratis, which was kind but tiresome. To-day he could not,
because there is no pianoforte in the house, so we talked about Mrs.
Arkwright's[389] songs, which he says he teaches to numbers of his
scholars (there is no end to his pupils). But there are great faults in
the scientific parts of her compositions, which he could correct in five
minutes--in short, he talks of a mistake in counterpoint as we do of
breaking one of the Commandments, and when I said she was a great friend
of mine, he said he should be quite delighted to correct anything she
sent to the Press, and always without touching the "air," and he was
very polite about it. Do you think it would affront Mrs. Arkwright if I
asked her, or that she would not take it as it was meant, as a kindness,
from such a lump of science as Sale is? Shall I ask her? Yours
affectionately,

E. E.


_Hon. Mrs. Norton[390] to Lord Auckland._

[_July 1833._]

DEAR LORD AUCKLAND, As you are the only person in your family who have
not "cut" me, perhaps you will allow me to apologise _through_ you, to
your Sister, for my rudeness last night.

Say that, as far as concerns her, I consider my conduct on that occasion
vulgar and unjustifiable, and that I beg her pardon. Yesterday was a day
of great vexation and fatigue--which of course is no excuse in the eyes
of strangers (whatever it may be in my own), for rudeness and want of
temper. I am very sorry. My apology may be of no value to her; but it is
a satisfaction to _me_ to make it. Yours truly,

C. NORTON.


_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden._

_October 25, 1833._

DEAREST EMMY, Eleven years ago we were together. To-day is Edward's
birthday, and I still see that house in Cadogan Place, and the window at
which I sat watching for you, my own dear Friend. I like to think how
long we've loved each other without a shade of alteration between us;
_du reste_, I need dwell on such things to smooth my mind after other
rugged bits of life. Your godchild[391] is a good, peaceable, fat lump,
with black eyelashes and a pretty mouth, which is all I can make out of
her yet.

I recovered tolerably well the first fortnight, since that I have been
but poorly. Anxiety and worry keep me back. However, it is all over now,
for our matters are pretty nearly arranged. Sir Guy sells out; it is
our only resource; it is the only way of paying what we owe, getting rid
of debt....

I conclude you are now sitting with your own goldfish under your
fig-tree, you who live under the shadow of your own old Men.[392] By the
bye, with your blue pensioners, I am sure you will feel for us in the
dispersion of our red pensioners. There was a great cry heard in the
Hospital, Kilmainham weeping for her old men, because they are no longer
to be! However, they are respited, for my enemy Ellice[393] put his pen
through their existence, and Mr. Littleton[394] too, and ordered even
the fashion of their dispersion, but forgot to enquire particulars, and
they have stumbled upon an Act of Parliament, and so must wait till
another Act breaks through it. Ellice dropped his pen, and was obliged
to pick it up again. Your affectionate

PAMELA CAMPBELL.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GREENWICH PARK,
_Sunday, December 15, 1833_.

DEAREST THERESA, I have just had a letter from your brother George,[395]
and though probably you heard from him by the same opportunity, yet it
is always a pleasure to know that one's brothers are heard of by others
as well as oneself. It makes assurance doubly sure, which that clever
creature Shakespeare knew was not once more than enough, in this unsure
world.

Mr. V. seems very happy and very well, and will probably be more
personally comfortable when he is the owner of a few tables and chairs.
It was such a relief _off_ my mind (as a friend of mine says when
anything is a relief _to_ her mind) to find that he had received an
enormous letter I wrote to him some time ago, a thing like the double
sheet of the _Times_ in private life, and which had been so long
unacknowledged, that I felt sure that it had been captured, and that I
should see a horrible garbled translation of it copied from a Carlist
paper, and headed "Intercepted Correspondence," whereupon I must simply
have changed my religion, gone into a convent, and taken the veil. The
_propriety_ of my letters surpasses all belief, so I should not have
been ashamed in that sense; but when I write to your brother, or to Lord
Minto, or to that class of correspondents, I always rake together every
possible anecdote and fact--or what is called a fact--and write them all
down just like a string of paragraphs in a newspaper. I always suppose
nonsense would bore them, so the horrid letters are made up of proper
names, and if there is an unsafe thing in the world to meddle with it is
a proper name, and that is the bother of a letter that goes abroad,
particularly to such a country as Spain. I saw George was just as fussy
about a letter he had written to your brother; but now we know our
little manuscripts have found their way safely, we mean to write
again--at least I do, the first time I find anything to say. At present
I am out of that article.

We have been living here rather quietly, not very though,--at least I
dined in town at several great dinners, at the Lievens, etc., that
fortnight the Ministers were all in London, and we went up several times
to the play with the Stanleys, and several of them came and dined here,
and so on during November. Then, George has been frisking about the
country at Woburn, Brocket, etc., shooting; and on Saturday he and I are
going to run down to Bowood for a week. It is an expensive amusement and
not worth the trouble, barring that it is worth while acknowledging the
kindness of the Lansdownes. He rode down here from London to ask us,
but I never go on his invitations. But, however, he wrote again as soon
as he got back, and then Lady Lansdowne wrote to insist on our fixing a
day. So, though I know she never wishes her invitations to be accepted,
yet if she will write, she must take the consequences, and so we are
going. I hear the Nortons[396] are to be there, which will be funny. I
do not fancy her, but still she will be amusing to meet for once.

We settle in town after that, at least Fanny and I do. George is going
to a great meeting of Ministers at Goodwood. I think it such a good
thing, the Ministers have all taken to go shooting about in a body. It
prevents their doing any other mischief. That is the way an enemy might
state it. I, who am a friend, merely presume they must have brought the
country to a flourishing state, since they seem to have so much leisure
for amusing themselves.

We have two of Robert's boys staying with us while Mrs. Eden is
recovering from her sixth lying-in. The eldest of the five younger
children is just five years old. Pleasant!

I send this to the Council Office as you desire, and have a vague idea
that C. Greville will read it, and throw it into the fire--officially of
course, I mean. Ever, dearest Theresa, your affect.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell._

GROSVENOR STREET,
_Tuesday_, [1837].

DEAREST PAM, Thank you just for giving me a push off--not that of all
the days in the year I could have chosen _this_ for answering you. I am
in long correspondence with Louisa (Mrs. Colvile) about that
flirtation,[397] that little interesting love story I imparted to you,
and, as usual, the young people are to be very miserable, because that
L100 a year which has been left out of everybody's income, when incomes
were created, is not forthcoming; and as usual again, I take the grand
line of "all for love and my niece well lost." Moreover, I think a small
income in these days is as good as a large one twenty years ago; and
that anything is to be preferred to a disappointment. But all
this--together with due attention to dignity one side and love the
other, and no two people ever understanding each other--keeps me writing
at the rate of twelve pages a day. I am quite tired of the manual
labour, and as I feel convinced that three months hence they will be
married, I grudge these _protocols_.

What fun your visit was to me, and I shall always think that last sin of
your drive to Greenwich and back was the best spent wickedest two hours
we ever passed. I have been twice for a few days to Eastcombe. Saturday
and Sunday we pass at Greenwich. George gardens for about fourteen hours
on Sunday, which I suppose is wrong, only that is his way of resting
himself. Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden._

_March 26, 1834._

DEAREST EMMY, I daresay the very sight of a letter from me frights you.
I was very sorry after I had written the nasty bitter letter. When I
wrote that, I was ill-tempered too! and one always writes harder than
one feels. However, my own Emmy, I had rather have written it to you
than to any other, tho' you may not thank me for _la preference_, if any
one can bear with me it is you, however. You mistook me if you thought
that I thought that either dear Lord Auckland or the Lansdownes had not
done their utmost for us! God knows I feel far more sure of Lord
Auckland's kindness to me than of my own Brother's. But there is much
danger in our sort of distress of getting embittered, my Darling. I pray
against this temptation, and strive against this most fervently, and I
do trust my cheerfulness has never flagged, and that I blame no one. We
have done all we can, and I will not fret....

Your little Godchild is a dear child, with immense eyes and four teeth.
She is wise, clever and quiet, and all your Godchild ought to be, but
not so pretty as some of her sisters. As they say the commodities are
always in proportion to the demand for them, I expect a great cry for
girls in a few years.

I have been to our Court but twice. I was told it was imposing, and I
did think there was a good deal of imposition. He[398] is sharp and
clever and does work like a horse, but I do think one man about him very
dangerous, and that is Blake the Remembrancer. I cannot help thinking
that man very double, nay, triple. There are no bounds to the gossip of
our little Court; the master likes it and is fed with it. I do not think
he is very popular, but that does not signify; here, the way of flesh
and all parties seems to be discontent, and murmur and grumble. Think of
the Wilt[399] being married,--_Ciel_!... Your own

PAMMY.


_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden._

1834.

I am over head and ears in your affairs. I have so much the bump of
speculation and lottery in my soul that I am decidedly of your opinion,
and would at once keep Greenwich and the Thames, than put my head under
that very excellent and comfortable extinguisher of the Exchequer,
particularly if my head were as _bien meublee_ and well arranged as your
George's small crop-eared shaven little crown. We always dressed our
heads alike _outside_, no curls. I would most certainly take my chance
and not dowager myself into the Exchequer....

I suppose Government, to hold together, must go upon the principle of
each Minister bringing a certain quantity of sense and an alloy of
folly. Now, surely, some of your colleagues bring a peck of dirt and
very few grains of reason. Are you obliged to eat it all?... My dearest,
tempt me not with the sound of pleasant books, I am all day at Latin and
Greek with the boys, I very nearly wrote your name in Greek letters.

Write to me; it cheers me, and I want cheering often, dear Emmy. I
grieve at your account of Lady Lansdowne.[400] She has not the
constitution for the illness of being cured by the London physicians, I
am very sure. Solomon, after he had taken all the physic in the world,
exclaimed: "Vanity of vanities."

Your Godchild has a mouthful of teeth. Tell me something of your
Sisters, of William Osborne, of that marriage of your niece, and
particularly of the fate of those _orchises_ we took down that day we
ran to Greenwich, did they ever come up?


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell_.

GROSVENOR STREET.
[1837.]

...I do not really care about my position in this short life, but I like
to be actually _posished_, don't you? I believe we shall end by
remaining at Greenwich, influenced chiefly by the enormous price of
villas.

I am sorry Lady Lansdowne writes in bad spirits, for barring the
melancholy circumstances attending Kerry's marriage, I should not have
thought this a troublesome year to her. The Wilt himself seems full of
attention to her, and if she hates London society, this is a charming
year, as such an article does not exist. You have no idea how odd it is.
Except herself, no person ever thinks of giving either ball or party. I
own I think it quite delightful; no hot rooms, no trouble of any sort,
and a great economy of gowns and bores.

We thought much of the Unions[401] for ten days, but they are going by.
There never was such luck as the Tailors starting by such ridiculous
demands. The middle classes, even down to servants, took against them,
and there seems to be very little doubt that, in a very few weeks, they
will be totally beat and the whole Union fund exhausted.

It is rather amusing to see them wandering about the Parks, quite
astonished at the green leaves and blackbirds. There were about fifty of
them playing at leap-frog the other morning. Only conceive the luxury of
going home after that unusual exercise, and after beating their wives
for making such good waistcoats, sitting down cross-legged to rest
themselves. They cost the Union L10,000 the first week, and L8,000 the
second, and as the whole amount of the Union fund is L60,000, it is easy
to guess how long it may last. It will end in frightful distress. The
great tailors are getting foreigners over, and employing women with
great success.

I have been in a state of agitation with a touch of bother added to it,
which would have made my letters very _hummocky_. That giving up
Greenwich was nearly the death of me, and our glorious promotion[402]
was inflicted on us on a particular Thursday, Epsom race day, which
George and I had set apart for a holiday, and a _tete-a-tete_ dinner,
and a whole afternoon in that good little garden. We went all the same;
but, as for gardening, what was the good of cultivating flowers for
other people's nosegays! So there I sat under the verandah crying. What
else could be done, with the roses all out, and the sweetpeas, and our
orange-trees, and the whole garden looking perfectly lovely; and George
was nearly as low as I was.

And then we had two or three days of bother for our future lives,
because, though I now never mean to talk politics, and to hear as little
of them as may be, yet I suppose there is no harm in imagining just the
bare possibility that the Government _may_ not last for ever.[403]
However, he is assured now of a retiring pension. If he chooses to play
at the game of politics, he must take his chance of winning or losing;
and moreover, this would not have been a time for separating from poor
Lansdowne, who has behaved beautifully all through these troubles. So
now we are fairly in for it, and after the first troubles are over, I
daresay it will do very well. It is the kind of office he likes, and he
is, of course, flattered with the offer of it, and Lord Grey has been
uncommonly kind to him.

We went on Tuesday to see the Admiralty, and I believe we shall be
moving into it the end of next week. It is a vast undertaking. The
kitchen is about the size of Grosvenor Square, and takes a cook and
three kitchen-maids to keep it going, but the rest of the establishment
is in proportion, which is distressing, as I look on every additional
servant as an added calamity. I will trouble you with the idea of _this_
house--your old acquaintance--with a bill stuck in its window, "To be
sold,"--rather shocking! Looks ungrateful after we have passed our best
days in it; but still I cannot fancy being much attached to _any_ London
house, so I do not mind about this. Our idea is to get a villa
sufficiently small to be adapted to our income, whenever the day of
dignified retirement comes; to move our plants and books to it, and
gradually to furnish it, and then to make it our only home for the rest
of our lives. I should like that better than any other life. Ever your
affectionate

E. E.


_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden_.

_Tuesday, June 10, 1834._

How do you do, and how do you feel? How does one feel when one becomes
sister to the Admiralty?... Stanley[404] seems a terrible loss, but at
this distance I cannot judge, of course. You will think me, of course, a
Radical, but I think he is wrong, for the Irish Church always did strike
me like a Hot-bed for raising Horse-Beans,--some would tell you for
raising thistles, but I don't go quite so far. I saw Mrs. Ellice, she is
in such a Grey fermentation, it might be dangerous, but she foams it
away in such long talk that it is very safe.

I saw Mrs. Foggy[405] as she is called; pleasant, merry, and going on
very well; people begin to get accustomed to her ways, and, I think,
like her on the whole! Darling dear Foggy is in good humour, and all
seems right. She is amusing, certainly, but certainly _elle parle gras_,
as the French say, when people speak improprieties. I always think part
of her education must have been carried on in the Canal boat, like _Vert
Vert_, when he got away from the nuns.

The Protestants are bristling all over this unfortunate country since
the Reform. I have seen nothing like the excitement among them. The
Catholics do not appear so excited. This is plain enough. The loss to
200,000 is immense, whereas the gain to 8,000,000 is comparatively
small.


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell._
HAM COMMON,
_Tuesday, July 23, 1834._

Yes, it is very odd--absolutely curious. But tho' you and I live in two
different islands--two different worlds--yet your letters always are
just what I think, and know, and say, and they fit into my mood of mind,
and you carry on the story I am telling--and you know all I did not tell
you, and say all I did not know--and the whole thing amalgamates. That
Littleton creature![406] Is not there an unity in that story of him with
all I know? Let's write his life. Did not I meet him at dinner the very
week after the stramash, when everybody crossed the street if they saw
him coming, they were so ashamed _for_ him? It was at a dinner at the
Chancellor's, the first given after Lord Melbourne's appointment,[407]
and he was there, and Lord Lansdowne, and several others, and Charles
Grey[408] as sulky as possible. And next to him sat Mr. Littleton--and
the first thing he chose to begin talking about across the table was
something about "one of the _tustles that O'Connell and I have had_." It
set all our teeth on edge, everybody being naturally with a
predisposition to _edge_-ism, and none of the ferment of the change
having had time to subside--and he the guilty author of it all! I really
would not have alluded for his sake to the letter O. I said to Lord
Lansdowne: "Well, I am surprised at him, for I have refrained from
talking about him, from really expecting his mind must give way, and
that there will be some horrid tragedy to make us all repent having
abused him." And he said, "That is exactly my feeling. I look at him
with astonishment; I can hardly believe he is what he seems to be." I
suppose it really was true, and that he did not mind. We tried, for two
or three days, I remember, to declare he looked very ill, but now you
say he had not lost a night's rest, I give up that point. It never was
very tenable.

The young Greys have all been pre-eminently absurd, Lord Howick more
than all the rest. He told me he had been to all the clubs, and calling
at all the houses he knew, to spread every report against the Chancellor
he could think of, and coming from him, of course, it was set down as
coming from his father, who is as unlike his sons as he well can be. I
do not wish to entrench on Mrs. E.'s[409] province--how tiresome she
must be!--but she can say nothing of Lord Grey I don't think. He is the
only great man I ever had the good luck to see--consistent and
magnanimous--two qualities that I never met with in any other
politician. I have closed my political accounts with him.... I am sure I
cannot tell you generally anything about the Government. Politics have
answered so ill to me in my private capacity that I gave them quite up,
and can only tell you these private gossipries of the time. I have not
read a debate since last Easter, and can only wonder how I could be so
foolish three years ago as to think politics and office the least
amusing. I suppose to the end of our days we shall all wonder at
ourselves three years ago. But I have had such a horrid uncomfortable
year this year; I never was so tired, so out of breath, so bored. You
may well ask where we lodge. At a little cottage on Ham Common, hired
by the week, without a scrap of garden, but where by dint of hard
labour, a doctor, and quantities of steel draughts, I have recovered a
little of the health I lost entirely by being kept eight months in
London, frying over the coals.

I declare I believe I have lived ten whole lives in the last ten months;
we have been so unsettled, which is the only state I cannot abide. First
George was to have that Exchequer place with Greenwich, and we made up
our plans for that, and were to part with Grosvenor Street; then
Greenwich was cut off from the Exchequer, and we prepared to give that
up; then the Government found it convenient to make him keep the Board
of Trade, and we went back to be as we were.

Then came the Stanley secession and we thought we were all to be out,
and reverted to the Exchequer, and looked at every villa round London.
Then came the Admiralty, and George sent me to Greenwich to pack up and
sell and give up everything, (the only spot of ground I care about in
the world).

Well! That was done, and as the goods were on their road, just turning
into the Admiralty gate, and just after we had paid Sir James Graham for
_his_ goods, and stuck up a bill in Grosvenor St. "To Be Sold"--out went
dear Grey.

Then for two or three weeks we did not know what to do. And then in all
that hot weather, at last we settled to move, and the arrangement of
that great Admiralty was enough to murder an elephant. Then, when George
set off on his Tour of the Ports, we came here, and just as we got
settled, a Mr. Brogden bought Grosvenor Street, so that I had to go up
and pack that up, and rout out the accumulated rubbish of sixteen years,
and move all the books, etc.

However they have done their worst now, we have parted with both our
houses, and all our goods, and when we are turned out, must live in a
tent under a hedge.

I have got a little black King Charles's spaniel of my own, that I mean
to boil down, and make into a comfortable "sup of broth" when we come to
that particular hedge "where my tired mind may rest and call it home."

I somehow feel as if I were sitting by watching George's mad career, and
wondering where it will end.

I never set eyes on him--you have no idea what the labour of the
Admiralty is--he never writes less than 35 letters every day in his own
hand, besides what the Secretary and all the others do.

Every Levee is a crowd of discontented men who would make an excellent
crew for _one_ ship, he says, but as they each want one, he is obliged
to refuse 99 out of every 100. However he is as happy as a king, I
believe, only he has not had time to mention it. He likes his office of
all things.

The Admiralty is a splendid home to live in, but requires quantities of
servants, and the more there are the more discontented they are.
Everybody says what fortunate people we are, and I daresay George is,
but my personal luck consists in having entirely lost his society and
Greenwich, the two charms of my life; in being kept ten months of every
year in London, which I loathe; and in being told to have people to
dinner--without the means of dressing myself so as to be always in
society. I wish Government would consider that, tho' a man be raised
high in office, yet that the unfortunate women remain just as poor as
ever.

Louisa (Mrs. Colvile) has just had her seventeenth child; Mary (Mrs.
Drummond) her ninth; and Mrs. Eden is going to have her seventh.

Lord Melbourne[410] made a good start in the House of Lords as far as
speaking went. I do not know what ladies have hopes of him, but the
"Fornarina,"[411] as he calls her himself, has him in greater thraldom
than ever. I see him very often and confidentially, but both of us
without any sinister designs.


_Miss Eden to Lady Charlotte Greville._

HAM COMMON,
_Friday [October 1834]._

MY DEAR LADY CHARLOTTE, I sent a note to thank you for my beautiful
purse down to Mr. Spring-Rice to frank, not knowing he was away from
home, and now that is come back to me I may thank you also for your
account of Lady F.[412] I am so glad the business is over at last; it
was very hard upon her to have it hanging over her so long, and I
congratulate you on being at ease about her. As for another
grandchild--your _grand quiver_ is so full of them already, that I
suppose you hardly have room for any more. I think it would be such a
good plan, if after people have as many children as they like, they were
allowed to lie-in of any other article they fancied better; with the
same pain and trouble, of course (if that is necessary), but the result
to be more agreeable. A set of Walter Scott's novels, or some fine
china, or in the case of poor people, fire-irons and a coal skuttle, or
two pieces of Irish linen. It would certainly be more amusing and more
profitable, and then there would be such anxiety to know _what_ was
born. Now it can be only a boy or a girl.

I expect and hope that Lady F. in about ten days will be walking about
looking younger and stronger than ever.

My purse is quite perfection, and I cannot thank you enough for it. I am
only afraid it is still more attractive than the last you gave me, which
so took the fancy of one of those men who sell oranges in the street,
that he snatched it off the seat of the carriage in which I was sitting
and ran away with it. Your ever affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden._

[1837.]

Tell me any old news you have by you, for I never see a newspaper by any
chance, and live in the wilds,--woods I would have said, only we are
scarce of trees. I hear news once a month from Mrs. Ellice. I think she
seems Lord Wellesley's Madame de Pompadour, and so happy! She is quick
and lively, but _furieusement intrigante_ I should imagine, from what I
hear of her; and her vanity has such a maw that she swallows the rawest
compliments. She was recommended to me by Mrs. Sullivan,--not merely
introduced to my acquaintance, but fairly confided to my heart. Well, my
dearest, I went with my friendship in my hand, ready to swear it before
the first magistrate, expecting to find a warm-hearted _etourdie_ full
of talent and genius. Well, we met, and I knocked my head against the
hardest bit of worldly Board you ever met with. Full of business, with a
great deal of the grey claw and _accaparage_. So I buttoned up my heart
to my chin, and we talked good harsh worldly gab, and we are charming
persons together.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

HAM COMMON,
_Monday evening, October 28, 1834._

DEAREST THERESA, I am kind to write to-night, for Fanny and I poked out
an old backgammon board of the General's[413] and began to play, and I
beat her two single games and a gammon, so that in coming to my letter
I am probably leaving "fortune at the flood, and all my after life will
be bound in flats and shallows." All your fault.

Our cottage is a real little cottage, belonging to an old General Eden
who, on the score of relationship, let us have it for almost nothing. It
is very clean and old bachelorish, and he lets with it an old housemaid
who scolds for half-an-hour if a grain of seed drops from the bird's
cage, or if Chance[414] whisks a hair out of his tail; we are grown so
tidy and as she is otherwise an obliging old body, she has been an
advantage to us. We took the house only by the week, and as my health
has entirely recovered the complete break-up it came to, from our long
detention in London, and as his Lordship is living alone at that
Admiralty, we depart on Wednesday to settle ourselves there till the
Government changes, or I am ill again. However, I do not mind London so
much in cold weather. I have been very busy this last week _setting up_
house, as the Ministers will be most of them in town next month without
their families, and George has announced an intention to make the
Admiralty pleasant to his colleagues. I have but one idea of the manner
in which that is to be achieved, and hope the cook may turn out as well
as Mr. Orby Hunter's recommendation promises. Oh dear! I dread the sight
of their dear old faces again, and of that "full of business" manner
which they get into when they meet in any number.

I wish I could write like Mrs. Hannah More, and have money enough to
build myself a Barley Wood,[415] and resolution to go and live there. I
am so taken by that book and amazingly encouraged by it, for she was as
dissipated and as wicked as any of us for the first half of our life, so
there is no saying whether we may not turn out good for something at
last.

We have been here eleven weeks, quite alone, but walking and driving
eternally, and very few interruptions except an occasional visit from,
or to, the F. Egertons and W. de Roos's, and a royal dinner, luncheon,
and party at the Studhouse, which always turns out amusing. The King is
so good-natured that it does not signify his being a little ridiculous
or so; it is impossible not to love him. The Albemarles[416] do the
thing in the handsomest manner as far as the dinner, establishment,
etc., goes, and I think the Studhouse a charming possession. She always
gets all the King's Ministers that she can find to meet him, and it
charms me to hear her _judgments_ of people:--How unlucky that the
Spring-Rices should _look_ less well at a dinner than the Stanleys; and
what luck she was in in having such a showy person as Lady Bingham last
year in the neighbourhood; not adverting to the possibility that one
person may be pleasanter than the others, and admitting that, their
position being changed, they do not amount to being _persons_ at all.

I suppose that things are going on well, for I never saw people in
greater glee than the Ministers are. Lord Melbourne is in the highest
state of spirits, which seems to me odd for the Prime Minister of the
country. They all went off from the last luncheon at the Studhouse
early, leaving only the W. de Roos's, Fanny and me and Lord Hill[417] to
go round Hampton Court Palace with the King,--a long and curious
process, as he shows it just like a housekeeper with a story for each
picture. It was pitch dark, so it does not much matter if the pictures
were as improper as the stories, for I saw none of them, but it lasted
two hours, and in the meantime the Ministers, having had their dinner
so early, had set fire to the two Houses of Parliament just for a _ploy_
for the evening.[418] That is the sort of view the Tories take of it,
and it sounds plausible, you see; and from Lord Hill's staying to see
the Palace it is clear he had not been let into that plot.

No, I did not see the fire,--wish I had--will trouble them to do it all
over again when there are more people in town. Is Lord Fordwich the new
Under Secretary? I asked George and he said he did not know, and I asked
Lord Melbourne and he said he could not tell me--both very good answers
in their way and such as I am used to, but it leaves the fact of
Fordwich's appointment doubtful, and I heard from Lady Cowper three days
ago and she said nothing about it.

There was a great _sough_ of India for about a fortnight, but I always
said it was too bad to be true, which is a dangerous assertion to make
in most cases, it only hastens the catastrophe. But this was such an
extreme case, such a horrible supposition, that there was nothing for it
but to bully it; and the danger is over now. Botany Bay would be a joke
to it. There is a decent climate to begin with, and the fun of a little
felony first. But to be sent to Calcutta for no cause at all!! At all
events, I should hardly have got there before George got home again, for
I should have walked across the country to join him, if I had gone at
all. I think I see myself going into a ship for five months! I would not
do it for L1000 per day.

Good-night, dearest Theresa. I see _Ann Grey_ is out, and rather expect
that will turn out to be yours too. Is it?[419] Your ever affectionat

E. E.

[In November 1834 the King dismissed Lord Melbourne, and sent for the
Duke of Wellington, who advised that Sir Robert Peel should form a
Government. Peel's return from Italy did not take place till December 9,
and the Duke in the meantime assumed control of various offices, thereby
giving offence to the Whigs. He became Foreign Secretary under Peel.]


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

ADMIRALTY,
_Monday, November 23, 1834._

MY DEAREST THERESA, Yes,--you see it all just in the right light; but
what will come of it nobody can say.... The truth is, till Sir Robert or
his answer comes, they have not the least idea themselves what they are
to do, or to say, or to think, and I should not be the least surprised
if he were to refuse to come, and many people think that from the
ridicule of the Duke's position and conduct now, the whole thing may
crumble away before Sir Robert can arrive.

The King is said to be very cross about it, and at the unconstitutional
state of affairs. It has been the oddest want of courtesy on the Duke's
part insulting the Ministers for his own _in_convenience. Mr.
Spring-Rice's[420] _keys_, besides his seals, were sent for two hours
after the Duke kissed hands on Monday, so that he could not remove his
private letters even, and has never been able to get them since. He is
naturally the _gentlest_ man I ever saw, but is in that state of
exasperation that he would do anything to show his resentment.

On Friday the Duke sent to Lord Conyngham to say he begged he would
dispose of no more patronage, to which Lord Conyngham answered very
properly that he had resigned, and was keeping the office solely for the
Duke's convenience (it is a patent office), and that he would leave it
with pleasure the next minute, but as long as he remained there he
should certainly do what he thought best with his patronage. The
Chancellor[421] was to have given up the seals on Saturday, when he
would have cleared off all arrears and closed the courts, etc., and this
was understood at the beginning of the week; but on Thursday the Duke
wrote to him that he must give up the Great Seal on Friday morning. It
appears that nobody but the King has a right to ask for the Great Seal,
so the Chancellor wrote to tell the Duke what was the proper
_etiquette_, and at the same time wrote to Lord Lyndhurst, with whom he
is on the most amicable terms, saying that the Duke, besides being three
Secretaries of State, President of the Council, etc., was now going to
be Lord Chancellor, so he should give notice to the Bar that the Duke
would give judgment on Friday afternoon, and sit to hear Motions on
Saturday morning. He came here quite enchanted with the serious answer
from Lord Lyndhurst, saying the Duke had no such notion, etc.

I suppose anything equal to the ill-treatment of Lord Melbourne never
was known.

The Tories go on asserting, in the teeth of his _advertised
contradiction_ (for he was driven to that), that he dissolved the
Government, and advised the Duke, etc. There is not a _shadow_ of
foundation for that. He went down to Brighton to propose the new
Chancellor of the Exchequer, not anticipating any difficulty. His
colleagues were all dining here that day, and were expecting him back
perhaps in the evening, as he had so little to do! He found everything
he said met by objection, and at last the King asked for a night's
consideration, and on Friday put a letter into Lord Melbourne's hand,
very civil personally to him, but saying he meant to send for the Duke.

Lord Melbourne never expressed any difficulty about carrying on the
government; never complained of difficulties in the Cabinet, which do
not exist; never advised a successor,--in short, it was as great a
surprise to him as to the rest of the world, and as the Court Party go
on saying the contrary, I mention this.

The truth is that that party--Lady T. Sydney, Miss D'Este, the Howes,
Brownlows, etc., have all been working on his, the King's, fears, and
exacted a promise that when Lord Spencer[422] died the King should try
the Tories, which he has quite a right to do; but he should not have
forced Lord Melbourne to take that office of great responsibility and
then have dismissed him without any reason, or without Lord Melbourne's
making any difficulties, and he made _none_. I could convince you of
this by several notes from him, besides the fact being now generally
known. He says in one note: "I do not like to tell my story; I cannot.
Besides, I hate to be considered ill-used; I have always thought
complaints of ill-usage contemptible, whether from a seduced
disappointed girl, or a turned out Prime Minister." So like him! Our
people have all been very cheerful this time, and it has been
_privately_ an amusing week.

Ours is the only official home left open, and as the poor things were
all turned adrift, with nothing to do, and nowhere to go, they have
dined here most days (I have found _such_ a cook!), and several others
have come in, in the evening.

Our plans are beautifully vague. We have no home, and no place, and no
nothing; but as we have a right to a month's residence after our
successor is gazetted, and as he cannot be appointed for a fortnight,
there is time enough to look about us. George leans to a place in the
country large enough to give _him_ some amusement, and that is cheaper
than a small villa which I should rather prefer, but either would do
very well. In short, I do not much care so as he pleases himself. We
have _esquived_ India, a constant source of pleasure to me, though I
keep it snug, as he is rather disappointed at having missed it, so I
must not seem so thankful as I am. I should like to go abroad for a few
months, but the session will probably be an interesting one and he would
not like to be out of the way. Your ever affectionate

E. E.




CHAPTER X

1835-1837


_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden._

_July, 1835._

I HAVE really escaped with my life--_I ain't dead yet_, but such a big
monster of a girl![423]--a regular Megalonia of a female, that if you
happened to find a loose joint of hers you would think it must belong to
an antediluvian Ox. Je vous demande un peu what am I to do with a
seventh girl of such dimensions?

Well, my own darling, your letter came just as I was allowed to read,
and it cheered me and delighted me, because you know we cannot help
thinking just the same, and my weak sides shook with laughter, and then
I cried because I do love you so much that I take a pining to see you,
and I am sure you do long to have me within reach of your Ship Hotel or
Ship Inn, for you are too wise to look upon it as more than your
Hostelrie!...

Do you remember how we always liked a maxim? I like a maxim, and I like
a good stout axiom, and a good compact system laid out straight without
any exception in any rule, a good due North and South argument, and
without any of your dippings of needle and variation of the compass. All
this we had in the Tories--but, alas, where are they now? _Ils ne sont
plus ces jours_, and I believe _we are_ the Tories. I think that Lord
Winchester, _e tutti quanti_, must feel like the old woman after her
_reveil_ when she found her petticoat cut off above the knee by that
most clever pedlar Peel.

Do you ever see him now? What a fight Peel made of it, and as
Plunkett[424] said to me, "Alone he did it," and I forgive him two or
three sins, because, that tho' he is a bad Chancellor, he loves the
Immortal.

My dear, I grieve to say what a _desperately good_ Chancellor Sugden
made.[425] Couldn't we hire him? All parties liked him except the
ultra-radical dreg of the canaille. He is vain and pompous; but he
amused me because his vanity is of such a communicative nature that he
would talk his character out to me by the hour, and I like any
confession, even a fool's. But a clever man's is very amusing, and I
pick out a bit of human nature and human character as attentively as I
see botanists pick petals and pistils.

It is very good of Lord Auckland to stand for my girl. I really believe
she is harmless, for she could knock me down, but she is merciful! What
shall we call her? I had some thoughts of Rhinocera. She was born the
day the Rhinoceros landed, or Cuvier,[426] because I was reading his
life and works just before she was born, and took a passion for him.

Might she not be called Eden?--Her other name is to be Madeline--her
Godmother's name....

My baby was christened Caroline Frances Eden, and I constantly call her
Eden. I think it sounds very feminine and _Eve_-ish.


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell._

ADMIRALITY,
_July 1835._

MY OWN DEAREST PAM, George wrote to tell you of the awful change in our
destination,[427] and I have been so worried, and have had so much to do
with seeing and hearing the representations of friends, and taking leave
of many who are gone out of town and whom I shall never see again, that
I could not write.

Besides, what is there to say, except, "God's will be done." It all
comes to that. I certainly look at the climate with dread, and to the
voyage with utter aversion. Then, we leave a very happy existence here,
and then, worst of all, we leave my sisters and a great many friends.
But still, there is always another side to the question, and I suppose
we shall find it in time. One thing is quite certain, I could not have
lived here without George, so I may be very thankful that my health has
been so good this year that I have no difficulty on that account, as to
going with him. And as other people have liked India and have come back
to say so, perhaps we shall do the same.

What I would give for a talk with you--that you might put it all in a
cheerful light. It makes no difference in our affection or _communion_
that has stood the test of such long absence that 14,000 miles more will
not break it down.

I am going to-morrow for ten days to Mary [Drummond]; she is in a
desperate way about our plans....

By all means stick an "Eden" into your child's name. Your most
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell_.

ADMIRALTY,
_[August] 1835._

MY DEAREST PAM, Our letters crossed, and yours was just what I wanted,
and you are as great a dear as ever, only I am never to be allowed to
see you....

A week ago we began our preparations. You do not and cannot guess what
that is--and I have despaired of writing you even a line--I never knew
before _really_ what it was to have no time. And besides the deep-seated
real Indian calamity, you cannot think what a whirl and entanglement
buying and measuring and trying on makes in one's brain; and poor
Goliath himself would have been obliged to lie down and rest if he had
tried on six pairs of stays consecutively. We sometimes are three hours
at a time shopping, and I could fling myself down and scratch the floor
like a dog that is trying to make a feather bed of the boards when I
come home.

It is so irritating to want so many things and such cold articles. A
cargo of _large fans_; a _silver busk_, because all steel busks become
rusty and spoil the stays; nightdresses with short sleeves, and net
nightcaps, because muslin is too hot. Then such anomalies--quantities of
flannel which I never wear at all in this cool climate, but which we are
to wear at night there, because the creatures who are pulling all night
at the Punkahs sometimes fall asleep. Then you wake from the extreme
heat and call to them, then they wake and begin pulling away with such
fresh vigour that you catch your death with a sudden chill. What a life!
However, it is no use thinking about it.

My present aim in writing is to ask whether there is not anybody in or
near Dublin who can make a sketch of you, something in the Edridge[428]
or Slater line, not very extravagant in price, and if you do not mind,
sitting for it for me. I will send its price by Lord Morpeth, when he
goes, and you must send it me either by a private hand, or if not, we
can have it sent under cover to George, if it is carefully packed. Will
you?

What do you think of the Lords? It is hardly possible to conceive such
hopeless folly, and it is clear that they are the only living animals
that cannot learn experience.

We shall be off in less than a month I believe, not that I believe
anything somehow,--I feel too dreamy and bewildered. Your ever affect.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to her Sister, Mrs. Drummond._

ADMIRALTY,
_Saturday [September 1835]._

MY VERY DEAR MARY, Your note was a sad blow to me; but perhaps it is
best that we should so have parted, and I am very thankful that we
should have had this week together. I am thankful for many things--that
we love each other so entirely; that you have a husband who has been so
invariably kind to all of us, and whom I can love in return; and then,
that your girls seem to me like real friends, and almost like my own
children. All these are great goods and absence cannot touch them. God
bless you, my darling Sister. Your ever affectionate

E. EDEN.

_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden._

CARTON,
_September 1, 1835._

I fear there is no good sketcher in Dublin, but there is a man who does
paint something like a miniature, and does catch a likeness, and it
shall be done for you next week, my darling. I never have you out of my
mind a minute, and I always thought I should not be sorry if a change
sent a Tory out instead of you.... I feel cheerful about you because you
are doing what is right, and only think what you would have been
suffering now if you were seeing him prepared to go without you....
Shall we take good in this world and not take the evil, _our old
compensations_? You might have lived years without either you or George
knowing how much you loved each other, and is there not an utter delight
in this feeling of devotion twice blessed?

Let me know how I am to write to you, and how to send my letters. How
little did I imagine when I read of India, and looked on those hot,
misty, gorgeous Indian views, that I should ever garner up part of my
heart there. I am staying here.[429] I always like them, but there is a
want of colour and life and impulse. There are many positive virtues
present, and an absence of all vice and evil, but yet something is
wanted. There is the dreaminess of Sleepy Hollow upon them.

Send me a bit of your hair, my darling, and always bear me in your
"heart of hearts, as I do thee, Horatio." I cannot believe it yet, nor
do you, dearest, in spite of the preparations, and it is best you should
not believe it till it is over....

It must be done, and so it had best be well done! and I will not hang to
your skirts and make it harder for you to go forward and do right, only
I felt all the love I have borne you for all these years choking me till
I sobbed it well out, you whom I loved as my own sister.... I was not
surprised at it; I felt it would be, it was so like life--such a horrid
piece of good fortune, such a painful bit of right to be done.

How right the Wise Men were to come _from_ the East! Only, I should not
have been particular about going back again; I had rather have stayed
and sat in Herod's back-parlour for the rest of my life.

When once it is over you will be very busy and very amused. Emmy, I mean
to open an account with you. I mean to keep a letter always going to
you, and so tell you every week what I am thinking about, because, you
know, in India, without any vanity, I may be very sure my letters will
be valuable. It will cool you to read anything coming from the damp
West.... I have been so eager about the Corporations, for Corporation in
this Country means abomination! And when I heard them all spitting and
scratching about the Tithe Bill, I thought what will they say to the
Corporation Bill that sweeps so much farther.

There is a great deal of rage and fury fermenting here, but I think
there will be no explosion. I own I am sorry to see that the fury of the
Orangemen, tho' it may not drive the lower orders of Protestants to
fight, will, by making him fancy himself ill-used, persuade him to
emigrate. Thousands are preparing to emigrate.

I do not hope to see Ireland better in my time, and it often makes me so
sad, for I do love it with the love one feels towards the child that is
most weak, most sick.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

ADMIRALTY,
_Thursday, September 1835._

MY DEAREST THERESA, I was very near you yesterday, and at the time I had
appointed, but my heart failed me about taking leave for so long a time,
and as I took one of those fits of lowness which sometimes come over me
now (partly from real bodily fatigue), I saw I should do nothing but cry
if I went to you, and that would be hard upon you and tiresome withal.
Besides, taking leave is at the best of times a hateful process, so I
would not go to you. And now, God bless you and yours, my very dear
friend. I daresay when I come back I shall find _you_ just what you are
now, and _yours_ very much increased in number and size.

Be sure to write to me a fortnight at the very latest after you see our
departure announced, and put your letter under cover to Lord Auckland,
Government House, Calcutta, and put it in the common post, if that is
more convenient to you. Otherwise, if you can find anybody to frank it
to Captain Grindlay, 16 Cornhill, he is our agent, and will at all times
take charge of letters and parcels for us. Pray give my best love and
wishes to Mrs. Villiers. Ever your affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

ADMIRALTY,
_September 1835._

MY DEAREST THERESA, I have received your pretty bracelet with tears,
which is a foolish way of accepting what is very dear to me, but every
day my heart grows more sore, and I look with greater despondency to an
utter separation from such kind friends as mine have proved themselves.
I did not need anything, dearest, to remind me of you. Our friendship
has happily, as far as I remember, been entirely free from even those
little coolnesses and irritations which will mix sometimes with the
closest intimacies. I cannot recollect the slightest _tiff_ between us,
and therefore I have no fears of the _effect_ of absence, but still the
absence itself is most painful. And your bracelet will then be an actual
comfort to me, and besides thinking it so particularly pretty in itself,
I am glad that it is one that I may wear constantly without fear of
injuring it. I have put it on my arm, and there it will stay, I hope,
till we meet again.

I am just setting off to Eastcombe to fetch home Fanny, who will be
delighted with your recollection of her. To-morrow we are to go to the
_Jupiter_ to settle the arrangements of our cabins, but Wednesday, late
in the day, we will go to Knightsbridge.

God bless you, my very dear friend. Many thanks for this and all the
many kindnesses you have shown me. Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Lord Melbourne to Miss Eden._

SOUTH STREET,
_September 24, 1835._

My Mother always used to say that I was very selfish, both Boy and Man,
and I believe she was right--at least I know that I am always anxious to
escape from anything of a painful nature, and find every excuse for
doing so. Very few events could be more painful to me than your going,
and therefore I am not unwilling to avoid wishing you good-bye. Then God
bless you--as to health, let us hope for the best. The climate of the
East Indies very often re-establishes it.

I send you a _Milton_, which I have had a long time, and often read in.
I shall be most anxious to hear from you and promise to write. Adieu.
Yours,

MELBOURNE.


_King William IV. to Miss Eden._

WINDSOR CASTLE,
_September 26, 1835._

The King cannot suffer Miss Eden to quit this country without thanking
her for the letter she wrote to Him on the 24th inst., and assuring her
of the satisfaction with which He received it.

His Majesty has long been aware of the sincere attachment which exists
between Lord Auckland and his amiable Sisters, and of his anxiety for
their Welfare and happiness, and he gives him credit for this exemplary
feature of his character, not less than He does for the ability and
correct zeal with which he has discharged his Public Duties.

Lord Auckland's conduct at the Admiralty has indeed been so satisfactory
to the King, that it is impossible He should not regret his Removal from
that Department, though His Majesty trusts that the Interests of the
Country have been consulted in his nomination to the high and important
Situation of Governor-General of India, and sincerely hopes that it may
conduce to his own advantage and satisfaction.

His Majesty is not surprised that Miss Eden and her Sister should have
determined to accompany so affectionate a Brother even to so remote a
destination, and He is sensible how much their Society must contribute
to his comfort, for the uninterrupted continuance of which, and of their
welfare, He assures them of His best Wishes.

WILLIAM R.

     [The end of September 1835 Lord Auckland, his two sisters, his
     nephew William Godolphin Osborne, their six servants, and Chance
     the dog, started on a five-months' voyage in a sailing-ship to
     India. Miss Eden described in her book, _Letters from India_, their
     many adventures on board ship, and her impressions of life in
     Calcutta. Her water-colour sketches of Funchal, Rio in Brazil, Cape
     Town, and her "Portraits of Princes and Natives," make excellent
     illustrations to all the long letters written during her six years'
     absence from England.

     In 1916 an Exhibition of Miss Eden's paintings, chosen and arranged
     by Mr. F. Harrington, was held at Belvidere, Calcutta, the first
     sketch mentioned in the catalogue being that of Chance.

     "I had such a pretty present this morning, at least rather pretty.
     It is a baby-elephant, nine months old, caught at Saharanpur by the
     jemadar of the mahouts, and he has been educating it for me, and
     offered it by way of Captain D., his master. William and I have
     been looking about for some time for a gigantic goat for Chance to
     ride on great occasions, but a youthful elephant is much more
     correct, and is the sort of thing Runjeet's dogs will expect. It
     just comes up to my elbow, seems to have Chance's own little bad
     temper and his love of eating, and is altogether rather like him."]


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell._

N. LAT. 17, LONG. 21,
_February 18, 1836_.

MY DEAREST PAM, I got William to write to you from the Cape, as we were
in a flurry of writing, visiting, and surveying Africa, and he had more
time, having been there before. We have had a very smooth sea, and I can
read and draw and write, and as we all are perfectly well, there is not
much to complain of, except of the actual disease--a long voyage, which
is a very bad illness in itself, but we have had it in the mildest form
and with every possible mitigation. At the same time I cannot spare you
the detail of all our hardships, and I know you will shudder to hear
that last Saturday, the fifth day of a dead calm, not a cloud visible,
and the Master threatening three weeks more of the same weather, the
thermometer at 86 in the cabin,--tempers on the go and meals more than
ever the important points of life,--at this awful crisis the Steward
announced that the coffee and orange-marmalade were both come to an end.

No wonder the ship is so light, we have actually ate it a foot out of
the water since we left the Cape. "Nasty Beasts," as Liston says. Your
lively imagination will immediately guess how bad the butter is, and I
mention the gratifying fact that two small pots of Guava Jelly and the
N.E. Monsoon sprung up on Monday, and we hope their united forces may
carry us to the Sandheads.

I never could like a sea life, nor do I believe that anybody does, but
with all our grumbling about ours, we could not have been 19 weeks at
sea, with so few inconveniences. Captain Grey is an excellent seaman,
and does more of the work of his ship than is usual. The officers and
midshipmen have acted several times for our diversion, and remarkably
well.

The serious drama, _Ella Rosenberg_, was enough to kill one. Ella's
petticoats were so short, and her cap with her plaits of oakum always
would fall off when she fainted away, and a tall Quartermaster, who
acted the confidant, would call her Hella, and never caught her in time!

Some of the sailors were heard talking over the officers' acting, and
saying, "They do low comedy pretty well, but they do not understand how
to act the gentleman at all."

How little we thought in old Grosvenor Street days, when we sat at the
little window listening to the organ-man playing "Portrait charmant"
while the carriage was adjusting itself at the door, that we should be
parted in such an out-_sea_-ish sort of way. That in the middle of
February, when we ought to be shivering in a thick yellow fog, George
and I should be established on a pile of cushions in the stern window of
his cabin, he without his coat, waistcoat, and shoes, learning
Hindoostanee by the sweat of his brow. I, with only one petticoat and a
thin dressing-gown on, a large fan in one hand and a pen in the other,
and neither of us able to attend to our occupations because my little
black spaniel will yap at us, to make us look at the shark which is
playing "Portrait charmant" to two little pilot-fish close under the
window.

I should like to go back to those Grosvenor St. days again. I have had
so much time for thinking over old times lately, that I never knew my
own life thoroughly before. I can quite fancy sometimes that if we could
think in our graves (and who knows), my thoughts would be just what they
are now--the same vivid recollections of former friends and scenes, and
the same yearning to be with them again. There is hardly anything you
and I have talked over, that has not come to life in my mind again, and
I could wring my hands, and tear my hair out, to go back and do it all
over again.

The cottage at Boyle Farm, W. de Roos's troubles, Henry Montagu, the
Sarpent,[430] even that old Danford[431] with the wen, Mrs. Shepherd and
the Hossy Jossies. Dear me! Did I ever have jollier days with anybody or
love anybody better?

Do write and tell me all about yourself now, and your children--I don't
half know them. There is a tassel of small ones, like the tassel at the
end of a kite's tail, that I know nothing about--not even their names.
Tell me all their histories. There is an Emily,[432] I know. What shall
I send her from Calcutta if we ever arrive there? It is now five months
since we have been travelling away from letters, and I feel such hot
tears come into my eyes when I think of....

_Monday, February 29, 1836._--I thought we should have been coming home
with our fortunes made by this time, but we are still within a hundred
miles of the Sandheads. At this precise moment we are at anchor in
_green_ water, so different to the deep blue sea, near some shoals,
which is advantageous, because we can pick up our petticoats and pick
our way to land.

_Thursday. In the Hooghly._--At last, by dint of very great patience and
very little wind, we have arrived, got the pilot on board early
yesterday morning, saw Saugur, which looks as if it had been gnawed to
the bone by the tigers that live on it. We are surrounded by boats
manned by black people, who, by some strange inadvertance, have utterly
forgotten to put on any cloaks whatever. We have a steamer towing us, a
civil welcome from Sir C. Metcalfe;[433] a Prince of Oudh, who has been
deposed by an undutiful nephew, and deprived of several lacs of rupees,
asking for his Excellency, well knowing that the first word even in
Hindoostanee is valuable, which is so much his Excellency's opinion,
that he wisely refuses to hear it, and, above all, we have received a
profusion of letters from home, ten fat ones for my own share. Nothing
unpleasant in them, which, considering some are dated five weeks after
we left England, is something to be thankful for.

Cecilia de Roos's[434] marriage; and poor old Lady Salisbury,[435] it
somehow seems as if nothing but fire could destroy her. I am going down
to look over the box that contains the dresses in which we are to appear
at our first Drawing-room to-morrow, and my blonde gown may, and in all
probability will, come out quite yellow and fresh-patterned by the
cockroaches. Your most affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

BARRACKPORE,
_March 24, 1836_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, In the utter bewilderment in which I live, from
having more to do in the oven than I could get through comfortably in a
nice bracing frost, I quite forget whether I wrote to you on my first
arrival. I sent off so many letters, necessarily precisely like one
another, that I have forgotten all about them, except that they
announced our arrival after a five months' voyage, and that we were in
all the nervousness of a first arrival in a hot land of strangers.

We have been here three weeks to-day, and are so accustomed to our way
of life that I cannot help thinking we have been here much longer, and
that it is nearly time to go home again. It is an odd dreamy existence
in many respects, but horribly fatiguing realities breaking into it. It
is more like a constant theatrical representation going on; everything
is so picturesque and so utterly un-English. Wherever there is any state
at all it is on the grandest scale. Every servant at Government House is
a picture by himself, in his loose muslin robes, with scarlet and gold
ropes round his waist, and his scarlet and gold turban over masses of
black hair; and on the esplanade I hardly ever pass a native that I do
not long to stop and sketch--some in satin and gold, and then perhaps
the next thing you meet is a nice English Britschka with good horses
driven by a turbaned coachman, and a tribe of running footmen by its
side, and in it is one of the native Princes, dressed just as he was
when he first came into the world, sitting cross-legged on the front
seat very composedly smoking his hookah.

Then, after passing a house that is much more like a palace than
anything we see in England, we come to a row of mud-thatched huts with
wild, black-looking savages squatting in front of them, little black
native children running up and down the cocoa-trees above the huts, and
no one appearance of civilization that would lead one to guess any
European had ever set foot on the land before. The next minute we may
come to a palace again, or to a regiment of Sepoys in the highest state
of discipline, or to a body burning on the river-shore, or another body
floating down the river with vultures working away at it. Then, if
George is with us, we may meet a crowd of white-muslined men who begin
by knocking their heads against the ground, and then give their long
petitions (asking for some impossibility) in the Hindustani language, or
else an English petition, which is apparently a set of words copied from
some dictionary. No sense whatever--otherwise an excellent petition.

I have described our Calcutta house and household so often that I cannot
do it again. It is all very magnificent, but I cannot endure our life
there. We go there on Monday morning before breakfast. We have great
dinners of 50 people, "fathers and mothers unknown," to say nothing of
themselves. Every Monday and Wednesday evening Fanny and I are at home
to anybody who is on what is called the Government House List. What that
is I cannot say; the Aides-de-Camp settle it between them, and if they
are the clever young men I hope they are, they naturally place on it the
ladies most agreeable to themselves.

On Thursday morning we also receive any people who chance to notify
themselves the day before. The visiting-time is from ten to one in the
mornings, and we found it so fatiguing to have 100 or 120 people at that
time of day that we have now chosen Tuesday evenings and Thursday
mornings, and do not mean to be at home the rest of the week. There are
schools to visit, and ceremonies half the week. Yesterday we had an
examination at Government House of the Hindu College, and the great
banqueting-hall was completely filled with natives of the higher class.
Some of the boys in their gorgeous dresses looked very well, reciting
and acting scenes from Shakespeare. It is one of the prettiest sights I
have seen in Calcutta. On Thursday afternoon we always come here, and a
prodigious pleasure it is. It feels something like home. It is sixteen
miles from Calcutta, on the river-side. A beautiful fresh green park, a
lovely flower-garden, a menagerie that has been neglected; but there is
a foundation of a tiger and a leopard and two rhinoceros', and we can
without trouble throw in a few light monkeys and birds to these heavy
articles. It is much cooler here, and we can step out in the evening and
walk a few hundred yards undisturbed.

Then, though we ask a few of the magnates of the land, and a wife or a
daughter or so each time, they are lodged in separate bungalows in the
park, and never appear but at luncheon and dinner, and are no trouble.
We are so many in the family naturally, that seven or eight more or less
make no difference at those times, and I take a drive or a ride on the
elephant alone with George very regularly.

I never see him at Calcutta except in a crowd. In short, Barrackpore is,
I see, to save me from India. I believe the Aides-de-Camp and
secretaries all detest it, but there is no necessity to know that.
George has made William Osborne Military Secretary, which gives him a
very good income, and plenty to do. He has talent enough for anything,
luckily likes occupation, and is very happy. Captain Grey is living with
us, but the _Jupiter_ sails the end of next week. I am afraid he will
have a tiresome journey home; he takes back many more soldiers than the
ship can conveniently hold, and not only that, but such quantities of
wives and children.

I hope you have written to me; you would if you knew the ravenous
craving for letters that possesses the wretches who are sent here. They
are the only things to care for; you cannot mention a name that will not
interest me, whereas I can never find one that you have ever heard
before. Fanny desires me to say she wears your brooch constantly. I need
not mention that of my dear bracelet. I hope in a few weeks we shall
find something to send home, but hitherto we have found nothing but very
dear French goods. Please write.

Give my love to your brother George when you see him or write to him.
Now that I am dead and buried I sit in my hot grave and think over all
the people I liked in the other world, and I find nobody that I knew had
more community of interests and amusements with their kind. I often long
for a laugh and talk with him, but it would be too pleasant for the
climate.

Tell me an immense deal about yourself, and do write, there's a duck.
Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell._

GOVERNMENT HOUSE, CALCUTTA,
_August 16, 1836_.

MY DEAREST PAM, Your long, dear letter has actually found its way
here--came in last week quite by itself, having travelled 15,000 miles
with nobody to take care of it, and it arrived feeling quite well and
not a bit altered since it left you. I cannot sufficiently explain the
value of a letter here; rupees in any number could not express the sum
which a letter is worth, and I do not know how to make you understand
it. But, you see, the scene in India is so well got up to show off a
letter.

I was suddenly picked up out of a large collection of brothers, sisters,
and intimate friends, with heaps of daily interests and habits of long
standing, devoted to the last night's debate and this morning's paper,
detesting the heat of even an English summer, worshipping autumn, and
rather rejoicing in a sharp East wind, with a passion for sketching in
the country, and enjoying an easy life in town--with all this we are
sent off out of the reach of even _letters_ from home, to an entirely
new society of a most second-rate description,--to a life of forms and
Aides-de-Camp half the day, and darkness and solitude the other
half--and to a climate!!

Topics of interest we have none indigenous to the soil. There is a great
deal of gossip, I believe, but in the first place, I do not know the
people sufficiently by name or by sight to attach the right history to
the right face, even if I wanted to hear it, and we could not get into
any intimacies even if we wished it, for in our _despotic_ Government,
where the whole patronage of this immense country is in the hands of the
Governor-General, the intimacy of any one person here would put the rest
of the society into a fume, and it is too hot for any super-induced
fuming....

The real _calamity_ of the life is the separation from home and friends.
It feels like death, and all the poor mothers here who have to part from
their children from five years old to seventeen are more to be pitied
than it is possible to say. And the _annoyance_ of the life is the
climate. It is so very HOT, I do not know how to spell it large enough.

Now I have stated our grievances, I must put all the per _contras_ lest
you should think me discontented. First, George is as happy as a King;
then our healths, as I said before, are very good, though we look like
people playing at Snap-dragon--everybody does. And though it is not a
life that admits of one doing much active good, some is always possible
in this position, and then it is a life of great solitude, which is
wholesome.

Then, as a set-off to discomforts peculiar to the climate, we have every
luxury that the wit of man can devise, and are gradually acquiring the
Indian habit of denying ourselves nothing, which will be awkward. I get
up at eight, and with the assistance of Wright and my two black
maids--picturesque creatures as far as white muslin and
scriptural-looking dresses can make ugly women--contrive to have a bath
and to be dressed, and to order dinner by nine, when we meet in the
great hall for breakfast.

When I describe my life, you must take for granted the others are all
much the same, except that His Excellency's tail is four times longer
than ours at least. Well, I have all my rooms shut up and made dark
before I leave them, and go out into my passage, where I find my two
tailors sitting cross-legged, making my gowns; the two Dacca
embroiderers whom I have taken into my private pay working at a frame of
flowers that look like paintings; Chance, my little dog, under his own
servant's arm; a _meter_ with his broom to sweep the rooms, two bearers
who pull the punkahs; a sentry to mind that none of these steal
anything; and a Jemadar[436] and four Hurkarus,[437] who are my
particular attendants and follow me about wherever I go--my tail. These
people are all dressed in white muslin, with red and gold turbans and
sashes, and are so picturesque that when I can find no other employment
for them I make them sit for their pictures.

They all make their salaam and we proceed to breakfast which is in an
immense marble hall, and is generally attended by the two Aides-de-Camp
in waiting, the doctor, the private Secretary, and anybody who may be
transacting business at the time.... At six the whole house is opened,
windows, shutters, etc., and carriages, horses, gigs, phaetons, guards,
all come to the door, and we ride or drive just as we like, come home in
time to dress for an eight o'clock dinner, during which the band plays.
We sit out in the verandah and play at chess or _ecarte_ for an hour,
and at ten everybody goes to bed.

The week is diversified by a great dinner of fifty people on Monday; on
Tuesday we are _at home_, which was originally meant for a sort of
evening visiting, but it is turned into a regular dance, as the hotter
it is the more they like dancing. Thursday mornings, Fanny and I are
also at home from ten to twelve for introductions, people landing or
coming from up the country, and for any others of society who wish to
see us.

It is very formal and very tiresome. They look very smart, come in
immense numbers, sit down for five minutes, and, if there are forty in
the room at once, never speak to each other. But it is a cheap way of
getting through all the visiting duties of life at one fell swoop. On
Thursday evenings we used to go to Barrackpore to stay till the
following Monday, but now we only go once a fortnight. We are an immense
body to move if it happens to be a pouring day--about four hundred
altogether.

Barrackpore is a really pretty place. I am making such a garden there,
my own private one, for there is a lovely garden there already, but a
quarter of a mile from the house, and nobody can walk half a quarter of
a mile in this country.

It seems so odd to have everything one wants, doesn't it, Pam? I wanted
a vase for fish in my garden; a civil engineer put up two.

The other day we ordered the carriage at an undue hour, and there were
no guards, and there was such a fuss about it--the Military Secretary
writing to the Captain of the Body Guards, and he blaming the
Aide-de-Camp in waiting; and I thought of the time when the hackney
coach _adjusted_ itself to the Grosvenor Street door, and of William de
Roos's sending Danford away from the play that the hack might seem an
accident, as if the carriage had not come.

Those were the really jolly days. I wish we could go back to them. You
cannot imagine how I enjoyed your history of your children, those are
the letters to send to India. Other people or papers tell public news.
What a pleasure it is to have a letter!

I am so glad you like Lord Morpeth,[438] I always did love him; I wish
you would tell him to write to me in that odd cramped hand. Poor Mrs.
Beresford, she goes on Wednesday next; I shall be glad when she is
safely off. She takes a box for you, with a gown George gives you which
I thought would be useful for your Castle drawing-rooms, and some
handkerchiefs William sends you, which I have had worked for him by an
old native, with a long white beard, who works like an angel. I mean to
send my godchild a present the next opportunity. Yours,

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
_August 24, 1836_.

MY DEAREST THERESA. After I wrote you that long letter of upbraiding for
never having written to me, your Edinburgh letter, which had reached the
respectable age of ten months, was forwarded to me, it having been
mislaid with a large packet of other letters, and remained four months
in the Custom House! So pleasant when one is almost stamping with
impatience for letters--or rather, would be so, if the climate did not
prevent those active expressions of feeling.

I think I told you how the American edition of _Dacre_[439] had been one
of my first purchases here, and I read it over with considerable
pleasure. I do not know exactly what I mean, but I do not think you and
your book are like each other. I do not mean any disparagement to
either; there may be a very pretty fair mother with a very pretty dark
child, both good in their way, but not like, and I cannot put your voice
to any of the sentences in your book, or say to any part of it, "So like
Theresa!" I am glad of that. I hate those _banale_ likenesses of books
to their author. Why did you not tell me the name of your new book? I
daresay everybody has read it and discussed it in England, and _I_ don't
know its name. And to think of you writing about it in that vague way to
me, 15,000 miles off!

The English editions of novels are to be had here for about three
guineas apiece. They charge rupees for shillings, and a rupee is about
two shillings and a penny. I have bought quantities of American editions
of English books; but then it is a bore waiting till a work is two years
old before one reads it. The Americans are valuable creatures at this
distance. They send us novels, ice, and apples--three things that, as
you may guess, are not indigenous to the soil. I own, I think the apples
horrid, they taste of hay and the ship, but the poor dear yellow
creatures who have been here twenty years, and who left their homes at
an age when munching an unripe apple was a real pleasure, and who have
never seen one since, fly at this mucky fruit and fancy themselves young
and their livers the natural size, as they eat it. The first freight of
apples the Americans sent covered the whole expense of the ship's
passage out.

We are all so grieved to-day for poor Mrs. Beresford, whom you may
remember as a Miss Sewell, going out with Mrs. Hope. Colonel Beresford
is the Military Secretary to Sir H. Fane,[440] and came here just a year
ago. She has always declared the climate disagreed with her, and as she
hated this place and its inhabitants, they did not like her, and said
her ailments were all fancy. I never thought so; and she has proved the
climate really disagreed with her, by having a violent fever that has
lasted two months. The doctors said there was nothing for it but a
return to England. Colonel Beresford came out with Sir H. Fane by way of
bettering his fortunes, but as they have been here only a year, they
have not yet got over the expense of coming out, so there was nothing
for it but her going alone. She is one of those people entirely
dependent on her husband's care. I hardly know such another attentive
_servant_ as he is to her--weighed her medicines, carried her about,
etc.--in short, been what she could not find here for millions--an
excellent English nurse.

On Tuesday she was to have gone on board, and I wrote to offer her
carriage, assistance, etc., and got back a wretched note from him saying
a sudden and rapid change had come on, and she was not expected to live
an hour. However, she has lived on, and the doctors still say that,
though they do not think she can live, the only chance for it will be
going to sea; so she is to be carried on board this afternoon with her
little girl, who is a dear little thing, but wants a cool climate too. I
cannot imagine a more painful time for Colonel Beresford than the next
few months, for as he is obliged to go up the country with the
Commander-in-Chief, and _The Perfect_, her ship, may not speak another
till they get to the Cape, it may be six months before he hears if she
survives the first week of change. If she does, I think she will
recover. I am so sorry for them; and here, where we are a limited set
who know each other at all, one thinks more of these stories.

I never could take to the Calcutta society, even if there were any, but
there is not. Almost everybody who was here when we landed five months
ago are gone either home or up the country. They come to Calcutta
because they are on their way out to make their fortunes, or on their
way home because they have made them, or because their healths require
change of station, and they come here to ask for it.

To-day was our _receiving_ day. We receive visits from eleven to one
every Thursday morning, and out of seventy or eighty people there were
few who were not new introductions. "Have you been here long?" "Only
just landed from the _Marianne Webb_--a tiresome voyage." "Did you
suffer much at sea?" And so on. "Did you come in the same ship?" "No, we
are just come from Lucknow." And then there comes all the story about
the hot winds up the country, and whether it is worse or better than
Bengal. So tiresome! I rather like to see the new arrivals, if they do
not put off calling for more than a week, as they arrive with a little
pink colour in their cheeks which lasts nearly ten days, but I heard one
of our visitors to-day, who has been in India twenty years, declare
seriously that he hated that colour; he thought it looked unnatural and
like a disease. I begin to see what he means.

God bless you, dearest Theresa. I want to send this by _The Perfect_,
and am so tired with our visits I cannot write any more. I hope you have
written again and sent yours. I hoped to send you something pretty by
this ship, but (it is not a mere _facon de parler_) in this rainy season
there is not an item of any description to be bought in Calcutta. Nobody
opens even the packages that arrive by mistake, as twenty-four hours
spoils everything, but when the cold weather begins, they say that the
merchants will have plenty of scarfs, silks, etc., from China and up the
country. I want something Indian. We have written to China for any or
everything, in the meantime. Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to ----._

GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
_November 3, 1836_.

Your last letter came to me by a Liverpool ship, so I think it right to
write by the same conveyance, and the more so because our stock of
London ships is low. Only one in the river, and she came only two days
ago, and I suppose it will be six weeks before she will be well stocked
with mosquitoes and cockroaches, and quite comfortable for passengers
again.

It is what is by courtesy called the "cold weather" now, and it is
charming to see some of the old Indians wrapped up in rough white
great-coats, rubbing their withered hands, and trying to look _blue_,
not being aware that their orange skins turn brown when there is the
least check of circulation. You have no idea what sallow figures we all
are, and I mention it now because in another year I suppose the real
Indian blindness will have come over me, and I shall believe we are all
our natural colour.

The new arrivals sometimes stagger us, but we simply say, "How coarse!"
and wait with confidence for the effects that three weeks' baking will
have, and a delicate tender yellow is the sure result.

With all the fine cold weather they talk of, I have not been able yet to
live five minutes, night or day, without the punkah, and we keep our
blinds all closed as long as there is a ray of sun. I do not mean to
deny that the weather is not improved, but when the chilly creatures who
have passed forty years here say triumphantly, "This must remind you of
an English November," they really do great injustice to my powers of
recollection. I should like to show them a good Guy Fawkes, with the
boys purple with cold, beating their sides, and the squibs and crackers
going fizzing along on the frosty ground.

This is our gay season. The Tuesday balls at Government House have
become the fashion and are popular with the young ladies, and there is
going to be a fancy ball given by the bachelors of Calcutta, which we
not only condescend to go to our noble selves, but Fanny and I have
organised two quadrilles, dressed them in remarkably unbecoming dresses,
assured them that they are quite the right thing, and have made the
whole scheme delightful by agreeing to their wish to meet at Government
House without their chaperons, and go with us.

My quadrille consists of eight young ladies, and if the care with which
I have selected their partners does not settle at least six of them
happily, I shall think it a great waste of trouble, red velvet, and blue
satin.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

CALCUTTA,
_December 29, 1836_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, Doctor Bramley is sending a little delicate offering
in the way of Chinese wood-carving to Lady Morley, so I take that
opportunity of sending you a scarf of Dacca muslin, worked at Dacca, and
which is considered the best specimen of the kind of thing here; but
then we have lost all knowledge of what is really pretty, I believe. I
am almost certain we are very nearly savages--not the least ferocious,
not cannibals, not even mischievous--but simply good-natured,
unsophisticated savages, fond of finery, precious stones and tobacco,
quite uninformed, very indolent, and rather stupid.

I wish the holes in my ears were larger, that is all, for I have lately
seen in my drives some Burmese with large wedges of amber, or a great
bunch of flowers, stuck through the holes of their ears, and I think it
has a handsomer effect than our paltry European ear-rings. Besides this
silver scarf, I see that I must write to you about Mr. Lister's
appointment[441] which I _lit_ upon accidentally in a heap of English
papers, and which will, I hope, be a great and permanent addition to
your comfort. I cannot say how glad I was to read it; a patent place
sounds comfortable, and as all you wanted in life was a little more
income, you may guess that I am very really happy one of my best friends
should have just what she wanted.

We have no letter of so late a date as the papers, so I must wait for
particulars till another ship vouchsafes to sail in.

How odd it will be if we all end our lives comfortable _rich_ old folks
and near Knightsbridge neighbours. If we live to come home, we shall be
very much better off than we could ever have expected to be, for there
is no doubt that the Governor General's place is well paid. It may well
be, for it is a hard-working situation and a cruel climate. But still,
it is all very handsomely done on the part of the Company, and it is so
new to us to be in a situation in which it is possible to save money,
that the result of the month's House Accounts is a constant surprise to
me. Not more surprising than that our House Accounts should be of that
extensive nature that it requires a Baboo, an aide-de-camp, and myself,
to keep them correctly.

I wonder whether you have seen our Knightsbridge house.[442] I hear it
is very pretty and I often think what fun it will be settling there.

I should like to know what you think of Mrs. Bramley supposing you know
her, because I cannot make out why she does not come out to join her
husband. He is a very delightful person, I should say almost without
comparison the pleasantest man here, more accomplished and more willing
to talk, and with very creditable remains of good spirits. She has a
sharp little sister, a Mrs. Cockerell, here, almost pretty and very
ill-natured, at least so they say, but we have not found her so the
little we have seen of her. She and her husband are going tiger-shooting
to the Rajmahal hills, for, impossible as it seems in this
endless-looking plain, there _are_ hills, 150 miles off. "Cock Robin"
and "Jenny Wren," as the little Cockerell couple are familiarly termed,
make one of these excursions every year, and Fanny and William mean to
join the party, with two or three others. It will be a very good change
of scene for her, and something out of the common course of life.
Travelling in the marching fashion, which is the way they mean to go, is
slow but amusing for a little while. Two sets of tents, one to live in
on Monday, while the other is carried on twelve miles, so as to be ready
on Tuesday. Everybody in India has their own set of servants, who are no
more trouble travelling than living at home. They find their own way
from station to station, cook for themselves, sleep on the ground, and,
in short, are quite unlike the fussy lady's maid and valet who dispute
every inch of the imperial and expect tea, beer, feather beds, etc., at
every bad inn on the road. But then, to be sure, it takes about fourteen
natives to do the work of one English servant. I suppose William and
Fanny could not march without thirty servants of their own, besides
guards, elephants, etc. All these, they say, make excellent sketching,
which is one of the amusements I look to, when we set off on our great
march next year.

I keep up my drawing, but entirely in the _figure_ line, as there is no
landscape in Bengal, and also the glare is so great that nobody could
draw it if there were; but every servant in the house is a good study,
and I shall very soon be sending home some sketches. I wish your book
would come out. I want a new novel very much. My best love to Mrs. V.
Ever, dearest Theresa, your most affectionate

E. E.




CHAPTER XI

1837-1840


_Miss Eden to her Sister, Mrs. Drummond._

GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
_January 16, 1837_.

THERE is a Lady Henry Gordon[443] here, on her way home with two of the
loveliest children I ever beheld. One of them puts me in mind of her
aunt, poor Lady M. Seymour,[444] but it is still more beautiful. They
are older than most children here, and have come from a cold part of the
country with fresh rosy cheeks. George and I had met them twice on the
plain when we were out riding, and had bored everybody to death to find
out who they were. William [Osborne] knew Lady Henry when she was a sort
of companion to Lady Sarah Amherst, and a victim to old Lord
Amherst's[445] crossness, so he went to call on her and discovered our
beautiful children. They have dined here since, and I want her to let us
have them at Barrackpore, as she is too busy preparing for her voyage to
come herself, but I am afraid she will not. Her husband is a very
particular goose, and a pay-master in some particular department, and
she does all his work for him. Nobody knows at all how he is to go on
while she is away. [Letter unfinished.]


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
_January 25, 1837_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, I will take your plan of sitting down forthwith and
answering your letter (of August 18th, received January 23rd) on the
spot, before the pleasure of reading it wears off. It means I am going
to answer your letter directly, and I am so obliged to you for asking me
questions--just what I like. Intellect and memory both are impaired, and
imagination utterly baked hard, but I can answer questions when they are
not very difficult, and if they are put to me slowly and distinctly; and
besides, I am shy of writing and boring people with Indian topics. I
used to hate them so myself. But if they ask about an Indian life, as
you do, and about the things I see every day, why, then, I can write
quite fluently, and may heaven have mercy upon your precious soul! So
here goes:

"Do you find amongst your European acquaintances any pleasing or
accomplished women?" Not one--not the sixth part of one; there is not
anybody I can prefer to any other body, if I think of sending to ask one
to come and pay me a visit, or to go out in the carriage; and when we
have had any of them for two or three days at Barrackpore, there is a
_morne_ feeling at the end of their visit that it will be tiresome when
it comes round to their turn of coming again. I really believe the
climate is to blame.

"They read no new books, they take not the slightest interest in home
politics, and everything is melted down into being purely local." There
is your second question turned into an answer, which shows what a clever
question it was.

Thirdly. It _is_ a gossiping society, of the smallest macadamised
gossips I believe, for we are treated with too much respect to know
much about it; but they sneer at each other's dress and looks, and pick
out small stories against each other by means of the Ayahs, and it is
clearly a downright offence to tell one woman that another looks well.
It is not often easy to commit the crime with any regard to truth, but
still there are degrees of yellow, and the deep orange woman who has had
many fevers does not like the pale primrose creature with the
constitution of a horse who has not had more than a couple of agues.

The new arrivals we all agree are coarse and vulgar--not fresh and
cheerful, as in my secret soul I think them. But that, you see, is the
style of gossipry.

Fourthly. It _is_ a very moral society, I mean that people are very
domestic in their habits, and there are no idle men. Every man without
exception is employed in his office all day, and in the evening drives.
Husbands and wives are always in the same carriage. It is too hot for
him to ride or walk, and at evening parties it is not considered
possible for one to come without the other; it is quite out of the
question. If Mr. Jones is ill everybody knows that Mrs. Jones cannot go
out, so she is not expected.

Fifthly. I believe in former days it was a profligate society, as far as
young men were concerned, the consequence of which is that the old men
of this day are still kept here by the debts they contracted in their
youth. But the present class of young men are very prudent and quiet,
run into debt very little, and generally marry as soon as they are out
of college.

Then as to the Hindu College. The boys are educated, as you say, by the
Government, at least under its active patronage, and they are "British
subjects," inasmuch as Britain has taken India, and in many respects
they may be called well-educated young men; but still I cannot tell you
what the wide difference is between a European and a Native. An elephant
and Chance, St. Paul's and a Baby-Home, the Jerseys and Pembrokes, a
diamond and a bad flint, Queen Adelaide and O'Connell, London and
Calcutta, are not further apart, and more antipathetic than those two
classes. I do not see how the prejudices ever can wear out, nor do I see
that it is very desirable. I do not see that any degree of education, or
any length of time, could bring natives to the pitch of allowing any
liberty to their wives. Their Mussulman creed makes it impossible, and
as girls are married at 7 or 8 years old, and after that are never seen
by any human being but their husbands, there is no possibility of
educating them, and in fact education could only make them miserable.
Even our lowest servants of any respectability would not let their wives
be seen on any account. They live in mud huts, something like Irish
cabins, and in half of that hut these women pass their lives.

Wright[446] has tried hard to persuade my Jemadar (a sort of groom of
the chambers), who is a superior man of his class, speaks and reads
English, and is intelligent, to let her see his wife, but he will not
hear of it. The Ayahs who wait on us are not at all considered, though I
have never made out to my satisfaction how bad they are.

There is an excellent Mrs. Wilson here, who for 20 years has been trying
to educate the lower orders of native females, but she told me the other
day, that she has never been able to keep a day-scholar after she was 6
or 7 years old, and she has now removed her whole establishment 7 miles
from Calcutta. She has collected 160 orphans, who were left utterly
destitute after a great inundation in 1833. They were picked up on the
banks of rivers, some even taken from the Pariah dogs! Mrs. Wilson took
any that were sent to her, a great many died out of whole cargoes that
were sent down. It is the prettiest thing possible to see her amongst
her black children, she looks so pleased and happy; she is in her
widow's dress without another European near her, and as she told me the
other day, with no more _certainty_ of funds than would supply her for
her next six weeks. In short, in a position which would justify a weaker
person in sitting down and taking a good cry, but she was as cheerful
and as happy as if she had not a care on her mind.

Sixthly. I do not speak a word of Hindustani, and never shall, because I
have three servants who all _understand_, though only one speaks it, and
the aides-de-camp are at hand for interpretation. I wish I had learnt
it. But there is nothing to read in it, it is difficult to learn
accurately, and as I said before, I am not driven to it by the servants.
In all this immense establishment there are not more than six who speak
English, and if my Jemadar dies, I must. The only time I miss the
language is out riding. When more than one of us ride, there is an
aide-de-camp with us, but as Fanny constantly goes out with William, I
found a _tete-a-tete_ with George was much to be preferred to that bit
of state, so he and I ride out alone, and of course he is met by a
petition at every odd turning, and sometimes we both long to enquire
into the case or to tell the man what to do, and it seems so stupid not
to be able to do so.

The guards do not understand a word of English, and the Syces who run by
the side of the horses are remarkably cute at understanding our signs if
they have reference to the horses, but have no idea on any other
subject.

Seventhly. The Menagerie is almost full. An old tiger, and a young one
who is just beginning to turn his playful pats into good hard scratches
and is now shut up in a cage grown up and come out, as we should say on
arriving at that dignity; a leopard, two cheetahs, two porcupines, two
small black bears, sloths, monkeys of sorts that are caught about 100
miles off and shut up, and parrots, and heaps of beautiful Chinese
pheasants. _Zoological Garden beasts_ do not walk about wild, but there
are a great many parroquets wild in Barrackpore, and alligators in the
rivers; and we have met, much to my discomfiture, some huge snakes.
There are vultures without end, and the great adjutant birds who live on
the top of Government House and walk about the compound all day, would
have surprised one in England; but I take it that when we commence our
march up the country we shall see many more strange animals. As it is, I
am quite satisfied still with the natives. I never see one that would
not make the fortune of an artist, particularly at this time of the
year. There are so many Arabs come down for the races, and the Burmese
or Mugg men, are come with fruit and fish, and yesterday when we went
out there were a crowd of Nepaulese, with such beautiful swords and
daggers, at the gate. We sent to ask what they wanted, and they said,
"Nothing, but to see the Lord Sahib go by." I am going to send for one
to add to my drawings of costumes.

There! Now I have done it thoroughly. I think you are cured of asking
questions, but it has amused me writing all this.

I wrote to you December 29th, and sent you a silk scarf in a parcel that
poor Doctor Bramley was sending home to his wife. He was with us at
Barrackpore three weeks ago, was taken with fever last Monday fortnight,
and died in seven days. There never was such a loss both publicly and
privately, but the former especially. There is nobody here who _can_
take his place at the Hindu College. He was a very delightful person in
his way and the man we saw most of, as George had a great deal of
business always to do with him, and he was very sociable with us. It is
a horrid part of India, those sudden deaths. Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

BARRACKPORE,
_April 17, 1837_.

MY DEAR MR. GREVILLE, they say that a letter written to-day will still
be in time for the overland packet, and for all the adventures to which
the _Hugh Lindsay_, the _Dromedary Dawdle_, the _Desert_, etc., may
entitle it. Waghorn[447] I see is not at Cairo--another calamity! I am
in opposition to George's government on the great Waghorn question. I
cannot see why they do not pay him anything he asks, and give him an
East Indian peerage, or anything else. All the letters that come quickly
to us are invariably stamped "to the care of Mr. Waghorn, Cairo," and if
I thought he were there now, I should, in defiance of the authorities
here, address this "to the care of dear Mr. Waghorn"! I suspect you
would then have it in less than two months; now, if you receive it in
1838 my fondest expectations will be gratified.

I cannot go back in our life more than 36 hours. It is all the same
thing, so I will suppose you called on Thursday morning, and after your
visit we came up to Barrackpore in the evening. You know what a horrid
bad road it is this side of the half-way home, and therefore will not be
surprised to hear that one of the leaders, the horse that you always say
is the handsomest of the new set, stepped on a loose stone and came down
like a shot. The postillion, who weighs about 1-1/2 lbs., as a small
native should, was pitched out of sight into a neighbouring presidency;
I believe the leaders ran over the fallen horse, who kicked at them, and
they of course kicked him. The spring of the carriage was broken, and
the four Syces and the postillion and the guards, being all good
Mohammedans, of course looked on contentedly, knowing that what must
be--must be. Luckily W. Osborne for once had no other conveyance but our
carriage, so he jumped out at the side, and we all tumbled out at
opposite doors, and he _Hindustani'd_ the Syces and cut the traces, and
we were all put to rights (barring that one horse), and not the worse,
thank you. Only it is so much too hot in this country to have
adventures.

We were all assiduously fanning ourselves when the accident happened,
but no fan would have helped us after that. Think of jumping out of a
carriage in a hurry with the thermometer at 95. I will give you a
journal of yesterday, to show the vividness and endless variety of our
amusements.

Breakfast at nine--an operation which lasts seven minutes, because
nobody has any appetite, and George has no time. Then we discussed the
papers.... In the afternoon, a neighbour sent a note requesting
admission to a new native school George has built in a park, for a
Brahmin boy of good caste. I gave the father Brahmin a note to the
schoolmaster, and with the proper craft of a native, he went and fetched
two more of his children and said the note was intended to admit them
all three. But the schoolmaster, as all schoolmasters should, knew how
to read, and refused them, so when George and I drove to the school in
the evening, we found them and about twenty others all clasping their
hands and knocking their heads against the ground, because they were
prevented learning English, and all saying "Good morning, Sir," to show
how much they had acquired. They say that at all times and to everybody,
since the school has been opened.

Then we drove to the Garden, when Chance and his suite met us, and he
swam about the tank for half an hour, and the tame otter came for its
fish, and the young lynxes came to be looked at, and we fed the gold
pheasants and ascertained that that rare exotic the heartsease was in
flower, but the daisy, the real English white daisy, has turned out a
more common Oenothera, and it proves that neither daisies nor cowslips
can be nationalized here. I myself think the buttercup might be brought
to perfection, but I know I see those matters in too sanguine a point of
view.

We came home hotter than we went out. William [Osborne] and Fanny had
been on the river, which was still worse. Dinner was not refreshing.

Then we all went out in the verandah, where there are great pans of
water used for wetting the mats put over the windows, and the
Aides-de-Camp found a new diversion in putting Chance in one pan, while
three of them lifted the other and poured the water over him. He
growled, as he used to do at you, to show he did not think those
liberties allowable, but immediately jumped into the empty pan to have
the bath repeated, whereat we all laughed, for that amounts to a good
joke in India. But we never laugh more than two minutes at a time; it is
too fatiguing. So then we went, like Lydia Bennet, to a good game at
Lottery tickets. Our intellects fell last year from whist pitch, and now
they have fallen below _ecarte_, but the whole household can understand
Lottery, and except that it is too much trouble to hand a rupee from one
card to another, we all like it very much.

At ten o'clock, Fanny and William and I went to a little sailing-boat he
has here, and we should have sailed, and it would have been cooler if
there had been any air. But there was a lovely moon, and the Hoogly is a
handsome bit of river, and we floated about for an hour, and then went
to bed. And so ends that eventful day.

We are all very well, though I have been rather ailing for ten days, but
in a general way you are quite right; I _have_ very much better health
here than I had at home. So all my abuse of the climate is gratuitous;
I do not owe it any spite, except for being so very disagreeable. I
trust there is a letter from you somewhere on the sea. George has sent
for this, so God bless you. I have not time to read it over. Yours ever,

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
_Sept. 11, 1837_.

MY DEAR MR. GREVILLE, George says he thinks I ought to write to you,
which is rather an impertinent thought of his, because he does not know
that I have not been writing to you every day, and he does not know that
I have nothing to say, and that out of that nothing I have already
furnished him with eight letters for this overland post. But he says
there is 3/4 of an hour yet before the last Bombay dawdle goes.
Three-quarters of an hour for the preparation of a letter that is to
travel 15,000 miles!

I am not going to comment on the dear young Queen; that I have done in
the other letters. But I never think of anything else, and we are all
dying of fevers brought on by court mourning, and curiosity coming on
the rainy season. Our own approaching journey[448] is one other great
interest, and we all declare we are packing up. It is almost as
fatiguing lying on the sofa and wondering what is to become of all one's
property as actually packing up, and may perhaps by perseverance produce
some result. But hitherto I have not done more than that personally. The
faithful Byrne, and the rest of his staff, have gradually removed many
of the comforts, and in two days the band and the horses and most of the
servants depart, and, as William Osborne observes with real
consternation, we shall not have above eight servants apiece left to
wait on us.

Certainly some of the arrangements are amusing. I asked Byrne just now
what our Ayahs (or black Lady's Maids) were allowed to put their
travelling-gear in. "Half a camel!" he said, with an air of reproach at
such desperate ignorance. "Oh, half a camel _apiece_," I said, looking
intelligent, and laying an emphasis on _apiece_ as if that had been my
doubt, and you know one hears such strange stories of camels carrying a
supply of water for their own private drinking, quite honestly, though
they have drunk it already, that I was ready to believe the Ayah, veils
and bangles, travelled the same way. But Byrne obligingly added that
each camel carried two trunks, one of which each Abigail might claim.

The steamer to Benares will be the most tiresome part of our journey,
there is so little to see on the banks; but once in camp I mean to
commence an interminable course of sketching. I hope my sister Mary will
show you some of the sketches I sent home about two months ago. I think
they would amuse you.

Our great anxiety now is for the arrival of the _Seringapatam_, a new
ship, quite untried, _AI_--a mark the papers put here to a ship that is
making its first voyage, but what it means I can't guess. Still, to this
untried article is confided the trousseau of myself, of Fanny, and two
other interesting females belonging to the camp who will, if the
_Seringapatam_ does not come very soon, be starved to death in camp,
reduced as we are to white muslins and chilly constitutions. The
_Coromandel_ I am also anxious for, as I have a nephew on board; but
still you know I have 48 nephews, and only one box of gowns, so if there
is to be a little adverse weather, etc.

We are going to give a dinner on Monday to the party that will go with
us in the steamer, and to rehearse our hardships. The punkahs are to be
stopped, as the heat on the river is always stifling; cockroaches to be
turned out in profusion on the floor; extra mosquitoes hired for the
night; the lamps to be set swinging; the Colvins[449] and Torrens'[450]
children to be set crying; Mrs. MacNaghten,[451] on whom we depend for
our _tracasseries_, to repeat all that any of the company have ever said
of the others; Mrs. Hawkins, who is very pretty, to show Hawkins how
well she can flirt with all the aides-de-camp. Altogether I think it
will be amusing.

There! I have no time for more. This ought to bring me two answers at
least. I am more ravenous than ever for letters. We are all well, more
or less. Yours very truly and heartily,

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
_October 2, 1837_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, A sort of a nominal, no--cousin of yours, Mr.
Talbot, is going home in the _Reliance_, and it gives me a good
opportunity of sending you a Bird of Paradise feather, as he can put it
into his portmanteau, and it will be no trouble to you, nor to him, nor
to anybody. Of course I shot it myself, and found the nest, and am
bringing up the young Paradises by hand, and they promise to have
handsome tails which I will send you in due course--that is the sort of
thing I mean to assert at home.

In little more than a fortnight we shall be off on our great journey to
the Himalayas. Everything we have in the shape of comfort is
gone--servants, horses, band, guards, and everything embarked a month
before us, as we shall go by steamer to Benares, and though that is slow
work, it is necessary to give the country boats a considerable advance.
The Ganges, you see, is not an easy river to navigate.

Sixty-five elephants and 150 camels will carry our little daily personal
comforts, assisted by 400 coolies, and bullock-carts innumerable. They
say that everybody contrives in the _melee_ to receive their own
camel-trunks and pittarhs safe every night; but I own I bid a long
farewell to every treasured gown and bonnet that I see Wright bury in
the depths of a camel-trunk.

We are all enjoying the thoughts of this journey--not that I shall ever
believe till I have tried that it is really true a tent can be as
comfortable as Government House, with its thick walls and deep verandah
and closed shutters. Still, we shall be travelling to a better climate,
and that is everything. Then there will be eligible sketching, both
buildings and figures, and we shall have occasional days of quiet and
solitude. And once up in the mountains I expect to be quite strong
again, and there is actual happiness in mountain air, independent of all
other comfort.

What became of that book you said we should have to read some time ago?
I have been vainly watching for it.

This must go. It has been sent for twice, and if you knew the
impossibility of doing anything in a hurry you would appreciate
particularly this semblance of a letter.

We are going what is called "in state" to the play to-night "by
particular desire"--not of ours, but of the Amateurs who have got up a
play for us before our departure. The thermometer is at 90, the new
theatre is without punkahs, the small evening breeze that sometimes
blows ceases entirely in September and October, and we are in black for
our King. Rather a melancholy combination of circumstances. _Priez pour
nous!_ God bless you, dearest. Your most affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

ALLAHABAD,
_December 1, 1837_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, I have never had but two letters from you since I
came to India. No wonder! I daresay the letters contrive to turn off the
instant they are out of your hands, and go to some better and nearer
climate. The odd thing is that my letters, which ought to know better,
do not seem to rush home with that impetus which would be natural under
the circumstances. At least, my sisters, whom I write to morning noon
and night, write nothing but complaints of the want of letters. If I
felt the least guilty I should feel provoked, but as it is I receive all
their murmurs with the gentle resignation of injured innocence.

I am at Allahabad, Theresa--"More fool I; when I was at home I was in a
better place": as dear Shakespeare, who knew all about Allahabad, as
well as everything else, observed with his accustomed readiness. I do
not know more about it, seeing we only arrived this morning. Our tents
are pitched on the Glacis of the Fort, an encampment sacred to the
Governor-General, and this Glacis, as you in your little pleasing way
would observe, is not Glace, seeing that I have just desired an amiable
individual clothed in much scarlet and gold to pull the Punkah, which,
by the _prevoyance_ of the Deputy Quarter Master General, has been
wisely hung in my tent. You see, what is called the cold weather is
really cold and remarkably pleasant in the mornings, and our march,
which we generally commence in the dusk at half-past five, and conclude
before eight, is very bracing and delightful. But then that horrid old
wretch the sun comes ranting up; the tents get baked through; and all
through the camp there is a general moulting of fur shoes and merino and
shawls, then an outcry for muslin, and then for a Punkah to give us
breath. We cannot go out till it is nearly dark; and then about
dinner-time, when we cross over from our private tents to the great
dining-room, we want cloaks and boas and all sorts of comforts again.
Those cold hours of the day are very English and pleasant.

I hate my tent and so does George. We incline to a house with passages,
doors, windows, walls that may be leaned against, and much furniture.
Fanny luckily takes to a tent kindly, but the majority of our camp,
consisting of various exemplary mothers and children, are of the house
faction.

Our chaplain and his Scotch wife, who speaks the broadest Scotch I have
ever heard, have been _eating_ with us all to-day, for, as Mrs.
Wimberley observed, "It's just reemarkable: the cawmels kicked all our
crockery off their bocks yeesterday, and to-day our cooking-tent is left
on the other side of the Jumna, so we've just nothing to eat."

We crossed the river at the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna this
morning.

Last night we went down on our elephants to see the advanced guard of
the camp pass over. It was a red Eastern sky, the beach of the river was
deep sand, and the river was covered with low flat boats. Along the bank
were tents, camel-trunks, fires by which the natives were cooking, and
in the boats and waiting for them were 850 Camels, 140 Elephants,
several hundred horses, the Body Guard, the regiment that escorts us,
and the camp-followers. They are about 12,000 in all.

I wish it was possible to make more sketches, but the glaring light is
very much against it, and the twilight is very short. There are robbers
in camp every night. That is part of the fun. We met an officer
yesterday riding for his life in the cold hours of the morning with only
a white jacket and trousers on. He looked shivery, and it appeared that
the Dacoits had entered his tent in the night, taken all they could turn
to account, and as European cloaks are of no value to a native, they had
cut the buttons and lace off his uniform and minced up into small pieces
all his linen. There is no end to the stories of the cleverness of
Dacoits, and that is one of the things I hate in camp. The instant it
grows dusk, the servants come in and carry off every little atom of
comfort in the way of furniture that one may have scraped together, and
put it outside the tent under the charge of a sentry. It is the only
chance, but it makes a gloomy-looking abode at night.

We are cut off from a great part of our tour by the dreadful scarcity in
the Upper Provinces. There is no fodder whatever to be had, and a great
camp like this makes in the best of times a great run on the price of
provisions.

We shall lose the sight of Agra, which I regret; otherwise I am not
sorry to miss the great stations. We are so plied with balls and
festivities, and have to give so many great dinners, that the dull road
is perhaps the most amusing after all.

I wish you would write. I always excuse you because I presume you are
hatching both a child and a novel; but if I do not soon hear of one or
the other, I cannot tell what excuse to make. I wrote to your brother
George. George and I were agreeing the other day that he is the only
friend who has utterly and entirely failed us; and yet somehow we cannot
believe it of him. But he was the only person we knew well who took no
notice of us even when we were coming away.

Now it is lawful to forget us, but it was rather shocking of him, was
not it? Pray give my love to your mother and Mr. Lister. Ever, dearest
Theresa, your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

SIMLA,
_April 28, 1838_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, I had meant to have answered your letter by the last
overland post, but I was poorly just as it started, and it is rather a
doubt whether it will be a safe conveyance this time. Something wrong
about the steamer, or the Arabs, or the dromedaries, or some of those
little items that go to make up an overland post. However, I can but
try.

Your account of poor Lady Henry interested me very much. Indeed,
everybody must be interested in her, but the melancholy fact is that it
is totally _impossible_ to help them. We saw a great deal of Lord
Henry[452] at Meerut, and took pains to show him great attention as he
was in a shy state after the results of that investigation. There was
not the slightest shadow of distrust as to his intentions, poor man! but
his utter incapacity made it rather surprising that Lord Amherst ever
should have given him an office of such trust, and not the least
surprising that he should have been robbed and cheated in every way, by
the number of crafty natives under him. I was thinking of any pendant to
him in London for your information, but I hardly know anybody with such
a _silly_ manner--something like Petre, but more vacant and unconnected.
He seemed thoroughly good-hearted, and very anxious about his children,
who, he told me, were to go either to Boulogne or Bordeaux, he did not
know which, but a great way from London! He was living with Captain
Champneys, his successor in the paymastership, and seems quite contented
to sit in a large arm-chair and look at Champneys in a fuss, which he
has been in ever since he got the appointment. Indeed, he wrote me word
yesterday that he found it so difficult to guard against the knavery of
the Baboos attached to the office, that he never could enough regret
having left his Aide-de-Camp with us.

George told me to say both to you and to Lady Morley that there is
nothing he wishes so much as to help Lord Henry, but that in the present
state of India there are no situations that are not responsible and
hard-working, and even if it were possible (which it is not) to give one
of these to a man who is a great debtor to the Government, Lord Henry is
really not capable of one.

I did not know till I came up the country how really hard-worked
Europeans are. It is lucky for them, for it is only the necessity of
being in these _Cutcherries_ or offices all day, that prevents their
sinking altogether under the solitude of their lives and the climate. In
most stations there are not above two or three Europeans, and in many
only one.

There were two young men here yesterday who talked quite unceasingly; it
was impossible to put in a word, and at last one of them said that he
had been eight years, and his brother four, in stations where they never
saw a European. They were both in horrid health, of course (everybody is
in India), and so they had got six months' leave to see what the hills
could do for them, and they said they were so delighted to find
themselves again with people who understood English, that they were
afraid they had talked too much. It was impossible to dispute the fact,
but still I was glad to hear their prattle; it evidently did them good.
Our band was their great delight; they had not heard any European music
for so long.

We tried to get up a dance two nights ago--a total failure I thought.
Most of the people here are invalids, and as there are no carriages,
and no carriage-roads, they can only come out in Jhanpamas (a sort of
open Sedan), and the nights are cold. The whole company only amounted to
forty, and I thought I never saw a heavier dance, but some of them
thought it quite delightful, and I am afraid will wish for another.

It is even more delightful than I expected to be in these hills; the
climate is perfection, and the pleasure of sitting out of doors looking
at those lovely snowy mountains, and breathing real cool air, is more
than I can say.

The change from those broiling plains was so sudden. At Bareilly the
thermometer was at 90 in our tents at night, and the next day at
Sab[=a]thu it was at 55 in the middle of the day. Such a long breath as
I drew!

These mountains are very beautiful, but not so picturesque, I think, as
the Pyrenees--in fact they are too gigantic to be sketchable, and there
are no waterfalls, no bridges, no old corners, that make the Pyrenees so
picturesque, independent of their ragged shapes. But I love these
Himalayas, good old things, all the same, and mean to enjoy these seven
months as much as possible to make up for the horrors of the two last
years, and as for looking forward, it is no use just now.

I think George will find Calcutta so extravagantly hot that perhaps he
will consent to go home sooner. That would be very satisfactory. The
deaths there have been very numerous this year. Almost all the few
people we knew intimately in the two years we were there, are dead--and
almost all of them young people.

Do you remember my writing to you about poor Mrs. Beresford's death? He
is here now with a second wife, twenty years younger than himself, to
whom he engaged himself three months after the first wife's death;
never told anybody, so we all took the trouble of going on pitying him
with the very best pity we had to spare! Such a waste!

What became of your second book? I cannot even see it amongst the
advertisements. I am disconsolate that we have had the last number of
_Pickwick_, the only bit of fun in India. It is one of the few books of
which there has been a Calcutta reprint, lithographs and all. I have not
read it through in numbers more than ten times, but now it is complete I
think of studying it more correctly.

Mention much about your children when you write. I find the letters in
which my friends tell me about themselves and their children are much
pleasanter than mere gossip. They really interest me--there is the
difference between biography and history. My best love to your mother,
and remember me to Mr. L. It is very odd how easily I can bring your
face to mind when I think of you. Some faces I cannot put together at
all cleverly, but I see you quite correctly and easily. Don't alter,
there's a dear. Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

SIMLA,
_June 10, 1838_.

A letter from you of November (this being the 10th of June) has just
come dropping in quite _promiscuous_. Though I have had one of a later
date, yet this has made me laugh and has put me in the mood to write to
you forthwith.

Your remarkably immoral views as to the mischief that religion does in a
country were wrong in the abstract, but they unfortunately just chimed
in with some views his Lordship had been worried into taking, and he is
quite delighted to have a quotation from your letter to act as motto to
one of his chapters. Here we have such a medley of faiths. The Hindus
convey a pig carefully cut up into a Muhammedan Mosque, whereupon the
Mussulmanns cut up the Hindus. Then again the Mussulmanns kill a cow
during a Hindu festival, and the Hindus go raving mad. Then an
_un_sensible man like Sir P. Maitland refuses to give the national
festivals the usual honours of guns, drums, etc., which they have had
ever since the English set foot in India. In short, there is an
irritation kept up on the plea of conscience, where the soothing system
would be much more commendable and much easier.

I must say that, except in the Upper Provinces, where once or twice we
have met with some violent petitioners, the Hindus and Mussulmans live
most peaceably; so that they have separate cooking-places, and that the
Hindu's livery Tunic is made to button on the right shoulder and the
Mussulman's on the left, they ask no other differences. We have about an
equal number of each in our household, and in Bengal they are all very
friendly together.

We are very much interested in our foreign politics just now. It is all
very well your bothering on about Canada,[453] and giving us majorities
of 29 in favour of Lord Glenelg[454] (your last letter of February had
mentioned that the Tories never would vote with the Radicals on such a
party question: Peel was above it!! How he always takes you in!). Those
little, trivial, obscure questions are all very well in their way, but
my whole heart is fixed on intelligence from Herat, and I live in a
state of painful wonder as to what Dost Mahomed's[455] real relations
with Persia and Russia may be.

One serious grievance is that the steamer which was to have taken our
letters home this month was ordered off to Persia to bring away Mr.
MacNiel,[456] if he wished to come, and our letters are "left
lamenting," like Lord Ullin, on the beach at Bombay. That is the sort of
thing George does in the plenitude of his power, and which you know
shocks us free-born Britons; and then we think of Trial by Jury, and
annual Parliaments, and no Poor Laws, and Ballot, and "Britannia rules
the waves," and all the old story.

We have had a picturesque and pleasant deputation of Sikhs from Runjeet
Singh, which we have returned by a Mission composed of Mr. MacNaghten,
_our_ Lord Palmerston, a dry sensible man, who wears an enormous pair of
blue spectacles, and speaks Persian, Arabic, and Hindustani rather more
fluently than English; of William Osborne, who goes in exchange for a
nephew of Runjeet's who came here; of Captain MacGregor, another
Aide-de-Camp; and of Doctor Drummond, who has left our little sparks of
life to go out by themselves, because Runjeet was particularly anxious
to be attended by the Governor-General's own physician. They are all
under the conduct of Captain Wade,[457] the Political Agent at Lahore,
who has lived so much with natives that he has acquired their dawdling,
soft manners and their way of letting things take care of themselves.

They are all at Adeenanuggur, a summer palace of Runjeet's, where, by
way of being cool, their houses are furnished with Tatties and
Thermantidotes, a sort of winnowing-machine that keeps up a constant
draft, and with that the thermometer ranges from 102 to 105. Poor
things! In the meanwhile they are perfectly delighted with Runjeet, as
everybody is who comes within his influence. He contrives every sort of
diversion for them. I hardly know how to state to you delicately that
the Mission was met at the frontier by troops of Cashmerian young
ladies, great dancers and singers, and that this is an extract from W.
Osborne's letter to-day, which I ought not to copy, only it will amuse
you: "Runjeet's curiosity is insatiable--the young Queen, Louis
Philippe, how much wine we drink, what George drinks, etc. His questions
never end. He saw me out riding to-day, and sent for me and asked all
sorts of impertinent questions. Did we like the Cashmerian girls he had
sent? Did all of us like them? I said I could not answer for the others;
I could only speak for myself." But Runjeet's curiosity is really
unbounded, as William states it. He requested George to send him samples
of all the wines he had, which he did, but took the precaution of adding
some whiskey and cherry brandy, knowing what Runjeet Singh's habits are.
The whiskey he highly approved of, and he told MacNaghten that he could
not understand why the Governor-General gives himself the trouble of
drinking seven or eight glasses of wine when one glass of whiskey would
do the same quantity of work. He had asked one gentleman to a regular
drinking-party, which they were dreading (as the stuff he drinks is a
sort of liquid fire), and his great amusement is to watch that it is
fairly drunk.

George says that your letter costs you nothing, so I enclose an account
of Runjeet's Court, which young MacGregor wrote me. If you have had
enough of him you can burn the letter unread, but I have a faint
recollection that the only Indian subject that was interesting at home
was "The Lion of the Punjab." It is a matter of great importance just
now that he should be our faithful ally, so we make much of him, and I
rather look to our interview with him next November. "If this meets
encouragement," as Swift says, I will give you an account of it.

Whenever we want to frighten any of our neighbours into good conduct, we
have one sure resource. We have always a large assortment of
Pretenders, black Chevaliers de St. George, in store. They have had
their eyes put out, or their children are in hostage, or the Usurper is
their own brother, or they labour under sundry disadvantages of that
sort. But still there they are, to the good. We have a Shah Shuja all
ready to _lacher_ at Dost Muhammed if he does not behave himself, and
Runjeet is ready to join us in any enterprise of that sort.

Still, all these _tendencies_ towards war are always rather nervous
work. You should employ yourself more assiduously in plucking Russia by
the skirts and not allow him to come poking his face towards our little
possessions. Whenever there is any important public measure to be taken,
I always think George must feel his responsibility--no Ministers, no
Parliament, and his Council, such as it is, down at Calcutta. To be
sure, as you were going to observe, _if_ he ever felt himself in any
doubt, he _might_ feel that he has my superior sense and remarkable
abilities to refer to, but as it is, he has a great deal to answer for
by himself.

I daresay he does it very well, for my notion is that in a multitude of
counsellors there is folly--"wisdom" was a misprint. And then again, if
the Directors happen to take anything amiss, they could hardly do less
than recall us. I certainly do long to be at home, not but what I am
thankful for Simla, and am as happy there as it is possible to be in
India, but still there is nothing I would not give to be with friends
and in good society again, with people who know my people, and can talk
my talk. Here, society is not much trouble, nor much anything else. We
give sundry dinners and occasional balls, and have hit upon one popular
device. Our band plays twice a week on one of the hills here, and we
send ices and refreshments to the listeners, and it makes a nice little
reunion, with very little trouble. I am so glad to see Boz is off on
another book. I do not take to _Oliver Twist_; it is too full of
disasters.

I must nearly have bored you to death, so good-bye. Please write again.
Yours most truly,

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

SIMLA,
_November 1, 1838_.

There is a small parcel going to you per Miss Fane (not a ship, but the
General's daughter, Miss Fane[458]), which you are to take care of, and
eventually it will be a pleasing little occupation for you. It is a
journal of William Osborne's,[459] kept while he was at Runjeet Singh's
Court, and illustrated with some drawings Fanny has made from nature
designs, and from some sketches made by one of our Aides-de-Camp, and
altogether it may eventually make rather a nice little publication, and
we think you will be just the man to edit it, and to cram it down the
throat of an unwilling bookseller, extracting from him the last penny of
its value--and a great deal more. It is not to be published till George
gives his consent, and as it gives an account of the Mission which
formed the alliance, which is to end in the war--which may end we don't
know how--and as William will indulge in levities respecting the Company
highly unbecoming the Governor-General's Military Secretary, who is in
the receipt of L1500 a year from the said Company, and as for many other
"as's," it is not to be printed till further advice. It is trusted to
you with implicit confidence. Lord Stanley, Fanny says, is to be allowed
to read it, but I have not heard of any other confidant, so you are not
to go rushing about with treble raps, and then saying: "Here are a few
pages about Runjeet, a man in the East, King of the Punjab, or Shah of
Barrackpore, or something of that sort, which I think would amuse you.
You may run them over, and lend them to anybody else who will take the
trouble of reading them." That is not the line you are to take--not by
any means. On the contrary, after a long silence, and with an air of
expressive thought, you are to observe: "I have been reading this
Memorandum--in fact, I wish I could send it to you; but there are
reasons. However, never mind; there is no harm in my saying that I have
been reading a journal. I almost wish it might be published; but yet, I
do not know. However, if it is, I am sure you _for one_ (a great
emphasis on 'for one') would be amused to the last degree. A friend of
mine in India, a young man, odd but clever, passed some time with
Runjeet Singh, and kept a sort of diary. Curious and odd. You may have
heard of Runjeet Singh,--Victor Jacquemont's[460] friend, you know; only
one eye and quantities of paint. I wish I could show you the little
work, etc." And so, eventually, you know, it might come out with great
_eclat_. I think William may write a second part of the Interview at
Ferozepore, which might be very gorgeous, taking our army into account,
as well as the meeting of the two great people.


ROOPUR,[461]
_November 13, 1838_.

I wrote the above before we left Simla, when we had a good house over
our heads and lived in a good climate, and conducted ourselves like
respectable people, and people who knew what was what. Now we have
returned to the tramping line of life, and have been six days in one
wretched camp, the first few so hot and dusty, I thought with added
regret of the Simla frost. And now to-day it is pouring as it pours
only in India, and I am thinking of the Simla fires. It is impossible to
describe the squalid misery of a real wet day in camp--the servants
looking soaked and wretched, their cooking-pots not come from the last
camp, and their tents leaking in all directions; and a native without a
fire and without the means of cooking his own meal is a deplorable
sight. The camels are slipping down and dying in all directions, the
hackeries[462] sticking in the rivers. And one's personal comfort!
Little ditches running round each tent, with a _slosh_ of mud that one
invariably steps into; the pitarrah[463] with the thin muslin gown that
was carefully selected because the thermometer was at 90 yesterday,
being the only one come to hand; and the fur pelisse, that in a wet
rag-house slipping from a mud foundation would be pleasant and
seasonable wear, is gone on to the advanced camp. I go under an umbrella
from my tent to George's, because wherever there is a seam there is a
stream; and we are carried in palanquins to the dining-tent on one side,
while the dinner arrives in a palanquin on the other. How people who
might by economy and taking in washing and plain work have a comfortable
back attic in the neighbourhood of Manchester Square, with a fire-place
and a boarded floor, can come and march about India, I cannot guess.

There were some slight palliations to the first day in camp: some
English boxes, with new books and little English souvenirs from sisters,
nieces, etc. And then I have a new horse, which met us at the foot of
the hills, and which has turned out a treasure, and is such a beauty, a
grey Arab. He is as quiet as a lamb, and as far as I can see,
perfect--and a horse must be very perfect indeed that I get upon before
daylight, when I am half-asleep and wholly uncomfortable, and which is
to canter over no particular road, and to go round elephants, and under
camels, and over palanquins, and through a regiment, without making
itself disagreeable.

The army will be at Ferozepore two days before we shall. The news from
Persia is so satisfactory, that probably only half the force will have
to cross the Indus, and it is very likely that Sir H. Fane will go home,
and Sir W. Cotton later.[464]


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Lister._

SIMLA, 1839.

MY DEAREST THERESA, Your letter, which I received three weeks ago, was
most welcome, though it was "the mingled yarn, of which we spin our
lives." Your happy bit of life with your brother, and your prospering
children, and your journey, which always (so as you stop short of India)
gives a fresh fit of spirits, and then your return, and that melancholy
catastrophe.[465]

I cannot say how grieved I was for that. Such a happy young life, and
one that was of importance to so many others! I hope Lord John will be
allowed to keep those children,[466] and I suppose she will have left
them under his guardianship. I suppose he would hardly object to all the
children being together. I see by the papers that you have been at
Cassiobury with poor Lord John.

Everybody writes what you say of Sir G. Villiers[467]--that he is not
the least altered, which I own surprises me, because as far as I am
concerned he has been decidedly "changed at nurse," and just simply
because he would not answer the two long letters I wrote him, I settled
that he was not the original G. Villiers, with whom one could talk and
laugh any number of hours, and whose visits were a bright spot in the
day, but that he was a mixture of a Spanish Grandee in a reserved black
cloak, with a mysterious hat and plume, etc., or a Diplomat in a French
comedy who speaks blank verse. But "it is the greatest of comforts," as
Mrs. Bennett said about long sleeves, to know that he is unaltered. I
should be sorry if those horrid Spaniards had gone and spoilt one of our
pleasantest men, and I still think that a system of sending out bores to
foreign courts would be an improvement.

Foreigners would never know how it was. A bore would be softened by
being translated into another language, or he might simply pass as an
original--_un Anglais enfin_; and then we might keep all the amusing
people to ourselves. I should like to have seen your brother; and how I
should like to see your children! I have no doubt they are as pretty as
you say; the little boy[468] always had a turn that way. I cannot make
out whether there are any more coming, but I suppose you would have
mentioned it if there were, and I think you are apt to increase your
family in a dawdling way, not in that rapid manner with which my sister
used to produce ten or twelve children all of a sudden, and before one
was prepared for the shock.

We came back to these dear good hills about a fortnight ago, and I love
them more dearly than ever. The thermometer was at 91 in our tents, and
after two days' toiling up the hills, we found snow in our garden here.
That is all gone, and the flowers are beginning to spring up. The snowy
range is so clean and bright, it looks as if one might walk to it, and
the red rhododendrons are looking like gigantic scarlet geraniums in
the foreground. I cannot sketch hills at all: they are too large here,
and there is no beginning nor end to them--no waterfalls, or convents,
or old buildings to finish them off.

We were about four months and a half in camp this year, so the blessing
of being in a house again is not to be described. I never am well in the
plains, and this year it would have been perverse not to have had
constant fever. We had rain every week, which kept the tents constantly
dripping, and we were very often apparently pitched in a lake, and had
to be carried through the water to dress. I was hardly a month the whole
time free from ague, and how George and Fanny are so constantly well is
a matter of astonishment to our doctor and every one else.

The Punjab was an interesting bit of our tour, and I am very glad we
have seen Runjeet Singh[469] and all his Indians in their savage
grandeur. He very nearly died just before we came away, which would have
been a dreadful blow in the political way, but he has happily rallied
again.

I should like to show you some of my Sikh sketches, though I have
horrible misgivings that, except to those who have run up Sikh
intimacies, and who prefer Shere Singh[470] to Kurruck Singh, or _vice
versa_, they may be tiresome performances. I have, in the meanwhile, had
several of my sketches copied by the miniature painters at Delhi, and
they have made some very soft likenesses from them. Do you ever draw
now? Or have you no time?

There are 96 ladies here whose husbands are gone to the wars, and about
26 gentlemen--at least there will, with good luck, be about that number.
We have a very dancing set of Aides-de-Camp just now, and they are
utterly desperate at the notion of our having no balls. I suppose we
must begin on one in a fortnight, but it will be difficult, and there
are several young ladies here with whom some of our gentlemen are much
smitten. As they will have no rivals here, I am horribly afraid the
flirtations may become serious, and then we shall lose some active
Aides-de-Camp, and they will find themselves on Ensign's pay with a wife
to keep. However, they _will_ have these balls, so it is not my fault.
Your ever affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lister._

SIMLA,
_June 17, 1839_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, I have had a letter of yours to answer more than a
month, but this is a bad time of year for writing home. We try all sorts
of plans; but, first, the monsoon cripples one steamer, and the next
comes back with all the letters still on board that we fondly thought
were in England. Then we try an Arab sailing vessel; but I always feel
convinced that an Arab ship sails wildly about drinking coffee and
robbing other ships. This is to go to the Persian Gulf, and if you are
living at your nice little villa, Hafiz Lodge, on the banks of the Gulf,
I think it just possible this letter may find you. Otherwise, I do not
see why it should.

And now for your letter. First: I see you are now Lady Theresa.[471]
Ought I to make any difference in my little familiarities? Secondly: as
touching Lord Clarendon's marriage,[472] which had been mentioned so
often as decidedly settled that I began to fear there could be no
foundation for it--I never have faith in a report that lasts three
months without becoming a fact. However, I am very glad it is all right
now. I remember he always liked her, and she has had rather a trying
life of it, which will fit her all the more for the enjoyment of
happiness.

You talk of your uncle's will as if it had been unsatisfactory. I was in
hopes Lord Clarendon was rolling in riches--I do not know why. You
should never write as if I knew anything. If you mention a will, you
should state it, beginning with "sound health of mind and body," and
ending with the witnesses' names; otherwise we never know anything in
India, and what little we do know we forget, for want of people to talk
it over with.

We cannot remember if that poor Lady H. Villiers[473] died; but I think
she did, and if so, I do not see who the late Lord C. could leave his
money to, except to the present one. However, he will be well off now,
at all events. Lady Verulam,[474] I own, I think a sad and very large
objection, but only at first; and as I rather hope to hear by the next
mail that your brother is in office, politics and business will prevent
any very wearisome intercourse.

Thirdly: as to those unfortunate H. Gordons. His memorial for leave to
retire is gone home to the Court of Directors, and George has no more to
say to it than you or I have. It rests entirely with the Court, but
George thinks they will give him leave to go home, as the idea of his
paying that large debt out of his wretched income is absurd, and he is,
in fact, a mere expense to them. But about the pension--there again no
authority, not even the Court, can help him. I see constantly in the
Calcutta papers that when anything the least unusual, or even doubtful,
with regard to the Pension Fund is contemplated, then it is put to the
vote of the whole Army, and always carried economically. Still, if the
Court give him leave to go home, I am sure it would not be worth his
while to live here in misery for the sake of the small addition to his
pension. I suppose it cannot be more than L100 a year altogether, and I
should really think it could not hurt Lady C. Cavendish[475] to make
that up out of her own allowance. You will have had my letter explaining
the absolute impossibility of George's doing anything here for him.
There is no such thing, Heaven knows, as a sinecure in India. For
military men there are Staff appointments, which are, of course, in the
gift of the Commander-in-Chief.

We have been uncommonly gay at Simla this year, and have had some
beautiful tableaux with music, and one or two very well acted farces,
which are a happy change from the everlasting quadrilles, and everybody
has been pleased and amused, except the two clergymen who are here, and
who have begun a course of sermons against what they call a destructive
torrent of worldly gaiety. They had much better preach against the
destructive torrent of rain which has now set in for the next three
months, and not only washes away all gaiety, but all the paths, in the
literal sense, which lead to it. At least I know the last storm has
washed away the paths to Government House.

The whole amount of gaiety has been nine evening parties in three
months--six here, and three at other houses. Our parties begin at
half-past eight, and at twelve o'clock we always get up and make our
courtesies and everybody goes at once. Instead of dancing every time, we
have had alternations of tableaux and charades, and the result has been
three Aides-de-Camp engaged to three very nice English girls, and the
dismissal of various native Mrs. Aides-de-Camp. Moreover, instead of the
low spirits and constant _tracasseries_, which are the foundation of an
Indian station, everybody this year has been in good humour, and they
all delight in Simla, and none of them look ill.

Our public affairs are prospering much, but I will not bore you with
details. We really are within sight of going home, dearest Theresa, but
it makes me shiver to think of it. I am so afraid something will happen
to prevent it.

I do not count Simla as any grievance--nice climate, beautiful place,
constant fresh air, active clergymen, plenty of fleas, not much society,
everything that is desirable; and when we leave it, we shall only have a
year and a half of India. The march is a bad bit; I am always ill
marching, and our hot season in Calcutta makes me simmer to think of it.
Then, the last five months will be cool, and we shall be packing. And
then, the 4th of March 1841, we embark, and in July of the same you will
be "my neighbour Lister," and we shall be calling and talking and making
much of each other. I should like to see your children. No, I do not
approve of Alice for your girl.[476] There is an unconscious prejudice
in favour of the name "Alice" which has risen to an alarming height, and
I think it my duty to oppose it. It gives me an idea of a slammerkin
milk-and-water girl. However, do as you like, only don't blame me if
Alice never looks tidy. Love to Mrs. Villiers. Ever your affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lister._

SIMLA,
_June 29, 1839_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, To-day an old sea letter of yours (January 23) has
come to hand, containing all that I wanted to know, so as there is an
odd opportunity of writing (a Chinese clipper going from Calcutta to
Aden, and the letters to find their own way from thence--such a post
office arrangement!) I take advantage of it....

This letter is six months old, but still very acceptable, and it shows
that I still have some right original English feelings,--that I have
been brought up in good Knightsbridge principles.

That old Lord Clarendon[477] was a brute; I always thought so. But what
can be the use of carrying on a farce of that sort to the end? He cannot
pop his head up even for a minute to say, "How I have tricked
you!"--supposing he was proud of it. My only hope is that Lady
Clarendon, who will find it difficult amongst her own nieces to hit upon
a worthy heir, will do what Lord Clarendon ought to have done. This must
go forthwith. Ever, dearest Theresa, your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to her Brother, Robert Eden [Vicar of Battersea]._

PINJORE,
_November 2, 1839_.

MY DEAREST ROBERT, Here we are again fairly in the plains, and to be
sure the plains are not the hills--an axiom the profound wisdom of which
you cannot appreciate, unless you had been yesterday luncheoning with us
at the Fir Tree Bungalow, with the snow in sight, the cool air rushing
about, and everything as it ought to be in October, the cones tumbling
off the fir trees, and the fern red and autumnal, and then you should
have been snapped up by your _Jhanpannies_ and run away with down-hill,
till in two hours you found yourself at Barr, the thermometer at 90 in
the tents, a man pulling the punkah for a little artificial air, and
nothing but dust and camels to be seen for miles round.

We came on eight miles to this place this morning, and stay two days to
allow time for our goods to arrive; but it is almost hotter than Barr.
Poor dear Simla! I had a great mind to cry when I saw the last glimpse
of it yesterday; but still I look upon this march as one step towards
home.

The army is on its way back from Cabul, but as Dost Mahomed is supposed
to be not far from the frontier, a larger force remains behind than was
at first intended. However, nothing can be known till the spring, for
the boundary between here and Cabul is impassable from snow, even for a
messenger during the winter. However well the expedition has succeeded
with reference to Russia and Persia, and to the safety of this country
from foreign enemies, I really think it is more important in the effect
it has had in India itself. Natives are totally unlike anything we know
at home; and they have had for some years an idea that their fate, or
what they call the good-luck of England, was to change, and the Nepalese
have been fomenting this notion with great care, so that there were many
petty states quite ready for an outbreak.

Every post now brings letters from Residents all over India, saying that
the success in Afghanistan has not only astounded the natives, but given
them faith again in English luck in general, and in their Lord Sahib in
particular. The further the news spreads, the more effect it seems to
make. There has been one very odd proof at Kurnaul in the Madras
Presidency of the _thinness_ of the crust over the volcano on which we
all sit in this country. The only wonder is it does not explode oftener.
The Nawab of Kurnaul has been often accused of disaffection, and lately
of having concealed stores. He was uncommonly angry, as people are when
they are accused of anything true or false, and desired three
commissioners should be sent to examine his jaghir. They found nothing
and were coming away, but some of the military authorities got
information from the Nawab's own people, summoned more forces, and asked
for another search. He said they were quite welcome to go into his fort,
and his prime Minister should go with them. Nothing was visible; but his
workmen betrayed him. They pointed out dead walls which were covered up,
concealed pits that were opened, etc., and everywhere arms were
discovered. More guns than belong to the whole army of [illegible];
rooms full of double-barrelled guns, and bags of shot attached to each;
and shells, which the natives were supposed not to know how to make. His
Zenana was turned into a Foundry, etc. There never was a thing done more
handsomely. As he has an income of only L100,000 a year, of course he
must be in league with richer and greater potentates, and his own 1500
followers could not have made much use of all this artillery. He made a
little fight for it, but he is in prison and his territories are seized
by the Company--one of the cases in which Lord Brougham would probably
like to talk about native wrong and British encroachments. George says
the Directors occasionally write a fine sentence about not attending
exclusively to British interests, just as if the British were here for
any other purpose, or as if everybody's interest were not to keep the
country at peace.

Lord Elphinstone[478] has done this Kurnaul business very sensibly and
well.

SHAH-I-BAD,
_November 8, 1839_.

I have kept this open in hopes of the overland post. It won't come. We
are progressing slowly and painfully. George and I think we have been a
year in camp; but other people say only a week. The heat is quite
dreadful, and I think I feel my brain simmering up in small bubbles,
just as water does before it begins to boil. We are in Mr. Clerk's[479]
district, and he has let Henry Vansittart come with the camp, which
delights him, and he learns a little bit of camp business, regulates the
price of flour at the bazaar, talks big about the roads, and by way of
showing how good they are, overturned his buggy and himself last night.
But he is pleasanter on his own ground than at Simla. My best love to
Mary. Ever yours most aff.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lister._

CAMP UMBALLA,
_November 5, 1839_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, I have not heard from you for a long time, but one
of the last overland letters mentioned that you had been ill, so it is
tempting to write and hope that you are well again.

The wife of the Private Secretary[480] came with me from Simla, because
in compliment to my weaker health I made shorter marches to the foot of
the hills with the last fat baby, Auckland Colvin[481] refusing to sit
anywhere but in her lap, and the baby before that refusing to go to
sleep unless she slept in the same tent with him, in which there were
the three children, two Portuguese Ayahs, and the children's favourite
bearers. No light, because the candles had been sent on by mistake to
the next ground; no carpets, because ditto; so that the servants kicked
up a dust even in their sleep. Several Pariah dogs were playfully
avoiding the Jackals, and about thirty bearers sleeping or smoking on
the kynants, or the space between the lining and the outside of the
tent. "_That I saw_," as Sydney Smith used to say in his charity sermons
when he was stating a particular case of distress which he not only
never had seen, but never heard of.

This was in our encampment in the hills, when the climate was still
delicious. Now the thermometer stands at 90 in the tents, and these
unfortunate ladies begin to march at four in the evening. I do not know
that the horn signifies, as I defy anybody to sleep in camp more than
two hours, and it is being uncommonly acute to snatch at that the first
week, till the sentries have learnt to stop the tent-pitchers and
camel-drivers from knocking down and packing up all night at unlawful
hours. I got Captain Codrington, our Quarter-master, to stay behind last
night instead of going on to pitch the advanced camp, that he might see
and hear what a quantity of illicit pitching and packing went on, and
the result was that he imprisoned 160 tent-pitchers, 56 camels, and
removed out of hearing the neighing horses of half the clerks in the
public offices, and we all went to sleep for at least half-an-hour,
which was very grand. Moreover, it is a rule that nothing should leave
the ground till the Governor-General's carriage goes by, and a gun is
fired to announce that highly important event; so to-day this rule was
enforced, and in a country of hot dust, which this is, a very good rule
it is. But it was funny to see the crowds of old men and beasts the
advance guard had stopped, camels and elephants innumerable, our own
band, several hundreds of grass-cutters' ponies laden with grass for
sale, palanquins full of small half-caste babies, everybody's pet dog
with their bearers, sofas and arm-chairs. My own tame pheasants in their
wooden house I saw in the _melee_.

Marching disagrees so much with me, that by the doctor's advice, and
George's desire, I leave the camp at Agra, and go straight down to
Calcutta, where I hope to be the middle of February. George does not
expect to be there before the 1st of April, but I rather hope he will,
driven by the heat, cut off some of his tour as the time draws nearer.
We have been joined on the march by several officers returning from
Cabul, and very flourishing they look, and they cannot make out that
their sufferings have been what the papers tried to make out. Captain
Dawkins, of Lord Auckland's Bodyguard, who has been through the campaign
with a regiment to which he lawfully belongs, has come back looking
fatter than most Falstaffs, and he brought back three of the sheep which
he left with us at Ferozepore last year, so that danger of starving was
not great.

God bless you, dearest Theresa. This is a very stupid letter, but then
it is better than none, which is what I have had from you. And you
cannot imagine how hot it is. Your most affectionate

E. EDEN.




CHAPTER XII

1840-1842


_Miss Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

BARRACKPORE,
_March 13, 1840_.

MY DEAR MR. GREVILLE, I give it up; I succumb; I see clearly I was all
wrong; generally am, quite mistaken, very sorry, very stupid, etc. But
you and every friend I have will do me the justice to say that since the
first year we passed here I have mentioned openly that I was regularly
twaddling, that I hardly remembered a proper name, and _never_ knew what
was meant for jest or earnest. I have written it home twenty times, and
it is not a complaint peculiar to me, but common to everybody who has
passed a hot season or two in India. Their brains are fairly stewed down
into a harmless jelly; and it is a merciful dispensation that, as they
have not bodily strength to laugh at a joke, they have not wit left to
understand one. I still think that your irony was too fine even for
England--I mean, I might have been puzzled there; here, of course, I
took it all _au pied de la lettre_. I should not have minded it so much,
if just at the moment when George had hazarded himself in a line that
must have ended in success or in impeachment, he had not been turned
upon by almost all the Indian authorities, and every paper without
exception. I did not care for their opinions, wretched little buzzings
of Indian mosquitoes, but when an imposing English hornet came down upon
me with the same small Toryisms, as I thought, I could not stand it.
However, I see it all clearly now, so let us make it up. "Hostess, I
forgive thee: look to thy servants. Wash thy face. Come, thou must not
be in this humour with me."

I rather expect the next overland may bring out a copy of William's
book; it is just the sort of thing which will make a great sensation
here. Everybody makes a point of fainting away if their names are
mentioned in the public prints; they have simple hysterics if they are
merely mentioned in a list of passengers by a steamer, etc.; but if
their names are coupled with a comment on their conduct or promotion,
they fall into a dream. Therefore a book upon a subject that may be
connected with politics, by a Military Secretary to the
Governor-General, will be too much for their nerves. I depend upon your
Preface for annihilating them. We are really looking to it with great
anxiety, and considerable prospect of amusement. The papers will wrangle
for a month if you have made any mistake as to the various members of
the Singh family, of which they know nothing themselves. Then _the_
Prinsep,[482] who wrote a book about Runjeet, which you have probably
made use of, is now a Member of Council, the greatest bore Providence
ever created, and so contradictory that he will not let anybody agree or
differ with him. If you have made any use of his book, I mean solemnly
to assert that I _know_ from the best authority you have never heard of
it or him, that it was a great pity you had not, etc.

Your friendship with Mary [Drummond] is certainly rather funny, but once
begun, I think it will go on progressing. Please to let me know if you
see the slightest inkling of a flirtation for either of the girls. They
are the greatest dears I know, and though I had rather they should not
marry till next year, that I may be by to approve, still I should like
to hear of it too.

We came up here this week to see if it were cooler than Calcutta (vain
idea!), and to receive the visits of the station, which, as there are
eight regiments at Barrackpore, were numerous and dull. We had two hours
of fat generals and yellow brigadiers clanking in and out of the room
yesterday; but one visit was rather amusing. The lady was like Caroline
Elliot in her young days; married to come out here; landed a month ago;
is in perfect horror at India; and evidently the poor husband has lost
any charm he ever might have had by his guilt in inveigling her out
here. I asked if she had got into her own house yet. "I have not seen a
house at Barrackpore. Tweddell has taken a barn for me, but I am not in
my own barn yet." "Have you found a good Ayah? She would help you." "I
have got some black things Tweddell calls servants. I do not understand
a word they say." She said she went to bed immediately after dinner, and
I asked if she dined late. "How can I tell? There is no difference in
the hours. Always shut up in a prison to be stung by mosquitoes. And
then Tweddell told me I should be a little Eastern Queen. Oh, if I could
go back this last year." She was dressed up to the last pitch of the
last number of the _Journal de Modes_, which, poor girl, will not be of
much use at Barrackpore, where the officers are too poor even to dine
with each other; and I own, I think Tweddell has a great deal to answer
for, and _is_ answering for his sins in a wearisome life. But to the
by-standers who have not seen a fresh English girl nor a hearty English
aversion for some years, she was an amusing incident.

Did you know much of Lord Jocelyn[483] at home? He has seen his Agra
and Delhi since he left us, is now doing a bit of tiger-shooting, and
then is coming down as fast as he can to join this Chinese expedition.
His regiment does not go, but George has got Captain Bethune to take him
as a guest. I think I should like to go marauding to Canton. We found at
Calcutta a box of bronze curiosities, etc., that we had ordered before
this little painful misunderstanding with Lin, etc., and they give a
great idea of what might be picked up by an experienced plunderer. Yours
ever,

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

BARRACKPORE,
_Sunday, April 19, 1840_.

MY DEAR MR. GREVILLE, The March overland is just come in, and they say
that if we send an express to Calcutta, to overtake the _other_ express
which was going off with George's despatches this afternoon, everything
will come straight at Bombay. In my own mind I see nothing but a long
train of innocent Bengalese running after each other, each with a letter
in his hand, the thermometer at 150, and the head man of the train
waving the small quantity of muslin he deigns to wear to a distant puff
of smoke in the Bay of Bengal.

However, as our friendship has had such a frightful _secousse_ and wants
steadying, I pay you every possible little attention, so I write this
hurried line to say that the few letters which have yet arrived, and two
stray papers, all speak in the highest tones of The Book, and of its
success, and how well it is got up, and we are longing for a copy of it,
and George is politically at ease from its being spoken of as a
_personal_ narrative, and altogether it seems like an amusing incident.
William is full of gratitude for all the trouble you have taken about
it.

We have subsided from the interests of Afghan politics into the daily
difficulties of keeping ourselves from being baked alive. I may say we
have _risen_ to this higher pursuit, for it is much the more important
of the two, and of much more difficult achievement. China promises to be
amusing; they are arming themselves and fitting up little innocent
American ships, and collecting war junks; and my own belief is that they
are so conceited and so astucious that they will contrive some odd way
of blowing up all our 74's with blue and red fireworks, take all our
sailors and soldiers prisoners, and teach them to cut out ivory hollow
balls.

Lord Jocelyn is staying with us, but will sail in about ten days in the
_Conway_. He goes merely as a volunteer with representatives of the
Dragoons, and George has arranged that he is to be passed into any ship
that is likely to see most service. He has great merit in the ardour
with which he looks about for information and for service, and I hope
the Chinese will not take him prisoner.

So the dear little Queen is now Mrs. A. C. I hope she will be happy; and
they may say what they like of her, but she certainly contrives to
conduct herself wonderfully, through a great many trying
ceremonies,--never awkward, and yet just shy enough, and I like her so
for being so affectionate to Aunt Adelaide.

Pray tell Mrs. Drummond I have had her letter and Theresa's journal,
much to my heart's content, and I would have written her another line,
but I am horrified at the price of letters. Not but what I guessed my
journal would cost a great deal too much--but L2. 8. 0! I am horrified
in the English sense. Here that would be dog cheap--24 rupees. I never
speak to anybody for less.

The long hand of my watch caught in the other, and the watchmaker
charged 20 rupees for bending it up a hair's breadth. But still, L2. 8.
0 for a letter! I flatter myself your office pays for this. Good-bye.
Ever yours,

E. EDEN.


_Miss E. Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

CALCUTTA,
_July 6, 1840_.

_My dear Mr. Greville_, At last a copy of _The Court and Camp_ has
reached Calcutta, and was picked up by an alert Aide-de-Camp, who was in
the shop when it arrived. It is immensely well got up, and altogether, I
think, a pretty little book, and more of a book than I expected. It is a
pity more copies did not come by one ship, for there are quantities
bespoken. But in the meanwhile everybody is borrowing this, and they all
delight in the introductory chapter, because, of course, not one of them
has the least idea of the _history_ of the Sikhs as connected with
India, nor of India as connected with anything else, so they are all
delighted at learning it so cheaply, and they look upon you as a prodigy
of Eastern learning. There are one or two misprints in the book, which
do very well for England, but is the sort of thing they will take up
here, where their intellects are below mistake par, but just up to a
misprint; and I should imagine that the Agra Akbar will wonder at the
ignorance of the aristocracy who can call a thermantidote a
phermantidote, and that the _Delhi Gazette_, which is courtly, will say
it ought to be phermantidote, and that they could give the Greek
derivation, only they have no Greek type.

I think you ought to feel a sort of paternal interest in the Sikh
dynasty, and would like to know that Kharak Singh[484] still retains
the name of King, and Mr. Clerk (the Governor-General's agent) says that
Noormahal's attentions to his father in public increase in proportion as
he deprives him of all power. He says Noormahal all through the Durbar
is occupied in wiping the dust from Kharak's band, when not a particle
has settled, or with a Chowry in driving away flies from his father's
hand, which they never approach, and that Kharak, though a fool, is wise
enough not to like these demonstrations of tenderness.

The fleet left Singapore for Macao on the 30th May; the fear of bad
weather prevented their waiting any longer for Admiral Elliot. William
Osborne and Lord Jocelyn seemed very well satisfied with their
accommodation in the _Conway_, and were gone on in her. William asked
some of the Chinese at Singapore whether their way of making war was
like ours, and they said, "Much the same, only more guns and less drum."
He asked what they thought of the steamers, which were, in fact, quite
new to them, and they said, "Oh, plenty at Pekin; only little smaller."
I am in a horrid mood of mind at all these requisitions from home that
are to keep us here another year; and have turned rank Tory on the spot,
and can think of nothing but the quickest means of turning the Ministry
out, and then of rushing down to the river-side and beckoning to the
first ship. But surely we never shall be kept here. I don't think the
people at home have an idea what a place it is, but they _will_ know
hereafter, if they go on behaving so in this life. And as for the idea
that any Governor-General is to stay till everything is quite quiet and
peaceable in this great continent, you might as well ask the fish to
stay in the frying-pan till they have put out the fire.

There always must be some great piece of work in hand here. In the
meantime, life is passing and friends are dying, and we are becoming so
old that it will be impossible to take up the thread of existence again
with the young things like the Drummonds, etc., whom I had looked upon
as the supports of my old age. It will never do to stay.

We are to have at dinner to-day a son of Theodore Hook's, just arrived.
He does not look as if he could improvise, or do much better if he
_provised_; but I never saw the father, so he may look stupid, too,
without being so. I see there are two of T. Hook's novels published
lately, and trust the son may have partially brought them out.[485]

I have become a great whist player upon the one-eyed monarch principle.
Nobody else can play at all, and when the Governor-General and the
Commander-in-Chief dine together, it is obvious that they must have
their rubber, and so I and the Aide-de-Camp or the Doctor play with
them. Can't you see the sort of thing? Shocking whist, but it helps the
evening through. I play much better than Sir Jasper,[486] but worse,
George says, than anybody else he ever saw. Ever yours,

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell._


CALCUTTA,
_July 17, 1840_.

MY DEAREST PAM, Your friend Mr. Taylor arrived this week with the letter
you gave him ten months ago--perhaps not bad travelling for a letter of
introduction, though not exactly rapid as a means of receiving
intelligence. However, a letter's a letter, and I am the last person in
the world to complain.

George has seen your Taylor, and says he is very promising, and I have
asked him to Barrackpore for love of you and in the strongest reliance
on your Edward's[487] judgment. Otherwise, there _is_ a brother of his
in this country now (thank goodness up the country) that used to drive
me demented--just the opposite to all you say of your friend--not
good-looking, not a "chap" at all, and rather a black sheep--though,
poor man, I should not say so. But you cannot imagine the provocation of
his manner or the excess of his conceit. It induced a freezing sort of
snappishness in oneself that was, however, utterly unavailing; it only
made him more affable and jocose. And, to crown all, he shaved his head
after a fever, or his doctor shaved it to tease him, or something of
that sort, and he came dancing about in a little velvet skull-cap.

I think my health has been so good this year at Calcutta because Pearce
Taylor was not there.

No, dearest, I never blame you for not writing. I always feel that I
know you just the same as ever, and that it is not your fault if your
children take up all your time. I only regret that the world should be
such a very large, thick, slice of bread, and that butter should be so
scarce that they should have been obliged to spread us at the two
opposite ends. We should have been much happier in the same butter-boat,
but I suppose it could not be helped. My side of the bread too, is
turned to the fire and I am half-roasted, which, if I do not write twice
to your once, is my _set off_ against the claims of your children.

I have always wondered how much you liked Mrs. Fane. You mentioned her
in one letter as liking her very much, and she is a good-natured little
woman, but not _one of us_, is she, Pam? I think she must have felt Sir
Henry's death.[488] He was always very kind to her in his way, without
putting her at her ease.

Our George has done very well in India, has he not? You know we always
thought highly of him even in his comical dog days.... Now I think he
has done enough, and might as well go home, but none of the people at
home will hear of it, and this month's despatches have made me
desperate. Moreover, I cannot stay away another year from Mary and her
girls, and fifty others. I do not like anybody here, and if we try to
get up a shade more intimacy with any lady, then all the others are
cross, and her husband or brother wants something, and that makes a
story, and so on.

William Osborne is gone with the China expedition, which is a sad loss
to poor Fanny. However, I believe that will be a very short business,
and that he will soon be back again. The Chinese have already begun to
say they hope there will be much talkee before fightee, which does not
promise much fightee. William says that at Singapore they saw quantities
of little dogs fattening regularly in coops for the table, and their
captain's steward was looking at them, which gave Lord Jocelyn and
himself an alarm about their future dinners.

Your little picture is still such a pleasure to me. Mind you keep like
it, that I may know you again. None of the children know me, which is
shocking and foolish. Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Lady Campbell to Miss Eden._


DUBLIN,
_September 27, 1840_.

Just so my darling. I am rather glad you wrote before you saw the Taylor
I sent, for fear he should be a beast in spite of Edward's good word.
Emmy, this other year seems harder to swallow than all the rest. But I
will not touch upon it; it is too raw. There has been a talk of our
asking for something in India; I thought it just probable that we might
pass each other at sea! However, we should have to leave so many
children they said it would not pay, and I could have hugged them. One
man I can scarce bear to look at who put it into Sir Guy's head at
first, and how much we were to lay by, and how charming the climate was,
and how I should marry my daughters!

Yes, Sir Guy's Fanny is married and very happy. Captain Harvey[489] is a
very handsome, nice person; they have not much money at present, but
that cannot be helped. Pam[490] has been with her for the last month at
Carlisle, where Fanny is quartered. Pam was very ill with ague, so I
sent her to the Napiers. She comes back to me next week. I long to show
her to you--not for the beauty, for she is no beauty, tho' nice-looking.
But, Emmy, she is quite, quite one of us--I need not explain how
pleasant, how good, how full of sense and fun. She is such a comfort to
me.

The next, Georgina,[491] is very pretty and very dear, but not so gentle
and patient as Pam.

I had my sailor boy for two blessed months. This boy, Guy,[492] came
home so improved, so gentle and affectionate, and delightful from sea. I
felt so thankful, as I rather feared the sea. It is a dreadful life to
be the mother of a sailor; so hard to bear. Wind always to me was a sad
sound, but now I can hardly help crying. All the rest are good little
nice things, and I have no governess, so I have a good deal of their
company more or less. We are quaking for the Brevet, but I will not
entertain you with my hopes and fears, and want of pence, or what you
call _Pice_, don't you?...

I like Lord Ebrington, and he seems to like you all so much. I get on
much better with him than with Lord Normanby. However, he does not give
dinners and balls and parties enough, and the _trade_ complain. Dear
Lord Morpeth is coming to dine with me to-day, and won't we talk of you?
He is such a charming person, and my most particular friend. You gave
him to me, you know, when you went away. Mary will have told you how we
had settled I was to go over and see her. Her girls are so nice, and she
herself dearer than ever, and all the better from going out more. For a
little while she really ensconced herself inside the high wire nursery
fender, and one saw her in the uncomfortable way in which when we were
bairns you may remember we used to see the fire, never getting at it
enough. I was sorry she gave up poor Grosvenor Place. I like all those
old Grosvenors; I could have cried when I looked at No. 30! _Du reste_,
I rather like getting old; there is wonderful repose in it; it saves one
so much trouble--so much of the work done. I am so glad you are getting
fat, so am I, and I combine also the grey hair which you mention George
has assumed. I am very grey; fat and grey sounds like an old cat, but
what does it signify? when once we meet, how young we shall feel then.
Emmy, do you remember your aversion to mittens? My dear, I was in
advance of my age. When I wore them, like Bacon and Galileo I appealed
to posterity, and posterity made haste, and everybody wears mittens,
morning, noon, and night. The only chance you have is, that they will
have burnt out before you come back, and my hair too. Everybody _lisse_
and banded, and they little know that George and I were the only two
people that wore close heads in our day.

[Illustration: Omery Galber

Eleanor, Countess of Buckinghamshire.]

The Lansdownes spent a week here. She is looking well, and in much
better spirits, and her countenance so much softer and gentler, that I
think her more loveable than I ever knew. I never knew how much I loved
her till I was with her in her grief.[493] Louisa[494] looking well
for her, and ready to talk and be pleased. Lord Lansdowne rather older.
I was wondering what made him look so well and distinguished and
conversable, and I found he was set off by Lord Charlemont, who rejoices
in a brown natural hair wig, which made Lord Lansdowne in his nice grey
hair look quite beautiful.

I have got a nice two-year-old[495] baby just _pour me desennuyer_; such
a nice duck! The youngest after six girls. Pam says he is doomed to wear
all the old bent bonnets out, and accordingly I found him in the hay
with a bonnet on.

_Tuesday, September 20, 1840._

I wrote all this Sunday and I must just add one word. Lord Morpeth dined
here early with me and the children, and was to start by the eleven
o'clock train to the packet for to sail for England to attend the
Cabinet Council, _as we vulgar_ imagine, upon peace or war, _rien que
ca_. However, my delicacy was such I did not pump at all. He is a real
good soul, and I have scruples about pumping him. Old Berkeley Square I
always make a point of pumping till the handle has come off in my hand
often, but very little water ever! Yours ever,

PAMELA CAMPBELL.


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

CALCUTTA,
_January 15, 1841_.

MY DEAREST SISTER, After a long cessation all our letters came to
hand--all from September to November 4th. You had been doing your
_Mimms_, which I never think sounds comfortable. Indeed, I remember
seeing the place once and thinking it very melancholy, damp, and
dead-leafish.

Yes, as you say, as long as Chance is alive there is a wall between
Dandy and death; but then you know spaniels live longer than terriers,
and at all events it would be a sort of preparation to Dandy to
insinuate to him that Chance has lost his last tooth, which the faithful
Jimmund, his servant, has had set in a silver ring.

You have never mentioned that you have a new clergyman of the name of
Hazlewood at Greenwich. You never tell _me_ anything in confidence
whatever, after so many years; and after all, I don't see the use of
making such a mystery of it. "But I have often observed a little spirit
of nonsense and secrecy," as Mrs. Norris says, about your clergyman,
that I would advise you to get rid of. Your Hazlewood (you see I know
his real name) is brother to our Captain Hazlewood, commonly called
Harum Scarum. Hazlewood Scarum got a letter by this last post saying:
"Lady Buckinghamshire, who is a constant attendant at my church, is, I
find, a sister of Lord Auckland's. You cannot imagine how much I wish to
make her acquaintance. I think our mutual interests in India," etc.,
etc.

Probably by this time you may have seen him. Our Hazlewood is going home
next week in the _Hardwick_. The wounds he received at Ghazni[496] were
very severe; and he rattles about, and dances and rides, and proposes
and breaks off his engagements, and altogether he has never let himself
get well, and has suffered so much from his arm lately that his general
health is beginning to give way, and Doctor Drummond has ordered him
home. A man who goes home on a medical certificate has his passage paid
by the liberal Company, and gets L50 a year while he is in England; so
that upon the whole a slight wound is not such a bad thing. I am rather
on the look-out for a generous adversary who will wound me just up to
the pitch of being ordered home, and having my passage paid, but not a
bit more. Poor Hazlewood's is much more than that; but the voyage will
probably set him up, though he will never have the use of his arm again.
As he will go to Greenwich to see his brother, I have given him a line
to you. It will not entail upon you more than a dinner, and he is a very
good-humoured, obliging creature, and not at all vulgar. There is not
the slightest chance of his spoiling the view at Eastcombe by setting
that little wretched stream the Thames on fire; though I have no doubt
he will try, as he always must be busy about something. He may give you
a flourishing account of us, as we are all going on very well, I think.

The Admiral[497] has made a shocking mess of China--at least he has done
nothing, and the force and the ships and the money have all been wasted,
leaving things just as they were a year ago. Now he has given up the
Command, writing most pitiable accounts of his being in a dying state
from disease of the heart, with no chance of reaching home alive; and
for the last ten days we have been believing this and pitying and
defending him. And now to-day George has a letter from him, written on
board his son's ship, saying they were all on the way home; that he
thought he had mistaken his complaint, which was now merely liver, and
that he felt nearly well again. It is an unhappy bit of his career, and
such weakness is rather odd in such a stern, stiff-looking man as G.
Elliot.

Charles[498] is now left sole Plenipotentiary, and if he can but keep to
his own mind two days running is clever enough to do very well; but he
is terribly vacillating. She wishes very much that she was with him
just now, and I can fancy she might be of use in keeping him up to the
mark; but she cannot go during the present monsoon, and except for the
pleasure of seeing Charles again, I think she will be very sorry to
leave Calcutta. Ever your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Mr. C. Greville._

CALCUTTA,
_January 17, 1841_.

MY DEAR MR. GREVILLE, I am grieved you were so troubled with the gout
when you wrote, as I have never been of the opinion that a fit of gout
is a matter of that perfect indifference which people who are not
sufferers from it claim to assert. I think you had better come out as
Lord Auckland's successor, if you cannot come and visit us. Nobody has
the gout in India. I suppose it is _perspired_ out of them. And even
General Elphinstone,[499] who was a wretched victim to it when we met
him going up to Meerut--almost the worst I ever saw--has, I hear, lost
it quite during the hot season. He is going to succeed Sir W.
Cotton[500] in Afghanistan, and does not like it on account of the cold
climate.... Ever yours most truly,

E. E.


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

BARRACKPORE,
_February 6, 1841_.

MY DEAREST SISTER, I am just come back from doing a bit of duty, so I
may as well try whether writing to you will not be a bit of pleasure in
this dark half-hour before dressing.

The little Nawab of Moorshedabad has anchored his fleet of boats just in
front of this house, on his way up the river home. He is the convoy of
the late lamented Captain Showers, who has gone and married himself to a
very plain, unpleasant young lady, and has consequently left us, and
George has given him the care of this boy's education. George took the
little Nawab a drive, and I have been, with Rosina[501] as an
interpreter, to see the Begum in her Pinnace, and it strikes me that it
is very lucky I was not born a Mussulmannee. I am sure if they shut me
up in that fashion I should have got into a thousand scrapes, and
probably some very bad ones; and moreover, I should have gone out of my
mind with bore and heat. She was in the centre cabin of the Pinnace,
with three or four antechambers made of curtains, so arranged that there
was no possibility of her being seen when one was opened. All the
jalousies of the cabin were shut, and it was so dreadfully hot that I
was obliged to ask for a breath of air; and then there was such a fuss:
Captain Macintosh and the boats that brought my servants requested to
keep off--sentries on deck thrown into a fuss--and then when a
fishing-boat came by, such a rush to shut up one wretched bit of blind
which nobody could see through--and if they had, I think they would have
been very much disappointed. "I am not the lovely girl I was," and the
Begum, though rather pretty, is so extremely small I don't think they
could see her at all without a glass. Her women were shut up in another
dark cabin, and her visible attendants were all of that class (saving
your presence) who are allowed to wait on Eastern ladies.

Visits to native ladies are much more amusing when I go with Rosina,
than when there is a stiff secretary translating from the other side of
the punkah. The Begum was delighted with some English flowers that I
took her, and began asking Rosina about England, and amongst other
things, she and her attendants having ascertained that it was really
true that we walked out in London, wanted very much to know if we did
not wear veils and loose trousers on those occasions. Rosina made them
all laugh very much, and the Begum gave her L5 when we went away. I
should think a laugh must be cheap at the money. I am quite sure I
should have gone wrong, particularly wrong, if I had been one of these
shut-up ladies, out of mere spite. It might have been difficult to
contrive it, but I think I should have been a very profligate Begum.
They say this little lady was. Now she is not more than twenty-six, and
having lost her husband has lost her power, and is under the control of
a strict mother-in-law, and her chief occupation is to _cook_ for her
son. She never lets anybody else cook for him for fear he should be
poisoned.

CALCUTTA,
_February 9, 1841_.

No more decisive news from China. Charles Elliot still goes on
negotiating--or as the people there call it, _no_-gotiating. The navy,
army, and merchants are all equally dissatisfied. By the last letter, he
declared Sir Gordon Bremer[502] was to attack the Bogue forts the next
day if the Chinese did not sign the treaty, but he has said so so often
that nobody will believe it till they see it, and even when they do it
is impossible not to regret that it was not done a year ago. Mrs. Elliot
has rather a hard time of it, I fancy, as the society here is chiefly
mercantile, and they all consider themselves ruined by all this weakness
and procrastination, and the papers, too, are full of abuse. She bears
it better than most people would, but fidgets about his vacillation, I
suspect. She talks of sailing in about ten days.... This day twelve
month how sea-sick I hope to be. Yr. most aff.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

CALCUTTA,
_April 6, 1841_.

MY DEAREST SISTER, I did not write to you last month. I daresay you
never found it out, only I am so honest I tell. But I had a large arrear
of friends to bring up, and as Fanny said she had written you a double
letter, I thought you would not miss me if "I just stepped out for a
bit."

I am sure you would pity me at this moment. Just fancy yourself trying
to be fond of Dandy's successor, and in the still lower position of
finding that successor refusing obstinately to be fond of you. As for
ever caring for a dog as I did for poor dear Chance, the thing is
impossible. I do not believe there ever was so clever a dog, and very
few equally clever men; and then, after eight years of such a rambling
life, we have had so many recollections in common, and he was such a
well-known character in India. I had no great fancy to have another; but
we are alone so many hours of the day that a pet is almost a necessity,
and a Doctor Young, who is just come from England, hearing I had lost
Chance, very politely sent me a little English spaniel he had brought
with him.

The gentlemen all say it is a perfect beauty, with immense ears, and a
short nose, and all the right things. It may be so; unluckily it is not
even the kind of beauty I admire, and in all other respects I think I
may safely say I never hated a small dumb beast so much in all my life.
It is wild and riotous and foolish, and whines after its old master
half the day; or else runs off like a mad thing, and the servants, who
cannot pronounce its name, Duke, are streaming about the house after it,
calling Juck, Juck! That name is its only merit. I suppose nobody ever
had a dog called Juck before. Everybody says it will grow tame, but I
know better. I have had it eight days, and I think in another week it
will be lawful to return it to Doctor Young, and say I cannot deprive
him of it--such a treasure, such a Juck!

Your account of Dandy barking at the Southwark police particularly
amused us. Fanny's dog flies at all the natives who happen to have
stepped out without their clothes just in that way, and George longs to
murder him for it, as a dog frightens them out of their senses.

We have just had the very Chinese news that George has anticipated all
along--indeed, so certainly, that two months ago he luckily sent his own
orders to stop all of the convoy and fleet that C. Elliot had not
dispersed. The Emperor would not even listen to that treaty, bad as it
was, so now it is a declared war, and the Bogue forts have been taken,
which was easily done, as the garrison all ran without firing a shot.

That was what George advised, and indeed ordered as far as he could ten
months ago, when the expedition started in full strength. Now the ships
are half-dispersed, half-crippled, and an immense proportion of the
soldiers dead or disabled, and it is evident that Charles[503] now does
not know what to do. In the meanwhile, in his odd mad way, he had sent
orders to have Chusan evacuated without waiting for a ratification of
the treaty, and he has been obliged to withdraw the few soldiers that
had garrisoned Hong Kong, his great hobby of an acquisition, because
they were wanted on board ship. So we literally have not an inch of
ground or a single thing gained by all this immense expenditure. The
Chinese actually ordered us out of Chusan before they would give up one
of their few prisoners, and we obeyed. The sort of fun they must make of
us.

I have had a line from Mrs. Elliot, who met the news at Singapore and
was much out of spirits. But George has not yet heard from Charles. It
is lucky he is what he is, totally blind to his own folly, for I am sure
half the men in his position would be driven to some act of desperation.

_April 14._

No more tidings from Charles Elliot. William is gone off on a
tiger-hunting expedition with a Mr. Larpent. It is a dreadfully hot time
of the year for this sort of work, but I believe tiger-shooting is that
degree of exquisite pleasure that makes up for all inconveniences, and
the mere idea did him a great deal of good. He has been in one of his
_meandering_ states of spirits ever since the excitement of the races
were over, living very much alone and looking utterly broken-hearted;
but this new excitement has roused him again, and he went off quite
happy with the thermometer at about 95, I suppose, out of doors.

Juck has subsided a little, but is a positive misery, and very
uninteresting. I am getting on very fast with a collection of drawings
and flowers, those that are not common in England. I sketch them and put
in the colours, and I have hired two natives by the month who sit in the
passage and paint them. I think you would rather like to see them (the
drawings, not the natives), but I know what you will say--Very pretty,
my dear, but they are all red and yellow. You must have had a sad want
of blue flowers,--and I don't exactly know how I can contradict you.
Some of the parasite plants, tho', are very beautiful. I have been
gradually making a new garden in front of the house, rather in the large
round chumpy line, but the size of the house requires that bold style,
and by the time we go it will be very pretty, and quite ready to be
destroyed by the next Lady.

Lady Amherst[504] made a magnificent garden all round the house, which
stands in the centre of what we call a huge compound. Lady William[505]
[Bentinck] said flowers were very unwholesome, and had everything rooted
out the first week. I never thought of restoring it till last year, and
now it is all done very economically, and only on one side of the house,
and at a considerable distance, so that the doctors can't have the
conscience to object, etc. I am just finishing two little fish ponds.

All the bamboo fences will be covered with creepers after the next
rains, and then, as I said, the next lady may pull them all up, and let
the ground lie fallow for her successor, and so on. Whatever she may
think of the garden, I am sure she ought to be obliged to me for
clearing up the house. It was all left in such an untidy state. You must
recollect those old looking-glasses that had been put in the ball-room
by Lord Wellesley. I think they must have lost all their quicksilver
when Lord Wellesley was a little boy. I sent them all to the auction
last month, as we are not up to re-silvering glass in India, and they
actually fetched L400; and with that I am going to have the ball-room
gilt in a very elaborate manner, and I think it will be a great
improvement.

We have lost Captain Hill, who succeeded Major Byrne in the management
of the house and its expenses, whether ours, or the Company's. He was
taken so alarming ill that he was obliged to go off to the Hills,
nominally on sick leave, but I fear there is no chance of his returning.
And it was all so sudden that he had no time to instruct his successor.
However, Gales is a very efficient House Steward, and I am carefully
educating Captain Macintosh in the Company's interests. It often strikes
me that a very extravagant Governor-General might puzzle the Directors
very much; he can order any expense whatever, and as it is, the
establishment is enormous. Of course they can recall him when his
accounts go home, but there is nobody to check him here.

They say Lord Elphinstone has been in a horrible scrape with them for
his Durbar expenses--money spent on his house and furniture. They ought
to think highly of my little looking-glass economy, and if they would
send us out just a dozen very large looking-glasses, etc. However, I am
going home, at least I hope so. I expect this will find you under a Tory
Government--wretched, ill-governed creatures! The last hope of elections
seems fatal, and China news will be a good grievance to have the
Government out upon. I wish our successor were named. It is quite time
he should be, as George wishes to see him here before we go. Do name him
at once.

Ever, dearest Sister, your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to her Brother, Robert Eden._

CALCUTTA,
_April 12, 1841_.

MY DEAREST ROBERT, There is no particular good news to send you this
time, though nothing much the reverse from India; but I think if the
Opposition did not take advantage of C. Elliot's first absurd peace,
they may turn the Ministry out on finding it is no peace at all, and
that, moreover, he has not left himself the means of carrying on a war.
There never was such a man, if he were not a positive fool. I really
think he would go mad when he looks back on all he has done this year.
The last act of giving up Chusan, without waiting to see if the Emperor
would ratify the treaty, is the crown to all his absurdity. We have not
a foot of land left of their territory, and they actually ordered the
last soldier out of Chusan before they would give up their few
prisoners. Everybody wonders what will be the next news. Probably, that
he will prevent Sir Gordon Bremer from taking Canton, for fear it should
hurt the feelings of the Chinese, and the Emperor will probably send
down orders that our sailors are to wear long tails and broad hats, wink
their eyes, and fan themselves, and C. Elliot will try to teach them. I
don't think my national pride ever was so much hurt.

Everybody is curious to know what the orders from home are. I have a
horrible fright that if the Whigs are still in, they will send out full
powers to George to take the business in hand. That _might_ interfere
with our going home, which would be much more distressing than any
national offence, and also it would be very inconvenient to him just
now.

The Punjab remains so unsettled that all the spare troops are obliged to
be kept on that frontier; and then Major Todd[506] has brought Herat
into a mess, and though I think that is nearer to you than to us, it
makes great difficulties in this direction. Then Singh and his army
cannot get on at all. Runjeet's death has been so like the death of
Alexander, and of half those great conquerors in ancient history that we
used to read about, and believe in. His army was a very fine thing, and
his kingdom a good kingdom while he was there to keep his one eye upon
them, but the instant he died it all fell into confusion, and his
soldiers have now murdered all their French (I began on a half sheet by
mistake) and English officers, and are marauding wildly all over the
country. It is not actually any business of ours, but it interrupts our
communications with Afghanistan; and, in short, it is obvious that it
might at last furnish one of those pretences for interference England
delights in, and when once we begin I know (don't you?) what becomes of
the country we assist--swallowed up whole.

Anyhow, I wish you would bestir yourself about our successor. It is high
time he should be named; moreover, my stock of gloves is exhausted, so
at all events I must come home. Do you think you could buy me instantly
from Fownes a dozen of long white gloves, ditto of short, and send them
off by some ship that is actually in full sail, not lying in that
dockyard where Grindlay locks up all the ships.

I suppose Fanny has given you most of our private history, so I have
given you this little touch of our public history. William is gone
tiger-shooting. Our new doctor is, I think, a very remarkable boxer, and
does not suit George at all. However, he is a good-natured man, and if
he would leave off cutting little melancholy jokes and making a face
like a rabbit when he laughs at them, and if he would not ask such a
quantity of small questions, there would be no harm in him. Your
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

CALCUTTA,
_May 6, 1841_.

MY DEAREST SISTER, Fanny means to write to you a line herself before the
post goes, and indeed may probably be strong again before the express
starts; but in the meanwhile I may as well begin a regular letter, as
she will not be able to do much. I am convinced we are all many hundred
years old, and barring that I have lost my hair, and my teeth, and my
eyesight, and I rather think my hearing, and am quite yellow and
probably stoop a little, I am very juvenile, and I must own never had
such good health in my life.

Between ourselves, our doctor is a perfect calamity, and George had
nearly yesterday made up his mind to get rid of him, but it would be a
strong measure. He has taken all the pains he could about Fanny, but he
is evidently an ignorant man on the subject of medicine, which is a
little unlucky for a doctor, and in other respects the greatest bore I
ever encountered--a sort of thing that makes one wag one's ears and
stamp, he is so tiresome and slow.

What has knocked him up with George is his treatment of the natives.
Nothing will induce him to take the slightest charge of the servants and
their families, and he and I came to a grand blow up on the subject
yesterday about a boy who had been bit by a mad dog. George wanted to
get rid of him on the spot, but I thought it would be supposed he had
been sent away on account of Fanny's protracted illness, which would be
ruin to him in his profession, and it must wait. But Macintosh added up
the case as it really stands: "The man is a brute to the natives, and I
am very glad that I have hated him ever since he entered the house, and
we all do the same."

Yesterday we sent for old Doctor Nicolson, the Sir H. Halford of
Calcutta, whom everybody abuses and yet they all send for him, and the
other doctors mind every word he says. I have no faith in him myself,
except perhaps in these Indian cases, which he has seen enough of the
last forty years, and at all events he has put Fanny in better spirits
about herself.

Certainly the body is quite as inconsistent as the mind. I remember
laughing so the first two years at people going out, even in the cold
weather, with shawls on, and thinking it affectation. All the last week
I have dined with two shawls on, and George with his great cloth cloak,
and both of us declaring the evenings were delicious, only too chilly. I
imagine the kitchen at Eastcombe would be an ice-pit in comparison. Last
night at cards I asked Captain Macintosh if he had any return of ague,
and he said no, but that he and Captain Hollyer were both so dreadfully
cold they wanted to have the jalousies shut. The thermometer was at 79,
but I was quite as shivery as they were. I hope we shall brace ourselves
up on the voyage home, otherwise you will think us very tiresome and
fusty.

I still think my new dog a great bore, thank you. I knew you were going
to ask, and I do not suppose I am capable of an infidelity to Chance's
memory, for everybody says this is a perfect treasure. I have had the
promise of another, more after Chance's pattern, but it is ill, and as
dogs always die in this country as soon as they are ill, it never may
reach me. But, in the meanwhile, I am not obliged to attach myself to
Juck. Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

CALCUTTA,
_June 1, 1841._

MY DEAREST SISTER, You can hardly have the cruelty to expect a poor
creature to write after three weeks of the most desperate weather ever
felt in India, and no signs of a change. Even the natives are completely
beat by it. The Baboos say they can't write, and the tailors can't sew,
and I see the man who is pulling the punkah has a large fan in the other
hand with which he is fanning himself. Even George owns to falling
asleep over his work; and then the evenings are so hot we cannot drive,
which is unwholesome for him. Under these circumstances it is rather
difficult to write.

Fanny left a letter for you before she went. They have been gone a week
to-day, and therefore ought to be at Singapore to-morrow. I heard from
her on Wednesday evening when the pilot left them, just gone to sea, and
she said she felt better, though the heat had been dreadful in the
river, and that it was the quietest ship she had ever been in, and that
William [Osborne] was very contented, etc.; and Sir Gordon wrote word
she was in excellent spirits. If they find a ship ready to start from
Singapore they may be back in less than five weeks, and at all events in
six, and I am sure they will have had a blessed miss of any part of this
month. I rather hope they will make a week's more delay, and go and see
Penang when they are about it. Everybody says it is so beautiful.

In the meanwhile, I take it we are going to bring her and Sir Gordon and
the whole ship's company into the Supreme Court, I believe, and probably
transport them all. The captains of three several ships have all come
storming up the river, declaring that Sir Gordon fired upon them because
they did not salute his pennant quick enough to please him; and one
captain has brought two _balls_, one of which passed between him and his
pilot, and the other went through the cabin full of passengers. As they
were arriving from England, not thinking of finding a Commodore, and
certainly not expecting to find him on board a steamer tugging another
ship, it is rather sharp practice firing at all; but firing loaded guns
is quite a new idea. I hope it will not be proved that Fanny has been
popping away out of her cabin on these unsuspecting new arrivals. Sir
Gordon is always amazingly on the alert about his dignity; and having
detained _The Queen_ a day in order that he might attend the birthday
ball, went to bed before supper. It was supposed from some jealousy
about the Members of Council taking precedence of him.

I cannot think Charles Elliot and he, by clubbing all the intellect
they have, will ever be a match for one Chinese, even of a very
pale-coloured button, or indeed an unbuttoned Mandarin, if there is such
an improper character.

Our Queen's ball was very magnificent, and, as I fondly hope it is our
last, I am glad it went off so well. I _wore my diamonds!_ I think that
sounds well, so the particulars will remain a mystery, but they really
looked very well, and George bought a beautiful row of pearls the other
day which he _lends_ me. We had Dost Mahomed and his sons and suite at
the ball, the first time he had ever seen European ladies in their
_shameless_ dress; but he did not see the dancing; George took him into
another room. He is a very kingly sort of person, and carries off his
half-captive, half Lion position with great tact. By way of relieving
George part of the evening, I asked him to play at chess, and we played
game and game, which was rather a triumph, considering the native chess
is not like ours, and he kept inventing new rules as we went on. I
somehow think if he were not a Dost it was not quite fair.

I opine this weather is having an excellent effect on George's mind. The
most opinionated Governor-General never could dream of staying another
year after having been done to a turn--I may say rather overdone now,
and I cannot think that he _is_ thinking of it, only the letter from
England frightened him. But he declares that he wrote home for a
successor two months ago. Mr. Colvin, who is as anxious to go home as I
am, was in his room when I went there just now, and we made an invited
poke, which elicited an explicit answer that he meant to go home,
barring any extraordinary accident. I do not know how there could be any
accident more extraordinary or more fatal than our staying here another
year, and I feel we shall go.

Whenever I am too much beat by the weather even to take a book, I find
I am always thinking of packing and tin cases, and whether the railroad
from Portsmouth is not a horrid conveyance; and I never dream of
anything that is not purely English.

Law! Sister, there is such a gale of wind it has actually blown open a
window by breaking an iron bar, and the rain is coming down like smoke,
and I rather think, but cannot be sure, that I am coming to life. Of
course it is not the actual rains, but they must come in a fortnight,
and this is a blessing for an hour.

My new dog is a total failure. I still call him mine, but Captain
Macintosh takes care of him. I have been offered another, but I know
nothing will do after Chance.

Take care of Dandy and yourself. Ever your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

CALCUTTA,
_July 18, 1841._

MY DEAREST SISTER, At first I scorned your spiteful imputation that I
had not written to you by the April mail, but upon looking back into my
littel boke of dates, I found it was true, and now I only wonder how you
found it out. I see that it is for some years the first month I have
missed writing, and for fear the case should occur again, I strongly
advise that you should seal up two or three of my old Indian letters, if
you can find them; and desire Streeton to bring one in on a silver
waiter at the proper time. You will be quite taken in, for I have a deep
conviction that my letters have all been copies one of the other, so one
on the old pattern will seem quite natural to you.

Those horrid English letters of June 4 came in yesterday. They always
give me a low day, but this was worse than ever. I had made up my mind
that the Whigs were to be out and the Tories naming another
Governor-General. I do not now think the dissolution will help them
much, but others say it may, and now they have sent out full powers to
George to try and mend up that Chinese mess, and he thinks that if the
Whigs stay in, that he will be obliged to stay on. However, I did
nothing but cry about it yesterday, and now to-day I see it all quite
differently. I don't think they will stay, nor he, nor we, and so I
won't bother you about it till I see things more dispassionately. We are
to have another post in before ours goes, and that will show the turn
the elections are going to take, and I think--I am not sure--but I
_think_ I can live on in the hope of that post settling our return. I
always believe for the best, and this would be such a disappointment
that I have a sort of faith it _cannot_ happen, and so let us talk of
something else.

I am glad Hazlewood's visit was not very fatiguing. He is a good-hearted
creature, and a shocking martyr to his wounds, but he has not half an
idea in his head, and I rather thought it a bold thing to introduce him.
But I daresay the pleasure to him was greater than the bore to you, and
that is the way to balance those things. And then, all Indians dote on a
live Countess. A stuffed one they would look up to, but a live one is
really a treat.

How is Dandy? Zoe, my new dog, is decidedly a treasure, marked just like
the lamented Chance, but smaller, and she does not interfere with my
respect to his memory, as she has no talents and no temper, but is
_creepmousey_, and cares for nothing and nobody but me, and requires
constant petting--a familiarity Chance did not admit of. She is
unluckily not used to the climate, and Brown, our coachman, who is
probably disgusted at having to doctor her so often, said to me
yesterday, "She is a nice little pet, ma'am, but I think the delicacy
of her health will give you a great deal of trouble." Just as if it were
a delicate baby.

We had a sad incident amongst the pets yesterday. Captain Thurlow was in
William's room, and was looking at some of his daggers and playing with
William's great bloodhound. William was called out of the room, upon
which Nero laid hold of poor Captain Thurlow's nose and bit it quite
through. They say he would have bit it off, if he had not been _in
play_. But in the meanwhile Thurlow is bit and Nero sent away, an event
that delights George, who always thought him an unsafe pet.


_August_ 11, 1841.

Think of that being written three weeks ago, and Thurlow was at
Barrackpore three weeks ago in attendance on his General, and his nose
so dreadful that, though he only appeared by candle-light, and that for
the first time since his accident, his poor dear nose made me so
squeamish I could not touch a morsel of dinner. However, they say it
will come right in time, but if it had been Thurlow's dog and William's
nose, George was wondering when he should have heard the last of it.

You will see our China news, which George thinks very good as far as it
goes. Charles Elliot is supposed again to have interfered too much
_against_ fighting, and to favour the Chinese pride as much as ever, and
the Army and Navy are both as bitter against him as the merchants; but
George is so thankful that our 2,000 men should have got out of the
scrape of attacking 47,000 without utter destruction, that he is rather
pleased. And then the million and a half of our money is a great point,
the more so that he has just heard that four million and a half of
dollars will be here in a week, just when money was most wanted.

I have had a long letter from Mrs. Elliot who had been at Canton before
this attack, and out shopping where no English lady ever shopped before.
She has picked up some curiosities of an expensive kind for George, and
some smaller ones for me, and Fanny has got a boxful from an American to
whom she gave a commission, and just because we want to unpack our
little goods, it is a Hindu holiday and the Custom House is shut. Do the
Hindu holidays annoy you much? But of course they do; we always felt
alike.

Poor Mrs. Elliot has had a trying life of it lately. She seems pleased
with this Canton business, and it is the best point at which Charles
could meet his recall. I imagine from some letters of his which George
showed me that it will not be a surprise to him, and he means to show
the world, etc., how right he has been. I foresee a long life of
pamphlets, don't you?

No other English post come in, but I think we have quite satisfied
ourselves that the Whigs cannot stay and we shall go in February at
latest. I have heard from Captain Grey, to whom I wrote to ask what
accommodation he could give us in the _Endymion_. He says, smaller than
the _Jupiter_, but he thinks he can take us all. We shall be fewer by
Mars[507] married; Chance, dead; and Fop, William's greyhound, also
dying of old age. I wonder whether we have only been here six years. I
imagine we are all dying of old age sometimes, and that we have been
here the usual Indian terms of twenty-one years.


_August 16, 1841._

The July post come in--the Elections all wrong, and so our going home is
certain. George sends his resignation by this post, and in February we
sail. God bless that dear post for bringing us such good news and so
quickly. I am still an excellent Whig, but there is much pleasure in
Opposition. And then the delight of going home! Good-bye, Sister; I'm
coming directly. Just stop one minute while I draw my ship up your
river. I really believe George is rather sorry, but he says not, and he
is an honourable man. Your affectionate

E. E.

     [Captain Elliot had been unjustly blamed for the management of the
     expedition to China. He was recalled by Lord Palmerston for
     disobedience to his instructions, and on his return to England he
     found Lord Aberdeen had become Foreign Secretary. Elliot's
     explanation of his conduct was satisfactory, and he completely
     cleared his character.]


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

CALCUTTA,
_September 10, 1841._

MY DEAREST SISTER, I have never felt such unwillingness to set off
letter writing as this month, and it will be worse and worse and worsted
for the next three, and then I shall be ready to write a line to say we
are going on board, and after that I never mean to write to you
again--never. I am tired of it, and besides, mean to pass the rest of my
life with you. What a horrid prospect for you to find me always tugging
after you with a long languid Indian story, only diversified by requests
for a large fire and shut windows. I would not be you on any account.
Besides, think of the obtuseness with which we shall meet each other's
topics. I beg to apprise you at once that I do not remember the
botanical name of any one single flower; so don't expect it. I have gone
back to the old childishness of roses, wallflowers, and carnations, and
beyond that I cannot charge my memory.

I have been ornamenting the garden with some stone vases that the
natives make very prettily, and just at the proper moment, Fop,
William's old greyhound, died, so I buried him _symmetrically_ opposite
to Chance, and Captain FitzGerald has put two ornamental vases over the
two dogs, with a slight tendency to the funereal urn about their design
for the consolation of my hurt feelings, and yet sufficiently like
flower vases to deceive the Tory Governor-General, so that he cannot be
spitefully tempted to pull them down again. Zoe, my new dog, is very
pretty and very small, but certainly with none of the genius of her
predecessor. In fact, between friends, she is rather dull, but she is
such a little helpless thing that nobody can help coaxing her, and I
could not expect two Chances in one life. George rather affections her,
though he says he thinks a black bottle full of hot water would be quite
as good as Zoe sitting on his lap, and full as lovely. Every morning in
the auction papers there is a list of "Europe toys" for children, and I
found one called a black cloth dog, defective, which is clearly another
Zoe for sale. However, all this is only a hypocritical jest. I am very
fond of her; and I assume you think that if anything happened to Dandy,
you would be obliged to try a successor. One wants something of the
sort.

Sir Jasper[508] and all the Nicolls family are on the point of setting
off for their march through India. Lady Nicolls has done it once before
and is fully awake to its horrors, and the young ladies do not like
leaving Calcutta, but Lady Nicolls looks so ill that it is lucky she is
going. They are a nice English family, and will be a loss here. The
married daughter from Madras arrived last week with the first
grandchild. Such a hideous little baby--but they are all in such
ecstasies with it. I went there this morning and found our Miss Nicolls
with the thermometer at 1000, I believe, walking up and down the room
with the baby, away from the punkah because they thought it made the
child sneeze. The perspiration was streaming down her face, and there
was old Sir Jasper in a white jacket snapping his fingers and saying,
Bow, wow, wow, and then rushing back to the punkah and saying he really
could not stand the heat, but perhaps the baby with her cold had better
not venture near the punkah. I believe the child was boiled; it looked
like it. I think I ought to be excused a few small sins for the merit of
going to the Nicolls this hot day.

There is an old blind General of 98 at Barrackpore, and his wife (who is
84) has just been couched, and sees with one eye, which is the only eye
they have between them, and now the old man is going to be couched, and
their pet doctor is ordered off with one of the marching regiments. They
applied for an exchange for the doctor, which Sir Jasper refused, and
the old lady came crying about it to Barrackpore last week; but I did
not think I could well ask for it. However, she wrote a moving letter
yesterday, and it is so hard at 90 and 80 to be thwarted in one of the
very few wishes one can form, that I took courage, and set off this
morning and expounded the case to Sir Jasper, who is very good-natured,
and I rather think will do what they want. Sir Henry Fane would have
snapped anybody's nose right off who had asked him for any favour of the
sort. It will make the old Morleys very happy. The glare was so great
that I think I shall have to be couched too; but that, of course, the
doctor will do gratis. My eyesight is shockingly bad--I mean even for my
age--and I have a strong and decided preference for large print.

I quite forget what one does of an evening in England. Here we dine at
eight and go to bed at ten, so a short game at cards after coffee fills
up the time, and nobody can read by the flickering lights here. Perhaps
you will play at Beg-of-my-Neighbour with me; and then we shall step
out, and smell the night-blooming stock in that little round border by
the breakfast-room, and listen to the nightingales, and then go to bed,
and I hope you will tell the bearers not to go to sleep when they are
pulling the punkah in the company-room, because that wakes me.

Dear me! I sometimes feel very English just now, but ungainly, and with
an idea that you will all laugh at us. I remember so well seeing all the
Lowry Coles[509] debark at Lord de Grey's from the Cape, and they were
very unlike other people, and had very odd bonnets on.


_September 15._

This must go. We have had a hard-working week,--a great farewell dinner
to the Nicolls, and then to attend a play which Sir Jasper bespoke, and
which lasted till near one. We luckily did not go till ten, but the
audience who had sat there since eight were nearly dead, and we were all
horribly hard-worked. Then I have been making a sketch of Dost Mahomed
and his family, and he set off this morning for the Upper Provinces,
leaving me with one of his nephews unsketched. So this morning, with
immense activity I got up early, and Colvin abstracted the nephew from
the steamer and brought him to sit for his picture before breakfast. The
nephew is very like the picture of Judas Iscariot. They are all very
Jewish, but he is a fine subject, and considering Colvin had had no
breakfast, he seemed to talk Persian with wonderful animation. Ever,
dearest Sister, yours most affectionately,

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to the Countess of Buckinghamshire._

BARRACKPORE,
_October 8, 1841._

MY DEAREST SISTER, It is time to be writing again. Only three, or, at
most four times more. It makes me yawn and stretch, with a sort of
nervous shivering--just as one used to feel as a child the morning
before going to the play with the idea that by some particular mischance
_that_ day never would come to an end, or that the theatre would tumble
down, or somebody take our box. I have those theatrical misgivings and
yearnings about the next three or four months, and I wish the September
post would come, just to make sure that the new Governor-General[510] is
a man of active _packing_ habits. I want to go in February. They say now
that going in March makes such a long voyage. I think it is rather lucky
that this month's news did not go home by last month's mail. That sounds
Irish, because, as you justly observe, it is not so easy to advance a
month's news as it might be a month's allowance; but there is George
with his predatory habits up to the ears in preparation for a Burmese
war, and if that news had got home in time, the Court of Directors would
probably have made a strong objection to a change of rulers at the
beginning of a war.

It may still go off, but the villain [illegible] who is almost a savage,
has suddenly moved down to within 24 hours' distance of our territories
with a horde of fifty thousand men, plenty of guns, boats, etc., and in
short, he looks full of mischief, all the more that he is egged on by
the Chinese. He may change his mind and take fright at the last minute,
but in the meanwhile he gives just as much trouble as if he had declared
war, and George has had a very busy week, ordering off regiments, taking
up transports, buying stores, etc., and as usual, if a thing has to be
done in a hurry, he has to _see to it_ all himself. He lives in a rage
with the slowness of the people whose real work it is, but by dint of
_aggravating_ them, he gets them through their work. I see the necessity
of sending out a fresh English head of affairs, with the English
constitution and habits of business, every five or six years. He keeps
all the poor languid Indians moving.

George was to have come up here yesterday, but he found the Captain of
the man-of-war and the Colonel of the regiment that are to start first
were making out that they could not possibly sail on Monday; so he sent
for them in the morning and made a row, and then asked them to dinner in
the evening to keep up the impression, and got some knowledgeable people
to meet them, and I suppose he will get them off in time. The Chinese
news is already better since Charles and Sir Gordon came away. Sir H.
Pottinger[511] began in the right way. The Chinese Commissioner wanted
to see him at Canton; he said it was the Commissioner's place to come to
him at Macao. Now there is an expedition gone to Amoy. The Chinese by
their proclamations seem thoroughly frightened. The General and all the
Navy people seem to be in ecstasies at having somebody who will not stop
all their fighting, and I should not be the least surprised if Sir H.
Pottinger finished it all in six months, by merely making war in a
common straightforward manner.

I suppose Fanny has told you of all Mrs. Elliot's anger, and her
expectations that Charles is to have titles and governments, etc., the
instant he lands in England. She is quite right, poor thing! to take his
part, though foolish to announce such expectations. But the change of
Ministry may be of use to him. Otherwise, there never was a man, meaning
well--which I really suppose he did--who has left such a fearful
character behind him with everybody but the Chinese, who profess the
greatest gratitude to him, as well they may. Your most affectionate

E. E.

     [In March 1842, Lord Auckland and his sisters left India. After
     their four months' voyage they settled down in a little whitewashed
     villa, Eden Lodge, Kensington Gore.

     Lowther Lodge was built subsequently on this site, now occupied by
     the Geographical Society.]




CHAPTER XIII

1842-1849


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lister._

KNIGHTSBRIDGE,
_Tuesday[1845]._

MY DEAREST THERESA, I can write to no one in all the nervous flurry of
these first meetings but yourself, my poor afflicted friend. Amongst all
the happiness of others your hard trial[512] haunts me, and shocked me
more, much more than I can say, when I heard it at Southampton.

I had dwelt so much on seeing you, as I was told you were unaltered, and
then to hear of this! I will not write more now, but even the first
moments of arrival cannot pass away without my telling you how heartily
I feel for you and love you.

We are all well. Your most affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Francis Egerton._

MONTAGU HALL,
_Tuesday [1846]._

MY DEAREST LADY F., I have been meaning to write to you constantly, but
once caught again in the trammels of civilised life the thing was
impossible.

We spent a great deal of time (very pleasantly, so there is nothing to
repent of) at Penrhyn Castle. We went there for two days last Thursday
week, and somehow stayed on till yesterday. Every time we talked of
pursuing our Welsh researches, Colonel Pennant[513] declared that that
particular sight was one of the drives from the Castle, and there came
round a jaunting-car with four great black horses, and we went off to
Conway.

There was no end to the sights, besides the Castle itself, which I think
one of the finest things I ever saw. The arches over the staircase
looked just like so much guipure lace carved in stone. Every table and
cabinet is carved either in slate, marble, or oak, till it is a
curiosity of itself. I slept in the State room, an enclosed field of
blue damask and carved oak. The bed, which I should imagine did not
cover more than an acre and a half, is said to have cost _L_1500. I
never had an opportunity of judging whether there was work enough for
the money, having slept generally near the edge.

Old Mr. Pennant spent _L_28,000 a year for twelve years in building this
Castle, and died just as it was finished. Everything from the Keep to
the inkstand on the table was made by his own Welsh people; and I never
saw a more wealthy-looking peasantry, and I suppose he spent his money
well according to Miss Martineau's principles of doing good; that of
getting as much work done for one's self as one's money will pay for. I
daresay that is all right, but it always sounds like a suspicious
system, and against all the early ideas of self-denial and alms-giving
that were so carefully dinned into one; but the result in the instance
of Penrhyn Castle has been highly satisfactory, and I do not really mean
that he did not do a great deal of good besides. There never was a more
charitable man.

The present Col. Pennant, too, seems very anxious to do all that is
right, but he is oppressed, I think, by his immense wealth, and is not
quite used to it yet. He seems quite wretched still for the loss of his
poor little heiress of a wife. I like him for that, and also for that,
having like Malvolio had greatness thrust upon him, he has not set up
any of the yellow-stocking men or cross-garters Malvolio thought
necessary, but is just as simple and unpretending as he was in his poor
days.

We had a very large party and a pleasant one, Edwin Lascelles amongst
others. What a man! If there happens to be any one day in which he does
not say or do anything absolutely rude, everybody takes a fit of
candour, and says: "After all, _I_ like Edwin Lascelles. I think we are
all wrong about him; he did not shut the drawing-room door in my face
when I was coming across the hall, and if you observed, he said before
he shut all the windows that he hoped nobody minded a hot room. I do not
think him selfish."

We came here yesterday; rather a change from Penrhyn Castle. The house
was built in the reign of Henry the Sixth, and furnished, I should
suppose, by his own upholsterer, and has not been touched up since
apparently. And there is a window from which Henry the Seventh escaped,
and another at which Oliver Cromwell looked out, and in short, every
window has its legend, but none of them have any shutters or curtains,
and the doors are all _on the latch_ and never shut, and the weather has
turned cold, and in short, it is a relief to my feelings to say that I
am bored to death and wretchedly uncomfortable, and think seriously of
following Henry the Seventh's example, and of escaping out of one of the
windows, to which my interesting legend will henceforth be attached.

It is very wrong, I know, to say I am so bored, but it is only to
you--and I might have an illness if I did not mention it--and though it
is extremely kind of them to have us here, I wish they wouldn't, and we
had never meant to come. But when we were on our way yesterday to
Pengwern (Lord Mostyn's) this Mr. and Lady H. Mostyn[514] brought him
over here, and then sent out letters and ordered post-horses to bring us
too, and I always knew how it would be. However, it is so very dull it
is almost amusing, particularly when I look at Lord Auckland, who has
always declared he should like the Mostyns. Indeed, he was the only one
of us who knew them, and I am happy to say that he sank into a sweet
slumber after coffee, from which he was roused with difficulty at
bed-time. One good of age and of hard practice in India is that one does
not mind being bored so much as one did in youth, though then, to be
sure, it hardly ever happened. The sediment at the bottom of the cup is
decidedly thicker whenever I am reduced to swallow a spoonful; but
still, I am more used to the taste of it, and as Dickens says of orange
peel and water, if you make believe very much, it is not so very nasty.
I am in a strong course of mutiny between them. But there is the
luncheon bell happily; that is always a cheerful incident. Ever your
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._[515]

BONCHURCH, 1845.

Our post goes out now about half-past one, and we have had an immensely
long sermon against the poor Babylonians, who have all been dead and
gone so long that I for one have quite forgiven them their little
errors; but the preacher here is always having a poke at the poor
sinners in the Old Testament. It can do them no good, and it does none
to us, and he preaches an hour extempore, and altogether I think he had
better not be so spiteful.

Our Bonchurch has been a most successful experiment, and I have not
enjoyed a summer so much for the last ten years. We have a beautiful
little cottage in pretty grounds of its own. The country about you know
well, and I must say it is a very kind dispensation that as the wear of
life takes away or deadens the interests that seem so exciting in youth,
and many of which are artificial, the love of nature becomes more
intense. I am quite happy with shadows and clouds passing over beautiful
hills. I wish I could read Wordsworth, but the actual food itself I
cannot swallow.

Fanny has certainly been very much better since she came here. She is
one of the people who cannot exist without constant excitement, and
then, though it makes her quite well for the time, it affects her
spirits still more afterwards. She never from a child was happy in a
quiet home life, though with such high spirits in society, and of course
that tells more in her present state of health. When the Bingham Barings
and Lady Morley[516] were at Bonchurch for a week, she was in good
spirits, and then seemed quite languid and thoroughly _cheerless_, and
then all of a sudden went over to Ryde for two days, and George says
walked and drove and paid visits, dined out both days, and seemed quite
as well as ever, and she certainly looked all the better for it. Now
again, she has sunk into a listless state, and I am afraid there will be
no amusement she will care about for the rest of our stay. We have the
R. Edens and 7 of their children perched on their little hill. Lady
Buckinghamshire was nearly three weeks perched on hers, quite delighted
with her life here. She had never before been on a railroad, nor on the
sea since 1793 (when my father was Ambassador in Holland), and she left
her carriage in England and rumbled about in a fly. She delights in
pretty country and astonished us by her activity.

Then Maurice Drummond[517] suddenly appeared, walking about the Island
with a young Grenfell, and they took a cottage for a week at Shanklin;
and it is certainly satisfactory, as Mary says, to see how innocently
the young men of the present day can amuse themselves. These boys walked
about 20 miles a day and were in such a fuss to keep their expenses
down,--ordering 4 lb. of mutton, and cutting off wine at luncheon, and
really happy in a good, joyous, young way. And they settled when they
went away that they should have a pilgrimage next year to their dear
Rose Cottage--such a little hole you never saw.

Maurice made no allusion to the state of his affection, but he does not
seem to pine. With a little mellowing he will turn out very agreeable;
he has so much natural fun. We wanted him to stay on with us, but he had
not time. Your most affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

EDEN LODGE,
_Tuesday [1850]._

MY DEAREST THERESA, Many thanks for your long amusing letter. I do not
wonder you are pleased, both with the Election itself and the manner in
which it went off; and I am not at all sorry you were spared the
presence of F. O'Connor.[518] Even though he could have done no harm, I
can't abide these Chartists, and hate to be convinced that they are
real live people, and particularly wish that they never may come between
the wind and my nobility.

Of course you will drive about in London for a few months with your
carriage as it appeared in the streets of Hereford, and by the courtesy
of the real member, you will be favoured with the real bouquet used on
that occasion. Great attraction, immense crowds, etc.

I know nothing more of Macaulay except that he unfeignedly rejoices at
an opportunity for getting out of office,[519] an escape that he has
unluckily wished to make for some time. There is of course a great
struggle made to keep him, but I can imagine office must interfere
materially with the pursuits and pleasures of his life.

I think Edinburgh,[520] which affects all sorts of classical and
pedantic tastes and enthusiasm, turning off one of the first orators and
cleverest men of the age for a tradesman in the High Street (both men
having the same politics), must feel slightly foolish now it is over.
They say the prejudice against Macaulay was entirely personal; he never
would listen to a word any of his constituents had to say, which is
hard, considering his demands on other people's ears; but still they may
look a long time before they find a member so well worth listening to. I
wonder whether Cowan is agreeable.

I am really better, thank you, and able to walk about the garden. But
the quiet system has answered so well in bringing back my strength, that
I am willing to go on with it a little longer. It is said about
Elections that the Liberal cause has gained ground, that the Government
has lost ditto, which is as much as to say that four Ministers have been
defeated and we have a very rough Radical Parliament. If Sir George
Grey[521] is beat, I think a fifth loss of that kind would lead to some
decided change. Yesterday everybody said his success was quite certain,
and as every Election has gone exactly against the assertions made in
London, I presume he is beat by this time.

My Lord[522] is very busy at Portsmouth reviewing, sailing, firing guns,
surveying, giving great dinners at bad Inns, and doing everything that
is most unnatural to a quiet landsman; but he seems very happy, and it
is more wholesome than that eternal writing. To-morrow, he is by way of
sailing to Jersey and Guernsey. I never understand men in office, and
cannot catch an _apercue_ of the motive which induces them to take
office or keep it; but I presume if this stormy sort of weather
continues, he will hardly persist in that little dutiful party of
pleasure.

We have been reading Lamartine's _Girondins_--interesting, as that
eternal French Revolution always is, but most painful reading, and I do
not like Lamartine's style. It is too epigrammatic and picturesque, and
his sentiments drive me mad. He tries to make out that Robespierre was
humane, Petion _homme de bien_, Madame Roland virtuous, the Revolution
itself glorious. It gives me a great deal of exercise in my weak health,
for I throw the book away in a rage, and then have to go and fetch it
again. Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

ADMIRALTY,
_Tuesday [January 6, 1848]._

MY DEAREST THERESA, How tiresome it is that you are out of town just
now! And such an unexpected blow, because we have acquired this year the
right to expect to find each other in London.

To-morrow being Twelfth Day, seven of Robert's[523] children drink tea
here, and Mrs. Ward's[524] nineteen youngest come to meet them; so I
scoured London yesterday morning to secure a conjuror for their
diversion, but there is an awful run on conjurors this month. Spratt of
Brook Street is engaged every day till the 19th; Smith of St. James,
ditto; but I worked my way steadily up from conjuror to conjuror through
all that tract of land lying between No. 1 Brook Street and 32 Fleet
Street; and there I finally grabbed Farley, who _says_ he can pound
watches into bits, and put rings in eggs and so on, though I rather
doubt it. Then from Fleet Street I drove straight and madly to Kent
House, determined to insist on the loan of Dejazet, and of Villiers and
Therese[525] too; if they were not above it; and "I tumbled from my
high" when I heard you were in the country till Thursday. What can be
the matter? Where is the country, and why are you there? However, if any
sudden change in your plans occurs, recollect that our innocent little
pleasures commence at 7 to-morrow evening.

Bowood was very agreeable. We stayed there eight days.

The Greys and Lady Harriet were in their best moods, and very pleasant.
Bingham kills me, dead; he is so tiresome, that it almost amounts to an
excitement. Macaulay quite wonderful, and I rather like him more for the
way in which he snubs the honourable member for V. Even the last
morning, when we four were breakfasting together by candle-light to come
up by an early express train, he made a last good poke at him. I asked
Mr. Dundas for some coffee, and he said he was shocked and he had just
drunk it, upon which Macaulay said: "What with your excess and your
apologies, Dundas, you put me in mind of Friday, who, when his father
asked for a drop of water, began thumping his breast and saying,
'Friday, ugly dog, drank it all up.'" Mr. Dundas clearly did not like
the epithet--indeed so little, that he was obliged to laugh outrageously
and to say: "One of the happiest quotations, Macaulay, I have heard you
make."

As a general rule, I should not recommend travelling habitually by the
railroad with Mr. Macaulay. The more that machine screeches and squeals,
the louder he talks; and when my whole soul is wrapped up in wonder as
to whether the stoker and the guard are doing their duty, and whether
several tenders and trucks are not meeting in between my shoulders, the
minor details of the Thirty Years' War and of the retreat of the 10,000
Greeks lose that thrilling interest they would have in a quiet
drawing-room. There is a sort of aggravation in knowing that 10,000
Greeks died ignorant of railway accidents; and there is no use in
bothering any more about them, poor old souls!

Your cousins the Duff-Gordons[526] were at Bowood. I think her anything
but agreeable, but I strongly suspect that instead of our cutting her,
she was quietly cutting all of us, merely because she thinks women
tiresome. At least, I think there is so little good done by being rude
to anybody, that I try to be civil to her, but was repulsed with immense
loss. She came down to luncheon every day in a pink striped shirt, with
the collar turned down over a Belcher handkerchief, a man's coat made of
green plaid, and a black petticoat. Lord Grey always called her the
Corsair; but she was my idea of something half-way between a German
student and an English waterman, that amounts to a _debardeur_. Whatever
that may be, I do not know.

London seems quite empty, the 4th Nr. of Dombey has given me infinite
pleasure, and I think even you must like that school. Just Villiers's
case at King's College.

I presume you are at the Grove. Love to all there--at least not all, but
a selection. Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

ADMIRALTY
[_Monday, 1848_].

MY DEAREST THERESA, I was not _standing out_ this time for the sake of a
letter; but, in the first place, I thought you were to be in town again
before this, and then I have been so poorly that writing was a great
exertion. It is five weeks to-morrow since I have had a breath of fresh
air, and now I have taken entirely to the sofa, and do not attempt
sitting up, even to meals. When I do, the second course generally
consists of a fainting fit, or some little light delicacy of that sort.
So now you see why I did not write; it would not have been _egayant_ for
your holidays. And illness always seems to me such an _immediate_
visitation from God that it never frets me as many other little
_travers_ do, which might have been avoided by a little more sense or
conduct.

Lord Auckland seems quite satisfied with the efficient state of the
Navy, notwithstanding the loss of that poor _Avenger_.[527] I saw such
an interesting private letter to-day from the gunner who was saved,
stating so simply his escape and difficulties, not making half the fuss
that we should if the carriage had been overturned and we had had to
walk half a mile home.

I do not feel alarmed by the Duke's[528] or Lord E.'s letters, but I do
not imagine they tell the French anything they did not know before, and
as the English never know anything till they have been told it twenty
times, it is perhaps not amiss that they should be so far frightened as
to make them willing to pay for a little more protection. They would
like a very efficient army and a great display of militia, but I doubt
whether they will like a shilling more of income-tax.

I always keep myself in good heart by all the axioms on which we were
educated, the old John Bull nonsenses--that one Englishman can beat
three Frenchmen; that the French eat frogs; and the wooden walls of old
England, and Britannia rules the waves, and Hearts of Oak, and _parlez
voos_--all most convincing arguments to us old warriors who lived in the
war times, and who went up to the nursery affecting complete
insouciance, but fearing that the French would arrive just while Betty
Spencer the nurse was down at supper. I quite remember those terrors in
1806; and then came all our victories, and the grand triumphs which
reassured me for life. I feel a dead of certainty that before the French
had collected twenty steamers, or had put twenty soldiers on board any
of them, Sir Charles Napier, or somebody of that sort, would have dashed
in amongst them and blown up half ships.

Still it might be as well to have a few more soldiers, if the Duke of
Wellington wishes for them, nor do I much object to his writing a
foolish letter. He has written a good many in his life.

I go on believing that if the use of pen and ink were denied to our
public men, public affairs would get on better. Johnnie[529] writes
foolish letters, and Lord P.[530] does not seem to have written a wise
one to Greece. Lord John called here last Thursday in good spirits, and
his visits are always as pleasant as they are rare. I do not mean that I
blame him for their rarity; it is more surprising that he should be able
ever to call at all. But as I have been so shut up for nearly a year, I
have seen but little of him, and I must say a little _snatch_ of him is
very agreeable and refreshing. Ever, dearest Theresa, your most
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to her Sister, Mrs. Drummond._

_January 1848._

MY DEAREST MARY, George came home yesterday--a journey from Bowood; a
Cabinet yesterday afternoon; another long one this morning; and a Naval
dinner which we gave yesterday.

He says Macaulay has quite recovered his spirits, and there was not a
break in his conversation at Bowood. Lord John paid me a late visit
yesterday, and the servants wisely let him in, though I had said not at
home. But it was good-natured of him, as he was only in town for a
night, to walk down because he knew I was ill. "So I told them they must
let me in."

I must say that when he told me particulars of the letters that had been
written to him, to the Queen, etc.--particulars he did not wish to have
repeated--and of the organised conspiracy it has been to try the
prerogative of the Crown, he is quite justified in any _twitness_ of
letters himself. It is a great pity that some of Dean Merewether's
letters,[531] and of Lord John's begging him to withdraw them, were not
published. He wrote to say that if he might have Hereford, or, as he
expressed it in a post-boy fashion, "If the Government gives me this
turn, which is my due, there would be no objection raised to their
giving Doctor Hampden the next Bishopric." So it shows the Bampton
Lectures had not much to do with it.[532]

As for the Bishop of Oxford,[533] the odd intrigue he has been carrying
on would have been hardly credible in Louis XIII.'s time in a Cardinal
who hoped to be Prime Minister himself. However, I won't say what I was
told not to say. But there is that to be said for our Queen and Prince,
that their straightforwardness is a very great trait in their
characters, and that they never deceive or join in any deceit against
their Minister, but always are frank and true, and repel all intrigue
against him. George thought the Prince very clever and well-informed at
Windsor; and his character always comes out _honest_. I take it that he
governs us really, in everything.

Somebody said to Lord John, "The Bishop of Oxford could be brought
around immediately if you would only say a few words to him," and he
answered, "I suppose he would, if the three words were 'Archbishop of
Canterbury.'" He did not seem at all bitter against him yesterday, but
said he had been made a bishop too young for such an ambitious man, and
that he had taken to court intrigues in consequence.

I am so glad _Daughters_ interested you.[534] I have heard such teasing
stories about that Lady Ridley--quite incredible. I am sure a few
mothers' and daughters' books are wanted just to make them understand
each other. If mothers would take the same pains not to hurt their
children's feelings, that they do not to hurt other people's children,
it would make homes much happier. They should not twit them with not
marrying, or with being plain, etc., and they should enter, whether they
feel it or not, into their children's tastes. The longer I live, the
more I see that if the old mean to be loved by the young, and even on a
selfish calculation they ought to wish it, they must think of their own
young feelings and susceptibilities, and avoid all the little
roughnesses from which they suffered themselves. One of the remorses of
my life is not having loved my mother enough, because she was a most
excellent mother; but she rather teased me, and held up other girls, and
roused bad feelings of jealousy. And my father we all worshipped, though
I think he was particular with us, but then it was all done with so much
tact. I heard a great deal more about Mrs. Fry[535] and her daughter,
which set me thinking over all these things. Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

ADMIRALTY,
_Friday_ [_April 1848_].

MY DEAREST THERESA, It is impossible to say anything in your favour as a
correspondent, so don't expect it. But you may have other good points. I
do not know that you are entirely depraved. To make an example: You
might hesitate to stew a child--one of your own, perhaps. But as a
constant letter-writer, you are decidedly and finally a failure. I could
not imagine what had become of you, and it was a beautiful trait in my
character not writing; because nothing is so tiresome as a letter about
a long recovery.

I am better, but not well, and the more shame for me, for Ramsgate was
charming, everything that it ought to have been, delicious weather for
anybody who could not walk much, or drive at all. As it was warm enough
to sit out half the day, we had a small house quite close to the sands.
Not an acquaintance to disturb us. Ella[536] and I suited each other
admirably. I was not equal to company, and yet should have been sorry to
drive my _young_ lady to a dull life. But it is what she likes best, and
she really enjoyed her quiet life, found plenty of amusement for
herself, and was quite sorry when our five weeks were over. I do not
know any sea place I could like better than Ramsgate; it is so dry and
so cheerful, and such quantities of vessels are constantly coming in and
out. There were Greek, Russian, Dutch, Swedish, Spanish and French ships
in _quantities_; and the most picturesque-looking people always walking
about in the shape of foreign sailors.

We came back on Monday, having a very smooth sea for our voyage, and a
remarkably thick fog for our reception, which has lasted till this
morning. It is fine now.

No, I cannot say I have worried my intellect much with endeavours to
understand the monetary crisis. I am sorry Parliament is to meet, being
well aware that a country cursed with a House of Commons never can have
any liberty or prosperity; but I suppose it is unavoidable. I was rather
glad the Government did something; because even if it is a losing thing,
I think the country is better satisfied when the Government seems to try
and help it, and it is more creditable to all parties. But it seems to
me that the measure has hitherto had a good effect, and has done no
harm.

May not I now allude to the "Secret of the Comedy," and wish you joy of
Mr. Lewis's new office,[537] which is one I should think he would like,
and I should think you would too. It is interesting work, without being
dull slavery, as many offices are.

To be sure, there never was anything like the character Lord C.
[Clarendon] is making for himself; and if he could make one for that
desperate country he is trying to govern, Solomon would be a misery to
him. But what a people! I quite agree with Carlyle, who says: "If the
Irish were not the most degraded savages on earth, they would blush to
find themselves alive at all, instead of asking for means to remain so."
But everybody agrees in saying they never had such a Lord-Lieutenant
before.

I always meant to tell you about your brother Montagu. Two old gentlemen
were sitting near me at Ramsgate and talking of the difficulty of
finding a seat at the church there, and one of them said: "It is just as
bad in London. I sit under the Hon. Villiers, and what's the
consequence? I never go to church because I can't get a place." The
friend, who was slow, apparently said, "Ah, and it's much worse if you
sit under what's called a popular preacher." "Why, sir, that's my case.
The Honourable Villiers _is_ a popular preacher, the most popular
preacher in London, and I say that's the worst of a popular preacher,
nobody ever can get in to hear him." I see Montagu preaching a splendid
sermon to himself, and his congregation all sitting glowering at him
because there is no room for them in church! But the idea is flattering.
The most remarkable marriage in my family is W. Vansittart's.[538] He
has been ten years in India, lost his wife, has two children, on whom he
settled what little money he had. His furlough was out, and now he has
found a Miss Humphreys; good looking, pleasant, well brought up,
thirty-four (his own age), and with _more_ than L100,000, and a
beautiful home in Hyde Park Gardens, who is going to marry him, settled
all her fortune on him, and of course he has not now the least notion
where India is, unless towards Paddington perhaps. There is another
sister, much younger, if you know of any eligible young man. Your ever
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

_Sunday_ [1851].

MY DEAR THERESA, I was quite sorry you took all that trouble in vain for
me, but I had already let in Lady John and Lady Grey.... But what
crowned my impossibility of speaking any more, was an extra visit from
Locock.[539] I am a beast for disliking that man, only everybody has
their antipathy born with them. Some don't like cats, some frogs, and
some Lococks. But he is grown so attentive, I repent, and he came on
Friday of his own account, and he did not scold me for not being better,
and he would not take his guinea, and was altogether full of the most
agreeable negatives. I am glad to have seen a doctor once refuse a fee.
I felt as if I had earned a guinea. Your ever affectionate

E. E.

_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

ADMIRALTY, _Saturday, December 1848_.

MY DEAREST THERESA, Your letter has come in at an odd time of day, not
leaving much time to answer it; but that is as well, as I cannot make
out a long letter. Lady Ashburton[540] is undoubtedly dead after twelve
hours' illness; but nobody seems to know much about it, and that family
always forget to advertise their own deaths, so that one keeps thinking
they may recover long after they are buried. The Miss Barings went to
Longleat the day after their mother's death, and the Ashburtons[541]
came to town for two nights, and then went to the Grange. I have written
twice to her but have had no answer, and I never know exactly how she
will take grief; but I should think she must feel all those rapid deaths
of friends and relations very much.

C. Buller[542] is such a loss to her society as well as to herself, and
it will make a great difference in her parties. He is so very much
missed by those who knew him well. We had seen a great deal of him this
year, and it was impossible not to be fond of him--he was so amiable and
good-natured and so light in hand.

I always felt Lady Ashburton would not long outlive Lord Ashburton; she
never cared much for anybody else, and was just the woman to fret
herself to death. Your affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

_Tuesday evening_ [1851].

MY DEAREST THERESA, I was very glad to see your hand of write again,
though you might have given a better account of yourself and Therese if
you had wished to please. And then poor Bully! That was melancholy; but
however, he has been a pleasure to you for years, and that is something,
as life goes. I am glad you are up to Lord John's tricks, because in a
general way that very artful young man takes you in in a manner that
astonishes me, who sees through him with wonderful perspicacity, and
when the Duke[543] told me he was going to Harpton[544] _on his way to
Knowsley_, I thought he was going to try to seduce my boy Sir George
[Lewis] from the paths of rectitude.

I wrote so much to your brother of all the Duke of Bedford said of the
old statesman being of use to the young one, and the young statesman
taking to the old one (words on which he rings the changes till he makes
me sick), that I can't write it all over again; but by dint of
positively declining to understand, and by being so intensely stupid as
to ask which Lord Stanley he meant (perhaps _he_ of Alderley), and by
writing him short, savage notes in the intervals of the weekly luncheons
he takes here, I hope I have rather enlightened that slightly damaged
article--his mind. It is a good old mind, too, in its little bald shell;
but Lord John had evidently persuaded him that new combination of
parties was necessary, and that Lord Stanley was, as he always calls
him, the young statesman of the age. William Russell has succeeded Lord
John at Woburn, and had evidently snubbed the Duke about this alliance,
as his tone was quite changed about it, and he was anxious to prove that
the friendship began here. Your affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

ADMIRALTY,
_Sunday_ [1851].

MY DEAREST THERESA, I may as well write a line while I can, just in the
stages that intervene between the pains of my illness and the pains of
my cure; the last being decidedly the worst and the most destructive; my
courage has gone for pain.

How are you and yours, and what do you hear from Dublin? I have heard
nothing about them since they went. London is this week entirely empty;
otherwise there has always been an allowance of a visitor a day--Lord
Grey, Lord Palmerston, Lord Cowper, passing through, and so on; and
while Lord Auckland and Fanny were at Bowood, my sister, Mrs. Colvile,
abandoned in the handsomest manner her husband and children in the wilds
of Eaton Place, and came and lived here. I was very unwell at the time,
and she is the quietest and best nurse in the world. Poor thing! she
well may be.

The report of Lord Godolphin's[545] marriage to Lady Laura gains ground,
and though I feel it is not true, it is too amusing to dispute. Ditto,
C. Greville's to Mrs. H. Baring.[546] I see his stepchildren playfully
jumping on his feet when gout is beginning. Henry Eden is so happy about
his marriage, and so utterly oblivious of the fact that he is fifty,
that I begin to think that is the best time for being in love. Miss
Beresford has L20,000 down now, more hereafter; and as the attachment
has lasted twelve years, only waiting for the cruel Uncle's consent,
which was wrung from him by Henry's appointment to Woolwich, they ought
to know what they are about, and luckily when they meet they seem to
have liked each other better than ever. But twelve years is rather an
awful gap....

Macaulay's book has unbounded success.[547] Not a copy to be had, and
everybody satisfied that _their_ copy is _the_ cleverest book in the
world. Don't tell anybody, but I can't read it--not the fault of the
book, but I can't take the trouble, and had rather leave it till I can
enjoy it, if that time ever comes.

Good-bye, dearest Theresa. Love to Mrs. V. When do you come to town? How
goes on your book?[548] Yours affectionately,

E. E.




CHAPTER XIV

1849-1863


_Miss Eden to Lady Campbell._

EDEN LODGE, KENSINGTON GORE,
_Tuesday evening, 1849_.

MY OWN DEAREST PAM, I hear to-day that you too are bereaved of what was
most dear to you;[549] and it has roused me to write, for if any one has
a right to feel for and with you, through my old, deep, unchanged
affection, early ties, association in happy days, and now through
calamity,--it is I. Dearest, how kindly you wrote to me in my first
bitter hours,[550] when I hardly understood what comfort could mean, and
yet, your warm affection did seem to comfort me, and I wish I could now
say to you anything that could help you.

You have children, to love and to tend, and yet again, they may be fresh
sources of anxiety. I have heard nothing but that there was a long
previous illness; and though you may have had the anxiety of much
watching, still I think that it is better than a sudden rending of the
ties of life.... We came here Friday, but I have not been able to go out
of my own room. This reminds me of you as well as of him. Your ever
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

EDEN LODGE,
_Saturday, December 1849_.

Thank you very much, my dear old friend, for thinking of me and my
sorrows in the midst of all your gladsome family, and your happy
Christmas. I earnestly hope and trust you will have many as happy, and
even more so as your children grow up around you, and become what you
have tried to make them.

The paper-knife is beautiful, and if it were not so I should have been
pleased at your thinking of me; and considering how long I have tried
the patience of my friends, it is marvellous how little it has failed.

It was a twelvemonth yesterday since he left me to go to the Grange. I
had got out of bed and was settled on the sofa, that he might go off
with a cheerful impression of me, and we had our luncheon together; and
he came in again in his fine cloak to say good-bye, and I thought how
well he was looking. And that was the close of a long life of intense
affection. I do not know why I should feel additionally sad as these
anniversaries come round, for I never think less or more on the subject
on any day. It is always there. But still this week is so burnt in on my
mind that I seem to be living it all dreamily over again.

I wish at all events to be able to keep (however cold and crushed I feel
myself) the power of entering into the happiness of others, and I like
to think of you, dear Theresa.... Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

[VILLETTE], BROADSTAIRS,
_Wednesday_ [1853].

MY DEAREST THERESA ...I do not know whether you have heard of dear
little Mary Drummond's marriage to Mr. Wellesley.[551] He is a really
good, sensible young man, the greatest friend her brothers and sisters
have, much looked up to in his office; and though he might have been a
little richer, they will not be ill off, and there is a tangible sum to
settle on her, and altogether I think it is a cheerful event. Their
_young_ happiness will do good to all our old unhappinesses, and I think
Mrs. Drummond's letters are already much more cheerful from her having
all the love-making, trousseau, etc., to write about instead of her
health. Little Mary is such a darling--so bright and useful and
unselfish, and so buoyantly happy, that I do not see how they are to get
on without her. Her letters make me feel almost youthful again. She is
so thoroughly pleased with her lot in life.

Maurice[552] and Addy are taking their holiday at Broadstairs. I had
never seen them in this sort of intimate way, and I did not expect to be
so pleased as I am with both of them. His manner to her is perfect--not
only full of tenderness and attention, but he is very sensible in his
precautions about her health, and takes great care of her in every way.
She looks fearfully delicate. He is very attentive to me too, and as
they came in this direction partly to see if they could be of use to me,
I am glad it has all turned out so well. My health is in a very poor
state, and I am obliged to give up going down to the Baths, but a
cottage always has room for everything; and we are turning what is by
courtesy called a Green-house, into a bath-room, opening out of my
sitting-room. I like the place, and its quiet and bracing air and its
busy sea. It is always covered with ships, and I do not regret the move.
Your ever affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Dover._[553]

BROADSTAIRS, 1851.

Your letter, dearest, was by some accident delayed on the road, and when
I received it the life you were all watching so anxiously was then only
to be numbered by hours, and I did not like to break in on you. Your
poor sister![554] From my heart I grieve for her, and from the very
beginning of this severe trial I have had almost daily accounts of her.

I would have written to you sooner about your own child's[555]
happiness, but I was very ill when I heard of it. It is one of the
marriages that seems to please everybody, and as I do not think anybody
would have been satisfied with a moderately good son-in-law for you, or
a commonplace husband for Di, I am quite convinced that all that is said
of Mr. Coke must be true.

I sometimes hope that when your child is married, and your poor sister
can spare you, that you and Lucia[556] might be tempted to come here for
a few days. The journey is only three hours, and it is such a quiet
little place to stay in. The hotel is only a little village inn. I do so
long to see you.

Lord Carlisle talked of coming here for a day or two, but then I was not
allowed to see anybody. I wish you would tell him with my love how much
I should like to see him at any time, when he can leave his family and
his public duties.

Lady Grey kindly came here on Saturday, and is gone back to-day, and I
had a visit from the Ellesmeres last week, for which I had been
anxiously looking, as I was obliged once to put them off, and I wanted
much to see her. She is looking very thin, and is much depressed; but
still it always does me good to be with her, and to see such a
well-regulated Christian heart as hers. The second day she talked
constantly of her boy,[557] and as it was her own volunteering I hope
the exertion may have done her good. Lord E. is particularly well. The
suddenness of the poor boy's death preys on her, and much as your sister
has witnessed of pain and illness, I still think that it is the sudden
grief which breaks the heart-strings. It is the difference between the
avalanche which crushes and the stream which swells gradually and has
time to find its level. But perhaps every one that is tried finds the
readiest excuse for their own especial want of resignation.

My health does not improve. They say the last attack a fortnight ago was
gout in the stomach. I trust God will spare me a recurrence of such
suffering, for I am grown very cowardly; but, at all events, every
medical precaution has now been taken, and I am not anxious as to the
result, though shamefully afraid of pain.

God bless you. Yours affectionately,

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

[VILLETTE], BROADSTAIRS, 1851.

There is nothing I like so much as a letter, dearest Theresa, but I am
so often unable to answer them that, of course, my correspondents are
disheartened, and I cannot wonder at it. Just now a private letter is
invaluable, for when I woke up after six days of agony, which cut me off
even from a newspaper, I found that there had not only been various
Ministries formed and destroyed, but that _The Times_ had become
perfectly drivelling. Its baseness and inconsistency did not shock me,
and we have been brought up to that; but it writes the sort of trash
that a very rheumatic old lady who had been left out of Lord John's
parties might indite. It really worries me, because I cannot make out
who or what it is writing for or about, or what it wants. There is no
use in commenting on your letters. I am very sorry for all that is past,
because I like Lord John, and he seems to have played a poor part. This
last abandonment of the Papal Bill[558] is to my mind the falsest step
of all, and I think the most ruinous to his character and the country,
and totally unlike him. I always keep myself up by setting down
everything wrong that is _done_ to the Attorney-General,[559] and
everything foolish that is _written_, to C. Greville. Quite unjust; but
I have never forgiven the Attorney-General that Park history, and C. G.
tried to do as much mischief as he could in _The Times_ last year about
foreign politics, and this year about the Pope.

Anyhow, it is an ugly state of things, and cannot last long. I heard
from a person to whom Sir James Graham said it, that he would not serve
_under_ Lord John, but that he would under Lord Clarendon; and I cannot
imagine that Lord Clarendon will not be Prime Minister before three
months are over.[560] I am afraid he is papally wrong, but I give that
point up now. The Pope has beat us and taken us; and when once a thing
is done there is no use in grumbling. England will be a Roman Catholic
country; and I shall try and escape into Ireland (which will, of course,
become Protestant and comfortable eventually), unless I fall into the
hands of Pugin,[561] who has built a nice little church and convent,
with an Inquisition home to match at Ramsgate. I suppose we shall be
brought out to be burnt on the day of Sanctus Carolus,[562] for the Pope
cannot do less than canonise Charles Greville.

I did not admire Lord Stanley's speech as many Whigs did; there was the
old little-mindedness and grudging testimony to adversaries in it. I
always think Lord Lansdowne comes out as a real, gentlemanlike,
high-minded statesman on these occasions. However, I know nothing about
it really, for I have not seen a human being this fortnight.

Eden Lodge had been let to what seemed an eligible tenant, a rich widow
with one daughter, but three days before she was to have taken
possession she said her friends had frightened her about the Exhibition.
I do not suppose anybody will take it this year, which is inconvenient
to me, in a pecuniary point of view; but it cannot be helped. You do not
mention the children--is Villiers grown up? married? Prime Minister or
what? Your book looks imposing in the advertisements.

Love to Mrs. Villiers and to Lord Clarendon when you write. Your
affectionate

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

EDEN LODGE, KENSINGTON GORE,
_Saturday, March 1856._

MY DEAREST THERESA, Such a fascinating bullfinch! Mr. Whittaker's
assortment arrived two days ago, and he brought six here this morning
in small wooden prisons; and the scene was most interesting. All of them
clearing their throats and pretending that they had taken cold and did
not know whether they _could_ sing; and all swelling into black and red
balls, and then all bursting at once into different little airs; and
Whittaker, who partakes of the curious idiosyncrasy which I have traced
in Von der Hutten and other bird dealers, that of looking like a
bullfinch and acting as such, going bowing and nodding about to each
cage, till I fancied that his coat and waistcoat were all _purfled_ out
like bird's feathers; and I, lying on the sofa, insisting in a most
stately manner that some of the birds did not bring the tune down to its
proper keynote, though it was impossible I could tell, as they all sang
at once. However, I chose one that sings to command (a great merit).
"'Tis good to be merry and wise," and now I have him alone, I am
confident you will like him. If not, the man will change him. I shall be
so pleased, dearest Theresa, if he gives you even a moment's pleasure,
and I am certain from sad experience that in a settled deep grief,[563]
it is wise to have these little adventitious cheerfulnesses put into the
background. It is good for those who are with us, at all events. And
there is something catching in the cheerfulness of animals, just as the
sight of flowers is soothing.

You must find Harpton looking pretty for March, particularly if it is
suffering under such a very favourable eruption of crocuses, etc., as my
garden is. I never saw them in such clumps.

I have been fairly beat by Miss Yonge's new book, _The Daisy Chain_,
which distresses me, as I generally delight in her stories; but if she
means this Daisy Chain to be amusing, it is, unhappily, intensely
tedious, and if she means it to be good, it strikes me that one of
Eugene Sue's novels would do less harm to the cause of religion. The
Colviles are very angry with me for not liking it; and, above all, for
thinking Ethel, the heroine, the _most_ disagreeable, stormy, conceited
girl I ever met with. Starting with the intention of building a church
out of her shilling a week--which is the great harrowing interest of all
Puseyite novels; finding fault with all her neighbours; keeping a school
in a stuffy room that turns everybody sick, because she cannot bear
money that was raised by a bazaar by some ladies she disliked; and
always saying the rudest thing she can think of because it is _her way_.
I read on till I came to a point when she thought her father was going
to shake her because she was ill-natured about her sister's marriage;
and finding that he did not perform that operation, which he ought to
have done every day of her life, I gave it up. The High Church party are
all going raving mad!

That pretty Mrs. Palmer[564] has had herself taken to a hospital as a
sort of penance in illness, and has left her most excellent husband and
five little children to take care of themselves. She has, moreover,
taken a vow of six hours' silence every day during Lent, but will write
an answer on a slate. If I were her husband I should take advantage of
that vow and give her my mind for six hours at a time. She may not
answer again. Ever your affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

EDEN LODGE, KENSINGTON GORE [1861].

MY DEAREST THERESA, Will you tell me what I am to think about the India
Bill?[565] I believe I think with Roebuck, that it is claptrappy, and
generally that it would make a mess of India, but I have not the least
idea what it means, and will you tell me what effect it had?

I am still so much occupied in rearing up Sir George Lewis to be Leader
of the House, that I have hardly time to write. May I ask you to make
his holidays advantageous, by pointedly contradicting everything he
says, or does not say, while you are at Harpton; allowing him to argue
in defence of his opinions, but continue to contradict him in the
pertest and most offensive manner. I am afraid, too, I must trouble you
to allow him to find fault with everything you do--from ordering dinner,
downwards; because, though I hope this India Bill will finish the
Derbyites, still my Leader must be up to his Opposition duties. After
the recess, the House will continue his education, and your domestic
felicity will be more complete than ever for this little sacrifice to
the public good. You are quite wrong, my dear, about Lord John. A
charming individual in private life, but not fit to govern a country or
lead a party. So please attend to the above directions. Your affect.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to her Niece, Lena Eden._

EDEN LODGE
[_October or November 1858_].

MY DEAREST LENA, It is pitch dark to-day, so that I have not been able
to attempt my newspaper. I am afraid you will have to go out as a daily
governess when I die, for I am spending my whole fortune in coats. Lady
Georgina Bathurst's[566] letter was very amusing, but it is clear that
her friend Bennett[567] makes himself generally odious, and that poor
Mrs. Bennett suffers as much from it as she did formerly. I am sick of
the High Church clergy's cant about respect for their Diocesan, etc.,
when they always do everything they can that is rude and disrespectful
to their Bishop; and it always surprises me that a sensible woman like
Georgina can be taken in by them. But she always was in extremes. In her
political days she did not think it possible that a Whig soul could be
saved, and may think so still....

The seagull pigeon is sitting. I am so glad I am not married to a
pigeon; they are such teasing, tyrannical husbands. Yours
affectionately,

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

RICHMOND,
_Tuesday evening_ [1862].

DEAREST THERESA, Sorry you did not come; hope for better luck Thursday.
I have had a _passage at arms_ with old Bentley, who has dawdled over
the "Auckland Correspondence"[568] till he says it is now too late for
the publication this season, and it will not appear till October; but
that this is the best time for a work of fiction, and he wanted mine
instantly. I wrote him a coldly savage letter, conveying all sorts of
reproaches in political terms, and saying that, as of course he could
not undertake a second book till he had done with the first, and as I
was in a hurry, I must accept the offer of some other publisher (I have
had several offers). Whereupon he rushed down here early this morning
and told Lena he was "a persecuted victim," that he would bring out the
_Semi-Detached_[569] in a month, and that he must have it, etc. He
offered only _L_250, and I really will not take less than _L_300. Lena
told him so afterwards, and he said he dared to say that there would be
no difficulty about terms if he could talk it over with you. So mind
you stick to L300 and a very early publication. I really do want the
money, for poor Richard Wellesley has been obliged to resign, and they
are ordered to winter abroad for the winter and will have some
difficulty in managing it, so I want to be able to help them.

Dear little Mary is a greater darling than ever. Ever your affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Charlotte Greville._

CHILD'S HILL, HAMPSTEAD,
[_August_] _Saturday, 1859_.

So like you, dearest, to think of sending that review, which I thought
very flattering. Lena had already picked it up at a neighbour's house,
and I am told it is a great help to a book to be reviewed by the
_Globe_. A review in _The Times_, even unfavourable, is supposed by
publishers to ensure a second edition, but _The Times_ does not stoop to
single volume novels. "Semi" has had more success than I require, and
considerably more than I expected.

It gave me real pleasure to think that I had amused you. That, and a
kind note from Lord Lansdowne, who said that the book had been a great
amusement to him in his convalescence, gave me intense gratification.
Altogether, people have been marvellously good-natured about it, and if
ever I write another story, which is not very likely, I shall call it
"The Good-natured World." I really do think that, though we all carp in
a petty childish way at each other, that there is an immense amount of
solid _bienveillance_ in constant circulation; only we do not think
about the kindness we meet with, till we actually want it, and then we
see the amount and the value of it.

I wrote my congratulations with very great ease to the Buccleughs. That
marriage seems to give universal satisfaction, and Char was in such a
fidget to have her son[570] married, that she would have put up with a
very inferior article in the way of a daughter-in-law. I am more puzzled
with my letters to Theresa Lewis. Lord Clarendon had cut him[571] on
account of his writings, and Theresa Lewis had never asked him to Kent
House, so you see there is rather a mess to be cleared up before
congratulations come out in a clear brilliant stream.

However, Lord Clarendon has been extremely amiable about it, which he
was sure to be, and Therese was so regularly and thoroughly in love that
I think T. Lewis was quite right to make no objections on the ground of
poverty. After twenty-one, young people may surely choose for
themselves, whether they will be rich or poor.

Do you want a perfection of a little dog to _egayer_ you? Lady Ellesmere
knows my little Manilla silk dog, a small bone run through a large skein
of white floss silk, full of wit and affection. I feel certain it would
be a happiness to you and no trouble, except that you would have to coax
it fourteen hours out of the twenty-four, and then strike for thirteen
hours.

Love to Lady E. Ever your affectionate

_E. Eden._


The Duke of Bedford was here yesterday. He is looking very thin but in
good spirits, and happily satisfied that Lord John is the best Foreign
Secretary we have ever had, and a _juste milieu_ between Lord
Palmerston's extreme French, and Lord C.'s extreme Austrian views.


_Lord Lansdowne to Miss Eden._

RICHMOND,
_August 22_ [1862].

MY DEAR MISS EDEN, Many thanks for your very kind letter. You will see
from the date of this I have advanced a step, and tho' not quite well
yet, am at least convalescent, and just in a state fully to appreciate a
pleasant letter or a pleasant book; the _Semi-Detached_, innocent as it
is, did indeed amuse me greatly. I only wish all people could be made
half as agreeable. You have been able to hurry on a catastrophe without
the assistance of one villainous couple.

I am much disposed to be seduced by your view of Napoleon III.; no man
ever committed such mistakes and knew so well how to get out of them. A
friend of Mme. de Stael once said to me that she had an irresistible
propensity to throw her friends into the river; but that it was relying
upon her skill _pour les repecher, l'un apres l'autre_. This is somewhat
the case with him. He would not run so voluntarily into blunders if he
did not feel confident of extricating himself. Believe me, always,
affectly yours,

LANSDOWNE.

Pray read B. Osborne's speech at Liskeard. One can afford to forgive
impudence when it is so amusing.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

CHILD'S HILL, HAMPSTEAD,
_Monday evening_ [1862].

MY DEAREST THERESA, This has been a great "Semi" day, concluding with
your letter which is just come; and I began the morning with four
closely-written pages from Locock, who generally throws very cold water
on any of my little pursuits. But he says the grandest things of "Semi,"
which he had read on Saturday evening, and says that a bystander would
have thought him quite mad; he was screaming with laughter by himself,
and that he is ashamed to add that in church next day it _would_ come
back to him. "It really haunts me." He was longing for Monday to read it
loud to Lady L., and he says that he must, at all events, be a good
judge of a confinement. _Blanche_'s lying-in is so thoroughly true.

I enclose a bit of Mary Auckland's[572] letter, which also came to-day,
and which is the third she has written about it. All the family from
Wells have written in the same strain, and Robert, who is painfully
punctual, was missing at breakfast the morning after "Semi" arrived; and
was discovered in bed, peremptorily declining to get up till he had
finished his book. We look upon this as a great compliment, as he never
looks at a word. Anne Cowper is equally civil; but then these are all
friends, and would say anything that would encourage me to fill up my
sedentary sick life with any occupation; so any little word that you
hear from strangers is more valuable as a genuine judgment.

To be sure--the luck of having you as my editress, my shield, my sword,
my everything. You know everybody, and are good friends with them all.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

CHILD'S HILL, HAMPSTEAD,
_Monday_ [_August_ 1859].

MY DEAREST THERESA, The important enclosure arrived safely this morning,
and I sent Ellis forthwith to get the money and pay it in at Drummond's,
for fear Bentley should fail to-day. But my belief is that he is a
wealthy Bentley; and he has behaved like a gentleman, and evidently is
not discontented with his bargain. And so, all's well that ends well,
even if it be only a Semi-Detached House.

Thank you again and again, dearest Theresa, for all the successful
trouble you took. Nobody but you could have brought the affair to such a
good end, and I now fondly think that between this and November you will
work up the Harcourt income to _L_4000 a year! You made _L_100 out of
the _L_25 I expected, therefore, etc., etc.

You all sound very happy at Harpton, and Lord Clarendon had given me the
same account, and said how much his girls[573] were taking to their new
cousin, and how pleased they were with Therese's perfect happiness.

The house in Pont Street is a good idea. Therese will be so handy for
you to fetch and carry, and it will be such a mere step for her to Kent
House. I do not mean to settle yet what my little offering is to be. I
want to choose it myself when I go back to town. And then I have rather
set my heart on a china dessert service, but if anybody else steps in, I
can easily set my heart on something else. There are so many duplicates
in wedding presents; such unnecessary quantities of inkstands and cream
jugs; that I think it better to wait a little and hit the spot at the
end. I began life by giving my sister Mary a dessert service when she
married on _L_900 a year, and settled in that little cottage at Neasdon;
and in all their after wealth Mr. Drummond never would have any other,
but went on filling up the breakages in the old pattern to the end. And
so it has been my usual wedding _cadeau_ since, and I gave one to J.
Colvile[574] when he went to India, and as I look on Therese as a niece,
I should like to go jogging on in the old dessert fashion; so, if
anybody consults you, say _that_ is bespoke. So Mr. Harcourt may have
one. But you will let me know in the course of time. The Sydney Herberts
called here yesterday. They had slept at the Grenville farm and he came
very good-naturedly to assure himself, he said, that I was aware of the
complete success of "Semi," which seems to have taken his fancy
prodigiously. He said it had become a sort of byword in London, and that
if anybody talked of taking a house, the answer was, Semi-detached, of
course. I have not seen him for 12 years, and he is not the least
altered in looks. They were going to dine with Florence Nightingale[575]
at Hampstead, or rather at her house, for she has come quite to the last
days of her useful life and is dying of disease of the heart. Every
breath she draws may be heard through her closed doors, but when she can
speak she still likes to talk to Mr. Herbert of soldiers' hospitals and
barracks, and to suggest means of improving them. Ever your affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

EDEN LODGE, KENSINGTON GORE,
_Saturday evening, November 1859._

MY DEAREST THERESA, Between Lena,[576] and Lady Ribblesdale,[577] and
Eddy and Theresa, and all the maids in the house, I am mistress of every
detail of the wedding, and I am so very glad that it all went off so
beautifully. Lena says it is the most interesting wedding she has been
at; there was so much feeling and family affection floating about; and I
hear dear Therese looked very pretty and very pale. But it is _you_,
my old dear, that I have been thinking of all day--thinking so much that
I am obliged to write to get the subject off my mind. I am so sorry for
you, but only just at this moment. And, after all, the wedding is not so
bad as the day of proposal to the mother. Then you had nothing to look
to but her going away; and now your next prospect is her coming back;
and in the meanwhile you have done all in your power to secure her
happiness.

[Illustration: The Hon. Emily Eden

from a drawing by George Richmond, R.A.

Emery Walker Ph. sc.]

God bless you, dear. This does not require an answer, but I could not
resist writing, and I thought you would like to know that I was as well
as could be expected; after the fatigue of being at Mrs. Harcourt's
wedding this morning. I really feel as if I had been there. Your
affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

RICHMOND,
_Monday evening_ [_October 1860_].

MY DEAREST THERESA, It is just bedtime, but I must write a line of warm
congratulation on the advent of the grandchild and our dear Therese's
safety;[578] I missed the announcement in _The Times_ this morning, and
it was not till the middle of the day that Lena, with a railroad sort of
screech, made the discovery, and then with infinite presence of mind I
said, "Then Theresa cannot be come to town and I shall hear from her
this evening." And so I did.

What a discovery chloroform is. By the time we are all dead and buried,
I am convinced some further discovery will be made by which people will
come into the world and live through it and go out of it without the
slightest pain.

Don't you think that if Therese continues to go on as well as she has
begun you will be able to drive down here? Lady Clarendon sometime ago
got an order for Lena to see Strawberry Hill, but as Lena only returned
from Wells on Saturday I made no use of it till to-day, and then we
found Lady Waldegrave was living there. However, an imposing groom of
the chambers showed us the pictures, and Lena saw the rest of the home,
while I was all the time longing to ask him if he knew anything about
Therese, but felt too low in the scale of creation to propound such a
question to him.

My best love to her. Do come here. Your affectionate

E. EDEN.

_Miss Eden to Lady Charlotte Greville._

EDEN LODGE, KENSINGTON GORE,
_October_ 24 [1863].

MY DEAREST LADY CHARLOTTE, A sudden wish has seized me to write to
you--not that I have an atom of a thing to say except the old hacknied
fact that I am very fond of you, and also that I heard constantly of you
when I was at Richmond through your sons,[579] and the Flahaults,[580]
and that now I do not see how I am to hear of you at all, except
somebody at Hatchford (not you) will have the kindness to write to me.

Barring the loss of the view, and the drives in that beautiful park, I
do not miss my Richmond so much as I expected.

There is always something intensely comfortable in home, and my own
books and things, and I am very busy with a new sitting-room that I have
made upstairs, by throwing two small bedrooms into one. It has made a
very pretty warm room, looks clean and bright, and then there is the
fun of furnishing it. It is painful to look out of the window. Those
dreadful Royal Commissioners have cut down all the fine trees belonging
to Gore House[581] and are running up a blank wall 20 feet high, for
their new garden.

My own trees are the only ones left in this neighbourhood, and though
the blank wall is better than another row of houses staring into my
garden, the general effect is that of living just outside the King's
Bench Prison. I look upon a man who cuts down a large tree in London as
capable of committing murder, or any other crime, and have a vague idea
that the Road Murder[582] might be traced home to Prince Albert and Lord
Granville, or one of these Commissioners.

It will interest Lady Ellesmere to know that Lena[583] has returned to
her navvies, and has been greeted with the greatest warmth. Indeed, I
should prefer a little more coolness in her place, as they all insist on
shaking hands, and I imagine washing is a virtue they do not practise
more than once a week. However, they are an interesting race, very
grateful in their rough way; and the Controller and Clerk of the Works
both say that there is a great improvement in their habits, and are very
eager now to encourage the readings. A great deal of the work in these
gardens has now passed into the hands of London bricklayers and
carpenters. They steadily declined listening to Mr. Ward, the
missionary, and were very rude to him.

He was very anxious Lena should try and tame them, so she began by
collecting the debris of her navvies, and sitting down with them under
the old tree (which they have killed of course), and some of the
bricklayers gathered round and began to laugh, so she told them very
quietly that they need not come out of their shed to listen to her if
they did not like it, but that if they came out she could not allow any
laughing at such a serious subject. And they took it very well and said
they did not mean to jeer, and that if she would come to their shed,
they would listen if they might smoke; and the navvies in their
gentleman-like way advised her to go, and said they would go with her,
and they made a path with planks and put up a sort of seat, and showed
the bricklayers how the little lady, as they call her, was to be
treated. And it all went well. She read them a tract called Slab Castle,
which always touches them, and when she came to the chapter on the
Bible, half of the bricklayers were in tears, particularly the ones who
had laughed, and they conveyed her to the gate, begging she would come
again, and clamorous for copies of Slab Castle--which I advise her to
decline giving for the present. But they have been extremely civil and
attentive since, and she has certainly heard such satisfactory accounts
of her old congregation, that it is an encouragement to go on. My love
to Lady or Lord E., and believe me ever, dearest, your affectionate

E. EDEN.


I hope Alice will not insist on my liking Miss Yonge's new book.[584] It
is more unintelligible than "The Daisy Chain," though not quite so
tiresome. But she brings in too many people. There are four generations
of one family, and her moral is quite beyond me. Those that are well
brought up turn out wicked, and the worldly family produce a crop of
saints. I am proud to say I am quite incapable of construing the slang
she makes her ladies talk.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

EDEN LODGE, KENSINGTON GORE,
_Monday_, _December_ [1863].

MY DEAREST THERESA, It is obvious that I must write and wish you and
yours a happy New Year, and a great many of them, and one happier than
the other; but barring that I do not see that I have anything else to
say. London is so utterly empty during Christmas week, everybody
thinking it right to go to somebody else's house, and it is always the
most solitary week of the year to me. But I feel so comfortable in the
thought that I am not passing it in bed as I have for the twelve
preceding years, that it seems to me a singularly merry Christmas.

I suppose you are all rehearsing and acting. Lady Derby writes word that
she hears Alice[585] is well enough now to think of acting on the 11th,
so I hope she has made great progress in health since she got home. Lady
Derby gives rather a poor account of him; he gains strength so slowly,
but she says that after being confined to his own room for three months,
he was now able to get about the house at times....

The only two people I have seen this week have been Lord Brougham and
Sir C. Wood.[586] Lord Brougham was only in town for two nights on his
way to Cannes. He is quite enthusiastic about my father's papers, and
has written something about them in the _Law Review_, and he was rather
good-humoured and pleasant. But on going away he always cries so much at
the prospect of our not meeting again, that he leaves me in a puzzled
state of low spirits. All the more, that I have not the remotest idea
whether it is his death or mine that he is crying over; but he looks so
well, I think it must be mine.

By the bye, your old Dean Milman[587] came hobbling into the room on
Saturday, full of abject apologies to Lena, whom he chose to suppose he
had affronted, and taking great care to ignore his real grand sin of
abducting the papers without asking leave. However, he came to say that
he was most agreeably surprised that Mr. Hogge has done his part
well,[588] and that he and Mrs. Milman had been greatly interested,
etc., which she amply confirmed. I like her very much, and she is still
so handsome.... Good-bye, dearest. I did not write sooner, as I had just
written to the Grove when your letter came, and as everything is public
property there, this counts for a letter to Lord Clarendon as well as to
you. Your affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to her Niece, Mrs. Dickinson._[589]

EDEN LODGE, KENSINGTON GORE [1864].

MY DEAR MRS. DICKINSON, I am charmed with your letter, I wanted to have
one from you. Dear old Longleat! I should so like to see it again. I
passed so much of my youth so very happily there, and I do not think I
ever attained loving anybody more than Lady Bath,[590]--not this
one[591]--but her mother-in-law, and the daughters pay back to me the
affection I had for their mother....

I suppose they told you about the Horticultural Fete? I saw and heard
nothing but the crash of carriages, and linkmen went on screaming for
them till nine at night. I have not heard linkmen screaming for the last
thirteen years.

Yesterday Lena got leave from one of her friends working in the garden,
to bring me in thro' a little obscure door into the great conservatory,
which we had to ourselves, and I really could hardly believe the flowers
were real, they were so unearthly beautiful, particularly the geraniums
and roses, great round stools of flowers of the brightest colours. Some
day I have a fancy that I shall be well enough to go down and visit you,
my old pet. What a bore for you! Your aff.

E. E.


_Miss Eden to Lady Theresa Lewis._

_March_ [1865].

MY DEAREST FRIEND, I would rather write to you myself. I am so thankful
I saw and took leave of dear Mary. She wished it so much herself, and
was as loving and as dear as ever. You know we had always been the
greatest friends of the family, and till I went to India, we had never
missed for a single day writing to each other. It was an intimacy that
only two sisters nearly of an age can have, and she referred to it again
on Tuesday, and told me still to be a mother to her children. They
always _have_ been like my own children. But I am most thankful I was
able to witness such a really happy deathbed as hers, so calm, so
peaceful, and her mind as entirely clear as it ever was in its best
days. And to see those six tall sons, four daughters-in-law, and her
three daughters all round her bed, the sons more overwhelmed even than
the daughters, and she thanking them, and saying how happy they had made
her, it was a scene that quite comforts me for her loss, and her poor
daughters had quite the same feeling. I saw them yesterday after the
case was hopeless and they were quite calm.

Dearest Theresa,[592] I do not think it good for you just now to go
through more melancholy scenes, otherwise you are one of the few I
should like to see. I _depend_ on you so much. Is it not strange that
with my health I should have outlived my six sisters--all, except Lady
Godolphin, in perfect health when I came from India? Ever, dearest, your
affectionate

E. EDEN.


_Miss Eden to Mrs. Dickinson._

EDEN LODGE, 1863.

I have been out only four times since I came to London. The very
ordinary looking women who inhabit London at this time of year, with
last year's dirty little bonnets put at the back of last year's dirty
little faces, and with dirty gowns to match spread over absurd hoops,
make me quite uncomfortable.

The "Semi-Attached Couple" was written in that little cottage at Ham
Common. I do not exactly know who Mrs. B. was at this moment, but all
our Camp ladies were always lying-in, and it is a very easy business in
India.

I do not exactly see unless I turn back, and grow young again, that I
shall ever visit you at Berkley,[593]--Richmond is looked upon by
doctors as an immense journey for me. I am very much pleased my book
altogether amused you. I have such quantities of old letters of thanks
for it, from people I had forgotten. I had a grand letter from Lord
Houghton (Monckton Milnes) in praise of my pure facile English, among
other things _Slang_ was not invented in my day.

You are quite right to make your children's childhood happy, and as
merry as possible, but please do not spoil them. Life does not spoil
anybody, and so teach them early to take it as it comes--cheerfully.
Your aff.

E. E.

[Miss Eden died in August 1869: her friend Lady Campbell three months
later.]




INDEX


Abby, Mr., 161

Abercromby, James, 50

Aberdeen, George, 4th Earl of, 352

Acton, Miss, 150

Adderley, Mr. and Miss, 82

Adeenanuggur, 300

Adelaide, Queen, 323

Admiralty House, 235, 240, 243, 246

Albemarle, William, Earl of, 244

Albert, Prince Consort, 372, 399

Allahabad, 292

Almack's, 134

Alvanley, Lord, 102-3, 128;
  Boyle Farm breakfast, 134-5; 164, 167, 201;
  ruined, 216-17

Amherst, Sarah, Countess, 340

Amherst, Lady Sarah, 279

Amherst, William Pitt, 1st Earl, 279, 295

Amoy, 357

Anglesey, Henry, 1st Marquis of, 127, 208

_Ann Grey_, 245

Anson, Colonel, 202

Anson, Viscount, 202

Apsley House, ball, 198

Arden, Colonel, 91-2, 216

Arkwright, Mrs. Robert, 226

_Arlington, note_ 217

Ashburton, Alexander, 1st Baron, 377

Ashburton, Lady (Mrs. Alexander Baring), 376-7

Ashburton, Lord and Lady (Bingham Baring), 377

Ashley, Hon. Lionel, 214

Ashley, Lord, 157, 187, 199

Ashley, Lady Harriet, 191

Ashley, Mr., 177

Astley's, 91, 133

Atholl, Duke of, 156

Auckland, Eleanor, Lady (wife of 1st Lord Auckland), 1-2, 10-11, 16-18

Auckland, George, 2nd Lord, created Earl of, 2;
  Melbury, 4, 7, 10;
  Dropmore, 12; 13, 18, 32;
  the Drummonds, 36, 37; 54, 58;
  Middleton, 59; 87;
  Bowood, 98;
  Tunbridge, 101-2; 104, 110, 113;
  Nocton, 121; 128, 136-7, 139-40;
  Ireland, 143-4, 148;
  Stackpole, 151, 159; 163;
  Greenwich Hospital, 165-6, 168; 172, 175, 187;
  Lady C. Sturt, 189;
  Lord Ilchester, 191; 199;
  Board of Trade, _note_ 204; 207, 218;
  death of Mr. Hyde Villiers, 223;
  letter from Mrs. Norton, 227; 232;
  the Exchequer, 233;
  Park Lodge garden, 235;
  Admiralty, 239-40; 251;
  Indian appointment, 252;
  departure, 259;
  journey, 261;
  Calcutta, 265-6; 268-9, 271;
  Simla, 296;
  Mission, 301; 310, 322;
  Burmese War, 356-7;
  return, 358;
  Naval Reviews, 366; 369, 371;
  death, _note_ 380

Auckland, Mary, Lady (wife of the
Bishop), 394

Auckland, Robert, 3rd Lord Auckland
(Bishop of Bath and Wells), 394. _See_
Eden, Robert

Auckland, William, 1st Baron, 2

Austin, Thomas, 165

_Avenger, The_, 369


Bagot, Mr., 215

Baring, Alexander (1st Lord Ashburton), 106, 128, 136, 158, 182, 196.
  _See_ Ashburton

Baring, Mrs. Alexander (Lady Ashburton), 35; 159;
  her daughter's love affairs, 181; 184;
  death, 376-7

Baring, Alexander Montagu (son of Bingham Baring), 189

Baring, Bingham (2nd Lord Ashburton), 159, 169, 189, 363, 367, 377

Baring, Lady Harriet (Lady Ashburton), 128, 159, 164, 169;
  praise of Miss Villiers, 183; 185, 188-9, 190, 193, 367, 377

Baring, Mr. F., 159

Baring, Miss Harriet (Marchioness of Bath), 181, 183, 184, 402

Baring, Henry, 195-6

Baring, Mrs. Henry, 379

Barings, Miss, 134, 377

Barrackpore, 263;
  menagerie, 266; 270, 284;
  native school, 286; 321

Bath, Thomas, 2nd Marquis of, 183, 192, 197

Bath, Isabella, Marchioness of, 32, 59, 77, 153, 158; 163;
  her daughter's marriage, 180-81, 182-3; 186, 190;
  Longleat, 192;
  her son's marriage, 195;
  death, 196, 402

Bathurst, Lady Emily, 17

Bathurst, Lady Georgina, 17, 80, 389-90

Bathurst, Lord, 139

Beckenham, 12

Bedford, Francis, 7th Duke of, 378, 392

Bedford, Georgiana, Duchess of, 49, 75

Begum, the, of Moorshedabad, 335-6

Belvidere, exhibition of pictures at, 259

Bennett, Rev. W. Early Bennett, 389

Benson, Mr., preaching at Tunbridge, 20

Bentinck, Lady Lucy Cavendish, 170

Bentinck, Lady William, 340

Bentley, Richard, 390, 394

Beresford, Colonel, 272-3, 297

Beresford, Mrs., 271-3, 297

Beresford, Miss, _note_ 91, 379

Berkley, 404

Bessborough, 145

Bethune, Captain, 322

Bexley, Lord (N. Vansittart), 1, 4, 11, 17, 93-4

Bigods (Mr. Drummond's house), 127

Bingham, Lady, 244

Bogue, forts, 336, 338

Bonaparte, Napoleon, 13, 74

Bonchurch, 362

Bonnington, 57

Bowood, 5, 47, 50-52, 62, 99, 108, 229, 367

Boyle Farm, 38, 97, 132-3, 262

Bramley, Doctor, 276; death, 284

Bramley, Mrs., 277

Bremer, Sir James Gordon, 336, 342, 346, 357

Broadstairs, 199, 202

Brougham, Henry, Lord Brougham and Vaux, 158, 193, 204, 207, 215, 237-8,
      247, 315, 401

Buccleuch, Walter, 5th Duke of, marriage, 182-3; 392

Buccleuch, Charlotte, Duchess of, 153, _note_ 180, 181;
  her son's marriage, 392

Buckinghamshire, Robert, 4th Earl of, 82

Buckinghamshire, Eleanor, Countess of (Sister), 35, 36-7, 81;
  Strathfieldsaye, 81-2; 87, 93;
  her attendance on Lady Sarah Robinson, 100, 113, 114;
  Nocton, 122-3; 128, 131-2;
  Downing Street, 141-2; 145, 152-3, 154;
  Wrest, 190;
  Dandy, 332;
  Bonchurch, 363

Buller, Rt. Hon. Charles, 377

Burgh, 38

Bushy, 40

Bute, Isle of, 57, 62

Bute, Lord and Lady, 64, 66-7

Butler, Lady Charlotte, and Lady Emily, 148-50

Buxton, Sir Thomas Fowell, 132

Byng, George, 188

Byrne, Major, 288-9, 340

Byron, George, Lord, 1, 3;
  Moore's _Life_, 194, 209-10

Byron, Lady, 1, 3, 19.
  _See_ Milbanke


Cabul, 314, 318

Cahir, 147-8, 149-50

Calcutta, 245, 262, 265;
  society, 273

Caledon, 174

Caledon, Catherine, Countess of, 174

Caledon, 2nd Earl of, 174

Calne, 97

Campbell, Caroline Frances Eden (Mrs. Percy Wyndham), 250-51, 252

Campbell, Miss Christina, 68

Campbell, Edward, 227, 326, 328

Campbell, Lady Elizabeth, 32.
  _See_ Cawdor

Campbell, Emily, 227, 232-3, 262.
  _See_ Ellis

Campbell, Fanny, 174;
  marriage, 329

Campbell, Miss Frances (sister to Sir Guy), 84

Campbell, Frederick, 331

Campbell, Georgina, 125, 329.
  _See_ Preston

Campbell, Sir Guy, 60-62, 64-6;
  description of General Way, 67-8; 69-70, 71, 73, 76, 83, 84;
  Crambo at Bowood, 98;
  appointment in Ireland, 115; 148;
  Armagh, 160; 172, 228, 329, _note_ 380

Campbell, Lady (Pamela FitzGerald), her aunt's illness, 32-3;
  Mary Drummond, 37, 38;
  her pig, 39;
  Mr. Rose, 40;
  Mule drive, 44;
  Lansdowne family, 47-53;
  Lady Mary Ross, 57;
  opinion of the Scotch, 58;
  marriage, 60;
  her husband, 61;
  the Scotch, 63;
  _The Times_, 64;
  Mount Stuart, 66;
  Emily Eden's hysterics, 69;
  Lady Jane Paget, 70;
  Lord and Lady Foley, 71;
  Mr. de Roos, 72;
  Queen Caroline's funeral, 74;
  Arques, 76;
  Whig vice, 79;
  Mr. de Roos's marriage, 83;
  Strathfield Turgess, 84-5;
  Lucy's marriage, 96;
  Lucy's death, 97;
  Bowood, 97-9;
  scarlet fever, 111-12;
  journey to Ireland, 125-7, 130;
  Limerick, 139; 144, 149-50;
  Armagh, 160-63, 172-5;
  her daughter Emily, 227, 231-3;
  _The Sunny Baby_, 250-52;
  Carton, 254-6;
  her children, 328-31

Campbell, Guy Colin, 329

Campbell, Pamela (Mrs. Charles Stanford), 79, 99, 147, 329, 331.
  _See_ Stanford

Campbell, Mr., of Stonefield, 72

Canning, Rt. Hon. George, 129, 139

Carnarvon, 2nd Earl of, 105, 221

Carnegie, Mr., 146

Carton, Maynooth, 254

Cassiobury, 86, 306

Castlereagh, Viscount, 134-5, 187, 210

Cator, Mr., 13

Cavendish, Lady Catherine, 311

Cavendish, Mrs., 90

Cawdor, Countess of, 32, 59-60, 137, 151, 196

Champneys, Captain, 295

Chance, 240;
  India, 259-61, 269;
  his suite, 286-7, 332, 337-8, 345, 349

Chantry, Sir Francis, 184;
  statue of Mr. Pitt, 185

Charing-Cross, 42, 50, 63

Charlemont, Francis, Lord, 331

Charlton, Kent, 19

Chatsworth, 89, 90, 169

Chesterfield, Lord, 134-5

Chichester, Lord, 75-6, 88

Chichester, Lady, 87-8

Chilvers, Mr., 69, 71

Chinese Expedition, 322, 328, 333

Chusan, 339-42

Clanwilliam, Lord and Lady, 152

Clarendon, George, 4th Earl of, 306-7;
  marriage, 309, 310;
  Ireland, 375, 385;
  Mr. Harcourt, 392;
  Harpton, 395.
  _See_ Villiers, George

Clarendon, John, 3rd Earl of, 310, 313

Clarendon, Maria, Countess of, 313

Clarke, Dr., 118-19, 124, 154

Clements, the, 74

Clerk, George Russell, 316

Clifford, Lord, 177

Cockburn, Sir Alexander, _note_ 385

Cockerell, Mrs., 277

Codrington, Sir E., 158

Codrington, Captain, 317

Coke, Hon. Mrs. Edward, 383

Cole, Mr. G., 178

Cole, Sir Galbraith Lowry, 355

Colvile, Mr. Andrew Wedderburn, 13, 186

Colvile, Eleanor, 86, 87

Colvile, Sir James, 395

Colvile, Hon. Mrs. (Louisa Eden), 18, 42, 59, 61, 63, 79;
  Eyam, 89;
  daughter's marriage, 231;
  seventeenth child, 240; 379, 388

Colvin, Sir Auckland, 316

Colvin, John Russell, 290, 316, 347, 355

Conyngham, 2nd Marquis, 246

Cootes, the, 40, 74

Copley, Sir Joseph, 91, 128, 220

Copley, Maria, 86, 87, 91, 121, 163, 165, 179;
  marriage of Miss Villiers, 200; 203, 216;
  marriage, 220.
  _See_ Howick, Lady

Copley, Miss, 86, 91, 165, 169-70

Corry, Mr., 191

Cotton, Sir Willoughby, 306, 334

_Court and Camp of Runjeet Singh, The_ 324

Cowan, Mr. C., 365

Cowper, Amelia, Countess, 6, 107, 167, 187, 199, 214-15, 245

Cowper, Anne, Countess, 394. _See_ Robinson, Anne

Cowper, Lady Emily, 167, 171, 178, 187. _See_ Ashley

Cowper, William, Earl, 214, 379

Cray, 80

Crichel, 189

Croker, Mr., 100;
  Boyle Farm breakfast, 135

Cust, Captain, 28

Custs, Miss, description of, 29

Cuvier, George, 251


_Dacre_, 271

Dacre, Lady, 176

Daltrey, Dr., 189

Danford (Lady S. FitzGerald's servant), 54, 262, 270

Darnley, Countess of, 36, 156

_Daughters_, 372

Dawkins, Captain, 318

Delancey, Lady, 13-15

Delancey, Sir William, 13-15

Derby, Elizabeth, Countess of, 145, 177-178

Derby, Emma, Countess of, 401

D'Este, Miss, 248

_Destiny_, by Susan Ferrier, 206

Devonshire, 6th Duke of, 5, 89-90;
  Fox cloak, 116, 157

Dickinson, Hon. Mrs. Edmund, 402, 404

Dino, Madame de, 202, 214

Donoughmore, Earl of, 146, 148

Douglas, Lady K., 16

Douglas, Mr., 28

Dover, Lady, 383

Downing Street, 138, 141, 153, 159

Doyle, Sir Charles, 146

Dropmore, 2, 12

Drummond, Charles, marriage, 35-7; 38-9, 56, 131, 201, 395

Drummond, Hon. Mrs. Charles (Mary Eden), 1-4;
  Bowood, 5, 7-9;
  Melbury, 10-11;
  Dropmore, 12, 17, 18, 21, 31;
  Mrs. Baring's ball, 35;
  Mr. Drummond, 35; 37;
  party at Burgh, 38; 40, 42, 49;
  dromedaries, 50; 52;
  Charing-Cross, 63; 70, 96, 114;
  children's education, 127-9; 130, 132;
  Bigods, 136-7, 140, 148;
  Grosvenor Place, 156; 240, 252, 320, 323;
  children, 326, 328, 330;
  Mary's marriage, 382;
  death, 403

Drummond, Doctor, 300, 332

Drummond, Edward, 46, 70

Drummond, Ella, 374

Drummond, Lady Harriet, 77

Drummond, Mary Dulcebella, 140.
  _See_ Wellesley, 382, 391

Drummond, Maurice, 364, 382

Drummond, Hon. Mrs. Maurice, 382

Drummond, Theresa, 323, 396

Dudley, John, Earl of, at Bowood, 98

Dumont, Pierre Louis, 48

Duncannon, Viscountess, 75, 148, 151

Duncombe, Mr., 28

Dundas, Mr., 367-8


East Combe, Charlton, Kent, 23, 28, 74, 93, 333

Ebrington, Viscount, 40, 329

Ebrington, Viscountess, 40

Eden, Hon. Emily, letters from Eden Farm, 1-18;
  her sister Mary, 3-5;
  sattin gown, 12;
  steam-party, 17;
  visit to Lady Grantham, 21-30;
  Longleat, 31;
  Rogers the Poet, 35;
  Mary's marriage, 36;
  Drummond party, 38;
  Duchess of Bedford, 75;
  George Osborne, 87;
  Chatsworth, 89-90;
  water-party, 91;
  Gog Magog, 93;
  Hertingfordbury, 95;
  education, 107;
  Bowood, 109;
  Lady Campbell's troubles, 111;
  Nocton, 117;
  Lady Sarah Robinson, 118-24;
  Bigods, 127;
  Barings, 128;
  Goderich tricks, 131;
  Boyle Farm, 132-4;
  Ireland, 143;
  Knowsley, 145;
  Lord Henry Thynne, 147;
  Lord and Lady Goderich, 154;
  _Journal_, 156;
  Panshanger, 167;
  Greenwich, 168;
  Hatfield theatricals, 176;
  Mrs. Baring's fidgets, 181;
  love affair, 188;
  Lady Bath's death, 196;
  energy at Court, 198;
  district visiting, 205;
  Guildhall, 206; 214-15;
  Church lectures, 218;
  Admiralty, 235;
  India, 252;
  voyage, 260;
  Barrackpore, 264;
  Calcutta, 267-84;
  journey up country, 288;
  camp life, 293;
  Simla, 298;
  Runjeet Singh, 300-2;
  the Begum, 335;
  Chinese expedition, 341-2;
  home, 358;
  tea-party, 367;
  illness, 369;
  Lord Auckland's death, 380;
  bullfinches, 387;
  navvies, 399

Eden, Hon. Fanny, 31, 46, 97, 103, 135, 137;
  Knowsley, 145; 152, 159;
  Lady Derby's death, 178; 196;
  Broadstairs, 199; 220;
  Ham Common, 242; 244, 266, 277;
  drawings, 303; 328;
  Chinese expedition, 346;
  Bonchurch, 363

Eden Farm, Beckenham, Kent, 5, 27, 188

Eden, Henry, Admiral, 91;
  marriage, 379

Eden, Henry Johnes (son of the Bishop), _note_ 199

Eden, Lena, birth, 112; 390, 396, 398;
  her navvies, 399; 402

Eden Lodge, Kensington Gore, 277, 358, 386

Eden, Hon. Morton, 5, 11, 28, 225

Eden, Rev. the Hon. Robert (3rd Baron Auckland, Bishop of Bath and Wells),
      11, 13, 74, 82-3;
  Eyam, 88-90;
  marriage, 92-3;
  Hertingfordbury, 95; 99, 103, 167, 171, 222, 230, 363.
  _See_ Auckland

Eden, Hon. Mrs. Robert, 112, 199, 230, 240.
  _See_ Auckland, Lady

Eden, William, General, 242

Edgeworth, Miss, 144, 180

Edridge, Henry, 253

Egerton, Lady Francis, 241, 244, 384, 392, 399.
  _See_ Leveson and Ellesmere

Egerton, Mr., at Hatfield, 176

Eldon, Lord, 43, 46, 107

Ellenborough, 1st Earl of, 133;
  Governor-General, 356

Ellesmere, Harriet, Countess of, 384, 392, 399

Ellice, Rt. Hon. E., 228

Ellice, Mrs., 236, 238, 242

Elliot, Sir Charles, 333, 336;
  Chusan, 338-9, 341-2, 346, 350-51, 352, 357

Elliot, Mrs. Charles, 336, 339, 350-51, 357

Elliot, Admiral Sir George, 13, 325, 333

Elliot, Mrs. George, 14

Elliot, Rt. Hon. Hugh (Governor of Madras), 62, 69

Ellis, Mr., 28

Ellis, Hon. Lucia Agar, 383

Ellis, Mrs. Charles (Emily Campbell), 227, 232-3, 262

Elphinstone, John, 13th Lord, 315, 341

Elphinstone, William G. Keith, General, 334

Erroll, Elizabeth, Countess of, 34, 160

Esterhazy, Prince, 202

Ewhurst, 188

Eyam Rectory, 88


Fane, Sir Henry, 272, 306, 327, 354

Fane, Mrs., 327

Fane, Miss, 303

Fazakerley, Mr., 51

Feilding, Caroline and Horatia, 70

Feilding, Captain and Lady Elizabeth, 5, 6;
  their children, 7; 26;
  fuss, 66

FitzClarence, Elizabeth, 34, 160.
  _See_ Erroll

FitzGerald, Edward, 33, 56, 132-3

FitzGerald, Lady Edward, 76, 130

FitzGerald, Lord Henry, 39, 85

FitzGerald, Lucy, 33, 36, 39, 40, 45;
  rabbits, 46; 49, 51, 52;
  Mount Stuart, 66;
  gingerbread, 68; 69, 70, 74, 82;
  marriage, 96; 97;
  death, 111

FitzGerald, Pamela, 32-4, 36-41, 43-58, 60.
  _See_ Campbell, Lady

FitzGerald, Lady Sophia, 32-3, 37-9, 44-6, 53-6;
  in the grumps, 62; 66, 73

FitzMaurice, Lady Louisa, 7, 15, 331

Flahault, Comte de, 398

Foley, Thomas, Baron, 71

Foley, Cecilia, Lady, 71

Fonthill, 78

Forbes, Lord, 133, 160

Fordwich, Viscount, 214, 245

Forester, Hon. Isabella, 96

Foster, Mr., 90, 141

Foster, Mrs., 236

Frognal, 21

Fry, Elizabeth, 373


Garrett, Mr., 75

George IV., King, 139, 157-8, 198

Glenelg, Lord, 299

Glengall, Countess of, 144, 146-9, 160

Glengall, 2nd Earl of, 149, 201

Goderich, Lord (Right Hon. R. Robinson, 1st Earl of Ripon), 101, 113, 118-22,
    131-2;
  Prime Minister, 138-9, 142-3, 156-7

Goderich, Lady (Lady Sarah Robinson), 131;
  her rage, 132;
  her husband Prime Minister, 138; 139;
  behaviour in Downing Street, 141;
  son's birth, 151, 153-4;
  cause of her husband's resignation, 156-7; 159-60;
  Wrest, 190, 204.
  _See_ Robinson

Godolphin, Lord, 379

Godolphin, Lady, _note_ 379, 404

Gog Magog, 22, 93

Gordon, Lord Henry, 295-6, 310

Gordon, Lady Henry, 279, 295

Gordon, Sir Alexander Duff, 3rd Bart., 368

Gordon, Lady Duff, 368

Gore House, 399

Gosford, 2nd Earl of, 174

Goulburn, Rt. Hon. Henry, 159

Government House, Calcutta, 265-7, 271;
  balls, 275

Graham, Mr. (Sir James Graham of Netherby), 23-4, 27, 239, 385

Graham, Mrs., 23

Grange, The, 104, 109, 180;
  Lord Henry Thynne's visit, 181-2;
  Lord Auckland's death, _note_ 380, 381

Grantham, Thomas, 3rd Lord (2nd Earl de Grey), his theatre, 24, 25, 116, 118;
   142

Grantham, Lady, 21, 23-6, 47, 54;
  liking for London, 61;
  child's illness, 141-2, 163, 165, 182

Granville, 2nd Earl, 399

Granville, Harriet, Countess of, 59

Gravesend, review of Tide-waiters, 103-4

Greenwich, 11, 165-7;
  Park Lodge, 168, 178, 183, 197;
  pensioners, 228, 231;
  departure from, 235

Greville, Mr. Brooke, 147, 150, 217

Greville, Lady Charlotte, 102, 157, 166, 190, 224, 226, 398

Greville, Charles, 141, 220, 230, 379, 385-6, 398

Greville, Henry, 92;
  cross, 96; 398

Grey, Captain, 261, 266, 351

Grey, Charles, 2nd Earl, Guildhall, 206, 207; 209;
  Reform Bill, 218;
  son's marriage, 220, 235, 237-8

Grey, Rt. Hon. Sir George, 2nd Bart., 366

Grey, Henry, 3rd Earl, 367-8, 379

Grey, Maria, Countess, 376, 384

Grindlay, Captain, 257, 343

Grove, The, 58, 369

Grosvenor, Lord and Lady, 135

Grosvenor, Hon. Robert, 134-5

Grosvenor Street, Lower, No. 30; 28, 41, 262

Guiccioli, Countess, 210


Ham Common, 239, 242, 404

Hampden, Renn Dickson (Bishop of Hereford), 372

Hampton Court Palace, 244

Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir William Vernon, 392, 396

Harcourt, Mrs., 397-8

Harpton, 377, 387, 389, 395

Harrington, Mr. F., 259

Harrowby, Lord and Lady, 17, 40, 220

Harvey, Captain, 329

Hatchford, 398

Hatfield, theatricals, 176; 204

Hawkins, Mrs., 290

Hay, Lady Isabella, 13

Hay, Lord, 13

Hayley, William, 85

Hazlewood, Captain, 332-3, 349

Heaphy, Mr., 15

Heber, Bishop, 184

Heber, Mrs., 198

Herat, 299, 342

Herbert, Hon. Sydney, 396

Herries, Rt. Hon. J. C., 157

Hertingfordbury, 93-5, 106, 176, 222

Hibbert, Mr. George, 186

Hill, Lord Arthur, 146, 148

Hill, Captain, 340

Hill, Lady Charlotte and Lady Mary, 62

Hill, Rowland, 1st Viscount, 244-5

Himalayas, the, 290, 297

Hindu College, 265, 281, 284

Hobhouse, Rt. Hon. John Cam, 27, 158

Hogge, Mr. George, 402

Holland, Lady, 49

Hollyer, Captain, 345

Hooghly, the, 262, 287

Hook, Theodore, 326

Hope, Mr. and Lady Elizabeth, 71

Hope, Sir G., 17

Houghton, Lord, 404

Howard de Walden, Charles, 6th Baron, 170

Howick, Lord, _note_, 220, 238, 367-8, 379.
  _See_ Grey, 3rd Earl

Howick, Lady (Lady Grey), 224, 376.
  _See_ Copley, Maria

Huskisson, Rt. Hon. W., 157-8, 203


Ilchester, Earl of, 8, 32, 191

Ilchester, Dowager Countess of, 8, 10


Jacquemont, Victor, 304

Jekyll, Mr., _note_ 154

Jersey, Countess of, 6, 59, 75, 135, 152, 187, 221

Jocelyn, Viscount, 321, 323, 325, 328

_Jupiter_, the, 258, 266


Kemble, Charles, 185

Kemble, Fanny, 185

Kenmare, Earl and Countess of, 150

Kent, Duchess of, 102

Kent House, Knightsbridge, 367, 392

Keppel, Major, 176

Keppel, Mrs., 217

Kerry, Earl of, 7, 47, 232, 234

Killarney, 150

Kingston, 5th Earl of, 144, 150

Knighton, Sir William, 157

Knocklofty, 146, 148

Knowsley, 137, 145, 152, 378

Kurnaul, Nawab of, 314-15


Labouchere, Mr. Henry, 159

Laleham, 153-4

Lamb, Lady Caroline, 3

Lamb, Sir F., at Panshanger, 167, 215

Lamb, Lady F., at Brocket, 199

Lamb, Hon. George, Westminster election, 27, 90, 116, 221

Lamb, Mrs. George, 88, 141

Lamb, Hon. William, 3, 144.
  _See_ Melbourne

Landseer, Mr., 75

Langley Farm, Beckenham, Kent, 36, 58

Lansdowne, Henry, 3rd Marquis of, 7;
  Bowood, 47-50, 52-3, 63, 73;
  Fonthill, 78; 80, 81, 109-10, 157, 201, 207, 214, 229, 232, 234-5, 237-8;
  looks, 331; 386, 391;
  letter to Miss Eden, 393

Lansdowne, Lady, 6-7, 15, 46-7, 49, 52, 63-4;
  Bridget, 76;
  kindness of, 99; 110, 141, 171, 214, 233;
  Lord Kerry's marriage, 234;
  sister's death, 330

Lascelles, Lady Caroline, _note_ 383

Lascelles, Hon. Edwin, 361

Lascelles, Mr., 28

_Last of the Mohicans, The_, 100

Leinster, Duke of, Lady Foley's extravagance, 71

Lennox, Lady Georgina, 83.
  _See_ de Roos

Lennox, Lady Louisa, 80

_Letters from India_, by E. Eden, 259

Leveson Gower, Lady Francis, 102, 105, 129, 153, 157-8;
  Hatfield, 176-7; 196;
  her daughter's birth, 201, 222, 224, 241, 244, 384, 392, 399.
  _See_ Egerton, Lady Francis; and Ellesmere

Lewis, Mr. George (Sir G. Cornewall Lewis), 374, 378, 389

Lewis, Lady Theresa, 392, 403.
  _See_ Lister, Mrs.; and Villiers, Miss

Lieven, Madame de, 156, 214, 229

Limerick, 126

Lister, Alice Beatrix (Lady Glenesk), 312

Lister, Mrs. (Lady Theresa Lewis), 199;
  her brother's death, 225; 257;
  death of Lady John Russell, 306;
  becomes Lady Theresa, 309; 312;
  death of Mr. Lister, 359.
  _See_ Lewis

Lister, Mr. Thomas Henry, 199, 201, 204, 217, 220, 224-5, _note_ 245, 276

Lister, Therese, 367, 395, 397-8.
  _See_ Harcourt, Mrs.

Lister, Thomas Villiers (Sir), birth, 217; 307, 367, 369, 386

Liston, John, 150

Littleton, Rt. Hon. Edward, 228, 237

Liverpool, Lord and Lady, 17-18

Locock, Sir Charles, 376, 393-4

London University, Professors, 137, 170, 193

Londonderry, Lady, 80

Longleat, 31, 62, 186, 192, 194, 195, 377, 402

Lushington, Mr., 17, 164

Luttrell, Mr. Henry, 153, 159, 164

Lyndhurst, Lord, 247

Lyon, Captain George, 96, 112


Macao, 325, 357

Macaulay, Thomas Babington, 365;
  Bowood, 367-8, 371; 379

Macdonalds, the, 50

MacGregor, Captain, 300-1

Macintosh, Captain, 335, 341, 344-5, 348

Mackintosh, Sir James, 158

MacNaghten, Mr., 300-1

MacNaghten, Mrs., 290

MacNiel, Mr., 300

Madden, Mr., 16-17

Mahomed, Dost, 299, 302, 314;
  attends Queen's ball, 347; 355

Maitland, Sir P., 299

_Malachi_, 100

Manchester Square, 305

Mansfield, Countess of, 40, 134

Markhams, Miss, the, 23

Matthews, Thomas, the actor, 55

Maynard, Viscount, 127

Mayor, Lord (Alderman Key), 206-7

Meerveldt, Count, 5

Melbourne, Lady, 3

Melbourne, Viscount, 167, 215-16, 222, 237, 240, 244-5, 246-8;
  letter to Miss Eden, 258.
  _See_ Lamb, W.

Melbury, 2, 4, 7, 10, 190

Mellish, Miss, _note_ 195

Melville, Lord, 139, 157

Melville, Lady, 26

Merewether, John (Dean of Hereford), 371

Metcalfe, Sir C., 263

Middleton, 5-6, 52, 202

Miguel, Dom, 156

Milbanke, Anne, 1, 3, 19.
  _See_ Byron, Lady

Mildmay, Sir Henry and Lady, 159

Miller, General, 171-2

Milman, Dean, 402

Mimms, 331

Minto, Earl of, 229

Mitchell's, 150

Montagu, Hon. Caroline, 220

Montagu, Edward, 40

Montagu, Hon. Henry, 62, 262

Montagu Hall, 359

Moore, Colonel, 162

Moore, Sir Graham, 162

Moore, Mr. (Lord Bute's agent), 67

Moore, Mrs., 5

Moore, Thomas, 110;
  _Life of Lord Byron_, 194, 210

More, Hannah, 42, 43, 243

Morley, General, 354

Morley, Lady, 276, 296, 363

Morpeth, Lord, 157, 176, 213, 254;
  chief secretary, 271; 330-31

Mostyn, Hon. Mrs., marriage, 163, 171

Mostyn, Hon. Edward, 362

Mount Shannon, 149

Mount Stuart, 65, 69, 71

Muir, Mrs., 58

Murray, Lady Caroline, 134

Murray, Lady George, 9

Murray, Mr. John, 115


Napier, Sir Charles, 370

Napier, Miss Louisa, 80

Napier, Mrs., 82

Napoleon III., Emperor, 393

Nawab of Moorshedabad, 334

Newton, Mr. (the artist), 106, 109, 113, 115

Nicholls, Sir Jasper, 326, 353-5

Nicolson, Dr., 344

Nightingale, Miss Florence, 396

Nocton, 58, 117-18, 138

Noor Mahal, 325

Norfolk, Duke of, 177

Norman Court, 78, 102, 152, 170, 187

Normanby, 1st Marquess of, 329

Norton, Hon. Mrs., 227, 230, 241


Oatlands, 224

O'Brien, Lady Susan, 8

O'Connell, Daniel, 208, 237

O'Connor, Feargus, 364

Ogilvie, Mr., 45, 46

_Oliver Twist_, 303

Osborne, Charlotte, 93

Osborne, Lord Francis Godolphin, 3, 21, 88, 93.
  _See_ Godolphin, 379

Osborne, Lady Francis Godolphin, 2;
  Gog Magog, 93.
  _See_ Godolphin, Lady

Osborne, George Godolphin, 3;
  marriage, 87-8

Osborne, Godolphin, William, 3, 10, 233, 259-60;
  Military Secretary, 266, 271, 277, 279, 286-8;
  Sikh Mission, 300-1;
  his _Court and Camp of Runjeet Singh_, 303-4, 320;
  Singapore, 325, 328;
  tiger-shooting, 339, 343, 346, 350

Osborne, Ralph Bernal, 393

Ossory, Lord, 79

Oudh, Prince of, 263

Ouseley, Sir Gore, 107, 164

Ouseley, Miss, 107, 140

Ouseley, Lady, 107


Paget, Lady Jane, 70-71

Palk, Mary, 129

Palmella, Mademoiselle de, 156

Palmer, Mrs. Edward, 388

Palmerston, Henry, Viscount, 214, 352, 371, 379, 392

Panshanger, vice and agreeableness, 167, 214-15, 226

Parliament, Houses of, 245

Parry, Captain, 81

Paul, Sir George, 8, 10-11

Peel, Lady Jane, 105

Peel, Lawrence, 105

Peel, Rt. Hon. Robert (Sir), 139, 158, 246, 251, 299

Peel, Right Hon. W., 34

Penge Common, 15, 18

Pengwern, 362

Pennant, Colonel Douglas, 360-61

Pennington, Dr., 154

Penrhyn Castle, 360-61

Percival, Mrs., 5

Petre, Edward, 177

Petre, Lady, 74, 177

Petre, Miss, 177

Petre, Mr., 28

Phipps, Mr., at Hatfield, 176

_Pickwick_, 298

Pidcock, Dr., 92

Pierpont, Mr., 188

Pinjore, 313

Pitt, William, statue of, 185

Plunkett, Lord, 251

Ponsonby, Mr., 159

Portland, Duke of, 170

Pottinger, Sir Henry, 357

Preston, Mrs. T. H., 125, 329

_Pride and Prejudice_, 104

Prinsep, Henry Thoby, 320

Pugin, Mr., 386

Punjab, the, 308, 342


Quintin, St., Mrs. Darby, 81, 97, 160.
  _See_ Wellesley, Georgina


Rajmahal Hills, 277

Reform Bill, 212

Ribblesdale, Emma, Lady, _note_ 306, 396

Ribblesdale, Thomas, 2nd Lord, 224, _note_ 306

Rice, Rt. Hon. T. Spring, 241, 244, 246

Rhinocera. _See_ Mrs. Percy Wyndham, 251

Riversdale, Lady, 12

Road Murder, 399

Robinson, Hon. Amabel (Lady Grantham's child), 141-2, 145

Robinson, Hon. Anne, 25;
  Nocton, 119, 121, 123;
  sister's death, 142, 182;
  Greenwich, 213.
  _See_ Cowper, Lady, 394

Robinson children, 31

Robinson, Elinor (Lady Sarah Robinson's daughter), 113-14;
  death, 116, 124

Robinson, Rt. Hon. F. G., 101, 113;
  Nocton, 118-22.
  _See_ Goderich

Robinson, Hon. Frederick W., 25, 167;
  Lady Emily Cowper, 171, 178

Robinson, Hon. George (1st Marquis of Ripon), 113

Robinson, Hon. Mary (Mrs. Henry Vyner), 25, 119, 121, 123;
  admiration for Lady Grantham, 142

Robinson, Lady Sarah (Lady Goderich), 2, 18, 30, 36, 81;
  behaviour in Downing Street, 100;
  Wrest, 113;
  her child's illness and death, 114-17;
  Doctor's party, 118-20;
  Nocton, 121-4, 129.
  _See_ Goderich

Rogers, Mr., the poet, 35

Romilly, Sir Samuel, 26-7

Roopur, 304

Roos, Hon. Arthur de, death, 97

Roos, Hon. Cecilia de, marriage, 263

Roos, Charlotte, Baroness de, 139

Roos, Lady Georgina de, 83, 85, 200-202

Roos, Hon. Henry de (Lord de Roos), 134-5, 262

Roos, Hon. William de, 72;
  marriage, 83-5, 99, 105, 115, 182, 244, 262, 270

Rose, Mr., 40-41

_Rosenberg, Ella_, acted on board the _Jupiter_, 261

Ross, Lady Mary, 57, 71

Russell, Lord Charles, 75

Russell, Eliza, 75, 94-5

Russell, Francis, Col., 216

Russell, George, Captain, death, 94-5

Russell, Lord John, 306, 371-2, 377-8, 385, 389, 392

Russell, Lady John, death, _note_ 306

Russell, Lady John (Lady F. Anna Maria Elliot), 376

Russell, Lord William, 378

Ryder, Lady Mary, 40


Sale, Mr., 226

Salisbury, Emily, Marchioness of, 263

Salisbury, Frances, Marchioness of, 176-7, 204

Sandheads, the, 262

Sarpent, the (Hon. Henry de Roos), 134-5, 262

Saugur, 263

Selkirk, Earl and Countess of, 14, 15

_Semi-Attached Couple_, the, 404

_Semi-Detached House_, the, 390, 393

Seymour, Lady Mary, 279

Seymour, Mrs., 33

Shelley, Mr., 75

Shottesbrook, 2, 5, 12, 44, 111, 188

Showers, Captain, 335

Simla, 295, 302-5;
  gaiety at, 311

Singapore, 328

Singh, Kurruck, Maharajah, 308, 325

Singh, Runjeet, Maharajah, 260, 300-304, 308, 320, 342

Singh, Shere, 308

Skelmersdale, Lord, 216

Skelmersdale, Lady, 401

Smith, Sydney, 115-16

Spencer, Earl, 248

Sprotborough, 86, 92, 203

Stackpole, 137, 149

Stanford, Mrs. Charles, 79, 147, 329.
  _See_ Campbell, Pamela

Stanley, Hon. Edward (Lord Stanley), 236, 244, 303, 378, 386

Strangways, Giles Fox, 53

Strangways, Hon. William Fox, 53

Strangways, Lady Theresa, 9

Stratford Place, No. 2; 46

Strathfieldsaye, 81, 85

Strathfield Turgess, 80, 83-5

Strawberry Hill, 398

Strutt, Lady Charlotte, 73

Strutts, the, 74, 135

Studhouse, 244

Studley, 24

Sturt, Lady Charlotte, 188-9

Sue, Eugene, 388

Sugden, Rt. Hon. Sir Edward, 251

Sullivan, Mr., 43

Sullivan, Mrs., 242

Sussex, Duke of, 206

Sydney, Lady T., 248

Sydney, Viscount, 21


Taglioni, Mademoiselle, 171, 220

Talbot, Mr., 290

Talleyrand, Charles, Marquis de, 202, 214

Taylor, Letitia, 17

Taylor, Mr., 326, 328

Taylor, Mr. Pearce, 327

Thames Ditton, 36, 38, 43, 52, 73, 97

Thurlow, Captain, 350

Thynne, Lady Charlotte, 153;
  marriage, _note_ 180, 181, 183.
  _See_ Buccleuch

Thynne, Lord Edward, 192, 194-5

Thynne, Lord Henry, 91, 147;
  Miss Baring, 180-82, 184, 195

Thynne, Lady Louisa, 32.
  _See_ Cawdor

_Times, The_, 385, 391

Todd, D'Arcy, Major, 342

Torrens, Mr. See _note_ 290

Townshend, Miss, 21

Truval, 62

Tunbridge Wells, 101, 105

Tweddell, Mrs., 321


Union, Trades, 234


Valsomachi, Sir Demetrie, 198

Vansittart, Hon. Mrs. Arthur (Caroline Eden), 44, 96;
  daughter's marriage, 163;
  illness, 170-71; 179, 188;
  Broadstairs, 199, 200

Vansittart, Caroline, marriage, 163.
  _See_ Mostyn

Vansittart, Henry, 316

Vansittart, Miss, 11, 17

Vansittart, Rt. Hon. Nicholas, 1, 4, 11, 17.
  _See_ Bexley

Vansittart, William, 375

Verulam, Countess of, 310

Victoria, Queen, 288, 323, 372

Villiers, Mr. Charles, 170

Villiers, Mr. Edward, 214, 223

Villiers, F., 187

Villiers, George (Earl of Clarendon), 91-2;
  dealings with the Goderichs, 131; 152, 160, 161, 170;
  popularity in Dublin, 194; 196, 200, 208, 213;
  his brother's death, 223;
  in Spain, 228; 267, 294.
  _See_ Clarendon

Villiers, Hon. Mrs. George, 89, 92, 115, 131-2, 138, 184, 224

Villiers, Lady H., 310

Villiers, Mr. Hyde, 199

Villiers, Lord, 221

Villiers, Rt. Rev. the Hon. Montagu (Bishop of Durham), 375

Villiers, Miss (Lady Theresa Lewis), 58, 109, 115, 143, 156, 159, 163;
  Italy, 167-8;
  marriage, 198.
  _See_ Lister

Voisins, Monsieur de, 221

Vyner, Miss, 20


Wade, Claude, Captain, 300

Waghorn, Lieut., 285

Waldegrave, Frances, Countess, 398

Wall, Baring (son of Charles Wall), 78, 91, 101, 104, 128, 151-2, 188,
     189, 221

Wall, Mrs. Charles, 153;
  her charm, 188

Wallscourt, Lady, 173

Ward, Mr., 399

Warren, Dr., 114, 117, 119

Warrender, Sir George, 17

Waterloo, 13-15

Way, Lady, 69-70

Way, General Sir Gregory, 67, 69

Wellesley, Arthur, 81

Wellesley, Georgina, 81, 97.
  _See_ Quintin, St.

Wellesley, Rev. the Hon. Gerald, 81

Wellesley, Mrs. Richard (Mary Drummond), birth of, 140

Wellesley, Richard, _note_ 382, 390

Wellesley, Mary (Lady Cadogan), 81

Wellesley, Richard, Marquis Wellesley, 232, 242, 340

Wellington, Duke of, 139, 156-7, 162, 169;
  Hatfield, 177;
  Ewhurst, 188, 246-7, 370

Wesley, John, 94

West, Dr., 114, 117, 119

Westminster Abbey, fire, 179

Weymouth, Viscount, 32

Whishaw, Mr., 8, 10-11

Wilberforce, Samuel, 372

Wildman, Mrs., 27

William IV., King, 198, 244, 246-8;
  letter to Miss Eden, 258

Williams, Sir Charles Hanbury, 8

Wilson, Mrs., her school, 282

Winchester, John, Marquis of, 251

Winyard, Mr. and Mrs., 30

Woburn, 52, 75, 194

Wood, Rt. Hon. Sir Charles, 401

Worcester, Lord, 77

Wortley, Mr. J., 176-7

Wrest Park, 113, 190

Wright, Miss (Miss Eden's maid), 96, 160, 268, 282

Wuertemburg, King of, 198

Wyndham, Hon. Mrs. Percy, birth, 250, 251

Wynn, Mr., 22, 24

Wynn, Miss, 22


Yonge, Charlotte M., 387, 400

York, Duke of, 59


THE END


_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.

_Macmillan and Co.'s New Books_

=The Life of Lord Kitchener of Khartoum.= By Sir GEORGE ARTHUR, Bt.,
M.V.O. Private Secretary to Lord Kitchener, 1914-16. With Portraits. 3
vols. 8vo.

=Life of William Booth, the Founder of the Salvation Army.= By HAROLD
BEGBIE. With Photogravure Portraits and other Illustrations. 2 vols.
8vo.

=The Letters of Henry James.= Edited by PERCY LUBBOCK. With two Portraits.
2 vols. 8vo.

=Samuel Butler.= Author of "Erewhon" (1835-1902). A Memoir. By HENRY
FESTING JONES. With 20 Illustrations, including two Facsimile Letters. 2
vols. 8vo. L2: 2s. net.

=From Liberty to Brest-Litovsk: The First Year of the Russian Revolution.=
By ARIADNA TYRKOVA-WILLIAMS. 8vo.

=A Private in the Guards.= By STEPHEN GRAHAM, author of "With the Russian
Pilgrims to Jerusalem," "Priest of the Ideal," etc. 8vo.

=A History of the British Army.= By the Hon. J. W. FORTESCUE. Vols. IX.
and X. With Maps. 8vo.

=The Grenadier Guards in the Great War of 1914-1918.= By
Lieutenant-Colonel the Right Hon. Sir FREDERICK PONSONBY (late Grenadier
Guards). With Photogravure Portraits and Plans. 3 vols. 8vo.


OFFICIAL HISTORY OF THE WAR.

Prepared under the direction of the Historical Section of the Committee
of Imperial Defence.

=Military Operations.= Vol. I. (To December 1914.) Western Theatre. Mons
to the Aisne and the first Battle of Ypres. By the Hon. J. W. FORTESCUE,
author of "A History of the British Army," etc. With Maps. 8vo.

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.


_Macmillan and Co.'s New Books_

=Democracy.= By the Right Hon. Viscount BRYCE, O.M., P.C., D.C.L., LL.D.,
F.R.S. 8vo.

=Europe in the Melting Pot.= By R. W. SETON-WATSON, D.Litt. With Maps.
Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

=Europe in the Nineteenth Century.= By F. J. C. HEARNSHAW, LL.D.,
Professor of History in King's College, London. Crown 8vo.

=Pan-Islam.= By G. WYMAN BURY, author of "The Land of Uz," and "Arabia
Infelix: or the Turks in Yamen." With Map. 8vo.

=French Ways and their Meanings.= By EDITH WHARTON. Crown 8vo.

=Through Deserts and Oases of Central Asia.= By Miss ELLA SYKES, F.R.G.S.,
author of "Through Persia on a Side-Saddle," etc., and Brigadier-General
Sir PERCY SYKES, K.C.I.E., C.M.G., author of "A History of Persia," etc.
With Illustrations and Map. 8vo.

=Profit and Sport in British East Africa.= Being a Second Edition, revised
and enlarged, of "A Colony in the Making." By Captain the Lord
CRANWORTH, M.C. With Maps and Illustrations. 8vo.


THE BLUE GUIDES. New Volume.

=England.= Edited by FINDLAY MUIRHEAD. With numerous Maps and Plans. Globe
8vo.


HIGHWAYS AND BYWAYS SERIES. New Volume.

=Highways and Byways in Northumbria.= By P. ANDERSON GRAHAM. Illustrated
by HUGH THOMSON. Extra Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.