Of the Black Mantles who supported us, two went down quickly and were
trampled on; Raoul was bleeding in the face, and I had received a nasty
cut across the head; but Armand d'Arçy and his friends were breaking
through the crowd, while the cries of "Orleans!" and "Condé" redoubled.

Suddenly in the midst of it, my sword snapped against a pike-head, and
in another instant I should have been killed but for Madame Coutance,
who, with the heavy end of the coachman's whip, struck my assailant
across the forehead, felling him like a log.

Taken by surprise, I turned to glance at my deliverer, when a brawny
fellow with fiery red hair, whose weapon had been wrenched from him in
the fray, leaped at my throat.  By the flame of a lackey's torch I saw
he was as ugly a rascal as one would find in Paris.  He had a huge
mouth, with yellow, wolf-like teeth; his face was scarred in a dozen
places; the bridge of his nose had at one time been broken, while the
veins of his neck stood out like cords, A pair of tattered breeches and
the remnant of a shirt constituted his fighting costume.

Missing my neck, he caught me round the body just under the arm-pits,
but leaving my arms free.  For a second or two I was held as in a vice;
I thought my ribs would crack under the pressure, and struggled wildly
for breath.  The main fight went on around us unheeded, as we swayed to
and fro, now lurching against the broken carriage, now pushed under the
heels of the kicking horses, or stumbling beneath the weapons of the
other combatants.

I could no longer distinguish anything clearly, and the shouting
sounded in my ears like the thunderous roaring of the ocean.  Blood was
running from my nostrils; the pain in my chest might have been caused
by red-hot knives; it was almost impossible to breathe.  The fellow was
slowly crushing me, and I was helpless.  I should have cried aloud in
agony, but could make only a faint gurgling noise.  Closer and closer
pressed the iron grip; my eyes burned like fire, while my breath came
in short, stifling gasps.  Still I stood firmly on the ground with my
feet wide apart, and, strong as my assailant was, he had not beaten me
completely.

If only I could get a breath of air into my lungs!  It was my one
chance and the last; but the brawny ruffian, guessing how nearly gone I
was, hugged me ever the more tightly, till it seemed that the unequal
strife could not last another second.  Whether the final result was
brought about by my last desperate effort, or was due to chance, I
could not tell, but suddenly both of us, locked as we were in each
other's arms, fell.  I was underneath, but, strangely enough, the
pressure relaxed, and my assailant uttered a deep groan.

Presently the heavy weight lying across my body was removed; I began to
breathe, and to wonder what had happened.  Very slowly I opened my eyes
and gazed in astonishment at the altered scene.

The street was in possession of the Queen's Guards, at whose approach
the rioters, acting on instructions from their leaders, had fled,
carrying their wounded comrades with them.  In the middle of the
roadway stood a group of young gallants--all of whom had borne a part
in the fray, and several Black Mantles, attending to a slightly injured
man!  Raoul and Armand d'Arçy were wiping the blood from my face, while
the Englishman was forcing some liquid between my teeth.

"How do you feel?" he asked.  "Can you stand?"

"Yes, there is nothing much wrong; only I have had a bear's hug, which
was by no means pleasant.  What has become of my opponent?"

"His friends carried him off.  He was insensible; one of the frightened
horses kicked him.  He was a savage customer."

"You had a narrow escape, my boy," said Raoul, smiling cheerfully; "you
were black in the face when we removed the fellow.  Now, lean on me,
you must pay your respects to the ladies."

"Salute the hero!" laughed D'Arçy.  "Bring flowers and wreathe a
garland for his brow.  Let the conqueror be crowned on the tented
field."

"Be still, D'Arçy," said Raoul, "your tongue runs like a woman's," and
he conducted me to Marie and her aunt, who, between them, made a pretty
speech in my honour.  They wished me to enter the carriage, which,
though badly damaged, remained fit for use; but to this I would not
agree, preferring to walk beside it.

While the coachman put his harness straight, and quietened his
frightened horses, the ladies spoke a few kind words to the wounded
Black Mantle who had fought for them so bravely.  Fortunately he had
not been seriously hurt, and was able, with the assistance of his
friends, to walk home.

Suddenly young D'Arçy, who could never remain long in a serious humour,
requested us to wait a few minutes, and without staying for answer
darted off to his friends, who immediately dispersed.

"What mischief is the young madcap bent on now?" I asked, wonderingly.

"Armand has a brilliant idea," Raoul replied, laughing, "be patient and
you will see."

Now that the excitement had cooled, I looked round for the Englishman,
but he had vanished, for which, when D'Arçy's hare-brained scheme
became plain, I was not altogether sorry.




CHAPTER XIII.

I again Encounter Maubranne.

The Queen's Guards had disappeared; the coachman was mounting to his
seat when Armand and his friends returned, flourishing lighted torches,
and singing a ridiculous song about the Abbé de Retz.

"A torchlight procession in honour of the bravery of the ladies!"
exclaimed D'Arçy with a merry laugh.  "Form your ranks, gentlemen; we
will teach the impudent little Abbé to keep his place!"

Holding torches in their left hands and naked swords in their right,
the youthful gallants fell in; some in front, others to the rear of the
carriage, while Raoul and I, unable to oppose this ludicrous whim,
walked on either side.  Marie, who did not favour D'Arçy's pleasantry,
sat so far back that her face could not be observed, but her aunt
entered into the fun, and laughed merrily when the torchbearers,
catching some luckless wight, forced him to bow humbly before the
carriage and to cry, "_Vivent les Dames!_"

The glare of the torches, the trampling of feet, the songs and laughter
of the escort, brought the people out in crowds, which compelled us to
proceed at a slow pace.  Here and there we heard a growl of "Down with
Condé!" but for the most part the worthy citizens enjoyed the spectacle
and cheered heartily.

In the Rue Michel we were brought to a halt, and it appeared as if a
second and more serious blood-letting would occur.  The narrow street
was already crowded, and a carriage, preceded by half-a-dozen lackeys
bearing torches, came towards us.  Casting a furtive glance at Raoul, I
discovered him looking anxiously at me; it was obvious to us both that
one party must turn back, but, unfortunately for any peaceful
intentions we might have had, young D'Arçy who led the van, showed no
sign of yielding.

"Make room there!" he shouted imperiously, as if he were Condé himself,
and the people, cowed by our display of strength, parted to right and
left, leaving a clear passage.

This gave us a clearer view of the other carriage, and I noticed with
dismay that it must belong to some important personage.  Behind rode a
number of cavaliers richly dressed, and what was more to the purpose,
well armed.  Suddenly a mocking cry from Armand informed us who it was
that paraded the streets thus numerously attended.

"Bring your torches nearer, gentlemen, that we may observe the red hat
of our little friend the better!" he exclaimed.

A burst of mocking laughter greeted this speech, as every one knew how
De Retz had been tricked by Mazarin, and how furious he was at having
failed to obtain a Cardinal's hat.  Even the bystanders, most of whom
were the Abbé's friends, joined in the laugh, for your true Parisian
loves nothing so much as ridicule.

"Poor little man," cried one of the gallants, with assumed sympathy,
"it is difficult for him to hit on the exact shade to suit his beauty
best!"

Now, as De Retz was one of the ugliest men in France, this pleasantry
was not likely to be well received, and I ran to the front with the
idea of preserving peace.  At the same time the Abbé, followed by my
cousin, left the carriage, and the cavaliers pressed up from behind.
Instead of retreating, Armand stood his ground firmly, and continued
waving his lighted torch in the face of the Abbé, crying, "Make way for
His Eminence!  The Cardinal wishes to visit the ladies his mob tried to
murder!"

"Eh?  What's that?  Ladies?  Murder?  What do you mean?" cried the
Abbé, affecting not to notice the ridicule.

"Permit me to give your gentlemen the word," interposed Henri, "and
these popinjays shall soon be cleared from your path."

"The popinjays will take some time to clear!" remarked Armand laughing.
"I am not acquainted with any law which gives a private citizen, even
though he be a prospective cardinal, sole right to the streets of
Paris."

Now my cousin Henri was not noted for his lamb-like temper, so, without
waiting for the Abbé's commands, he drew his sword and rushed at
D'Arçy, crying, "On guard!"

Another instant and the Rue Michel would have become the scene of
fierce combat, but, unseen by us, a stranger quietly pushed his way
through the crowd, and placed himself without the least hesitation
between the combatants.  I gazed at him with interest.  He was a tall,
finely-built man, with a long, flowing beard, and the most resolute
face I had yet beheld in Paris.  His eyes were bright, shrewd, and
piercing, his chin was square and firm, every line of his features
betokened power and the habit of command.  Looking at him one was
tempted to exclaim, "Here at least is a man!"

He wore the long robe of a councillor, and carried no weapon, but he
would have been a daring man who attacked him.  The danger in which he
stood troubled him not at all; he did not seem even to be aware of it.

"Put up your swords, gentlemen," he said quietly, and as if quite sure
that no one would question his right to command.  Then, turning to De
Retz he added in the same cool tones, "Monsieur l'Abbé, I am surprised
you have not sufficient influence to prevent a breach of the peace!  It
ill becomes a dignitary of the Church to be taking part in a street
brawl."

I can hardly imagine that De Retz was awed by the speaker--perhaps he
had private reasons for avoiding a quarrel with this strong, purposeful
man: at least he showed no offence at the rebuke, and not only
requested Henri to sheathe his sword, but actually offered a half
apology for the quarrel, which really was none of his seeking.

"One must always yield to the ladies!" he exclaimed gallantly, and,
with a courteous bow to the stranger, ordered his coach to be turned
back.

"Who is he?" I asked Raoul, as the peacemaker, after scolding D'Arçy
for his rudeness, and bidding him be less hasty in future, withdrew.

"Matthew Mole, the first President, and the only honest public man in
France," replied Raoul bitterly, as he resumed his place in the
procession.

The torch-bearers were not yet weary of their mischief, but the
encounter with De Retz rendered them less demonstrative, and the
remainder of the journey passed without incident.  On arriving at the
Rue Crillon, in order to keep up the character of the play, Armand
marshalled his comrades in two lines, forming a kind of triumphal
passage for Marie and her aunt.

As soon as the ladies entered their house the escort dispersed, some
going one way, some another, Raoul and I walked away together, and
D'Arçy, still bubbling over with fun, accompanied us.

"A nice evening's amusement," laughed the young scamp; "but what was it
all about?  _Ma foi_, Beauchamp, I shall have to look after you more
carefully in the future, or you will be getting into further scrapes!"

"Take care yourself," I suggested, "or De Retz will lay you by the
heels.  He won't be in a hurry to forgive this night's work."

"Oh! the Abbé is a man of sense; he will laugh at the joke to-morrow,
and accept his defeat gracefully.  What a firebrand your cousin is!
Did you notice his eyes flash?  I thought he meant to make mincemeat of
me!  It is a pity you are always against him; he will take quite a
dislike to you."

"Peleton and Maubranne are more to be feared than Henri," said Raoul.
"Each of them has several scores to settle with our friend."

"And with you and D'Arçy!"

"Yes, but we possess powerful patrons; you have none.  If Peleton
stabbed either of us in the back he would have to answer to the Duke of
Orleans, but who is there to champion your quarrel?  Come with us to
the Luxembourg, and let us introduce you to the Duke.  There is no
dishonour in taking fresh service now that Mazarin has fled."

"Still I intend to stand by the Cardinal!"

"Bravo!" cried Armand; "never desert your colours!  I wish, though,
that you belonged to our side."

"You will come over to us yet," I said.  "A week ago you were hand in
glove with De Retz; now you are Condé's friends.  Next week----"

"That is too far off to consider," laughed Armand.  "Next week?  Why
there are several days before that time arrives!  Your mind flies too
fast, my boy.  I have yet to hear what led to such a hubbub this
evening!"

"A mere trifle," remarked Raoul; "Madame Coutance behaved foolishly.
The Abbé's mob ordered her to cry 'Down with Condé!' and she told them
they weren't fit to be his doormat."

"She has plenty of pluck!"

"It is a pity she hasn't a little more common-sense.  To-night she
might have set all Paris by the ears through her want of thought.
Mazarin was right in declaring she is like a child playing with fire."

"By the way," asked Raoul, "who was the soldier fighting for us?  By
his uniform he should be one of the Queen's Guards."

"He does belong to them.  He is an Englishman named Humphreys, and a
right good fellow."

"A fine swordsman!  It was wonderful how he cleared a space; the people
were afraid to be anywhere near him."

"I must introduce him at the first opportunity.  You are sure to like
him."

"Not as an opponent," laughed Raoul; "and he doesn't seem likely to be
anything else at present.  Well, we turn off here; I shall see you at
the end of the week."

"Meanwhile keep your eyes open!" D'Arçy advised, as they proceeded
towards the Luxembourg, while I, crossing the Pont Neuf, turned down by
the Quai.

I had at the time a great deal to think of.  Being young and strong, I
cared little for the threatened danger, but my stock of money was
running low, and I foresaw that, unless something unexpected happened,
I should be stranded before long for want of funds.

Thus far, I thought bitterly, my search for fortune had not met with
much success.  Twice I had been within an ace of death, and my body
still bore the marks of several wounds.  Mazarin, to whose service I
was pledged, had been banished, and I could find another patron only
among his enemies.  Completely wrapped up in these thoughts, I wandered
along the dirty quay, and turning mechanically in the proper direction,
reached the Rue des Catonnes.

The next day I increased my stock of ready money by the sale of my
horse, which enabled me to carry on again for a time, and I hoped that
before the supply was exhausted a fresh turn of fortune's wheel would
relieve my difficulties.  Raoul, of course, would have lent me his
purse freely, but that I did not wish.

During the evening my English friend came across from the Palais Royal
for a chat about the adventure of the previous night.  Like Raoul, he
blamed Madame Coutance for her stupid behaviour, speaking his mind
freely, and not stopping to choose his words.

"Did you return with your comrades?" I asked.

"Yes, and a lucky thing too, or I should have got into worse trouble.
As it was, our captain reproved me severely for engaging in a street
brawl.  Upon my word I think my brain must be softening."

"What is the matter?"

"Matter?" he cried, banging his fist on the table.  "Why, it takes a
man all his time to find out where he stands in this topsy-turvy city.
Just tell me what this commotion is about, will you?  It may be easy
enough for a Frenchman to understand, but for me--it makes my head
swim."

He listened attentively while I explained the situation, asking a
question here and there, and turning the answers over in his mind.

"Oh," he observed at the end, "the affair is simple enough after all.
The Queen has only to clap Orleans, Condé, and De Retz into the
Bastille, and the trick is done.  If their friends grumbled, why they
could go too, and fight out their quarrels in prison.  What is the use
of being a Queen if you don't rule?"

"Your plan is excellent, but it would bring about civil war, and we
don't want that."

"But you have it now!" he objected quickly.  "What else was the visit
of the mob to the Palace the other night?  And this Condé--he issues
his orders like a king, though according to you he is only a subject.
I would have no such subjects in my country."

"The trouble must be over soon.  The King will be proclaimed of age on
his fourteenth birthday, and all parties will rally round him."

"A good thing for the country!" said he, rising.  "Well, I must get
back; I am on guard to-night."

It was dreary work sitting in my room alone, so, putting on my hat, I
strolled into the streets, and finally found myself at the house in the
Rue Crillon.  Madame Coutance was at home, and she received me with
high good-humour, calling me one of her knights-errant, and declaring I
had helped to save her life, which was really true.

It was interesting to observe how differently the two ladies regarded
the same circumstance.  The elder one could talk only of the romantic
parts; the challenge of the mob, the defiance, the fight, the arrival
of the soldiers, the torchlight procession, the humbling of De Retz.
Marie, on the contrary, cared little for these things; all her anxiety
was for the people who had been injured.

"The more I see of these troubles, the more hateful they become," she
said.  "They have divided families, and parted friends; they have
starved the poor and desolated the country, and no good has resulted
from them."

"The country requires a strong man like Condé to hold the reins,"
remarked her aunt.

"Or a learned priest like De Retz," I put in slily, and was met at once
by strong expressions of dissent; Marie, in particular, declaring she
would rather hear of the recall of Mazarin, which I ventured to
prophesy would be the outcome of these petty squabbles.

The girl seemed rather sad, and I was not surprised when she said, "I
wish we were back at Aunay, away from the turmoil.  There is no peace
in this continual whirl of excitement.  I am always thinking some evil
is going to happen."

"Nonsense," exclaimed her aunt.  "How can there be any danger now that
Condé has returned to his rightful place?  De Retz will never dare to
harm the prince's friends," a naïve remark, which much amused me.

It was late when I left the house, and the street was nearly deserted.
Standing a moment on the step, I suddenly became aware of an
ill-dressed fellow evidently watching me from the shelter of a door-way
nearly opposite.

"A spy!" I concluded, "and a very clumsy one, too.  I wonder if he has
been set to dog me?"

I crossed the road carelessly, when the fellow, no doubt hoping he had
not been noticed, slipped off, and, on my following a short distance,
he darted into a narrow street and disappeared.  Puzzled by this
strange behaviour, I hid in the shadow of a wall, and kept a patient
watch for over an hour, but he did not return.

"Chut!" I exclaimed at last, "Raoul has shaken my nerves with his
warning of Peleton and Maubranne.  Most likely the man did not know me
from Adam."  I endeavoured to dismiss the incident from my mind, yet I
could think of little else during the walk home, and even the next day
the memory of it clung to me.  It seemed absurd to suppose that any one
would spy on my actions, but in those days nothing was too absurd to be
true.

"Well," I thought, "it can soon be tested.  I will visit the Rue
Crillon again to-night, and keep a sharp look-out."

The streets as usual were extremely noisy; the citizens were out in
crowds, and several slight scuffles occurred between the friends of
Condé and De Retz.  Taking no notice of these squabbles, I proceeded
briskly to the Rue Crillon, and there found my man in his hiding-place.
He was carefully watching the house opposite, but as soon as I appeared
within sight he vanished.

"Oh, oh," said I to myself, with a chuckle, "it is Madame Coutance you
are watching, is it?  Well, my friend, you will find that two can play
at that game!" and, discovering a quiet corner, I stood flattened
against the wall with my face muffled.

Two hours passed, but the man did not re-appear, and, when midnight
arrived without any incident, I left the Rue Crillon, which was now
almost deserted.

In a side street a number of people were cheering loudly for Condé, and
farther on I met half a dozen cavaliers evidently returning from some
meeting.  One was Baron Maubranne.  Willing to keep out of mischief, I
drew aside to let him pass, hoping he would not recognise me.  He
passed on singing lustily, but a second man stared insolently into my
face.  Keeping my temper, though my fingers itched to chastise the
fellow, I went on my way, thinking the danger past; but in this I was
wrong.

To reach the Pont Neuf it was necessary to traverse a narrow dingy
court, and here my life and my story nearly came to an end together.

Still thinking of the mysterious spy in the Rue Crillon, and not at all
of Maubranne's friends, I proceeded slowly, paying little heed to my
route.  Happily for me the court was very quiet; the inmates had
retired to rest, and nothing broke the stillness of the night.

Suddenly I stopped, with my hand on my sword, and listened intently.
From behind came the swift patter of footsteps, and turning round I
perceived dimly the figure of a man gliding along in the shadow of the
wall.  Before I could get my sword free he sprang at me, and, in
endeavouring to avoid the blow, I fell heavily.  With a jeering laugh
the assassin flourished his sword, and, as I caught sight of his face,
all hope vanished, for the man was Peleton.  Looking down at me, he
gripped his weapon more firmly, and prepared to strike home.

"You are a clever lad," said he tauntingly, "but all the skill in the
world won't save you now.  I intend to pay off my old debts."

The fall had half stunned me, but the sound of his voice and the gleam
of steel brought back my senses.  I was struggling to regain my feet,
when I heard a hoarse shout, and the next instant Peleton's weapon went
flying into the air.  A second man had run up hurriedly, and was
gripping my assailant's arm.

"Fool!" cried he, "can't you wait?  Don't you know the Abbé has need of
him?  A plague on your stupid temper; it will ruin everything.  Put up
your sword, M. de Lalande," for by now I was standing on guard, "our
friend here has made a trifling mistake, that is all."

It was difficult to refrain from laughing at the man's coolness.  He
spoke as if a sword thrust was a matter hardly to be considered; but I
thanked him, nevertheless, for having saved my life.

"Not at all, not at all!" he replied.  "There is nothing to be thankful
for.  I only grudged my friend the pleasure of paying his score before
my own account was settled."

By this time I had recognised Maubranne, who, for some reason best
known to himself, had interfered to prevent my being killed.  Now he
rejoined Peleton, who meanwhile had groped about in the darkness and
recovered his sword, and the two worthies departed together, leaving me
in a state of considerable amazement.




CHAPTER XIV.

I Fall into a Trap.

For a short while I remained trying to understand clearly what had
happened, but it was all so strange that I could make nothing of it.
There was, of course, no mystery in Peleton's attempt on my life, but
what was I to think of Maubranne's rescue?

The baron had distinctly stated I had no reason to thank him, I was
only enjoying a respite, and that for the oddest of reasons--the Abbé
had need of me!  What could be made of so astounding a remark as that?
De Retz was no friend to me, while almost every act of mine had been
opposed to his interests.  Without having the least suspicion as to the
actual truth, I felt that the Abbé's plans boded me no good.  I was
like a person groping in the darkness, and expecting every moment to
fall into a deep pit.

"Can't you wait?" Maubranne had asked.

For what was Peleton to wait?  And how could it affect me?  Why should
the fellow's temper spoil everything?  From Maubranne's words it
appeared that the success of their scheme, whatever it was, depended on
me.  Yet from the very beginning I had fought them tooth and nail.

"This business will drive me crazy," I muttered, "it is worse than the
muddle at La Boule d'Or.  Both these blackguards would gladly give me a
few inches of steel, and yet, having me wholly in their power, they do
me no injury.  It is evident that I, in some manner, am to further the
interests of their party.  Am I to be offered a bribe?"

This was making myself out to be a person of some consequence, but I
could think of nothing else.  However, it was useless to stand there
all night, so, keeping a keen look-out for fresh danger, I hurried from
the court and made straight for the Pont Neuf.  A few night-birds were
abroad, but I passed on swiftly, keeping well within the shadow of the
walls.

As it chanced, the night's adventures were not finished even yet.
Turning into the Rue des Carolines, I was almost at home, when a man,
slipping from the shadow of a doorway, swung a lantern in my face.
Peleton's cowardly attack had put me on my guard, and in less than a
second my sword was at the fellow's throat.

He was either very stupid or very brave.

"M. de Lalande?" said he quietly, and, thrusting a folded paper into my
hand, vanished.

I ran a few yards hoping to catch him, but he was soon swallowed up in
the darkness, and there was nothing for it but to return.  In my room I
opened the packet with nervous haste.  The letter, or rather note,
consisted of only a few words, and had no signature.  I gazed at the
writing curiously, it was cramped, partly illegible, and in a man's
hand.  By supplying a letter here and there I managed to piece together
the strange message.

"When the net is spread openly, only a foolish bird will be ensnared.
A wise one will fly away.  An old story relates how a swallow once
found safety in the tents of an army."

Nothing more!  I read it through again and again till I had learned
every word by heart.  Who wrote it?  I knew not.  I counted no friends
among the enemy, and danger was hardly likely to come from Raoul's
party.  Peleton's attempt to murder me was merely the outcome of
personal spite, and had nothing to do with this fresh adventure.  Yet,
on one point, the message was clear.  Some peril threatened me, and my
best chance of safety lay in flight.  But why?  I sat down to thresh
the matter out.

Including my cousin, I had three enemies.  Henri disliked me, because I
had, to a certain extent, spoiled his plans; yet I did not, for an
instant, imagine that he sought my life--that was out of all reason.
There remained Maubranne and Peleton, either of whom would kill me
without scruple, but that very night the baron had interfered to save
my life!  Once more I was forced back on the mystery attached to his
words.  What was it the Abbé proposed to do with me?  Buzz! buzz! buzz!
The question hummed in my head till I was nearly wild.  It went with me
to bed, it kept me awake half the night, and was the first thing I was
conscious of in the morning.

Directly after breakfast, I hurried to the Luxembourg to take counsel
with Raoul.  He was on duty, but young D'Arçy, observing my agitation,
volunteered to relieve him.

"What is it?" asked my comrade anxiously.  "Has anything happened?
Here, come into this room where we shall not be interrupted."

Without delay I plunged into the story, telling him first of the
mysterious spy in the Rue Crillon, the encounter with Peleton, and
Maubranne's strange action and words.

"Well, my friend," said he, "you have an adventure on hand now that
ought to keep your time fairly occupied!  I don't understand it in the
least, but it is plain you have become an important person.  There is
one thing I would like to know, but don't answer if you would rather
not.  Are you in Mazarin's secrets?"

"I have heard nothing of the Cardinal since my visit to Aunay."

"Then that notion falls to the ground.  I thought De Retz might imagine
you could give him some useful information.  And yet, I don't know.
People say he is already in the Queen's confidence."

"Well," I remarked, "if the first chapter is exciting, what do you
think of the second?" and I showed him the warning note, which he read
with a strangely puzzled air.

"Where did this come from?" he asked, and I informed him, adding that
the messenger was a total stranger whom I should be unable to recognise.

"Still," said he, "it shows there is some one in the Abbé's confidence
who wishes you well.  I wonder if it can be Madame de Chevreuse?  She
is concerned with most of his plans."

"I have not met her since the night of the ball and besides, this is a
man's writing."

"That can be accounted for easily; she employs several secretaries."

I shook my head, saying Madame de Chevreuse was not likely to interest
herself in my welfare.

After walking about the room for a time, Raoul stopped and exclaimed,
"Suppose we are looking at the matter from the wrong side?  How can you
be certain this note comes from a friend?  It may be a trick to lure
you away from Paris!"

"If so, it will fail.  I will not leave the city for an hour, even were
Turenne to offer me the command of a regiment."

"Why not accept service with the Duke?  You would be in a much safer
position."

"No.  I will see this thing through alone.  I will not budge a foot for
all the fighting priests in the country."

"Don't be over venturesome.  De Retz is a crafty foe and is playing
just now for high stakes.  If rumour speaks true, he is going to try a
fall with Condé himself.  Now I must set Armand at liberty, but I will
come to your rooms at the first opportunity.  Meanwhile, if you require
help, a note will bring me instantly."

I returned home still in a state of bewilderment.  The mystery was as
dark as ever, and, cudgel my brains as I would, I could throw no light
on it.

That same evening I laid the case before John Humphreys, but naturally
he was unable to offer any explanation.

"Show me an enemy," said he, "and I will stand up against him, but I am
a poor hand at fighting shadows.  However, it is plain enough that some
one has marked you down, and you will have to walk warily."

That, indeed, was the only advice any one could offer.  The thing which
troubled me most at this time was the presence of the spy in the Rue
Crillon.  The ladies apparently had not noticed him, so I said nothing
to them, but continued to keep a strict watch on the mysterious
stranger who night after night prowled about near their house.  What he
expected to gain was difficult to imagine, as he neither followed
Madame Coutance abroad nor attempted to molest her.  At first I thought
him a clumsy fellow, but twice when I tried to catch him he vanished
cleverly down the narrow streets.

One evening, while strolling carelessly along the Rue Pierre, I met my
cousin Henri.  He was wearing a long mantle with a hood, and appeared
in a great hurry.  To my surprise, however, he stopped and exclaimed
quite cordially, "Ah, cousin, you are a stranger!  I have not seen you
for a long time.  I was sorry to hear of Peleton's mad prank.  Were you
hurt?"

"No," said I, rather shortly.

"You are a lucky fellow, Albert.  For a lad from the country, you have
done well.  _Peste!_  You have made quite a splash in the world, and I
am proud of my cousin."

"You do me great honour," said I, with a mocking bow.

"Not more than you deserve.  By the way, is it true that you have
joined Condé's party?"

"Why?"

"Because you were with his mob when Madame Coutance behaved so
stupidly."

"I did my best to save a woman from being torn to pieces--nothing more."

"It was very gallant of you," and then, as an afterthought, "so you
still fancy there is a chance of Mazarin's return?"

"There may be, or not.  I only know that I am pledged to assist him,
and that the De Lalandes have been taught to keep their word."

"Quite right!" returned Henri, gaily.  "Well, adieu, my faithful
cousin!  Your constancy is touching, and I hope it may bring you good
fortune, but of that I am doubtful," and, with a careless laugh, he
hurried on.

"Planning some fresh mischief!" I muttered, and dismissed the incident
from my mind.

Nearly a week had now passed since the receipt of the mysterious note,
and nothing of consequence had happened.  Every day I went into the
streets without disguise or attempt at concealment, and no one paid any
attention to my doings.

About this time the city was considerably agitated, and filled with all
sorts of conflicting rumours.  Among other things it was hinted that
Mazarin, having re-entered France, was marching at the head of a
foreign army on Paris, with the avowed object of razing it to the
ground.

De Retz, laughing in his sleeve, went about attended by a numerous and
well-armed retinue to protect him from being murdered; Condé followed
his example, and the _petits maîtres_ swaggered more than ever,
especially when they met the friends of De Retz; at the Hôtel Vendôme,
the Duke of Beaufort stayed in bed, having, according to rumour, been
poisoned; while Gaston of Orleans was popularly supposed to have joined
four separate plots in one day, and betrayed them all to the Queen
before night.  Thus far, however, nothing serious had resulted from
these wonderful doings, and I was chiefly concerned with my own private
affairs.

"It seems to me," I said to Raoul one night, as we walked together
toward the Rue Crillon, "that we have been making a mountain out of a
mole-hill.  More than a week has passed now since the warning, and I am
none the worse."

"Yet the spy still keeps watch?"

"He was there last night, but I could not get near him.  Perhaps you
may have better luck."

The man was in his usual place, and I pointed him out to Raoul,
whispering, "That is he.  Are you acquainted with him?"

"No.  He belongs to the class that either De Retz or Condé can buy by
the dozen.  Don't look that way.  Let us cross the road.  I will slip
through this alley and enter the street at the other end; then we shall
have him between us."

Unfortunately for our purpose the fellow was particularly wide-awake,
and as Raoul appeared at the corner he moved away.  Following
cautiously, we kept him in sight for a good distance, but finally he
disappeared in a maze of alleys.

"_Peste!_" exclaimed my comrade, discontentedly, "he is an artful
rascal.  If we could catch him he might be able to tell us all we want
to learn.  There must be some reason for his actions.  Is he always
alone?"

"Always."

"We must set a trap for him."

"Let me try once more by myself.  I dislike the idea of being beaten by
a spy."

"As you will; and if you fail, I will borrow some troopers from the
Luxembourg and lay him by the heels.  At all events the fellow will
know who pays him."

The next night I set off for the Rue Crillon, and, after spending an
hour or two with Marie and her aunt, went back into the street.  My
man, as usual, was in full view, and it appeared to me, rather overdid
his part, as if he was anxious to attract my attention.

However, there was not much leisure for reflection, and I walked
quickly and boldly towards him, when he immediately made off.  Angry at
being baulked so often, and determined to discover his business, I
followed sharply, and nearly caught him at the bottom of the narrow
street running at right angles to the Rue Crillon.  A stupid
charcoal-burner lost me my advantage here, but perceiving which way the
spy went I hurried on in the same direction.

For half an hour I patiently tracked my quarry, through a network of
narrow streets and alleys crossing and re-crossing each other like an
Eastern puzzle.  By this time I was hopelessly astray, never having
been in that quarter, which was one of the worst in the city.  Under
other circumstances I should have feared to trust myself in those
horrible courts, but now I did not even remember the danger.

Presently the spy himself seemed doubtful as to which turning to take.
He stood a moment in apparent hesitation, but, finding me close on his
heels, darted as if at random up a narrow entrance.  It was a
_cul-de-sac_ containing perhaps half a dozen houses, and I chuckled
inwardly on finding how completely he had trapped himself.  I could not
have desired a better place for my purpose.  The court was very quiet;
the houses were old and dilapidated, and the inmates had either gone to
bed or had not returned from their nightly wanderings.  We two had a
clear stage to ourselves.

The man was a regular coward after all.  He looked this way and that
with frightened eyes, ran on a few paces as if hoping to find a way
out, came back, and finally made a dash to get past me.

"Oh, ho, not so fast, my good fellow!" I cried, barring his path.
"Where are you going in such a hurry?"

"I have lost my way, monsieur," he answered in a whining voice.

"How strange!  So have I!  We may as well keep each other company.
Don't look like that, I am not going to hurt you."

"I feared monsieur meant to kill me," he whimpered.

"Bah!  I only want a little information, which will be well paid for.
Are you willing to earn ten crowns?"

"Ten crowns, monsieur?  Certainly."

"Then tell me what you do in the Rue Crillon and who pays you?  Answer
these questions and here are the ten crowns."

"And if not, monsieur?" said he, still whining like a beggar.

"If not it will be the worse for you.  Quick, make your choice, I
cannot stay here for ever."

It was the rascal's turn now to laugh, as some one, throwing a heavy
mantle over my head, tripped me up violently.

"His sword, quick!  Take it away!  Tie his arms firmly; he is a mad
bull for fighting.  Now his pistols, François, you fat pig!  Softly
monsieur!  Tap him on the head if he struggles.  Are you ready, Pierre?
What a time! are your fingers in knots?  Now, monsieur, your
choice--will you come quietly or must we use force?"

I lay on the ground half dazed and only partly understanding the
fellow's meaning, so, to awaken my interest he repeated his questions,
pressing one of my own pistols to my head.

"Take that thing away," I said, "and help me to my feet.  You have the
upper hand at present."

Laughing mischievously, he withdrew the weapon, and his companions,
pushing me upright, half led, half dragged me into one of the
dilapidated houses.  We ascended a flight of stairs, went along a
narrow passage, and so into a room which had been prepared for my
reception.

At least, that was the conclusion I arrived at when two of the men
having gone out, the third said, "Monsieur, there is a bed of straw in
the corner, the door is bolted, the window barred, and I am going to
keep watch inside all night, while Pierre and François relieve each
other outside the door."

I could not see the speaker, as the room was in darkness, but his voice
sounded familiar, and I tried, but in vain, to remember where I had
heard it before.  However, this did not matter, so I lay down on the
straw, and wondered what the adventure meant.

Who were my gaolers, and what did they intend to do with me?  Presently
Maubranne's words flashed into my mind, and set me thinking that this
might be a move in the plot at which the mysterious note hinted.  Just
how De Retz could make use of me I had not the faintest notion, but he
was a clever schemer, and had, presumably, laid his plans carefully.
However, as no amount of speculation on this head would improve
matters, I began to reflect on the best way of escape.  My arms were
tightly bound, the door was well secured, the window barred, and a
gaoler, wide-awake and armed, sat between me and it.  Altogether the
prospect was far from cheering.

"Sleep will perhaps bring counsel," I muttered, and, turning on my
side, I dozed off into a light, restless slumber.

With the coming of day I was able to make an inspection of my new
abode.  The room was small, dirty, out of repair, and destitute of
furniture.  In the corner opposite to mine was another heap of straw,
and on it sat the man whom long ago I had gagged and bound in the
chamber at La Boule d'Or, and who afterwards was my companion from
Aunay to Paris.  Perceiving that I recognised him, the rascal showed
his teeth in a broad grin, and exclaimed, "The wheel has turned,
monsieur!  It seems that we have changed parts."

"And you are uppermost this time," I answered, striving to speak
good-humouredly, for it is a bad plan to quarrel with one's gaoler.

Rising and taking a turn round the room, Pillot stood still at my side.

"Listen to me, monsieur," said he.  "Some months ago I lost the game to
you and you acted like a lad of honour.  When your own life was in
danger you remembered me, and I am still grateful.  Now let me give you
a friendly warning.  Of course, you are planning to get away.  Abandon
the idea, as you cannot escape alive.  There is an armed man beneath
the window, while Pierre or François will knock you on the head without
the least hesitation.  We all have our orders."

"_Merci!_  It is just as well to know what one has to expect.  Do the
orders include starving your prisoner?"

"Here comes François in reply to the question; but you must pass your
word not to take advantage if I unbind you."

After a moment's reflection I gave the required promise, upon which
Pillot untied my arms, and then, opening the door, admitted François,
who carried the food.

"Here is breakfast, monsieur," said the dwarf, making an elaborate bow.
"It is not as good as the supper we enjoyed together in the village
inn, but François has not had much experience in the character of host.
Later on he will doubtless acquit himself better."




CHAPTER XV.

Under Watch and Ward.

As soon as breakfast ended my arms were bound again, and François took
his departure, leaving me with Pillot, who could not conceal his
amusement at my plight.

"Pardon me, monsieur," said he laughing, "it is comical!  You expected
to trap François, and behold, you are caught yourself!"

I tried to look at the rascal sternly, but the humour of the thing
tickled me so, that I joined in the laugh myself.  Truly I had gone out
for wool, and should return shorn!

"Tell me," said I presently, "am I forbidden to ask questions?"

"Why, no!  Indeed it would be impossible to stop monsieur, unless a gag
were placed in his mouth," and thinking, probably, of the incident at
La Boule d'Or, he showed his teeth in a broad grin.

"A truce to your mummery," I cried; "will you answer my questions?"

"I do not remember that monsieur has asked any?"

"Well, here is one.  How long am I to be kept in this den?"

"It is impossible to say precisely, but monsieur will not continue to
occupy this apartment for more than a day or two."

"A day or two?"  I thought my ears must have played me false.  Noticing
my surprise, he added, "Monsieur will have done his part by that time."

"What will happen then?"

"Ah!" said he, shrugging his shoulders and raising his eyes, "who can
tell?  We are all in the hands of Providence."

"True, my friend, but I am also in the hands of De Retz, which is
hardly as pleasant.  It seems that I have suddenly become a person of
some consequence!"

"Sufficiently important to have made many enemies, monsieur!"

"De Retz among them?"

"Chut! no; he would be pleased to call you his friend.  I was thinking
of personal enemies like M. Peleton and the Baron Maubranne.  The Abbé
and M. de Lalande will only use you for the good of the Cause; but I
distrust the others."

"The good of the Cause?  You speak in riddles, my friend!"

"It is necessary, monsieur; as it is, I have spoken too much."

"But you will answer one other question?  Why did that wretched
François prowl about the Rue Crillon?"

Pillot burst into a peal of such merry laughter that I thought he would
be choked, and it was long before he could reply.

"Pardon me, monsieur," he exclaimed at length, "but really the joke was
excellent.  François acted the spy only when you were about; and simply
to attract your attention.  He was the bait, and you--pardon the
expression--were the fish, though I, for one, did not expect to see you
landed so easily."

Pillot's explanation made the affair a trifle plainer, and showed how
foolishly I had acted.  Instead of being a stupid dolt, this François
was really a clever fellow, who had tricked me admirably.  My cheeks
burned as I saw what a dupe I had been.  As a matter of fact, he could
have slipped away at any moment, instead of which he had purposely
lured me on.  His hesitation at the corner of the _cul-de-sac_, his
apparent attempt to dash past me, his whining answers, all had their
purpose, and, while I reckoned myself master of the situation, Pillot
and the third man were creeping out of their hiding-places.  Truly, I
had myself been a stupid dolt!

Still there was one point which puzzled me, and I asked Pillot why the
fellow waited so long before playing his trick.

"François obeys orders," he replied.  "It would not have suited our
purpose to have shut you up before last night."

This sounded mysterious, but Pillot would not enlighten me further, and
alone I could make nothing of it.  Except on one point, the dwarf
talked freely enough, and was a very agreeable gaoler.  A true child of
Paris, he knew the city well, and having been mixed up in all sorts of
adventures, was able to relate numerous startling stories.  The time
passed pleasantly enough till about eleven o'clock, when he went away,
and his place was taken by the man called Pierre.

At first I was rather glad of the change, imagining this fellow might
be more simple, as indeed he was; so simple, in fact, that he knew
nothing.  He was a short man with a massive head, thick neck, broad
shoulders, and limbs like those of a gladiator.  He sniffed
contemptuously at the pistols which Pillot had left, but handled a huge
iron-shod club lovingly, and on being spoken to, grunted like a pig.
Sitting on the straw, he laid the club beside him, and, having cleared
a space, produced a dice-box and dice, with which he played left hand
against right.

After watching this monotonous game for half-an-hour, and finding
Pierre absolutely deaf to my questions, I turned my face to the wall
and tried to think.  Pillot's conversation had explained many things,
but unfortunately it threw no light on the reason for my imprisonment.
He had not denied that De Retz was the man behind the curtain, but what
was it the Abbé wished me to do?

The more I puzzled the more mysterious the affair looked.  I invented a
thousand reasons, all more or less fantastic and absurd, till my mind
grew wearied with thinking.  Meanwhile, Pierre sat on his heap of straw
calmly playing his ridiculous game, calling out the numbers as the dice
fell, but keenly alive to the slightest sound.

Thus miserably the afternoon wore away; the room grew dark; Pierre
packed up his dice, and, walking to the barred window, peered into the
darkness.  I wondered whether Raoul or John Humphreys had called at my
rooms, and if so, what they would think of my sudden disappearance.

Presently, I heard the sound of approaching footsteps; the door was
unfastened, and Pillot entered with a couple of candles stuck in broken
bottles, which only served to make the place more dreary than before.
Then François followed with some supper, and after he and Pierre had
departed, my gaoler did the honours of the table--or rather the
floor--like a generous host bent on pleasing his guest to the utmost.

He was rather excited, and talked so freely that I hoped to worm some
information out of him, but the rascal guarded his tongue well, only
letting fall a hint that we might take a long journey on the following
night.  Still I gathered from his air of mystery, and the importance he
displayed, that the plot--whatever its nature--was rapidly ripening.

"Now, monsieur," he observed, when we had finished supper, "I shall
leave you to the care of François.  Remember my warning, and do not
attempt to escape, because it is useless.  If all goes well we shall be
able to provide you with better accommodation in a day or two.
Meanwhile, you have only to enjoy yourself, and to thank the kind
friends who are keeping you out of mischief."

Having finished this pretty speech he took his departure, the door was
fastened, and François began his watch for the night.  Afraid, perhaps,
of falling asleep, he stalked up and down the room, stopping
occasionally beside my bed to hope that monsieur found himself well.
François was more polished than Pierre, and certainly replied to my
questions.  Only, whatever I asked, he answered, "I am truly sorry,
monsieur, but I do not know."

The fellow might have been a talking bird that had been taught to
repeat but one sentence.  As a last effort I offered him a heavy bribe
for his information, but he was too honest to betray his trust, or,
which was just as probable, he had no wares of any marketable value.

I slept that night by fits and starts, but whether asleep or awake my
mind was filled with omens of evil.  What was happening in the outside
world?  Again and again I asked the question without finding any answer.

Spurred on by my fears, I began to dream of escape, but the adventure
was so absolutely impossible that I had to abandon the idea.  My arms
were tightly bound; François walked up and down, ever watchful and
alert, carrying his half pike; outside the door lay Pierre with his
huge club, while Pillot was within call; and I had a suspicion that he
was not the least capable of my gaolers.  No, it was evident that I
must wait till a more favourable opportunity presented itself.

I watched the earliest streaks of light streaming through the barred
window, and, though it was summer time, I shivered with cold.  The dawn
broadened, became morning; a few wandering sunbeams that had lost their
way came peeping through the bars and cheered me, though their stay was
brief.  Later, sounds of life arose outside; I heard Pierre's deep
tones, followed by Pillot's milder ones, and presently the door was
opened.

Now, had my arms been free at this moment I would have made a dash for
liberty, in spite of Pierre's club and Pillot's pistols, but, in the
circumstances, it was madness to think of such a venture; so I lay
still.  François by now was almost too sleepy to walk straight, and
Pillot, bright, fresh, alert as a bird, entered on the duties of gaoler.

The prisoner who feeds with his keeper is not likely to starve, and I
certainly cannot accuse my captors of being niggardly in the matter of
food.  On this particular morning Pillot was too agitated to eat; twice
he jumped up and walked to the window; indeed, but for my exertions,
the breakfast would have been removed untasted.  As it chanced, my
appetite remained good, and, in view of the possible journey, I ate for
both.

Only once during the day did Pillot leave the room, and then his place
was taken by Pierre, who, in less than three minutes, was deep in his
usual game of throwing the dice, left hand against right.  To do the
villain justice, however, he did not neglect his duty.  His eyes were
upon me frequently, while at the slightest stir, he turned quick as
lightning, one hand grasping his ponderous club.

Toward the middle of the afternoon Pillot returned, and kept me company
for the remainder of the day.  He was deeply excited, and as the
evening approached began to bubble over.  He would break off in the
middle of a sentence, and, running to the window, listen intently,
holding up his hand meanwhile for silence.  François, too, who came in
once or twice, seemed equally agitated, but Pierre, I have no doubt,
was calmly playing, interested chiefly in the result of his game.
Perhaps he did not understand why the others were so anxious, or why
they spoke to each other in low whispers!

As for me, I soon became as deeply interested as Pillot.  Why did he
listen at the window?  Did he expect to hear some pre-arranged signal,
or the rattle of the carriage which was to bear me away?

Once I nearly tricked him into betraying the secret.  He had dispatched
François on some errand, and was pacing the room restlessly, when I
said at a venture, and in a careless tone, "So the grand coup is to be
made to-night?"

"This very evening, monsieur!" and he rubbed his hands briskly.

"It will cause an immense sensation?"

"A sensation?  _Corbleu!_  There will be----"  He checked himself,
looked at me slily, and finished by saying, "Ah, yes, monsieur, perhaps
so."  Then he returned to the window to listen; so my attempt to catch
him by surprise had failed.

Another hour passed, François had returned, and the two stood talking
rapidly but in such low tones that I could not catch a word.  To judge
by their gestures, François was the bearer of fresh news, but whether
good or evil I could not determine.  It was, however, evidently of
considerable significance, and such as to astonish the dwarf.

This secrecy and show of excitement played on my nerves.  I became
restless and irritable, and chafed more and more at my confinement.
Whatever was about to happen, I wished it was over and done with.

The evening wore on, it became dusk, in an hour or two night would
fall; but still, as far as I was concerned, there was no change.  The
two men maintained their position at the window; but they no longer
talked; it seemed as if they could only wait.  The silence became
painful; there was not a sound in the half darkened room; I wondered if
my gaolers had forgotten how to breathe.  I rustled the straw: they
turned swiftly, and Pillot shook his head as if to reprove the action,
but he did not speak.

Presently François said something in a low whisper to his companion,
and the dwarf in a sort of hoarse scream cried, "Be still.  It must be
now, I tell you; it was all arranged this afternoon."

After this neither of them spoke, but both stood still and motionless,
till suddenly there came to our ears the sounds of hurrying footsteps
in the street.  It was a relief to hear them, even if the runner had
nothing to do with me.  They came nearer and nearer; the pace
slackened; finally some one stopped beneath the window.  Evidently this
was the man for whom my captors watched.  What news did he bring?
Pillot himself could not have waited more anxiously than I did to hear
the tidings.  I felt sure that in some mysterious way my fate hinged on
the words of this unknown messenger.

Very quietly I raised my head from the straw and listened with strained
ears.  No sound save the heavy breathing of its occupants broke the
stillness of the room.  At last I seemed likely to hear something which
would afford a clue to the mystery; but here again I met with
disappointment.  Only one word came from the man in the street, and I
was scarcely wiser than before.

"Failed!" he said, and immediately began to whistle the air of a
popular song, which probably conveyed some information to the dwarf.

Muttering savagely, Pillot ordered the messenger to bring the carriage
round, and, turning to me, said more calmly, "Monsieur, the plot has
miscarried, and you must leave Paris.  I cannot explain further, but
you have no choice.  Come with me quietly, or----" and he raised his
pistol.

My head began to swim again.  The plot had failed!  What plot?  What
had I to do with it?  Why should these people wish to carry me off?
Afterwards, when the truth came out, the affair seemed simple, so
simple, that I was ready to laugh at my own stupidity.  I tried to
obtain some information, but Pillot stopped me promptly.  I had never
seen him so thoroughly roused; he dug his nails viciously into the
palms of his hands; his eyes looked like those of a hunted animal.

"Quick!  There is no time to argue.  It is a case of life and death for
you and me, and perhaps for many besides.  I wish you no harm,
monsieur!  I will save your life if you will let me."

"Set me free," said I, "and I will save my own."

"I cannot do that--for the sake of others."

François had disappeared, but Pierre was in the room, and he toyed
nervously with his club.  I do not know how the dwarf would have acted,
but there was no mistaking his companion's purpose.

"An end to this," he exclaimed.  "Come, monsieur--or stay!" and he
flourished his huge weapon threateningly.

"It is best, monsieur; it is really best," cried the dwarf.  "Ah,
_corbleu_, it is too late!  Listen!  There are the soldiers!  Oh,
monsieur, what can I do?"

"Bah!" said Pierre, raising his club, "it is his life or ours."

At that moment François, whose face was livid with fear and passion,
burst into the room.

"Fly!" cried he, "fly, while you have the chance!"

"Is it the soldiers?" asked Pillot.

"No, worse!  Condé's ragamuffins, and they are yelling for M. de
Lalande."

At these words I was speechless with amazement, but Pillot cried, "The
people?  Condé's mob, did you say, François?  Then there has been
treachery.  This is Peleton's work; he wishes to find revenge and
safety at one time.  Unbind the prisoner, Pierre.  Quick, you dolt!  I
am no murderer, as M. Peleton will find.  Monsieur, I give you a chance
of your life let what will come of it.  François, a sword!  Here,
monsieur, this way, and the saints preserve us!"

I was free and armed: the door was open; yet I had never stood so near
death since my first coming to Paris.  From the terrible uproar one
would have concluded that the inhabitants of every alley in the city
had gathered outside.  The street door was being smashed by heavy
blows, and, as I ran out on the landing, a fierce mob swarmed up the
stairs, screaming, yelling, and shouting for De Lalande.

There was no time to ask questions or even to think.  Carried away by
passion, the people were thirsting for my blood, though why, I could
not imagine.  Was this a part of the plot too?  What did it all mean?
No one had ever called me a coward, but at that moment my limbs
trembled, and perspiration oozed from every pore.  The cries of the mob
were more awful than the roar of some savage beast.

"Quick!" cried Pillot, "it is an affair of seconds," and then every
sound was drowned in a fierce shout of "Where is he?  Death to the
assassin!  Kill them all!"

"No, no," exclaimed one voice, louder than the rest, "the others may be
honest folk!  Only one came in.  I saw him!  I shall know him!  You can
tell him by his gay dress!"

"That is Peleton, the scoundrel!" said Pillot "If you are killed now,
he will be safe," and the dwarf hurried me along.

With bull-dog courage Pierre and François stood at the head of the
stairs, demanding to know why their house was invaded, and denying that
any one had recently entered.

"A lie!  A lie!" shouted Peleton from lower down.  "I chased him all
the way, and saw him enter here!"

"Stand aside," commanded a second man, "and let us search the house, or
it will be the worse for you!"

Pierre and François were both sturdy fellows, but they could not have
held the stairway long, and besides, why should they sacrifice their
lives for me?

From where we were the mob was out of sight, and we could not perceive
what was going on, but it seemed as if they hesitated, when suddenly
the cry of "The soldiers" was raised.  Then, making his final effort,
Peleton urged the mob on with renewed shouts of "Kill the assassin!"

At the end of the passage three steps led down to a room, the door of
which was locked, but Pillot possessed the key.  We could hear the
crowd rushing up the stairs and on to the landing; another moment and
we should be too late, but my companion, who had recovered from his
nervousness, succeeded in opening the door.

"The window!" he exclaimed, pushing me forward.  "Quick!  I will put up
the bars and follow."




CHAPTER XVI.

I become a Prisoner of the Bastille.

I ran across the room and then stopped suddenly: it was a cowardly
action to leave the man to face my enemies alone!

"Fly, monsieur, fly!" he implored.

"Not I, Pillot, until we can go together.  You have stood by me, I will
stand by you.  The bars are up?  Good!  That will delay them a moment.
Can we move this chest?  Take one end and we will try.  _Ma foi!_
'twill be quite a war of the barricades!  Now this table.  'Tis heavy!
So much the better.  Here they come!"

With a roar the mob swept along the landing.  Our door, which was
strong and massive, withstood for a time their heaviest blows.

"Now, monsieur, the window!" cried Pillot; "the barricade will soon be
down.  This way.  _Peste!_" and he uttered a groan.

In the excitement he had forgotten, and I had not noticed, that the
window was barred.

"We have trapped ourselves, M. de Lalande!" he exclaimed bitterly.
"There is no way out!"

"Chut!  The bars will break," said I, clambering to the ledge, and
grasping the middle one; but it was very thick and firmly fixed.

The roar of the mob outside doubled my energy; I pulled and tugged with
all my might, skinning my hands in the effort.  Hammer, bang, crash!
behind me.  How long would our defences stand?  Would the soldiers
arrive in time?  Would the bar never loosen?  Surely it was giving!
Yes!  I could have shouted aloud in triumph--it was yielding!  Another
wrench would be sufficient!  Oh, for the strength of twenty men!  Now!

A yell of joy and a groan of despair announced that I was too late.
The door was down, the table overturned, the room was filled with the
howling mob.  They were headed by two men, one dressed as a
charcoal-burner, the other as a mason.  Each, however, carried a good
sword, and in spite of their disguises I recognised them as Maubranne
and Peleton.

"There he is!" cried the baron pointing to me, and again the appalling
shouts of "Kill the assassin!" were raised.

For these poor deluded people, led away by such scoundrels, I felt only
a deep pity, but my anger rose hot against Maubranne and Peleton.  Why
did they call me assassin?  Why endeavour to take my life and to
blacken my good name at the same time?

At the last pinch Peleton hung behind, but the baron, who did not lack
courage, advanced, and the mob followed with a hideous roar.  Do not
imagine that I wish to set myself up for a hero.  At that terrible
moment I had no thought of anything, and what I did was done almost
unconsciously.

Maubranne came first, while behind him waved a forest of clubs and
staves.  I saw in his eyes that he intended to kill me, and, rendered
desperate by fear, I leaped at him, plunging my sword into his breast.
He dropped heavily, and for the moment an intense hush fell on the
startled crowd.  As if by inspiration I saw my one chance and seized it
eagerly.

"Citizens!" I cried, gazing boldly on the sea of angry faces, "that man
lied to you.  He is no charcoal-burner, but the Baron Maubranne,
Condé's bitterest enemy.  I am ignorant of what has happened in Paris.
Two nights ago this Maubranne set a trap for me and shut me up here."

"That is true," exclaimed Pillot.  "Maubranne was the plotter, this lad
is innocent; he does not even guess why you wish to kill him!"

Would they believe?  Was it possible?  My heart almost ceased beating
as I gazed at the fierce faces.  The weapons were lowered.  Staring at
each other dubiously, the men hesitated, and I breathed more freely.  I
had forgotten Peleton, who, safe behind the human screen, cried
savagely, "Kill the murderer!  Down with the assassin!"

That served his purpose better than the finest argument.  Heated by
passion the people thought no more of the dead charcoal-burner but only
of his slayer, and made a movement to surround me.  My last hope had
failed, but I stood on guard, my one regret being that the cowardly
Peleton would not trust himself within reach of my sword.

Now, however, another sound mingled with the shouts of the populace,
and a swift glance showed that the soldiers were forcing a passage into
the crowded room.

"Make way there!" exclaimed the leader in a tone of authority.  "In the
King's name!  Drop that pike, you rascal, or I'll run you through.
Where is this M. de Lalande?"

At first it appeared certain that there would be a terrible conflict
between the mob and the soldiers, but the officer, by a lucky hit, not
only saved my life--at least for the time--but cajoled the crowd into
good humour.

"Is this the fellow who slew Condé?" he asked, to which came an
answering chorus of "Yes, yes!  Down with the murderer!"

Until that moment I had no idea what my supposed crime was, and the
officer's question filled me with horror.  Condé dead! and I charged
with murder!  It seemed monstrous, impossible.  But the officer was
speaking, and I must try to understand.

"Do you want all who were in the plot punished?" and again there broke
out an assenting yell.

"Then let me remove this lad, you imbeciles!  If you knock him on the
head now, it will be all over: while, if he is imprisoned, the
authorities will soon discover his accomplices."

This suggestion met with a torrent of applause, and the ruffians
offered no further resistance to the soldiers, who, forming in a body,
marched me downstairs into the court where they had left their horses.
I was immediately placed on one and firmly bound; the troopers mounted,
the officer issued his orders, and we set off accompanied by the mob.

The city was in a state of seething excitement, which increased
wherever our procession came in view.  The people, pouring from the
houses in thousands, blocked the roads until they became almost
impassable, and the leader of the horsemen was in despair.  Every one
wished to see the wretch who had murdered Condé, and numbers shook
their fists at me and cried, "Kill the assassin!"

Some, however, regarded me as a martyr, and angry cries against the
soldiers, mingled with shouts of "Down with Condé!" began to be heard.
At one spot in particular a determined rush was made by a number of
burly ruffians directed by a little man from the window of a corner
house.  I recognised my late gaoler, Pillot, and was glad that he had
escaped, though much afraid that his attempted rescue would only make
the authorities more certain of my guilt.

Two or three soldiers were knocked over, but the rush was stayed, and
after this the friends of De Retz, for such I concluded them to be,
confined their attention chiefly to threats.  Still the danger of an
outbreak was considerable, and the officer in charge, fearful of the
consequences, decided to convey me to the Bastille.

By riding through the less frequented streets, and breaking into a trot
wherever such a course was possible, we gradually drew ahead of our
undesirable escort, and at length turned into the famous avenue.
Throughout the journey I had anxiously scanned the faces of the
multitude, hoping to see Raoul, or D'Arçy, or my English friend, John
Humphreys.  But I had not recognised a single acquaintance, and now my
heart sank as we halted before the first massive gate, guarded by
sentries.

As soon as the drawbridge was lowered, we crossed to the court where
the Governor's house was situated, and the officer, dismounting,
entered, reappearing in a few minutes with the order for my admission
into the fortress.  Escorted by two prison officials, I walked up the
narrow avenue to the second drawbridge, passed the guard-house, and
stood in the wide court, while the ponderous gates clanged behind me,
as if shutting out all hope.

"La Calotte de la Bazinière," said one, and the other, bidding me
follow, ascended to the highest storey of the nearest tower, and
unlocked the door of a room into which I entered--a prisoner of the
Bastille!

The turnkey swung his lantern around, hoped--rather sarcastically to my
thinking--that I should be comfortable, relocked the door, then the
outer door, and I was left, not simply alone and in darkness, but
beyond the reach of human hearing.  Stumbling across the room, I lay
down on a mattress and endeavoured to account for the events of the
last two days.

From a few words let fall by the officer, it appeared that some one had
killed, or attempted to kill, the prince, and I had been arrested as
the assassin.  That the plot was hatched by the Abbé's party I had
learned from Pillot, though, as it afterwards appeared, no one intended
anything more serious than kidnapping Condé and shutting him up in a
safe place.

Now, in an enterprise of this daring nature, the actual leader was
likely to be my cousin Henri, and working from this I began to piece
together a very tolerable story, which after events proved not to have
been far wrong.  My previous adventures had proved how easy it was to
mistake me for my cousin, and on this point the conspiracy hinged.  If
the plot succeeded, well and good; if not, it was necessary to show
that the Abbé's party had nothing to do with the affair.

I was well known as a devoted _Masarin_, and it was no secret that the
Cardinal, though banished, still communicated with his friends in the
capital.  What more likely then, than that the attempt on Condé's life
was made by _Masarins_?  And if so, who more likely to lead it than the
penniless youth who had refused point-blank to join any of the other
parties?  Mazarin, it would be asserted, must have left me in Paris for
this very purpose.

Then again the crafty plotters had so arranged that everything would
fit neatly into place.  It could easily be proved that I had suddenly
disappeared and remained in hiding till the appointed night, when,
having failed in my object, I had hurriedly and secretly left the city.
This, I concluded, was the outline of the plot, but De Retz and my
cousin had not made allowance for the cowardly treachery of Maubranne
and Peleton.

These worthies, by both of whom I had the honour of being much hated,
had worked out a different, and to them, a much more satisfactory
ending.  If Condé's assassin could be caught, red-handed as it were,
and slain by the angry people, there would be an end to the business.
For this purpose they had conducted the mob to my prison, but the
speedy arrival of the soldiers had upset their plans; Maubranne was
dead, and I lay on a mattress in La Calotte de la Bazinière.

"_Peste!_" I exclaimed irritably, "I have intrigued myself into an ugly
mess.  This comes of being too clever.  What will they do with me, I
wonder?"

The situation was indeed serious.  With the exception of Raoul, D'Arçy,
and John Humphreys, I had no friends, and these three could do little.
De Retz would naturally use all his powerful influence to prove my
guilt, and as likely as not I should be condemned without a trial.  As
far as I could judge the future did not look particularly bright.

As soon as dawn came straggling through the window I rose and peered
about me.  The room arched to support the roof, and only in the middle
was it possible to stand upright.  It contained but one window, having,
both outside and inside, double iron gratings.  The furniture consisted
of a worm-eaten chair, a table with a leg broken, an empty jug, a
mattress, and two flagstones on which in cold weather a fire could be
built.

Raoul once told me of a man who had escaped from the Bastille, but I
fancy he could not have been lodged in my cell.  I could tell by the
window that the walls were tremendously thick, while the door was of
iron, and fastened on the outside by massive bolts.  Still I was not
altogether discouraged, and, dragging the table beneath the aperture, I
climbed to the top.  Crash! I had forgotten the broken leg, and fell to
the ground, wrecking the table and giving myself a considerable shock.

After that I lay down again on the mattress till about nine o'clock, as
near as I could judge, when there was a noise outside as of bolts being
withdrawn, and the turnkey entered the room with my breakfast.  He was
a short, sturdy man, somewhat after the build of Pierre, but with a
more intelligent face.

"Monsieur has met with an accident?" he said, gazing with a grin at the
ruined table.

"I knocked the wretched thing over."

"Ah, it was not meant for monsieur's weight," he laughed, and putting
the breakfast on the ground, contrived to prop the table up.

"There," he exclaimed triumphantly, "now it will serve, but I would
advise monsieur not to place it in a draught, it may catch cold."

Guessing that he understood what had happened, I said, "I wished to get
a view of the scenery; there is little to look at inside.  The
Bastille, or at least the prisoner's part of it, is not pretty."

"It is strong, monsieur, and one cannot have everything.  Has monsieur
learned that the prince was not hurt."

"No," I cried briskly, "tell me all about it."

"There is not much to tell beyond the fact that monsieur missed his
aim."

"What!  Do you really believe it was I who shot at Condé?"

"Monsieur is certainly very young for such a deed," he replied, shaking
his head solemnly, and with this evasive answer he took his departure,
bolting and barring the door behind him.

In the evening he returned, but this time I had no word with him, as he
was accompanied by the officer of the rounds and several soldiers.  The
officer gave me a casual glance, searched the cell carefully--though
what he expected to find I cannot imagine--shrugged his shoulders,
ordered the turnkey to fasten the door, and presently I heard the tramp
of their feet along the corridor.

Several weary days dragged by in this manner.  The turnkey regularly
brought my meals, and sometimes in the morning stayed for a few
minutes' gossip, but with this exception I was left alone.

One morning, contrary to the usual custom, he was attended by four
soldiers, who stood at attention while I ate my breakfast.  As soon as
the meal was finished, the gaoler directed me to follow him, and,
escorted by the soldiers, I descended the massive staircase shut in on
each storey by ponderous double doors, crossed the wide court, ascended
another staircase, and so into a large room known as the Council
Chamber.

Here four men sat at a table, and one--an ugly, weazened fellow dressed
as a councillor--ordered me to stand before them.  Then the soldiers
retired well out of earshot, and the examination began.  First of all
the councillor asked a number of questions concerning my age, name,
family, and estate, one of his colleagues writing down the answers as I
gave them.  Then followed a long harangue on the infamy of my crime,
after which the speaker implored me to make a full confession, and to
throw myself on Condé's mercy.

"Not," he exclaimed, "that we require your confession; these proofs are
too clear," and, noticing my start of surprise, added coolly, "listen,
and then say if I am not right."

Turning the papers slowly over one by one he read the heads of a mass
of evidence which his agents had collected, evidence so clear and
convincing that, on hearing it, I almost believed myself guilty.  It
began by describing me as a penniless lad, who, having come to Paris to
seek my fortune, had taken service with Mazarin as a secret agent; and
all my doings with the Cardinal were carefully noted down.

For this I was prepared, but the next paragraph brought the blood to my
face with a rush.  It stated that, having discovered Madame Coutance
was a friend of Condé, I had struck up an acquaintanceship with her for
the purpose of worming out the secrets of his party.

"That is false!" I cried hotly.

"Softly, my friend, softly!" exclaimed the weazened little councillor,
"we will hear your remarks at another time and in another place," and
he continued calmly with his reading.

The third stage showed how cleverly the conspirators had laid their
plans.  Numerous witnesses had met me going towards that part of the
town where I was afterwards discovered in hiding, and they all affirmed
that I acted as if not wishing to be recognised.  This, of course, I
could not deny, as many people must have noticed me when chasing the
crafty François.

"We are ready to prove these things against you, monsieur, and more
also," said the councillor.  "For instance, there are the names of two
men who saw you take a prominent part in the attack on the carriage and
afterwards run away.  Now, will you confess?"

"I am innocent, monsieur."

"What an absurdity!  Must we then put you to the question?"

"It is needless, monsieur; I am speaking the truth."

"You are obstinate," he exclaimed, screwing up his little eyes, "but a
turn or two on the rack will alter that.  Come now, will you deny that
you are a spy of Mazarin's?"

"Certainly, monsieur.  It is true that I am in the Cardinal's service,
but I have heard no word from him since he left Paris."

"Are you acquainted with Madame Coutance?"

"Yes, she is a friend of mine."

"Good!  I thought we should arrive at the truth.  Now, will you explain
how you came to be in the house where the soldiers found you?"

"It is a strange story, monsieur, and says little for my sense, but you
shall hear it," and I related how cunningly François had lured me into
the arms of his fellow-plotters.

"Pah!" exclaimed the councillor, wrinkling up his forehead, "that is a
child's invention.  You cannot expect us to believe such a tale."

"Still it is true, monsieur."

For nearly an hour longer the councillor continued putting all sorts of
questions concerning Mazarin's plans, none of which I could answer.  My
silence made him very angry, and at last he exclaimed in a passion,
"Take him away.  I warrant we shall soon find a means of loosing his
tongue."

The soldiers formed up and I was marched across the courtyard, where
several prisoners who were not confined to their cells assembled to
watch me pass.  I gazed at them eagerly, but they were all strangers
who only regarded me as a prisoner in a far worse plight than
themselves.

"Courage, monsieur," whispered the gaoler, as the soldiers turned back
from my cell, "we all have our misfortunes."

He spoke in a kindly manner and I looked at him gratefully, for a
prisoner has but few friends.  Then the door clanged, the bolts were
pushed home, and I was left alone to reflect on the councillor's last
words.  I had heard too much not to understand what he meant by finding
a way to loose my tongue, and I instantly began to conjure up all kinds
of horrible pictures.  However, it was useless going to meet trouble,
so I endeavoured to banish the subject from my mind, and to think of my
friends, Raoul, Marie, and the Englishman, who were doubtless wondering
what had become of me.




CHAPTER XVII.

Free!

On the third night after my visit to the Council Chamber I was awakened
from a sound sleep by some one shaking my arm.  Looking up and rubbing
my eyes, I beheld the gaoler with a lantern in his hand bending over me.

"Rise, monsieur, and dress quickly," said he.

"Who wants me at this time of night?" I asked.

"I do not know, monsieur.  I have my orders, and the soldiers are
waiting at the foot of the stairs.  But courage, monsieur!"

The tone in which the man spoke made me shiver.  It was plain that he
expected the worst, and I immediately remembered the councillor's
threats.  My heart beat quickly at the thought of the dreaded torture
chamber, and my fingers trembled as I fastened my clothes.

"Am I to be put on the rack?" I asked, but the gaoler, shaking his held
slowly, replied that he knew nothing.

"An officer of police brought an order signed by the Governor, but he
would answer no questions.  If it should be so, confess everything,
monsieur.  You are very young, and the rack--ah!"

"Thanks, my friend, though I am sorry your advice will not help me.  I
have already told the truth, and they would not believe it."

"Say what they wish, monsieur!  Anything to escape the torture!  I have
been in the chamber once, and it was horrible for a strong man even to
look on.  And they are sure to get what they want in the end."

"At all events I will bear up as long as I can!"

"It is useless, monsieur, useless, I assure you," said he, as I
finished dressing.

We left the room, and, descending the stairway, found the soldiers
drawn up at the bottom.

"Albert de Lalande!" exclaimed their officer, and the next minute I was
walking in the midst of my escort to the court, where a carriage stood
in waiting.

"Enter, monsieur," said the officer, who himself followed, while the
troopers mounted their horses.

I leaned my head against the back of the coach in a state of both
wonder and relief.  Whatever else happened it seemed that I was not to
be taken to the torture chamber.  The night was dark, but I could tell
that we were leaving the Bastille.  Where were we going?  I addressed
myself to the officer, but received only a curt "Silence!" in reply.

Did they intend to execute me without further trial?  It might be
so--more than one prisoner had been hurried from the Bastille in the
darkness for that purpose.  Might was right in those days, and justice
stood a poor chance of getting itself heard.

I could not discover in what direction we drove, but the journey was
long and apparently roundabout, perhaps in order to avoid attention.
The officer sat rigidly upright, with his sword drawn, keeping keen
watch and ward as if I had been a most desperate criminal.  There was,
however, small chance of escape, even if I could overpower my guard.
The soldiers rode on each side of the coach, and I should have been cut
down instantly.

At last the carriage stopped, the officer opened the door and ordered
me to descend.  We had halted in front of a large building, which at
first I failed to recognise.  Several armed men stood on the top-most
step.

"At least the place isn't a prison!" I concluded, as the officer
hurried me to the entrance and along the corridor, while two of the
gentlemen in waiting followed close behind.

Nearly at the end, and on our right hand, was a door hung with rich
tapestry.  Pushing the curtains aside, the officer knocked softly, and
then ushered me into a large apartment furnished in the most sumptuous
and magnificent manner.

"Albert de Lalande, your Highness!" he announced, and I looked quickly
at the man who stood up to receive me.

This, then, must be the renowned Condé who had restored lustre to the
French arms, though I held that the country had amply repaid the
brilliant soldier for his skill and valour.  I was also one of those
who believed that winning a battle did not place a man above the laws,
nor give him the right to ride rough-shod over his fellows.  Still,
Condé was a brilliant general, and certainly second to none save
Turenne; while there were not wanting numerous flatterers who ranked
the prince first.

A thin man of average height it was who stood before me; firmly set,
well-proportioned and muscular.  The Bourbon type was strongly marked
in this member of the family--thick lips, large mouth, high and
prominent cheek-bones.  He possessed a good brow, betokening
intelligence, and sharp, keen, blue eyes that pierced through me.

"Why, monsieur the assassin is scarcely more than a boy!" he exclaimed
with a sneering laugh.

"I am old enough not to be frightened, even by Louis de Bourbon!" said
I, angry at his taunt.

"_Parbleu!_  These are brave words from a prisoner of the Bastille!
The Governor feeds you too well!  But come, I have several questions to
put.  Why did you try to kill me?"

"I did not try, your Highness!  At the time of the attack I was a mile
away, shut up in a room and well guarded."

"You seem fond of prison," he said, and I felt that he did not believe
a word of my story.

"I had no choice in the matter, your Highness."

Condé looked me straight in the face, and I met his gaze without
flinching.

"You look like an honest lad," he exclaimed grudgingly, "but the
evidence against you is strong.  Come, tell me everything, and I will
promise you a pardon beforehand.  Was it Mazarin who urged you on?"

"I have not heard from the Cardinal for months, monsieur.  If the plot
was his work, he did not take me into his confidence.  But I think,
monsieur, that your enemies are nearer home."

"How?  No one in Paris but De Retz would plan such a deed."

"The Abbé is a dangerous enemy, your Highness."

"No," said Condé, looking puzzled, "it could not have been De Retz.  He
and his henchman, De Lalande--your cousin by the way--were with me five
minutes after the pistol was fired.  I wish you would trust me."

"You will laugh at my suspicions, and the explanation will not benefit
me."

"_Ma foi!_  I have learned to consider nothing strange in this citizen
squabble.  Come, speak as a friend, and I promise on my honour not to
repeat your words."

I hardly knew what to do.  I had no wish to injure either Henri or
Pillot, but on the other hand, my own life was in danger, and finally I
resolved to relate the story with as little mention of names as
possible.

Condé listened attentively, stopping me now and then to ask some
searching question, and evidently considerably puzzled by the whole
affair.

"If this be true," said he at last, "it seems that Mazarin had nothing
to do with the plot.  But there is one point which still requires
explanation.  If you were not there, how could the mob have followed
you to the house?"

"They did not follow me, but were led by two of my enemies."

"Who were they?"

"One was Baron Maubranne dressed as a charcoal-burner, and him I
killed."

"Who was the other?"

"M. Peleton, disguised as a mason.  He kept out of my way, the coward!"

"_Corbleu!_" exclaimed Condé, laughing, "that showed his discretion.
Now, M. de Lalande, I am going to think over this extraordinary story.
Meanwhile you must return to the Bastille.  It is not exactly a
pleasant residence, but it is above all things safe.  True, the
Governor will keep out your friends, but I will take care that he does
not admit your enemies.  By the way, who is this M. Beauchamp of whom
you have spoken?"

"An officer in the household of the Duke of Orleans."

"Ah, well, I shall be visiting the Luxembourg in a day or two, and I
may meet him."

Summoning the officer, who had remained on guard just inside the door,
he directed that I should be driven back to the Bastille without delay;
and thus my night adventure ended.

It was early morning when we reached the famous prison, but my gaoler
received me with a cheerful smile.

"I hope monsieur's journey has proved a pleasant one," said he, for, of
course, he had watched the departure of the carriage.

"It has not been amiss," I answered, "and it may help to prove my
innocence.  At any rate, it was more agreeable than a visit to the
torture chamber," and I began to undress.

The interview with Condé had raised my spirits, and I felt more
cheerful than at any time since my arrest.  Although doubtful at first,
he was evidently impressed by my story, and for his own sake would
endeavour to unravel the mystery.  I had, however, to exercise
considerable patience.  Another week passed wearily enough, and during
the whole of that time no whisper reached me from the outside world.  I
was left entirely to my imagination, and even Gaston of Orleans could
not have changed his mind as many times as I did during that period.

At one moment I felt sure of freedom; the next I listened to the roar
of the hungry mob assembled to witness my execution.  I turned hot and
cold at every sound; now fancying the gaoler was coming to set me at
liberty, again that he was bringing news of my condemnation.

One morning after breakfast I was sitting daydreaming as usual, when
the door was opened, and the turnkey requested me to finish dressing
and follow him.

"What is it now?" I inquired anxiously.

"An order to attend the Council Chamber, monsieur."

"Am I to receive my freedom?"

"I cannot tell, but there are no soldiers below, which is not a bad
sign."

I knew my way by now, and followed my gaoler briskly down the staircase
to the chamber.  The four councillors were there, standing together,
and near them was Condé himself.

"Well, M. de Lalande, did you expect to see me again?" he asked.

"I hoped to do so, your Highness."

"Then you do not fear my discoveries?  Well, I have inquired into your
story, and am inclined to believe you spoke the truth.  For one thing,
M. Peleton has disappeared."

"Then he has received a warning, your Highness."

"That is possible, as he may know too much.  Still, without his
evidence I cannot probe to the bottom of this affair.  Now I am going
to make you a proposal.  If I set you at liberty, will you find this M.
Peleton and bring him to me?  His arrest is necessary, you understand,
in order to clear your own character."

"Then I shall be the more anxious to discover him, your Highness."

"Very well; and remember, it must be done without noise or fuss, by
yourself and your friends.  If my fresh suspicions are correct, he has
powerful patrons whom I have no desire to ruffle for the present.  So
it must be your private affair, and you take all the risks."

"I will do that willingly."

"So I expected," said he, laughing, and at once directed the weazened
councillor to make out my paper of discharge.  Having fulfilled certain
formalities, I was escorted beyond the five gates and set at liberty.

It was strange what an unfamiliar aspect the streets of the city at
first bore.  I stood for a time perplexed by the change from the gloomy
Bastille, bewildered by the noise of the traffic, and scarcely knowing
which direction to take.  Wandering on aimlessly, I at length found
myself on the Quai Henry IV., and, keeping steadily along past the
Hotel de Ville, reached the head of the Pont Neuf.  Turning off here, I
was soon in the familiar net-work of streets near the Palais Royal, and
presently entered the Rue des Catonnes.

My landlord, who would hardly have raised an eyebrow in the midst of an
earthquake, made no comment on my long absence, but, merely observing
that monsieur would perhaps like something to eat, disappeared.

Going to my room, I removed my sword, which had been returned to me on
leaving the Bastille, and sat down.  In a short time my worthy host
brought some food, for which I was really grateful, and I asked
cheerfully if any one had called at the house to inquire for me.

"A soldier of the Queen's Guards who comes every evening, monsieur.  He
is a foreigner, I think, he speaks French so badly."

"Ah, an Englishman, a fine fellow, and my very good friend."

"There is also a young cavalier who comes from the Luxembourg to
inquire if you have returned.  He it was who informed me that monsieur
had gone into the country."

"And they come every evening?"

"Without fail, monsieur."

"Then be sure to send them up the instant they arrive."

About six o'clock, observing Raoul approach the house, I withdrew
quickly from the window, so that he might be taken the more completely
by surprise.  Suddenly the footsteps ceased, and I heard my friend
putting his question to the landlord.  The answer was not
distinguishable, but it produced a remarkable effect.  There was a rush
and a clatter on the stairs, the door of my room was opened quickly,
and Raoul threw himself into my arms.

"Albert," he cried, "I began to fear we should never see you again.
You are too venturesome, my dear fellow.  Listen!  What is that?  Ah!
here is your English friend, and mine, too, now.  He is a splendid
fellow."

"Back again, my friend!" cried John Humphreys, as he entered the room.
"You have had a long holiday this time."

"Longer than was agreeable," I answered, laughing, "but sit down and
tell me the news; I am dying with curiosity."

"So are we," observed Raoul; "we want to know all that has happened to
you."

"Didn't the story get abroad?"

"Only a little.  We heard you were suspected of leading the attack on
Condé.  In fact, there were people who swore they saw you fire, though,
naturally, I knew that was rubbish."

"Did you guess the truth?"

"Yes, and told Humphreys here.  But I have not cried it from the
housetops."

"You were wise; it is an affair that requires delicate handling," and I
repeated the story of my adventures, from my disappearance to the
moment of my being liberated from the Bastille.

"The plot is no mystery to us," said Raoul thoughtfully, "but it will
be difficult to prove.  We have not the slightest doubt that your
cousin Henri fired the pistol."

"Is he still in Paris?" I asked curiously.

"Yes, and goes about quite openly with De Retz."

"Why doesn't Condé arrest  him?" asked Humphreys, who was not in the
habit of beating about the bush.

"Henri de Lalande has played his game far too cleverly," laughed Raoul,
"you may depend that his share in the plot was known only to himself
and De Retz."

"But," said I, "the instructions for trapping me must have been given
by him."

"There you are wrong.  The man François has been examined, and he knows
nothing of your cousin.  He was employed and paid by Peleton, who was
wise enough to mention no names."

"Peleton is an arrant coward, and a traitor to boot."

"Just so," said Raoul, "and were he caught the whole secret would be
laid bare.  But he has vanished."

"And it is my business to find him; I have promised Condé to do so,
though without implicating him, and, besides, I want to clear my own
name.  Is he likely to have left Paris?"

Raoul went to the door to make sure that no one was listening, and
coming back, said quietly, "I will tell you my idea.  Everything
depends on Peleton, and De Retz is aware that he would betray his
dearest friend for a hundred pistoles.  Do you follow me?"

"Perfectly," said I impatiently, "go on."

"As soon as Condé got on the right track, Peleton disappeared and has
not been seen since.  Now if he were a free man, he would long before
this have made a bargain with Condé in order to preserve his own skin."

"Do you think----" I began in horror, but Raoul interrupted me, saying,
"No, no, not as bad as that.  I simply mean they are holding him a
prisoner till the affair has blown over.  De Retz is making a hard
fight with Condé, and if the prince is beaten, why, then Peleton can
talk as much as he likes.  Of course for your own sake you must try to
unearth him, and I will help in the search."

"So will I," exclaimed Humphreys, "though I shall be of little use
unless it comes to fighting."

"There may be enough and to spare of that," said Raoul, "if Henri de
Lalande is the fellow's gaoler.  He may be a rogue, but he is a
fearless one."

Raoul's theory was, certainly, mere guess-work, but the more we
discussed it the more likely it appeared to be correct.  Peleton was a
tricky fellow, and I understood my cousin too well to believe that he
would allow him to be at large.

"If Peleton's hiding-place is to be discovered we must watch Henri," I
suggested at length, and the others agreed.

"There is one thing I can do," remarked Raoul.  "The Duke of Orleans
has command of the gates, and I can request the officers on duty to
watch for Peleton.  I shall leave Condé's name out, and make it a
personal favour."

"Meanwhile Humphreys and I will take a walk in the neighbourhood of
Notre Dame.  We may possibly meet Henri on his way to visit the Abbé."

"Don't run too far into danger; the Abbé's parishioners are not the
most gentle of citizens."

The Englishman laughed lightly, and tapped his sword as if to say,
"This will prevent them from being too saucy."

We went down into the street, and Raoul, promising to return the next
evening, departed on his errand, while Humphreys and I turned in the
direction of the cathedral.  The people, as usual, were in a high state
of excitement, but we met with no adventure worth relating, and
unfortunately saw nothing of my cousin.

"Never mind," said Humphreys, "the luck doesn't always come at the
first throw."

Next morning I paid a hurried visit to the Rue Crillon, where I
received a warm greeting from the ladies, who had already heard of my
release.

"At first the prince thought you were guilty," exclaimed Madame
Coutance.  "It was stupid of him, but then, appearances were against
you."

"They certainly were," said I, "and even now there are people who
imagine I had a share in the plot."

"Not those in high quarters.  They know the truth, but cannot prove it.
By the way, had you come last night you would have met your cousin."

"It is so long since I saw him that he is quite a stranger.  Did he
inquire for me?"

"Yes," replied Marie, "and he was delighted to learn that you were free
of the Bastille.  At least, he said so," and she looked at me with a
meaning smile.

It was apparent that both Marie and her aunt guessed the truth, but the
subject was a delicate one, and they did not dwell on it; only, as I
was leaving, Madame Coutance whispered, "Do not forget that the street
as well as the Bastille has its dangers."

"Thank you for the warning," I answered, "but I shall be more wary in
future."

The rest of the day I spent in prowling about the city, in asking
questions here and there, and in watching sharply for either Pillot or
my cousin, but the search proved fruitless, and towards the end of the
afternoon I returned to my rooms, jaded and weary.




CHAPTER XVIII.

The Fight on the Staircase.

About seven o'clock in the evening John Humphreys, who was just off
duty, joined me, and shortly afterwards Raoul arrived.

"No news?" cried the latter, noticing my gloomy looks.  "Well, there is
no need to despair.  I have so arranged that Peleton will find it
difficult to slip through the gates, and I have heard something of your
cousin.  Young D'Arçy met him last evening in the Rue de Roi."

"Then he has taken up his old quarters in La Boule d'Or and hidden
Peleton there!" I exclaimed; but Raoul shook his head.

"Condé's troopers have searched the house by now, and no doubt a watch
is set.  Still, we might walk that way."

"Have you told Armand the story?"

"Yes, he can be trusted; and he has a host of acquaintances."

"Very well, let us go down to the Rue de Roi;" then, turning to
Humphreys, I remarked, "we may have need of our swords to-night."

We had only just turned the corner of the street, when Raoul exclaimed,
"Why, there is D'Arçy!  Armand, here is an old friend who will be glad
to see you."

"De Lalande!  So they have let you out of the Bastille?  Condé made a
mistake.  He should have kept you behind the bars till the trouble is
at an end.  You will soon be running into fresh mischief.  Where are
you going now?"

"On a voyage of discovery," said Raoul.  "Will you come?"

"Gladly!  The times are out of joint, and I have nothing to do."

I introduced him to Humphreys, and we went on together to the Rue de
Roi.  Leaving us at the corner, to watch, Raoul crossed the road and
boldly entered the famous inn.  The street was crowded with people,
and, lest some chance passer-by might recognise me, I muffled my face,
and leaned against the wall, while Armand and John Humphreys stood a
short distance off.

Raoul was absent a long time, and we began to fidget, but presently he
came out and made his way toward us.

"We are on a false scent," he said; "our quarry has not been there,
though Henri has.  Condé's troopers have searched the house twice in
three days, and the landlord is quite indignant.  But I believe the
rascal knows something about Peleton."

Armand was on the point of answering when I caught sight of a figure
which induced me to draw my companions back where they would not be
noticed.  It was Pillot in a tremendous hurry.  He had been running
fast: his hair and face were wet with perspiration; he was breathing
irregularly, and kept glancing over his shoulder as if expecting to
discover an enemy.  Stopping outside the inn, he looked anxiously up
the street, was apparently reassured, and then darted like an eel up
the side entrance.

"The Abbé's man," said D'Arçy; "the poor fellow our friend here half
murdered."

Raoul became excited.  "A messenger either to or from Henri de
Lalande!" he exclaimed, and was about to dart across the road when I
pulled him back roughly, saying, "Be still!  You will spoil everything.
Let us stay here and follow when he returns."

"Good advice!" agreed D'Arçy.  "We may learn something.  Hola!  What an
uproar!  Something serious the matter one would imagine.  Here comes
D'Artagnan with his musketeers!  The fellow rides as if Paris belongs
to him.  See how he sweeps the _canaille_ out of his path!"

"The crowd is closing up," said Humphreys, "and the musketeers will
have hard work to force a way.  Ah! there's one fellow down.
D'Artagnan is a fine rider.  See how he manages his horse!  He would
have done good work in our ranks at Naseby.  And a sworder, too!
There's a stroke!"

"Smother him!" laughed D'Arçy; "we shall have the rabble here in a
minute.  Be quiet, my dear fellow; I warrant D'Artagnan is no better
fencer than yourself."

"Hang D'Artagnan!" cried Raoul excitedly.  "Look, there goes the little
man."

"And a man in a gray cloak behind him!  Is that Peleton?"

"No," said I, "it is my cousin.  Quick, let us follow and see where
they go."

While the squabble progressed in the narrow street, and the air was
filled with threats and cries of terror, while steel rang against
steel, and from more than one quarter came the sounds of firing, we ran
swiftly in the wake of my cousin and his henchman.  Pillot surprised us
by the rapidity of his movements.  Though so short of stature he ran at
a tremendous pace, and had the man in the gray cloak been able to keep
pace with him, we must soon have been thrown off.  As it was, we kept
the second of the fugitives well in view; and so the chase continued
almost without a stop, save when Pillot halted from motives of prudence.

The noise of the strife behind us died away; we were in a labyrinth of
narrow streets, and had need of caution, though Humphreys suggested
overtaking my cousin, and forcing him at the point of the sword to
speak.

"No, no," I exclaimed, panting, "that will never do.  A fight here
would bring the people out in hundreds.  Besides, my cousin is no
coward, and we should obtain nothing from him by force."

So we ran on, maintaining the interval between us and the gray mantle,
till at length Pillot stopped for his master, while Armand d'Arçy,
plucking my sleeve, whispered, "Do you know where we are?"

"Yes," I answered quietly, "I recognise the street.  Higher up on the
other side is the house of Martin the astrologer.  We shall discover
something now.  Unless I am very greatly mistaken we are close to
Peleton's hiding-place."

"Your cousin is an artful rascal, Albert.  Just notice how
unconcernedly he walks along.  No one would imagine he was in any
danger.  Ah!  They are crossing the road!  _Corbleu!_ you were
right--they are going to Martin's."

"Follow me one at a time, and without making a sound," I said, softly.
"Keep close to the wall, and well out of sight.  What an old fox Martin
is!  I thought Mazarin had taught him a lesson."

Hiding in a doorway below the astrologer's house we awaited events.  It
was evident that Pillot had not fetched his master for nothing, and
Raoul, who stood next to me, whispered, "They have scented danger of
some sort, either to Henri or to Peleton."

"Peleton is shut up in that house somewhere, take my word for it," I
answered quietly.  "Look!"

Drawing a whistle from beneath his mantle, Henri blew sharply, and
almost immediately the window was thrown up.  We could not hear the
conversation, but presently the man inside closed the window, and a few
minutes later the door was opened.  Then Henri said something in a
whisper to Pillot and entered.  The little man waited till his master
had disappeared, gave a last glance at the house, and turned, as we
supposed, to come down the street.

"Let him pass," whispered Raoul, "then spring on him from behind and
clap a mantle over his head.  We must not let him call for help."

"Be as gentle as possible; he is a plucky fellow, and I am a long way
in his debt.  Don't forget that he saved my life."

To our surprise, however, Pillot did not get farther than the next
house, when he stopped, and began to unlock the door.  This unexpected
manoeuvre held us in amazement, but Raoul, who had no intention to be
thus baulked of his prey, acted promptly.  Bounding from his
hiding-place, he reached the door almost at one leap, and his hands
closed like a vice round Pillot's neck.  The next instant we were all
in the passage, and D'Arçy closed the door.

"Now," exclaimed Raoul, loosening his grip, "if you raise your voice
you are a dead man.  Do you understand?"

"'Tredame!" spluttered the dwarf, rubbing his neck, "monsieur explains
himself well.  He speaks to the point and leaves no room for mistakes.
But perhaps monsieur will tell me the reason for this unexpected visit.
My poor house is not often honoured by such company!"

"The wheel has turned again, Pillot; nothing more," I laughed.  "We
want to see M. Peleton, who is a very dear friend of ours."

"Is it you, monsieur?  It would have been better for us had I left you
to Maubranne's mercy.  As to M. Peleton, how should I know anything of
him?  He disappeared after that affair with Condé."

"Be sensible, Pillot, the game is against you.  We are four; you are
one, and in our power.  Accept your defeat like a man, and wait till
the wheel brings you on top again.  Peleton is in this house or the
next, and we intend to find him.  Come, there is no time to waste."

"Monsieur is so pressing one cannot refuse him," said he, and led the
way along the passage, with Raoul's pistol at his head by way of
reminder.

"We must have a light," D'Arçy declared; "there is no fun in visiting
our friends in the dark."

"There is a lighted candle in the room on our left," remarked Pillot,
and, with Raoul still guarding him, he went to fetch it.

We were now at the bottom of the stairs, and I suggested that Armand
and Humphreys should stay there as a kind of rear-guard.

"A good plan!" said Raoul.  "Should this fellow attempt to escape run
your sword through him.  Now, my man, lead on, and remember you will
pay dearly for mistakes."

I had rarely known my comrade so firm, so energetic and determined:
this was a phase of his character not often shown.  Pillot shrugged his
shoulders carelessly and led the way.  Up we went through the silent
house, past many empty rooms, till our guide came to a halt on the
topmost storey.

"Our dear Peleton likes to be high up," said he with a grin; "it is so
quiet and pleasant.  By this time most likely he has gone to bed; he
keeps good hours.  Perhaps monsieur will unlock the door while I hold
the candle," and he handed Raoul a key.

Stooping down, my comrade endeavoured to insert the key, but there was
evidently something amiss.

"Monsieur has not the knack," said Pillot.  "Shall I try?"

"I believe you have given me the wrong key, you rascal."

"Oh, surely not, monsieur!  I could not have been so stupid.  Let me
see it.  No, it is the proper key, monsieur.  See," and taking the key
from Raoul, he asked him to hold the light.

In passing from one to the other the candle by some means dropped to
the ground and the light was extinguished, leaving us in darkness.

"Do not move, monsieur; it is close to your foot.  Now I have it!  Ah,
you have kicked it away.  What a misfortune!"

We could hear the rascal groping about for a time; then all was still,
and he made no reply to our calling.  Raoul was furious, and threatened
to kill the fellow, when he caught him, a clause very needful to add.

"He has tricked us!" said Raoul, searching for the candle, though with
small hope of finding it.

To my astonishment, for I thought Pillot too sharp to leave it behind,
the candle lay unbroken not a yard from my feet, and a light soon
showed that our guide had disappeared.  It was very annoying to be
duped in this way, but I could not help laughing at Pillot's craftiness.

"He won't try to get past Armand and Humphreys," said Raoul; "he will
hide away in one of the empty rooms."

Suddenly some words spoken by Mazarin months before came into my mind,
and I began to rail at my folly.

"Raoul," I cried, "unless we get Peleton out quickly it will be too
late.  There is a means of communication between the two houses, and
Pillot has gone for assistance."

"Peleton isn't likely to be in here," growled Raoul.

"Why not?  Pillot would have given you the right key if the room was
empty.  Anyway we will find out," and taking a run I dashed myself
against the door.

Raoul followed, and then we went at it together.  Once, twice, thrice.
The last time it showed signs of yielding--presently with a crash it
burst open.

"Come on," I cried, seizing the candle which I had placed upright
against the wall.  "Can you see anyone?"

"No," answered Raoul, "but there is a bed in the corner.  Bring the
candle."

We ran across the room quickly, and there, fully dressed, but with his
arms bound, lay Peleton.  His face was ghastly white, and he shook with
fear.

"Get up," I cried sharply--there was no leisure for ceremony--"do you
hear?"

"What do you want with me?" he whined, for, with all his bluster, the
fellow had no more pluck than a pigeon.

"To carry you to Condé--dead or alive--you can take your choice.  If
you listen to my advice, you will come peaceably.  I will go first,
Raoul; you come behind and keep a sharp eye on our friend."

"And I will use a sharp sword if he doesn't mind himself," said Raoul.

Now I shall always believe that as soon as his first fright had passed,
Peleton was rather pleased than otherwise to accompany us.  His
information would be worth much to Condé, and I have no doubt he
expected to drive a very good bargain.  He did not attempt the least
resistance, nor did he endeavour to lag behind as I hurried him from
the room.

We had reached the head of the stairs when I drew a sharp breath, and
Raoul uttered a cry of anger.  The scene was lit up by the flare of
torches, and Pillot's shrill laugh came floating up to us.  At the same
moment we heard Henri's mocking voice, and there, sword in hand, stood
my cousin, barring our path.  Below him were several brawny ruffians,
bearing pikes and clubs, and, last of all, Pillot, who shouted with
good-humoured banter, "Aha! the wheel has turned again, monsieur!"

Henri affected to treat the matter as a joke, saying, "Chut!  Albert,
did you not know Peleton was my guest?  I cannot allow him to leave at
this hour!  The night air is not good for him.  Return to your room, M.
Peleton, my cousin will accept your excuses."

"A truce to this farce," I cried.  "Will you let us pass peacefully?"

"Certainly.  You can come down, but I cannot part with M. Peleton just
yet.  I enjoy his society too much."

"We shall not leave without Peleton," I cried.

"Then you will not go at all.  I am sorry, there is no help for it."

He kept his temper admirably, but none the less I felt that if we were
to get past, it would be by force of arms, so, raising my voice, I
called to Armand and Humphreys who were still keeping guard at the foot
of the stairs.  In an instant they came bounding up, and Henri, polite
to the last, exclaimed, "As you will, cousin, but remember I am not to
blame."

The next instant we were in the thick of the fight.  By the accident of
position Raoul was opposed to Henri; Pillot, with three companions,
disputed the way with our friends below, while three others rushed
fiercely at me.  One, advancing too hurriedly, ran himself on the point
of my sword, but the others pressed their assault so savagely that I
had much ado to preserve my head from being battered in.

Once during the mêlée my foot slipped, and I was brought to my knees.
A short, thick-set man, whom I dimly recognised as Pierre, stood over
me with his club raised for striking.  I saw him swing the weapon round
so as to deliver a sturdier blow, when, with a howl of pain he let the
club fall.

"Jump up, De Lalande!  Where's our man?  Ah, there he is!  Get him
between us and we will make a rush for it."

The speaker was John Humphreys, who had gallantly fought his way to my
side, and was now keeping a clear space with his sword.  Peleton stood
just above us, shivering with fear, and I must admit that his position
was far from pleasant.  His arms were still bound, so that he could not
ward off a blow, and one brawny ruffian was making desperate efforts to
reach him.

Suddenly there arose a terrible cry, sending a thrill of fear to our
hearts.  The staircase was on fire!  Armand called to us to descend
quickly; Pillot screamed to his master.  My assailants, thoroughly
cowed, beat a hasty retreat, Raoul and Henri alone, undisturbed by the
cries, continued the deadly fight.

"Run, Humphreys," I cried, "and do not let this fellow slip away when
he reaches the bottom."

The Englishman nodded, and dashed off, while I turned to Peleton.

"Come," I said, "or you will be burned to death," but he stood like a
statue.  He seemed numbed by fear and unable to move a step, until I
shook him roughly.  Then he roused himself and let me lead him.

As we came abreast of my cousin, I saw him fall, wounded, but could not
go to his help.  Peleton's nerves had broken down, and without me to
lean on he must have stumbled.  The flames took a firmer hold, the heat
became intense, the smoke was suffocating.  I called Raoul by name; he
answered cheerily, bidding me not to lose Peleton.

One man, quickly followed by a second, sprang past me and hurried to
the top of the staircase.  It was Pillot with a trusty comrade, and the
dwarf, recognising me, shouted some directions, which, unfortunately, I
failed to understand.  The smoke filled my nostrils, I began to
suffocate, but staggered on blindly, dragging Peleton with me.  Below
us the stairs had begun to burn--soon they would fall with a crash.

And where was Raoul?  Why was my gallant friend not by my side?  Had
Pillot slain his master's enemy in the confusion?  I endeavoured to
call again, but only a dull, choking sound came from my throat.  The
horror of the situation gave me superhuman strength.  I dragged Peleton
from step to step, caring nothing for smoke or flames; if the fire
scorched my feet I felt no pain.

Suddenly two figures sprang toward me; they were Armand and John
Humphreys, and together we hurried Peleton into one of the lower rooms
which the flames had not reached.

"Attend to him," I cried, "don't let him escape," and ran swiftly to
the staircase, but Armand was as quick as I, and as I mounted the first
step he pulled me back.

"Where are you going?" he demanded, and his tone was stern and
peremptory.

"To seek for Raoul.  Quick, let me go, or I shall be too late."

In reply he tightened his hold on my arm, exclaiming, "It is utterly
useless, Albert, the staircase will be down in a few seconds, you will
only throw your life away."

I begged and prayed him to release me, but he clung the more
strenuously for my appeals, till at last I struggled like a madman to
get loose.  The steadfast fellow, however, kept his grip, and I could
not fling him off.

In the very midst of the struggle came the sound of a terrific crash,
and a broad tongue of flame leaped up to the roof of the building.
Then Armand freed my arms; against my will he had saved me from a
terrible death--the staircase had fallen in bodily.

"Poor Raoul!" exclaimed my companion sorrowfully, but the lump in my
throat prevented me from making any reply.  I could only stand and
stare at the burning débris which formed the funeral pile of my gallant
comrade.




CHAPTER XIX.

I Lose all Trace of Henri.

By this time the flames had attracted a number of people, who ran from
all directions to gaze at the spectacle.  Armand brought me back to my
senses by saying, "We must make sure of Peleton, Albert, or he will
escape."

"Humphreys will guard him while you fetch a coach," I said, "then drive
him straight to Condé."

"And you?"

"I shall stay here till--till----"

"I understand.  We will escort this fellow to the Hotel de Condé, and
then return."

My passion had exhausted itself by now; I could only stand bewailing
the loss of my trusty friend.  Meanwhile the crowd increased; soldiers
appeared on the scene; men dashed buckets of water on the fire; some
seized burning pieces of wood and flung them into the street where they
could do no more mischief.

I toiled with the rest, and gradually we got the flames under, but
there was no sign of Raoul's body.  One man we found was quite dead,
and no one recognised him.  What had become of the others?  Some had
dashed down the stairway in front of me, but I had left Raoul and
Henri, Pillot and his companion, nearly at the top.  Where were they,
if not buried beneath the smouldering débris of the fallen staircase?

Presently a roar of excitement came from the people behind me, and
glancing towards the astrologer's house I beheld a man, hatless,
bleeding, and scorched by the hungry flames, rush into the street.

A hubbub of voices at once arose.

"Bravo, monsieur!"

"That's one who was in the house!"

"He has saved one man's life!"

"See, his face is cut!"

At sight of him my heart for a moment stood still; then I called aloud
"Raoul!" and, scattering the people right and left, ran, frantic with
joy, toward the friend I had never again expected to meet alive.

"Raoul!" I cried, "Raoul!  Where have you been?  I thought you were in
the burning house!"

"There was your cousin to save," he answered simply, flushing like a
girl.

"You risked your life to save his?"

"Pshaw!  I could not leave him to die like a rat.  Then Pillot came
with one of his fellows and we carried him through the secret passage
into the next house."

"Is he seriously hurt?"

"I am afraid so; though Pillot calls his wound a scratch.  But what of
Peleton?  Has he escaped?"

"No!  He is safe in the Hotel de Condé by now.  D'Arçy and Humphreys
took him there in a coach.  But come, let us get away from this crowd,
and visit the surgeon in the Rue Pierre.  It is quite time your wounds
were attended to."

"It is scarcely worth the trouble; I can have that done at the
Luxembourg."

However, I managed to persuade him, and the surgeon, a man whom I had
met more than once at the Palais Royal, bathed his wounds, applied some
ointment, and lent him a hat.  He was a wise man and asked no
questions, though no doubt he learned in the morning all that he wished
to know.

Leaving the house we walked to the end of the street, when Raoul
stopped, saying, "You had better not go any farther with me; Condé will
be expecting you."

"To-morrow will do," I replied, and we were still discussing the point
when Armand and the Englishman suddenly made their appearance.

I need not describe their joyful surprise on perceiving Raoul, whom
both believed to be dead.  John Humphreys did not make a great display
of his feelings--he rarely did--but Armand clapped Raoul on the
shoulder and executed a lively dance.

"Where is Peleton?" I asked, when he had sobered down.

"In the Bastille by now, I expect.  Condé is delighted; he will learn
all about the plot within twenty-four hours.  I never saw such a coward
as Peleton!"

"The fellow isn't worth powder!" exclaimed Humphreys in disgust.

"Anyhow there is an end to De Retz's scheming," I remarked cheerfully,
but Raoul shook his head.

"The Abbé can take care of himself," said he; "you will find that
Peleton has no proof against him.  It is your cousin who will suffer."

"I thought Henri was killed on the staircase'" cried Armand.

"No, he was wounded, but we managed to convey him along a secret
passage, of which Pillot knew, into Martin's house.  He is a bold
rascal!  I shall feel quite sorry if he falls into Condé's clutches.
Did the prince question you, Armand?"

"No, he was too much occupied with Peleton, but he intends sending for
Albert in a day or two.  You will be wearing his livery soon, my
friend!" said he, turning to me.

"Not likely!" I replied laughing.  "Remember I am still a _Mazarin_!"

Humphreys and I accompanied our friends some distance on their way, and
then turned off in the direction of the Palais Royal.  We did not talk
much, for I was tired and sleepy, but I thanked the Englishman for the
gallant part he had played in Peleton's capture.  Indeed, without his
assistance I question if the adventure would have ended so successfully.

Remembering Armand's remarks, I remained in the house the whole of the
next day, in case Condé should send a message; but it was not until the
third evening after the fight that one of his gentlemen appeared with a
request that I would go immediately to the Hôtel de Condé.  The prince
received me graciously, and, indeed, he displayed a very winning manner
when it suited his purpose.

"Well, M. de Lalande," he exclaimed, "you have kept your promise, and
Monsieur Peleton is occupying your old cell in the Bastille.  Do you
know, I fancy he is rather pleased at leaving his late quarters?"

"I can well believe that, your Highness!  He does not like being on the
losing side.  But I hope he has made it quite plain that I had nothing
to do with the conspiracy?"

"He has told me everything in his power.  By the way, De Lalande, that
cousin of yours must be a very daring fellow!"

"My cousin Henri, your Highness?" said I, with a start of surprise.

"Yes, the man who carried the plot through!  De Retz has an able
lieutenant in him.  Oh, come, do not look so astonished.  You must have
guessed the truth, and now there is no need for concealment.  Peleton's
evidence is sufficient to bring your cousin's head to the block.  But I
bear him no ill-will, and he can still save himself."

"How, your Highness?"

"You are a clever lad," said the prince, "and honest, as far as honesty
goes in these days.  You are from the country, I believe?"

"Yes, your Highness," I answered, really surprised now.

"And have enjoyed many a good day's fishing, I warrant?  Ah, I see you
have.  Have you ever gone out with the determination to hook one
particularly big fish?"

"Why, yes," I replied, laughing, and quite at my ease.  "I remember an
old trout, a regular monster, that I could never catch, though I tried
often enough.  He was a wily fellow and would not take the bait."

"But you landed others?"

"A good many, your Highness, though they did not make up for the one I
missed."

"Then you can understand my feelings, De Lalande.  I have been angling
a long time for a very wily fish, but I cannot get him on my hook; and
the lesser ones are not worth catching.  They are useful only as bait."

Now I began to perceive the prince's drift.  The big fish was, of
course, De Retz, who so skilfully avoided capture; Peleton only ranked
as one of the smaller fry.

After a time, Condé, who had been watching my face closely, spoke more
plainly.

"M. de Lalande," he began, "I am going to ask you a question.  Will you
take service with me?"

"You do me great honour, your Highness, but it is impossible.  I have
pledged my word to Cardinal Mazarin."

"His power is gone."

"Which seems to me all the more reason why I should stand by him, your
Highness.  A fallen man has the most need of friends."

"And obtains few.  However, I will not attempt to persuade you, but
there is one matter in which it may suit your interest to serve us.
Would you like to see your cousin led out to execution?"

"By no means, your Highness!  He played me a nasty trick, 'tis true,
but I am sure he had no hand in Maubranne's scheme."

"Very well.  I will speak plainly to you.  This Peleton has told me all
he knows.  His confession is sufficient to bring your cousin to the
block, but it is not enough for my purpose.  It strikes at the second
man and leaves the first untouched.  Now, I would much prefer that it
should be the other way, and in this you can assist me."

"I will enter into no schemes to entrap my cousin, your Highness."

"No, no!" answered the prince pettishly; "you mistake my meaning.  I
want you to go to him from me, privately.  Make him aware that Peleton
has confessed and his own head is in danger.  Do you understand?"

"So far, your Highness."

"The rest is simple.  He can save his life if he chooses, by adding to
Peleton's confession.  If he will not do this he must take the
consequences."

"Your Highness has made a mistake," I answered coldly.  "Henri de
Lalande is not another Peleton.  He will not purchase his life on these
terms."

Condé laughed and exclaimed, "At least you can offer him the chance.
Find out where he is hiding and deliver my message.  Then he can please
himself."

Although feeling sure that Henri would refuse to avail himself of
Condé's offer, I allowed myself to be persuaded, and, before leaving
the house, agreed to report to my cousin what the prince had said.

I soon discovered that the promise was easier to make than to fulfil.
Henri had vanished, and on all hands I heard rumour of his death.  So
steady and persistent was the report that even Marie and her aunt, on
whom I called the next day, believed it.

"It is quite true," Madame Coutance declared.  "De Retz has offered up
prayers for the repose of his soul, which he would hardly venture to do
if he believed your cousin was still alive.  I met Madame de Chevreuse
last night and she informed me that the Abbé is disconsolate."

I did not argue the point, though in my own mind I concluded that De
Retz was a very clever schemer, and that these reports of Henri's death
were circulated in order to deceive Condé.

In the afternoon I paid a visit to the astrologer's house, and by dint
of bribing the porter gained admittance.  Fortunately for the learned
Martin the fire had not reached his rooms, though some parts of the
buildings were damaged.  The philosopher received me very affably, and
spoke in feeling terms of my cousin's illness, but when I asked if
Henri would see me the wily old fellow regarded me with the utmost
astonishment.

"M. de Lalande is not here!" he observed.  "Did you not know?  How
strange!  Why, he had left before D'Artagnan arrived with his
musketeers to search the house.  It appears that your cousin has
offended Condé, or the Duke of Orleans, or some powerful person, and is
in danger of being imprisoned."

"It is said in the city that he is dead."

"Dead?  I hope not, but in his weak state the hurried flight may easily
have proved fatal.  The soldiers were sent to arrest him, but his
faithful servant, by some means, heard of their coming, and smuggled
his master out just in time."

"Pillot?"

"Yes, he is a trusty fellow."

"Where was my cousin taken?"

"Pillot did not trust me with his secret," said the astrologer, smiling
blandly, "and I have not seen him since."

"But you can guess where he is to be found?"

"Indeed, I have not the least notion, monsieur," and the bland smile
became still more bland, "but as to the rumour of your cousin's death I
would fain hope that it is not true."

Remembering the nature of my last visit with Mazarin to this house, I
placed small faith in Martin's remarks, but as it was clearly
impossible to obtain any further information I took my leave, resolving
to discover for myself what really had become of Henri.  Raoul joined
me in the search, but for a long time our efforts were fruitless.  It
became, indeed, difficult not to believe in my cousin's death.  Many
even of Condé's friends accepted the report as true, while the Abbé's
henchmen openly mourned the loss of their brilliant leader.  Still I
was not entirely satisfied, especially as no trace could be found of
Pillot.

During one of our expeditions we came across Pierre and François, the
one grim and hostile, the other smiling and communicative.

"Monsieur is right," replied François in answer to my questioning, "M.
de Lalande did leave the astrologer's house; I helped to carry him.  He
was ill--dying, I think.  We took him to a safe place.  Pillot stayed
to nurse him and I left them.  He instructed me to go because the
soldiers were watching."

"Could you show us this house?" I asked.

"Monsieur would have his journey in vain.  M. de Lalande is not there
now.  Pillot took him, or his dead body, away in a carriage."

"Where is Pillot now?"

"Ah! monsieur asks a question!  Perhaps he is dead too!  I have not
seen him since."

For a moderate consideration François agreed to point out the haunts
which his former ally had been in the habit of frequenting.  Such dens
of vice and misery, where crime, starvation, and disease went hand in
hand, I had never beheld.  I wondered how any one could live in such
noisome places even for a day.  The sufferings of the people were
terrible; a dreadful pestilence mowed them down in scores.  Small
marvel that a clever agitator like De Retz could obtain hundreds of
willing tools ready for any act of bloodshed and violence.

Always hungry, always in filth and rags, scarred and disfigured by
disease, their numbers decimated many times over by an ever-present
plague, what could they know of the sanctity of life?  Death walked and
talked with them continually; a familiar guest, eating and drinking by
their side like a trusty comrade--feared by none, welcomed by many.
But for François we should never have left these dens alive.

With all our care and trouble we could obtain no information.  My
cousin had vanished so completely that I gradually became convinced of
his death, and an accidental meeting with De Retz confirmed me in this
belief.

Coming one day from the neighbourhood of Notre Dame, I met the Abbé
face to face.  He stopped involuntarily and his face became white.

"De Lalande?" he gasped.  "De Lalande?  Is it possible?"

"Albert de Lalande," I said.

"Ah," he exclaimed with a sigh of relief, "Henri's cousin!  I had
forgotten you, and it is a shock to one's nerves to meet a dead man in
the flesh."

"Is my cousin really dead, monsieur?"

"_Ma foi!_  What a question!  Why do you ask?"

"Because I imagined the report had been spread about to deceive Condé."

"No," he replied, showing no offence at my remark, "I would it were so,
but M. Beauchamp's sword bit deeply.  Pillot should have informed you,
but he has had much to do.  He has taken his master's body home for
burial.  I feel his loss greatly.  Your cousin was an admirable man,
and I shall never find his equal.  But what of yourself?  Have you
taken service with Condé?"

"No, monsieur, I still fight for the Throne."

"And for Albert de Lalande!  Well, well, as long as you steer clear of
me I wish you no harm."

"Monsieur is pleased to be gracious," I returned with a mocking bow.
"I am indeed grateful."

The little rogue's eyes twinkled brightly, and he went away laughing.

So Henri was really dead and laid to rest in the family vault!  I could
no longer question the truth of the rumour after seeing the Abbé's face
when he met me.  It was certain that he, at least, believed my cousin
was dead and buried.  Even Raoul could not shake me on this point,
though he rather scoffed at the story.

"It is a trick to deceive Condé," he said.  "If Henri is dead, where is
Pillot?"

"He has taken the body home."

"Chut!  The tale is a pack of lies.  The Abbé is keeping your cousin in
hiding till Condé has lost his power.  Have you heard that he is going
to accuse the prince of high treason?"

"De Retz?"

"Yes, to-morrow in open court at the Palais de Justice.  There are
likely to be warm doings, and it is my belief if De Retz wins your
cousin Henri will soon come to life."

That night I wandered about the city by myself.  Raoul and Armand were
with the troops in the Luxembourg; John Humphreys was at his post in
the Palais Royal; the gates of both palaces were closed and barred, for
no one knew what an hour would bring forth.  The night passed quietly,
but, as soon as the dawn broke, bands of armed men, in the pay of De
Retz, moved down on the Palais de Justice, swarming into the halls and
galleries and seizing the best positions.  The crowd outside rapidly
increased to enormous numbers, and very soon cries of "Down with Condé"
were heard.

About an hour after De Retz put in an appearance loud shouts announced
the coming of the prince.  He rode haughtily at the head of some two
thousand fighting men, who marched afoot with their hands on their
swords, and apparently quite ready to use them.  I was standing near
the gate as Condé passed, and to my surprise he beckoned me toward him.

"Has your search failed?" he asked.

"Yes, your Highness.  According to all accounts my cousin is dead, and
I am sure De Retz thinks so."

"Why do you say that?" he asked quickly.  "Come with me; it is
important that I should have the latest news."

Accordingly we walked together along the corridor, which was filled
with armed men, and so into the Parliament Hall, Condé listening with
deep attention to the story of my chance meeting with De Retz.

"Ah!" he exclaimed thoughtfully, "that will account for more than one
strange incident," and leaving me he took his seat in the assembly.

I was too far off to hear the speeches, but there was tremendous
excitement, and I think everyone was expecting the meeting to end in
bloodshed.  Better sense, however, prevailed; Condé sent a nobleman to
ask his friends to withdraw, and De Retz went with a similar message to
his own retainers.  Then something happened which threatened to undo
all the good.  Condé's messenger getting back first shut the door, and
when the Abbé knocked, opened it only a little way.  As De Retz
endeavoured to squeeze through, the nobleman caught and fixed him
between the two halves, at the same time calling to his friends to kill
the Abbé.

[Illustration: "The nobleman caught and fixed him."]

It was a critical moment, as the first blow would have been the signal
for a fierce fight, yet I could hardly refrain from laughing at the
spectacle.  The little man's head and shoulders were within the hall,
and the rest of his body was outside, while he could not stir an inch.
Happily no blow was struck, as one of Condé's captains, crying "Shame!"
ran forward, and two or three of us nearest the door managed to
extricate the Abbé from his awkward situation.

"Thank you, gentlemen," he exclaimed; "I am glad there are some men of
honour in the prince's train," and he passed to his seat as if nothing
unusual had happened.

"There will be no more trouble to-day," said a man close to me; and he
was right, but Paris had only just missed another revolution.




CHAPTER XX.

News at Last.

The incident at the Palais de Justice somewhat sobered the Parisians,
and for several days the city presented quite an unusual appearance of
peace.  Once more the mob retired to its own quarters, and the nobles
of the different parties renewed their private friendships.

By this time I had abandoned my search for Henri, and spent most of my
time with Raoul and Armand d'Arçy, or with John Humphreys.

One evening while chatting with the Englishman at the Palais Royal, Le
Tellier, the Under Minister, passed by.

"Are you not M. de Lalande?" he asked, turning and looking hard into my
face.

Now, coming from him, this was a very stupid question, as, when Mazarin
ruled in Paris, Le Tellier had often seen me with the Cardinal.
However, I shrugged my shoulders, and answered carelessly that he made
no mistake.

"I believe you are in the Queen's service?" he continued.

"It is an office without salary, then," I answered, thinking of my
nearly empty purse, which was not likely to wear out through the
rubbing of coins against it.

"Tut, tut!" he exclaimed, "money is not plentiful at Court just now;
nevertheless you will be amply rewarded.  Come with me, I have a word
for you," and he led me aside.

Wondering at his manner, but glad of a chance to do something, I waited
for him to speak.

"You are aware," he began, "that, in two days from this, the King is to
be declared of age, and that he will proceed in state to the Parliament
House?"

"Certainly, monsieur, that is common talk; the citizens are very
pleased."

"Those who are peacefully disposed!" he exclaimed; then, sinking his
voice to a whisper, he added, "but there are some still eager for
mischief.  It would be a pity if a tumult should arise during the
King's progress.  The soldiers, fortunately, can be depended on, but in
addition, we require a band of gallant gentlemen to line the route.
Can I rely on you for one?"

"Assuredly," I replied, "I shall be glad to assist."

"Then come to me at midnight to-morrow, and I will inform you where to
station yourself."

"Another adventure?" inquired  Humphreys, when I returned to him.

"Pouf!  A bagatelle, nothing more!  Le Tellier is anxious that I should
have a good view of the procession.  You will accompany the Queen, I
suppose?"

"The orders have not yet been issued.  It is a good idea this of
declaring the King of age; though he is only a youngster."

"Fourteen," I said.  "It is understood that his mother will continue to
rule as before."

"Just so.  But in the King's name.  Don't you see that it will cut the
ground from under the feet of her enemies?  While they would plot
against the Regent, they will not dare to raise arms against the King.
I call it a very sensible proceeding.  People will have to choose sides
now, either with the King or with his foes.  If Condé and De Retz do
not submit, they will be rebels.  They must either obey or defy the
King, and we shall have a plain issue."

"It will keep Mazarin out, though."

"Quite so.  If I were you I should obtain a post under the young King."

This was sensible advice, but considering myself still in Mazarin's
employ, I decided to let the matter wait a while longer.  Perhaps I
might even yet hear from Belloc.

On the morning of the eventful day I took my place, by Le Tellier's
orders, about a hundred yards from the gates of the Palais de Justice.
Other cavaliers, well armed, were stationed at short intervals along
the line of route, making little show, but ready at any moment to
pounce on any one endeavouring to stir up strife.

As it chanced, Le Tellier's precautions were not required.  There was a
tremendous crowd, but the people were in the best of humour, and amused
themselves by shouting "_Vive le Roi!_" with all their might.  They
cheered for the Queen-Mother as well, and, listening to them, one would
have thought Paris the most loyal city under the sun.

"_Ma foi!_" exclaimed the cavalier on my right, "it is wonderful; but
how long will it last?"

"Till the show is over most likely.  The citizens love a pretty
spectacle, no matter who provides it."

Round after round of cheering announced the approach of the procession,
which was on the most magnificent scale.  After a body of trumpeters
came fifty guides clothed in the Royal livery, and then eight hundred
gorgeously dressed nobles on horseback.

I felt a passing pang of envy at sight of the nobleman who led the
Light Horse.  His robe was of gold embroidery, and he carried his sword
in a baldrick of pearls.  In his hat waved a splendid plume of
feathers, and the trappings of his white horse were of scarlet adorned
with pearls.  The spectators could not contain themselves, but clapped
their hands and cried "Bravo!" vigorously.

After the Light Horse came the Hundred Swiss in their romantic costume,
and then a crowd of gentlemen, followed by the marshals of France--one
carrying the King's sword, with the scabbard resting on his arm.  Then
a thundering roar broke out, and the people appeared beside themselves
with delight.

"Live the King!" they cried.  "God bless him!" "God save his Majesty!"

I craned my neck as eagerly as any other sightseer, as our youthful
monarch approached.  He was truly a handsome boy, and managed his fiery
horse with the grace and skill of an accomplished rider.

"What a King he will be!" exclaimed one bystander.  "He will bring back
the glory to our country.  _Vive le Roi!  Vive le Roi!_" and again
there was an outburst of cheering.

No one paid any attention to the princes and nobles following him; all
the cheers were for the King and the King alone.

I observed Raoul ride by, and presently John Humphreys appeared with
the guards who surrounded the Queen's carriage.  Raoul was smiling,
for, like a true Parisian, he enjoyed a pretty show, but the Englishman
strode along as if he had a mind to be done with the business.  Just as
he was on a level with me I received a great surprise.  On the other
side of the road a little man had pushed himself right into the front
line of spectators, and was gazing anxiously up and down as if
expecting to recognise some one.

"Why, surely," I said, half aloud, "that is my old acquaintance,
Pillot!" and, looking a second time I became sure of it.

The dwarf seemed ill at ease, and altogether unlike his usual self.
His face, too, was white and pinched, as if he had been suffering from
a severe illness.

"_Parbleu!_" I muttered, "one would not think he had but just returned
from the country!  Perhaps he missed the air of Paris!  Anyhow, I am
glad he is back, as now I shall learn the truth as to my cousin's
death.  When the procession is gone by I will beckon to him to come
over."

At that moment Pillot caught sight of me; he became more nervous than
before, and to my astonishment instantly began edging back into the
crowd till he was lost to view.  Now this curious behaviour set me
thinking.  Why should Pillot endeavour to get out of my way?  Was he
afraid that I should hand him over to Condé?  Certainly he had been
mixed up in the plot, but so had Pierre and François, and the prince
had not thought it worth while to imprison either of them.

"There is some mystery about this which I must look into!" I muttered.
"Pillot is not the man to slink away without reason."

For the time, however, I could do nothing, but as soon as the King
returned to the Palais Royal I began an eager but unavailing search for
the dwarf.  He had disappeared completely, and there was no trace of
him anywhere.

In the evening Raoul and John Humphreys met at my rooms and I informed
them of my discovery.  The Englishman thought little of it, saying
Pillot was likely to keep out of my way, but Raoul, like myself,
fancied he had some reason for his strange behaviour.

"The fellow isn't afraid for himself," he declared.  "He knows Condé
will not touch him, and besides, he is a plucky rascal.  Depend on it,
there is something beneath this business, and I should guess it has to
do with Henri de Lalande."

"But my cousin is dead and buried!" I objected.

"Chut!  You have no proof of it.  He may be in hiding for what we know,
and waiting his opportunity.  According to all accounts, he will soon
have little to fear from Condé."

"The prince is lost," exclaimed Humphreys.  "Did you notice he stayed
away to-day?  It is rumoured in the palace that the Queen is furious,
and that there is to be no more giving quarter.  Condé will be an
outlaw before long."

"And it is my belief," remarked Raoul, "that when Condé goes, Henri
will reappear.  Still, if you wish, Albert, we will help you to find
Pillot."

"The worst of it is I have not the faintest idea where to look."

"We can try the house in the Rue de Roi."

"The walk will do us good," said Humphreys, "and I am off duty till
midnight;" so, putting on our hats, we went into the street.

Paris was holding high holiday that evening.  The buildings were
decorated with flags and streamers; bonfires cast a lurid light on the
animated scene; crowds of people went to and fro, laughing merrily and
cheering the nobles and ladies who rode by in their gorgeous carriages.
The spell of the morning was on them all; and though many realised that
the troubles would soon break out more fiercely than ever, every one
seemed bent on making the most of the brief truce.

"You Parisians are a remarkable set!" exclaimed Humphreys as we walked
along; "I believe you would dance on the edge of a mine."

"Till the explosion occurred!" laughed Raoul.  "Did you notice the
folks in that carriage, Albert?  One was your friend Lautrec; he still
follows Condé's fortunes.  Ah! there goes Marshal Turenne!"

"A fine general!" remarked Humphreys.  "Why doesn't the Queen give him
the command of the army?  He would make short work of Condé."

"Wait till the prince draws the sword," said Raoul, "and we shall see.
Have you forgotten that at present we are all friends?"

The Englishman declared it was scarcely worth remembering, as, in a day
or two, we were just as likely to be enemies, and I thought there was a
considerable amount of truth in his remark.

We wandered along slowly, chatting together, but scanning the faces of
the passers-by and keeping a sharp look-out for Pillot.  There was,
however, no sign of him, and I had just suggested going straight to the
inn, when Raoul, suddenly taking a man by the arm, exclaimed,
"François?  How lucky!  Why, you are just the fellow we want!" and
turning round I saw that he was addressing the amiable spy of the Rue
Crillon.

François gazed at us with a beaming smile.  He was not a bad-hearted
fellow, and bore no malice in spite of all that had passed.

"Where are your friends?" asked Raoul.  "You should not be alone on
such a night as this.  Where have you left Pillot?"

"Pillot?" echoed François wonderingly.  "I have not seen him for weeks;
he is in the country somewhere."

"Oh, now, François, you are making fun of us!  We know that our friend
Pillot is in Paris."

"Monsieur is wiser than I, then!" replied François.  "They say, down in
our quarter, that he went to bury his master and has not returned.  I
assure monsieur that not one of his old friends has set eyes on him for
a long time past."

The man spoke so straightforwardly that even Raoul believed he was
telling the truth, though it seemed strange, if Pillot were really back
again, that none of his acquaintances should be aware of it.  Why had
he kept himself hidden all this time?

"We want to find him," said Raoul after a pause, "but not to do him any
injury.  Suppose he has returned to Paris--if he ever went away--where
is he most likely to be?  I assure you, François, that he has nothing
to fear from us."

"I cannot tell, monsieur.  I think you must have made a mistake.  If he
were inside the walls I should have seen him.  He has not been back to
any of his usual haunts."

Evidently there was no information to be obtained from François, so
Raoul gave him some money and let him go.

"Perhaps the fellow was right in saying you had made a mistake,"
remarked Humphreys, but this I would not admit.  Not only had I seen
Pillot, but he had recognised me.

"Let us try at La Boule d'Or," Raoul suggested, "and, if that is
useless, we will not bother any further.  After all, it really is of
small consequence one way or the other."

The famous inn was crowded as usual, but Raoul conducted us to a
private room, where, in a few minutes, we were joined by the landlord.
He remembered me immediately, and began to speak of the trick I had
played on the dwarf.

"We have come to meet Pillot," interrupted Raoul playing a bold game;
"tell him we are here."

"But, monsieur, it is impossible!  He is not in my house.  He has been
here only once since monsieur tied him up.  It would not be a safe
place for him.  Besides, I have heard that he is no longer in Paris.
Monsieur can search the place himself if he wishes.  At the present,
the inn is empty of guests.  Two friends of the prince have been
staying here, but they departed yesterday."

"And all your rooms are free?"

"That is so.  Monsieur is at liberty to search the house."

"Come," said Raoul to us, "we are not likely to discover anything, but
we shall feel more satisfied perhaps."

Taking a candle the landlord led the way, and we tramped after him,
searching every room.  Raoul knew the house thoroughly, so that nothing
escaped us, and we were bound to admit that Pillot was not in the inn.
Leaving us outside, Raoul entered the public rooms, but he could
neither find the dwarf nor gain any information of him, and at last we
departed, my comrades feeling more than half inclined to believe that
my eyes had deceived me.

However, as Raoul said, I should gain little even by finding Pillot.
If my cousin still lived--which I sincerely hoped--he could not be in
much danger from Condé.  Beneath all the gaiety and merriment of that
night, it was easy to observe the shadow of coming trouble, and,
indeed, before many days had passed Paris was again in a state of
turmoil.

Condé was almost openly in rebellion: the country trembled on the brink
of civil war; of authority there was none save in the strong hand;
every man did that which seemed right in his own eyes.  Bands of armed
ruffians paraded the streets, robbing and murdering as they pleased;
the soldiers quarrelled among themselves; the nobles fought in the
public places, unsheathing their swords even in the Parliament House.
Thoroughly wearied of this meaningless strife, I longed for a strong
man, such as our present most gracious King has proved, who should whip
these snarling dogs back to their kennels.

One evening I sat at my window looking into the street below.  The
inhabitants of the Rue des Catonnes were having fine doings.  From one
end to the other they swarmed--a heaving mass of excited humanity.  It
was plain that a crisis had arrived.  Paris was in rebellion, but
against whom or what not one in a thousand knew or cared.  For the
moment the people were masters, and they made the most of their
opportunity.

I watched their antics in amazement.  Costly furniture, handsome
brocades, rich tapestry and gorgeous hangings littered the street.
Grimy, unwashed ruffians swaggered about in clothes costly with lace,
and plumed hats, some even carrying swords.  They were in the merriest
humour imaginable, but I knew well that a chance word might change
their mirth into madness.

"They have plundered some nobleman's house," I muttered.  "I wonder who
the victim is?"

I was still sitting at the window when the tramp of horses' feet
sounded in the distance, and presently D'Artagnan appeared at the end
of the street with a body of cavalry.  For a minute or two it seemed as
if the rioters would oppose his progress, but, having no leader, and
perhaps being in no mood for a fight, they began to slink away by ones
and twos into the houses.  A few lingered half defiantly, but obtaining
no support from their fellows, they also disappeared, and not a blow
was struck as the soldiers rode through the street.

"Bravo!" I exclaimed, "the mischief may be stamped out yet.  I wonder
if the other quarters are quiet," and, buckling on my sword, I crossed
the room just as a man in dishevelled dress rushed panting up the
stairs.

I gazed at my unexpected visitor in amazement and rubbed my eyes.  Were
they playing me false?  No!  It was Pillot sure enough, and he was
gasping for breath.  Why had he come to me?

"Just in time, monsieur," he stammered as he leaned against the wall to
recover.

"What is it?" I exclaimed.  "What do you want?  Quick, I am in a hurry."

"Wait, monsieur.  Listen; you must!  I ran all the way to the Rue
Crillon, but you were not there."

"The Rue Crillon?" I interrupted, thinking of Madame Coutance and
Marie.  "Is anything the matter there?  Are the ladies in danger?"

"No, no," he answered impatiently.  "No one will harm them.  They are
as safe as at Aunay.  It is of your cousin.  He calls for you,
monsieur; he is dying--and alone!  Come with me, monsieur, quick!  I
must return at once; he may be dead!"

"A truce to this mummery," I said sternly.  "What new trick is this?
Do you imagine I am to be trapped a second time?  My cousin is dead and
buried; the Abbé himself told me."

Pillot gazed at me in blank despair.  His face was white, his lips
twitched nervously, his words came with a sob.

"It is false, monsieur, false.  I deceived the Abbé as I deceived all
for my master's sake.  I spread about the story of his death; I tricked
De Retz because he could not be trusted.  To save his own life he would
have thrown your cousin to the wolves.  It is each for himself,
nowadays, monsieur.  I wormed out their plots: they could not deceive
Pillot.  De Retz is a clever schemer, but the biggest rogues make
mistakes.  He believed my tale, and so did Condé.  Only one man besides
myself and M. de Lalande knew the truth, and I was obliged to trust
him.  As to your cousin I have guarded him against all comers; I have
nursed him day and night; I have tricked the soldiers, but now the end
is come.  Prince and priest are welcome to the secret now."

"But what do you wish me to do?" I asked suspiciously.

"To soothe your cousin's last moments, monsieur; to close his eyes in
death.  He calls for you always."

If Pillot was playing a part, he was indeed a superb actor.  Yet still
I hesitated, so intense was the distrust with which in these days each
regarded his neighbour.

"Do you doubt me, monsieur?" he asked.  "Do I plead for the dying in
vain?  This is no trick.  Why should I deceive you?  We have been on
opposite sides, but we have played the game fairly.  I have even gone
out of my way to serve you.  It was I who sent the note warning you
against our own trap."

"And saved my life after I had blundered into it!"

The dwarf watched my face as if his own life depended on my decision.

"Pillot," I said at length, "I will trust you.  But, if you deceive me,
so surely as you stand there I will run you through with my sword."

"Monsieur is welcome in any case," he answered, "if only he will come
at once."




CHAPTER XXI

The Death of Henri.

Many a time I had left the house in the Rue des Catonnes with a very
doubtful chance of returning, but I had rarely gone out with such a
pressing sense of danger as now.  Pillot's sudden appearance, his
strange story, and the memory of former deceptions wrought on my
nerves, and I almost wished Raoul or John Humphreys was with me.

The rioters, too, now that the soldiers had departed, returned to the
street in a very quarrelsome humour.  They stood in groups talking
angrily; and one brawny ruffian, yelling "Death to the Nobles!" struck
at me with a pike.  Happily my sword was free and I pinked his arm;
still it would have gone hard with me but for Pillot, who procured us a
passage by the use of some jargon well-known to these night-birds.

"Be cautious, monsieur," he said, "the mob is growing dangerous.  The
riot has not spread far, but to-morrow----!"

"Will the city rise?"

"Nothing can stop it, monsieur.  These people are like wild animals.
You can excite them to a certain pitch, but beyond that----"

"What is the grievance now?" I asked, and Pillot shrugged his shoulders.

"There are many things, monsieur, but at present the chief is hunger.
The inhabitants of these quarters are half starved, and they want to
know why.  They will put the question very loudly in a day or two."

"Will they rise against the throne?"

"It all depends.  A whim or a word will do it.  Some one will cry 'Down
with Condé!' and there is your revolution ready-made.  The man who is
starving does not stop to reason.  The cry may be 'Down with the
Nobles!'--no one knows as yet, and no one cares."

Presently I asked why he had ventured abroad on the day when the King
was declared of age.

"My master was better then," he said, "and desired to learn how affairs
were shaping.  We heard a rumour that Condé would not be present; so I
went to find out.  It was a risky thing, and the sight of you
frightened me."

"It need not have done; I wish my cousin no harm."

"True, monsieur, but we were not aware of that."

"Where have you hidden your master?"

"In an outhouse at La Boule d'Or.  We dared not take him to the inn; he
would have been discovered.  I was afraid the other evening when you
came with M. Beauchamp."

"Then you saw us?"

"I watched you enter, monsieur--and go away," and the rascal could not
help chuckling.

Through dirty courts and fetid alleys where the sun never shone, my
guide led the way, bringing me at last to the familiar Rue de Roi.  My
distrust had vanished by now, and I followed him unhesitatingly.
Crossing the road and walking rapidly through a private passage, we
reached the back of the inn.  The yard was in partial darkness, but I
made out an old building which communicated by a covered way with the
hostelry.  Lighting a candle, Pillot entered this passage and stood
listening intently.  No sound could be heard; all was silent as the
grave.

"Too late!" he exclaimed sadly, and, heedless of me, sprang up the
stairs two at a time, the flame of the candle flickering violently.  I
heard him turn the handle of the door, and, running up quickly, passed
in with him.

The evening shadows were relieved only by the glimmer of the candle,
but I gave no more than a passing glance at the wretched room.  Somehow
I had felt convinced almost from the first that Pillot was telling the
truth, and now the proof was before me.

The dwarf, who had placed the candle on the table, was bending over a
figure close by.  It was my cousin, wrapped in an old dressing-gown and
seated in a deep arm-chair.  He looked wasted and white, his mouth was
drawn at the corners, his eyes burned deep in their sockets with a red
glow, I could almost see through the thin white hands that lay loosely
on his lap.

Pillot, as I have mentioned, bent over him, and called softly,
"Monsieur, monsieur, your cousin has come; I have fetched your cousin."

"Henri!" I cried--for the dying man apparently took no notice--"I am
your cousin, your cousin Albert.  Do you not wish to speak to me?"

There was a faint gleam of recognition in his eyes, and it appeared as
if he were trying to brace himself; then he extended one hand, and said
quietly, "Albert!"

I urged him to let me send for a skilful surgeon, but he shook his head
impatiently, saying, "No, no, he could do nothing.  Pillot has been my
doctor and nurse.  Good little man!"

One could perceive that he was dying, and I would not disturb him
further, though the dwarf wished to carry him to his bed.

Presently he looked at me with a faint smile whispering, "The elder
branch will lead again.  It is well; you are a better De Lalande than
I.  At one time I hoped we might have been friends, but you had chosen
your part."

"We can be friends yet."

"No, no; it is too late.  What I have done I have done; but there is
one matter pressing on my mind.  Will you forgive me for--for----"

"The plot?" I put in cheerfully.  "Of course, I forgive you freely; it
was all in the game."

"You did not believe I meant to kill you?"

"Not for an instant," I answered honestly.

He lay back in his chair, and a gratified smile flickered across his
face.

"Maubranne did not tell me," he said feebly.  "He knew I would not--not
consent.  I only intended to keep you shut up for a few weeks.  What
have you done with Peleton?"

"He is in the Bastille!  He informed Condé of all that he knew."

"Pah!  I warned the Abbé against him, but he refused to listen.  Tell
Raoul not to worry about me.  I should have recovered but for the
soldiers.  Pillot had to move me.  It was horrible, but the end is near
now.  Ask the Abbé to bury me in Paris."

He stopped exhausted; his eyes closed; his head fell forward, and I
thought that life was gone.  Pillot stood near me choking back his
sobs.  I had not given him credit for such feeling.

"Oh, monsieur," he whispered, "your cousin was good to me; I would have
given my life freely to save his!"

"Hush!  He is speaking again!"

Very low and faint were the words, but we heard him say, "Pillot, are
you there?  Good little man, I will not forget.  Fetch my cousin,
Pillot.  Quick, do you hear?  Ah, _monsieur le prince_, you are too
late!  It is a pity!" and he laughed derisively.

There was silence for a time, and then I whispered softly, "Henri!" but
he made no answer.

The feeble light played on his face, half hiding, half revealing the
ghastliness of it; and we, without speech or movement, stood watching
him, till the candle sputtering out left us in darkness.  Pillot would
have fetched another from the inn, but he feared to stir lest the sound
should disturb the dying man.  How long we remained thus I cannot tell,
but shortly before morning broke there came a strange, convulsive
rattle from the huddled figure in the chair, and we knew that Henri de
Lalande had passed from the power of man.

"May his soul rest in peace!" said Pillot simply.

"Amen," I replied, and, moving softly, closed the dead man's eyes.

I was scarcely more than a lad then, and Henri's melancholy death in
this wretched room made a deep impression on me.  It was a sad ending
to what might have been a brilliant career.  The early dawn, creeping
into the room, cast fantastic shadows everywhere, and the light falling
on my cousin's face imparted to it a strange appearance of life.  I
could almost have thought he was smiling at me.

"I have lost a good master," said Pillot.  "You and he were not the
best of friends, monsieur, but there are many worse men in Paris than
the one who has just died."

"I am sure of it," said I somewhat absently, for my thoughts had turned
to the previous night's rioting.

"The King is dead; live the King!"  What a world of meaning lies in
those simple words!  I was really sorry for my cousin's death, but
there was no leisure to indulge in grief; the living were in need of my
assistance.

Paris was up in arms!  The mob had already broken loose, and, unless
the ruffians were quickly checked, no one could foretell how the tumult
might end.  As yet only a house or two had been plundered, but within
twenty-four hours Paris might be reduced to ashes.  I thought of Marie
and her aunt, and determined by some means to get them from the city.
It seemed pitiful to leave my cousin lying dead there, but I could do
him no good, and Pillot would carry his message to De Retz.

"Pillot," I exclaimed, "I must leave you to attend to your master's
burial.  The Abbé will not refuse his last request.  I would stay, but
it is necessary for me to attend the ladies in the Rue Crillon.  If the
mob rises there may be danger."

"You are right, monsieur!  Paris is no place for them at present.  Take
them out of it as quickly as possible.  As to your cousin, I will see
that he has proper burial; I will go to De Retz at once."

"What will you do afterwards?  You will not care to serve the Abbé
again?"

"Ah, no!  I would wring his neck with pleasure, monsieur!"

"I do not wish that.  Come, let me make you an offer.  I am not rich
like my cousin, but if you will take service with me, I will arrange
that you are properly paid."

"After all that has passed?  Monsieur is exceedingly trustful."

"Because I am aware how loyal you have been to M. de Lalande."

"Very well, monsieur; let it be so.  You will find that I shall serve
you faithfully."

"I am sure of that.  Now listen.  As soon as my cousin is buried, start
for Aunay--you know the road.  If you do not find me there I shall have
gone to join the Cardinal and you can follow.  Here is some money; you
will need it before we meet again."

As soon as these matters were arranged we went out, and Pillot
carefully secured the door.  The morning had broken cold and gray, a
drizzling rain fell, the streets were deserted; the night-owls, wearied
by their exertions, had returned to their roosts.

"There is still time to see Raoul," I muttered; so, bidding Pillot go
straight to the Abbé, I turned off in the direction of the Luxembourg.

At the Palace the change from the stillness of the city was startling.
The gates were closed and guarded; soldiers, fully equipped, stood at
their posts; the courtyard was filled with nobles in a state of
excitement.  Happily for my purpose Raoul observed me and came to the
gate.

"What has alarmed you so down here?" I inquired.  "Is the Duke afraid
of a siege?"

"Have you not heard the news?  Come inside where we can talk.  It has
all happened just as we reckoned it would.  Condé has thrown off the
mask and broken with the Court.  It is rumoured that Spain has offered
him a body of troops, and that he intends to tempt fortune in a Civil
War.  The Queen is firm and does not mean to let him back out; it is do
or die for him now."

"All the better; we shall be able to distinguish friends from enemies.
It will be an awful thing, but once Condé is well beaten the country
will stand a chance of peace.  The Duke of Orleans will join forces
with the Queen?"

"I cannot say," answered Raoul shamefacedly; "he is pulled this way and
that, by both parties.  Most probably he will wait to find how things
go."

"Then he is a coward as well as a traitor!  _Faugh!_ I wonder you have
patience to stay with him!  I can understand a loyalist and even a
rebel, but a weather-cock like the Duke is beyond me.  Why does he not
come boldly into the open?  This twisting and turning will do him no
good.  One would imagine he was a hunted hare."

"There is no need to ask what you will do?"

"Not a bit, I shall join the royal army and serve as a trooper, if no
better berth offers.  Thank goodness the field is clear now, and we
shall know where we stand.  But first I must get Marie and her aunt out
of the city.  Paris will not be safe for them when the mob rises, as it
is sure to do.  But I have some further news; my cousin is dead."

"I thought you said he died weeks ago."

"Pillot spread that rumour about, but there can be no mistake now, as I
have just come from his deathbed," and, while my friend listened
attentively, I related the strange story of the past night.

"Poor fellow!" exclaimed Raoul; "we were never very friendly, but I am
sorry for him.  He would have made a name for himself in time.  He must
have had some good points for Pillot to stick to him so closely.  The
little man will be lost without his master."

"He has taken service with me."

"I have no doubt he will serve you well.  Shall you go to the Rue
Crillon at once?"

"Yes, and endeavour to induce Madame Coutance to leave before the
danger becomes pressing.  Well, I must be off, and I wish you were
coming with me."

"I shall follow you," he said resolutely, "and fight for the Crown,
with or without the consent of the Duke."

"Bravo, old friend!" I cried impetuously.  "Condé against De Retz or
Orleans I can understand; but Condé against the Throne is another
matter.  The point of every honest man's sword should be turned against
a traitor!  Why not come now?"

"Because the Duke may yet take the field for the Queen!  He must make
up his mind in a few days at the most."

He walked with me to the gate, and after a brief farewell I set out
towards the city.  Thus far nothing unusual had occurred, but there
were numerous signs of a coming storm.  Most of the shops remained
closed, door and windows were barricaded, sober Black Mantles, armed
from head to foot, stood in groups talking of the situation.  The
denizens of the courts still rested, but some, more energetic than
their neighbours, made furtive excursions into the main streets.  They
slunk along with pike and club, as if even now half doubtful of their
own strength, though here and there a self-appointed leader shouted for
death to the nobles.  But the time was not yet.  The appetite of the
_canaille_ was not sufficiently whetted; later they would be ready for
the feast.

Walking quickly to the Rue Crillon, I found the ladies breakfasting,
and was glad to join them, as I had eaten nothing for many hours.  They
were not aware of the previous night's riot, and Madame Coutance
laughed at the idea of leaving the city.

"There is no danger," she declared, "and, besides, I have business in
Paris."

"But your friends are gone," I urged.  "You have heard that Condé has
turned traitor?"

She flushed angrily, and answered in her masterful way, "I know the
prince has taken up arms to secure his rights."

"In any case he is not here to protect you from the fury of the mob."

"Bah!" said she scornfully, "a pack of cowards!  Any one--a woman
even--could send them flying with a riding-whip!"

Argument was thrown away on her, but I did my best, even exaggerating
the danger, and begging her to depart if only for the sake of her
niece.  However, she remained obstinate; not, I think, out of mere
bravado, but because she misjudged the strength of the rising.
Standing at the window, she pointed to the quiet street, saying
triumphantly, "Where is the danger, M. de Lalande?  The Rue Crillon
looks to me as peaceful as the park at Aunay.  Besides, the citizens
are in favour of the prince, and they will not injure us."

Shrugging my shoulders impatiently, I made no reply; she must bear the
consequence of her folly.  Even Marie seemed to think lightly of the
peril, though she thanked me prettily for my thoughtfulness.  At last,
annoyed by my failure, I bade them farewell, and returning to the
Luxembourg despatched a soldier in search of Raoul, who looked
surprised at seeing me again.

"The woman is an imbecile," he exclaimed angrily, "but we must save her
in spite of herself, if it is at all possible.  Are you aware that the
gates are guarded, and that no one is allowed to pass without a permit?
The Duke has just issued the order."

"In that case I may as well abandon the idea of getting them through,
unless you can obtain a permit for us."

"I will try, if you will wait here a few minutes," and off he went to
the palace.

"Another plot, De Lalande?" cried a laughing voice at my elbow, and,
turning my head, I perceived Armand d'Arçy, who had just come up.

"Only an attempt to get Madame Coutance and her niece out of the city.
I am afraid there will be mischief in a day or two."

"Sooner than that, my friend!  The pikes are being sharpened and the
_canaille_ will be all armed by nightfall.  I suppose you have heard
the news of Condé?"

"That he has shown his true colours?  Yes! it is the best thing that
could have happened.  Of course you are for the Crown and against
Condé?"

"I am for the Duke of Orleans," said he.

"What, against the King?"

"Against the world, if it comes to that!  I chose him as my patron and
must stand by him, though I hope he will not assist Condé."

"If he does you will be a rebel."

"All right," cried he, with his merry laugh, "there will be small
novelty in that.  Ah! here comes Beauchamp, looking as solemn as an
owl.  Can you not manage to screw out a smile, Raoul?  A glimpse of
yourself in a glass just now would frighten you to death.  Look a bit
lively, there is plenty of time for being miserable."

"Brulé has arrived with his report," said Raoul, "and things are even
worse than we expected; the barricades will be up to-night.  Here,
Albert, take care of this," and he gave me an order signed by the Duke:
"Allow bearer and two friends to pass the gate of St. Denis without
question or delay."

"Thanks," said I, slipping it into my pocket, "it may mean all the
difference between life and death, though whether Madame Coutance will
leave is more than I can tell.  And now, good-bye, for the second time;
I am going to my rooms for a few minutes, and after that to the Rue
Crillon."

"Avoid the short cuts," D'Arçy advised; "or you may get into trouble,
and if you are invited to cry 'Down with the King!' shout with all your
might.  Better to use your breath unpleasantly than to lose it
altogether."

"It is as likely to be 'Down with Condé!' as anything else," I answered
laughing, "and in that case you will hear my voice at the Luxembourg."

"By the way," said Raoul, "have you seen John Humphreys?"

"No, I must spare five minutes for him.  It is only a hop, skip, and
jump from my place to the Palais Royal," and, with their good wishes
ringing in my ears, I set off for the Rue des Catonnes.




CHAPTER XXII.

The Mob Rises.

"Ah! it is monsieur!" and my landlord came from his room, where he had
evidently been watching for me.  "A note from the Palais Royal,
monsieur!  The messenger has called three times; it is of importance."

"From the Palais Royal?  Let me see it.  Ah! what a nuisance.  Well, I
must attend to it; meanwhile, get me a coarse blue woollen overall and
a workman's cap.  My finery and plumed hat are likely to cause trouble."

"They shall be at once obtained, monsieur," said he without a trace of
surprise.

"Good!" and I turned back, glancing again at the paper as I walked.

"Come to me at once.  Le Tellier."  That was all!  What was in the wind
now?  The under-minister had kept me waiting long enough, and sought my
service just when I required leisure for other matters.  If Le
Tellier's business did not fit in with my own it must wait, as I had
resolved on saving Marie and her aunt at all costs.

Inside the gates John Humphreys met me.  He was in good humour, and
delighted that Condé had at last thrown down the gauntlet.

"It is a straight fight now," said he; "the sort of thing I understand.
It is rumoured that the Queen will leave Paris, and the guards will
escort her.  Have you a berth in the King's household yet?"

"No, I am still unattached, but Le Tellier has just sent for me; so
there is no knowing what may happen.  By the way, I have seen my
cousin," and I related briefly the story of his illness and death.

"Bravo, Pillot!" exclaimed Humphreys when I had finished; "he's a
plucky rascal, and loyal, too.  What will become of him now that his
master is dead?"

"He has agreed to take service with me.  But I must go; Le Tellier has
been waiting for some time," and I proceeded quickly to the
under-minister's apartment.

"At last, M. de Lalande," rather irritably.  "I began to wonder if you
had left Paris!  Are you still willing to do the King a service?"

"I shall be delighted, monsieur."

"Humph!" said he, making a wry face, "I am not so sure of that.  I
intend to send you on a dangerous errand.  You will need a keen eye,
sharp brain, and, as likely as not, a strong arm.  My last messenger
was waylaid and nearly killed, and you may fare even worse."

"The prospect is not over pleasant," I answered laughing, "but I may
have better luck."

"I hope you will," said he doubtfully, "but it is a risky venture.  You
know that Cardinal Mazarin is at Bruhl, near Cologne?  Well, it is
necessary to take him an important paper."

"There seems small risk in that!"

"There you are wrong.  It is well understood that letters pass to and
fro, and his enemies are on the watch.  It may be they will learn your
secret before you get outside the gates.  Their spies are everywhere;
even, I may say, in the Palace itself.  Now, will you undertake the
commission?"

"Certainly, but I cannot travel on foot."

"There are horses in France, I suppose."

"One cannot buy them without money, which so far, has never been
plentiful with me."

"Oh," said he, "I will attend to that.  The King cannot afford to be
niggardly in this matter, eh?" and without even making a wry face he
gave me a liberal supply of money.

"Now," he continued, when I had replaced my purse, "this is a serious
affair, and the Court will depend not only on your courage but on your
skill.  Mazarin must receive that letter, and no one else must see it.
Do you understand?"

"Perfectly, monsieur."

"You will leave Paris to-night; trust no one, and remember that every
man you meet on the road may be a spy in Condé's pay."

"Then the chief danger is to be expected from the prince?"

"From every one," he exclaimed sharply.  "King's friends.  Queen's
friends, _Frondeurs_ and _petits maîtres_ are all to be suspected until
that letter is placed in Mazarin's own hands."

Being a very tiny packet it was hidden without much difficulty, and,
after listening to Le Tellier's cautions all over again, I left the
apartment.  Humphreys was waiting in the courtyard, but, staying only
to whisper, "Secret service," I hurried on to my own rooms.

"Monsieur will find his things on the bed," said the landlord; "they
are rather shabby, but they will attract less notice than new ones."

I asked if the town was quiet, and with a shrug, of his shoulders he
said, "As yet, but there will be mischief presently.  Monsieur is wise
to put on an overall if he wishes to walk abroad."

"I am going to look on, nothing more.  Now bring me something to eat,
and I will pay your bill."

"I am obliged," said he as coolly as if it were an everyday incident,
though I am sure he must have felt surprised at such an unexpected
stroke of luck.  I know I was astonished at my own ability to pay him.

"Monsieur will return?" said he questioningly, when at last I was ready
to depart.

"I trust so.  Keep the rooms for me."

He took the money, opened the door, and bowed low as I went out.  He
had always treated me well, and I was glad to have the means of
settling my debt to him.

A considerable change had taken place in the streets since the morning,
and there were numerous signs of the threatening storm.  The Black
Mantles had disappeared, having shut themselves up in their barricaded
houses.  Brawny men, half-naked and unwashed, patrolled the roadway,
mostly in two and threes, but here and there in larger groups.  Every
one had a weapon, pike or club, axe or chopper, while a certain
proportion carried horse-pistols, or blunderbusses.

I pushed on quickly through the crowd to the Rue Crillon, feeling more
alarmed at every step, as the promenaders were rapidly getting ripe for
mischief.  Thus far I believe they had no settled purpose beyond
general plunder, but no one could tell what might happen at any moment.
I ought really to have gone on with Le Tellier's note, but I could not
make up my mind to abandon the ladies.  Most of their friends had
followed Condé, Raoul could not leave the Luxembourg, and they were
practically alone in Paris.

When I reached the Rue Crillon it was nearly empty, and I managed to
pass unobserved into my friends' house.  Marie and her aunt were
sitting in an upstairs room that faced the street.  Madame Coutance was
looking out with an expression of scorn, but the girl's face was pale
and apprehensive.  At first they failed to recognise me in my workman's
disguise, but after a second or two the elder lady exclaimed, "Why
surely it is M. de Lalande, our cavalier, the knight-errant who goes
about rescuing distressed dames.  But why this mummery, my trusty
knight?  What does it mean?"

"That I intend doing my utmost to save your life, madame.  Come, before
the mob begins to work mischief.  Raoul has procured me a permit which
will pass us through the gates."

"You have grown wondrous timid of a sudden," she laughed.  "I can
perceive no sign of danger.  There are a few people in the street, but
they are quiet enough."

"They are swarming from their dens in all quarters of the town, madame,
and they are as likely as not to come here."

"But why should they?" she inquired, and I could only reply by asking
why they should not.

"They cannot wish to injure us," exclaimed Marie; "we have done them no
harm!" a remark which showed how little the girl understood the
passions of an angry mob.

For ten minutes or more I stood there begging Madame Coutance to
escape, and all the while the number of people in the street steadily
increased.  They had done no mischief as yet, but passed their time in
an aimless sort of promenade, shouting, singing, and mocking at any
well-dressed passer-by.  Once the whole crowd for some reason swept
into the adjoining street, and for a brief period the Rue Crillon was
left empty.

"Your bogey has vanished, Albert," cried Madame Coutance in triumph; "I
told you there was no danger."

"I trust madame will prove the surer prophet, but I am still doubtful."

"Here they come again!" cried Marie.  "What a horrid din!  What are
they doing, Albert?"

"Singing, but I cannot distinguish the words.  They are growing more
restless now.  I should like to see D'Artagnan ride up with his
troopers; he would soon clear the road.  But I expect there is
sufficient work for him in other parts."

For a while we stood, half hidden by the heavy curtains, watching the
antics of the crowd, and wondering what would happen next.  The people
moved to and fro like caged animals, walking a few steps and turning
back or crossing repeatedly from one side of the road to the other.  A
body of soldiers would have dispersed them easily, as they had neither
purpose nor leader.

Presently they began to cluster more thickly at a spot some twenty
yards below our house, and then I saw a big ragged fellow holding aloft
a red flag, while another was pointing to it, and talking violently.  I
could not hear what he said, but every now and then the crowd shouted
approval of his words.

"The fellow is hatching trouble," I muttered to myself, and, almost
unconsciously, I felt for Le Tellier's note.

"They will attack the Palais Royal," said Madame Coutance.  "They are
angry because the prince has been driven away.  I am sorry for the
Queen, but they will not hurt her, if she promises to recall him."

"Be still!" I exclaimed with more freedom than politeness, "and listen.
Now, can you understand?"

It had come at last.  Chance or fate had given the mob a cry, which was
all they needed.  They were bent on plunder and violence, and any
excuse was good enough.  Low, deep, and stern, like the early rumblings
of a volcano, the cry sounded; then the volume swelled, became clearer
and more piercing, till at last in one stupendous roar it shook the
place.

"Down with Condé!  Down with Condé!"

Marie shivered and gave a gasp of terror, but her aunt still smiled
scornfully; she was really an amazing woman.

"What imbeciles!" she exclaimed; "they do not know who is their best
friend."

"Nor care," said I, "they intend being their own friends this evening.
Stay there a moment while I see to things downstairs."

"Do not venture into the street, Albert," cried Marie, "you will be
killed," and I promised to take no risks.

Collecting the servants, who were half dead through fright, I set them
to work barricading the lower part of the house, and as soon as they
had done all that was possible, I ran again up the stairs to the room
which the ladies still occupied.  By now the street was packed, and
more than one dwelling house had been broken open.  Out went costly
furniture to be smashed into fragments by the howling rioters, and,
"Down with Condé!  Death to the friends of Condé!" echoed and re-echoed
on all sides.

The mob moved nearer, and attacked the house on the opposite side of
the street.  Crash went the door, and the people rushed in with cries
of triumph.  We saw them appear in a room on a level with our own; the
window was flung open, and a beautiful statue was hurled on to the
pavement below.  Down came rich hangings, costly pictures and gilded
mirrors; the small articles only were stolen, the others were hacked
and chopped and trampled to pieces underfoot.

"Madame," said I firmly, "you must delay no longer.  For your niece's
sake, if not for your own, you must attempt to escape."

A loud howl added force to my advice, and a dozen stalwart hands banged
at our frail barricade.  It could not resist long, and what chance
would there be for us, when the rioters had swept it away?

"Down with the house!  Burn it!  Burn it!  Have them out!  Friends of
Condé to the death!  Room there for Pierre's club!  Bravo, Pierre!"

"Madame," I cried passionately, "listen to reason.  Do you want this
innocent girl killed before your eyes?  These wild beasts will have no
mercy."

"It is too late," she answered calmly, "and we both come from a race
that knows how to die."

"It is not too late; there is still a chance.  Get some clothes from
the servants, and disguise yourselves; we can slip out at the back."

Even then I believe she would have stood her ground, but for Marie's
evident terror.  The poor girl could not conceal her dismay, and her
eyes distended in fright as the hungry roar of the mob leaped from the
street.  Those in front hacked at the barrier: those behind urged on
their fellows with deep-mouthed baying.

"In!  In!  Set it on fire!  Death to Condé's friends!" they roared.

"Go!" said I sternly, pushing Madame Coutance out of the room, "and I
pray that this poor girl's death is not laid to your account."

The terrified servants had already fled, but madame found some
garments, in which the two dressed.  I waited for them on the stairs,
and my blood ran cold at the yells of the ravenous pack below.  Crash!
Crash!  The barrier was yielding!  A few more stout blows and they
would be upon us.  A second, aye, even half a second might mean the
difference to us between life and death.

"Quick!  Quick!" I cried, as the ladies in their borrowed dresses ran
from the room.  "The barricade will fall at any moment!"

Half dragging, half supporting Marie, Madame Coutance and I ran swiftly
along the landing, as, with the noise of a river in flood, the crowd
burst into the hall.

"Down with Condé!"

The shout was appalling, and even Marie's aunt, for all her bravado,
shrank at it.  The sound of the savage voices urged us on, through the
servants' quarters, down a narrow staircase, into the kitchen, and so
to the yard beyond.  The door was already wide open, and we pushed
through to a side street.  Just in time!  A portion of the mob had
swept round to the back of the house, and almost directly we found
ourselves in the midst of the crowd, fighting, pushing, struggling,
with all our might to force a way through.

Marie, poor girl, clung to me nervously in an almost fainting state,
but her aunt walked boldly with head erect and her eyes flashing like
stars.  In spite of the terrible danger I could hardly repress a smile
at sight of this high-born dame in her servant's dress, compelled to
struggle with the _canaille_ like a woman of the markets.  To make
matters worse, we were forced to cry aloud, "Down with Condé!" which I
did lustily, but madame made many wry faces, and, but for her niece,
would have refused outright.  It was quite painful enough for her to
hear others insulting the great hero.

Twice we were swung back to the door of the house, which was now
completely wrecked; then, still surrounded by the mob, we were tossed,
like floating straws, clear of the street.  Since that night I have
taken part in more than one fierce battle, but have never experienced
the same feeling of horror as during that eventful struggle in the Rue
Crillon.

The danger was not yet over; we had still some distance to walk, and
every few yards we met groups of rioters hurrying to the work of
destruction.  Some cried, "Down with the Queen!" or "Down with the
Parliament!" but most of them yelled "Down with Condé!" because for the
moment that was the popular cry.

Just at first we walked rather briskly, but very soon Marie's pace
became slower, she hung with greater weight on my arm, and I feared
every moment she would faint; It was evident that unless she got better
we should not reach St. Denis that night.

We were in a fairly quiet street when Madame Coutance suddenly
exclaimed, "Let us rest a few minutes in this doorway.  Marie, look up,
child; there is nothing to fear now; we are safe here."

For answer, the girl, whose nerves were completely overwrought,
shuddered and sobbed.

"Take me away," she cried, "oh, take me away.  Back to Aunay; anywhere
out of this horrible place."

"That is what we are going to do," I said soothingly.  "I have a
special permit which will pass us through the gate of St. Denis.  But
you must be strong and brave, or we shall not get there."

"I will try," she moaned, "I will try; but oh, it is horrible."

"Hush!" exclaimed her aunt sharply, "listen."

I had been too much occupied with Marie to pay attention to anything
else, but now I distinctly heard the sound of voices on the other side
of the door.

"Poor child," a woman was saying softly, "she is half dead with fright.
Let her come in, I say."

"But the rioters?" exclaimed a second person.

"Pouf!  The street is clear enough.  Take down the bar, Jules."  Then
we heard a sound as of a heavy bar being removed.

The door opened ever so slightly and a woman cried, "Quick, come in,
before you are seen.  Where is the poor girl?  Cheer up, my little one,
no one shall harm you here.  Now, Jules, put up the bar again!  Ah!
that is right.  This way, monsieur," and she led us all into a tiny
room, poorly furnished, but neat and clean.

She was a comely woman of middle age, rather short, with bright keen
eyes, and pleasant face: her husband, Jules, was a ruddy-cheeked man,
bald on the top of his head, but with a ring of stiff white hair which
stood up like a fence.

"It is really very generous of you to risk so much for strangers," I
began, but the woman would not let me finish.

"One cannot let a child die for want of a helping hand," said she
briskly, "and as for these brigands, I would cut off all their heads at
a blow.  Ah, it is easy to see that you do not belong to the
_canaille_."

I have had little experience of the sea, but as we sat in that room I
think we must have felt like sailors who, after a stormy voyage, have
glided into a peaceful harbour.

Both Jules and his wife were very attentive, especially to Marie, who
was getting much calmer; they gave us food and drink, and offered to
hide us in the house as long as we cared to stay.

"It is growing late," said they, "and you cannot go abroad to-night.
To-morrow----"

"The danger will be just as great," interrupted Madame Coutance.  "We
thank you for your kind offer, but, believe me, it will be better for
us to depart now.  Monsieur has a pass, and once outside the city we
shall be safe."

"And to-morrow," said Marie, "it may be too late.  Besides, you may get
into trouble for hiding us, and then I should never forgive myself."

As far as my plans were concerned it was better to start at once, but I
took no part in the discussion one way or the other, though feeling
extremely pleased when Madame Coutance decided that we should sleep
outside Paris.

The kindness of our good Samaritans, and the relief from the tumult,
had done Marie so much good that she was ready to face the danger
again, so, at the end of an hour, we prepared to start.  I offered
Jules a sum of money, but neither he nor his wife would take it, and we
could only thank them, and hope they would not suffer for having
afforded us a temporary refuge.




CHAPTER XXIII.

The Ladies Leave Paris.

We could still hear the hoarse shouts of the people, but the streets in
the direction of St. Denis were quiet, and the darkness prevented us
from being observed.  As Marie had recovered her strength we walked
quickly, and finally arrived at the gate, where the Duke of Orleans had
stationed a double guard.  The officer on duty regarded us with
suspicion, but I showed him the order, which he dared not disobey.

"You may pass, monsieur," said he with mocking politeness, "it is not
for me to disapprove of the Duke's friends."

The fellow's words roused my anger, and my face burned, but time was
too precious for me to quarrel with him.  We had saved our lives, it is
true, but our plight was still miserable enough.

"We must find somewhere to sleep," said Madame Coutance, "and in the
morning we can hire a carriage.  Marie is too tired to walk farther."

This was the best plan, but I knew nothing of St. Denis, and it was
only after a weary search that I secured accommodation for them in a
small inn.  The place was dirty, and the landlord ugly enough to
frighten one, but Marie and her aunt behaved very bravely, making no
complaint.  They retired to their room at once, while I kept guard
outside the door with loaded pistols and naked sword.

The next morning I learned the lesson that it is not always well to
judge by appearances.  Touched by the ladies' distress, the innkeeper
did all he could to help me, and, through his assistance, I succeeded
in hiring a wretched cart to carry us a stage on our journey.

"I am sorry it is such a poor affair," said the man, "but there is not
a carriage in the place.  It is strange how many people have left Paris
during the last few days.  One would think the plague had broken out."

"The plague would have been less harmful," said I, remembering the
scene in the Rue Crillon.

In view of Le Tellier's note all this delay was extremely awkward, but
there was no help for it; I could not leave Marie and her aunt stranded
at St. Denis.

Madame Coutance laughed merrily at sight of the clumsy vehicle, and she
joked on my taste in choosing such an elegant equipage.  However, we
made the inside fairly comfortable with rugs and cushions, and, having
paid the inn-keeper, I assisted the ladies to their seats and clambered
in after them.  The driver, a stolid, thick-headed fellow, cracked his
whip, and we started off at a brisk trot, which, however, the horses
did not keep up long.

Hitherto there had been no opportunity to speak of my cousin's death,
but now I informed my companions of what had happened.  Both were
deeply grieved at the news, Madame Coutance especially showing more
feeling than I should have expected.

"Did he die of his wound?" she asked.

"In a measure; but chiefly from the hardships endured through hiding
from Condé."

"The prince would have forgiven him!"

"On conditions; and Henri would have refused them.  My cousin was not
the best of men, but he was loyal to his friends."

"You are right," exclaimed Madame Coutance warmly; "in many ways Henri
de Lalande was a gallant gentleman.  And now, what are you going to do?"

"As soon as you reach Aunay I shall join the King's friends."

"Ah!" she exclaimed with a smile, "I know you are against the prince,
but I wish you success for yourself, and if you fall, well, the
battlefield is a fit resting-place for a gentleman of France."

"I shall pray for you, Albert," whispered Marie, "that you may come
safely through every danger.  I hate all this fighting and bloodshed,
and wish the country could be at peace."

"It will be soon," I answered, and then for a while we journeyed in
silence.

About four o'clock in the afternoon we reached a large village, and the
driver pulled up at the principal inn.  This was the end of his stage,
and though we offered him a handsome sum of money he refused to go a
yard farther.  He declared that his horses required rest, which was
true enough, and that his master had ordered him to return to St. Denis
in the morning.

"We must make the best of it," exclaimed Madame Coutance; "I daresay we
can obtain some sort of accommodation for the night."

Our reception was far from encouraging, but when the innkeeper
discovered that we were not penniless, his manner changed.  The ladies
were shown into the best room, a chamber was made ready for them, and
the servants received orders to prepare a good meal.  All this was
extremely pleasant, but there was a greater slice of luck to follow.
As soon as I had explained the situation he offered to solve our
difficulty.  A carriage?  Certainly, he had the very thing, and a team
of beautiful horses as well.  Of course it would be expensive, but
then, no doubt, monsieur would be willing to pay for the privilege.

Finally it was agreed that we should start at dawn, and I went to sleep
that night with a feeling of relief.  It was barely light when we sat
down to breakfast, and the ladies shivered on going into the cold air,
but the carriage was comfortable, and, when the leathern coverings were
drawn down, warm.

"Decidedly an improvement on the open cart," exclaimed Madame Coutance,
as she leaned back against the cushions.  "We ought to reach Aunay
before nightfall."

I earnestly hoped we should, as I was becoming uneasy concerning Le
Tellier's note.  However, as nothing could be done until the ladies
were placed in safety, I endeavoured to dismiss the subject from my
mind, and to appear as pleasant as possible.  There is no need to
linger over the details of the journey.  We stopped two or three times
for food and rest, and at one place to change the horses, but we met
with no adventure of any kind, and arrived at the chateau about three
o'clock, quite two hours sooner than I had dared to hope.

"Home again," said Marie softly, as we entered the hall, "and I hope it
will be long before we leave it."

"Not until the prince rides triumphantly into Paris!" exclaimed her
aunt.  "Why do you smile, M. de Lalande?  The prince has already beaten
Mazarin, and he will make short work of the rest."

"Very likely, madame," I said, not wishing to be drawn into an
argument, but, remembering the note in my pocket, I greatly doubted if
the Cardinal were as completely overcome as his enemies believed.

It was a difficult matter to get away from Aunay that evening.  The
ladies declared I was tired, and begged me to stay until the next day,
but this, though they were not aware of it, was out of the question.
Finding at last that I was resolved to depart, Madame Coutance insisted
on my wearing a plumed hat which had belonged to her husband, and told
me to choose the best saddle-horse in her stables.

"True," said she, with a charming smile, "you are an enemy to the
prince, but I do not forget that you are also one of my best friends."