So we embraced each other.

"We shall see you again some day?" I said.

"Yes, if you come to Corsica."

"No, but won't you come to Paris?"

"I shall never go there," replied Lucien.

"In any case, you will find my card on the mantelpiece in your
brother's room--do not forget the address."

"I will promise you that should any event call me to the Continent you
shall have my first visit."

"Very well, that is agreed."

We shook hands once again and parted; but I noticed, so long as he
could see me, he followed me with his eyes.

All was quiet in the village, although, of course, there was the usual
agitation which follows the completion of a great public act; and as I
went along the street I sought my friend Orlandi, who had never
addressed a word to me, nor even thanked me; and so I passed the last
house in the village, and entered the open country without having seen
any one like him.

I thought he had entirely forgotten me, and under the circumstances I
quite excused him, but before I got very far out of the village I
perceived a man stride from the underwood, and place himself in the
middle of the road. I recognized him at once as the man who in my
great regard for appearances, and in my impatience, I had accused of
ingratitude.

He was dressed in the same costume as he had appeared in the previous
evening in the ruins of Vicentello.

When I was about twenty paces distant from him he took off his hat;
while I spurred my horse so as not to keep Orlandi waiting.

"Monsieur," he said, "I did not wish you to quit Sullacaro without
accepting my thanks for the kindness you have shown to a poor peasant
like myself, and as in the village I had not the heart, and could not
command the language, to thank you, I waited for you here."

"I am obliged to you," I said; "but it was not necessary to take any
trouble about it, and all the honour has been mine."

"And after all, monsieur," continued the bandit, "the habit of four
years is not easily overcome. The mountain air is strong at first,
almost suffocating--but now when I go to sleep in a house I should be
afraid the roof would fall upon me."

"But surely," I said, "you will now resume your former habits. I
understand you have a house, a field, and a vineyard."

"Yes, but my sister looks after the house; but the Lucquois are there
to work in the field, and to raise the grapes. We Corsicans do not
work."

"What do you do, then?"

"We overlook the labourers. We walk about with a gun upon our
shoulders."

"Well, my dear Monsieur Orlandi," I said, extending my hand, "I wish
you good luck; but recollect that my honour as well as your own will
be compromised if you fire at anything but game or wild animals. You
must never on any account draw a trigger on the Colona family."

"Ah! your Excellency," he replied, with an expression of countenance
which I never remarked except amongst the natives of Normandy, "that
hen they gave us was a very thin one."

And without another word he disappeared in the brushwood.

I continued my journey thinking that it was very likely that the
meagre fowl would be the cause of another rupture between the Orlandi
and the Colona.

That evening I slept at Albitucia, next day I reached Ajaccio.

Eight days afterwards I was in Paris.



CHAPTER XII.

THE day I arrived in Paris I called upon M. Louis de Franchi. He was
not at home.

I left my card, with an intimation that I had just returned from
Sullacaro, and that I was the bearer of a letter from M. Lucien, his
brother. I inquired when he would be at home, as I had undertaken to
deliver the letter with my own hand.

To conduct me to his master's study, where I wished to write a note,
the valet led me through the dining-room and the _salon._

I looked around me as I proceeded with a curiosity which will be
understood, and I recognized the influence of the same taste which I
had already perceived at Sullacaro; only the taste was here set off by
true Parisian elegance. M. Louis de Franchi certainly appeared to have
a very charming lodging for a bachelor.

Next morning, about eleven o'clock, my servant announced M. Louis de
Franchi. I told the man to offer my visitor the papers and to say that
I would wait on him as soon as I was dressed.

In five minutes I presented myself.

M. Louis do Franchi who was, no doubt from a sense of courtesy,
reading a tale I had contributed to _La Presse,_ raised his head as
the door opened, and I entered.

I stood perfectly astounded at the resemblance between the two
brothers. He rose.

"Monsieur," he said, "I could scarcely credit my good fortune when I
read your note yesterday on my return home. I have pictured you twenty
times so as to assure myself that it was in accord with your
portraits, and at last I, this morning, determined to present myself
at your house without considering the hour, and I fear I have been too
early."

"I hope you will excuse me if I do not at once acknowledge your
kindness in suitable terms, but may I inquire whether I have the
honour to address M. Louis or M. Lucien de Franchi?"

"Are you serious? Yes, the resemblance is certainly wonderful, and
when I was last at Sullacaro nearly every one mistook one of us for
the other, yet, if he has not abjured the Corsican dress, you have
seen him in a costume, which would make a considerable difference in
our appearance."

"And justly so," I replied; "but as chance would have it, he was, when
I left, dressed exactly as you are now, except that he wore white
trowsers, so that I was not able to separate your presence from his
memory with the difference in dress of which you speak, but," I
continued, taking the letter from my pocket-book, "I can quite
understand you are anxious to have news from home, so pray read this
which I would have left at your house yesterday had I not promised
Madame de Franchi to give it to you myself."

"They were all quite well when you left, I hope?"

"Yes, but somewhat anxious."

"On my account?"

"Yes; but read that letter, I beg of you."

"If you will excuse me."

So Monsieur Franchi read the letter while I made some cigarettes. I
watched him as his eyes travelled rapidly over the paper, and I heard
him murmur, "Dear Lucien, Darling Mother----yes----yes----I
understand."

I had not yet recovered from the surprise the strange resemblance
between the brothers had caused me, but now I noticed what Lucien had
told me, that Louis was paler, and spoke French better than he did.

"Well," I said when he had finished reading the letter, and had
lighted the cigarette, "You see, as I told you, that they are anxious
about you, and I am glad that their fears are unfounded."

"Well, no," he said gravely, "not altogether; I have not been ill, it
is true, but I have been out of sorts, and my indisposition has been
augmented by this feeling that my brother is suffering with me."

"Monsieur Lucien has already told me as much, and had I been sceptical
I should now have been quite sure that what he said was a fact. I
should require no further proof than I now have. So you, yourself, are
convinced, monsieur, that your brother's health depends to a certain
extent on your own."

"Yes, perfectly so."

"Then," I continued, "as your answer will doubly interest me, may I
ask, not from mere curiosity, if this indisposition of which you speak
is likely soon to pass away?"

"Oh, you know, monsieur, that the greatest griefs give way to time,
and that my heart, even if seared, will heal. Meantime, however, pray
accept my thanks once more, and permit me to call on you occasionally
to have a chat about Sullacaro."

"With the greatest pleasure," I replied; "but why not now continue our
conversation, which is equally agreeable to both of us. My servant is
about to announce breakfast. Will you do me the honour to join me, and
we can talk at our ease?"

"I regret that it is impossible; I have an appointment with the
Chancellor at twelve o'clock, and you will understand that such a
young advocate as I am cannot afford to stay away."

"Ah, it is probably only about that Orlandi and Colona affair, as you,
no doubt, are aware, and I can re-assure you on that point, for I
myself signed the contract as sponsor for this Orlandi."

"Yes, my brother said as much."

"But," he added, looking at his watch, "it is nearly twelve o'clock; I
must go and inform the Chancellor that my brother has redeemed my
word."

"Ah, yes, most religiously, I can answer for that."

"Dear Lucien, I knew quite well, though our sentiments do not agree on
this point, that he would do it for me."

"Yes, and I assure you it cost him something to comply."

"We will speak of all this later, for you can well understand how
pleasant it is for me to re-visit with your assistance my mother, my
brother, and our home surroundings, so if you will tell me when you
are disengaged----"

"That will be somewhat difficult; for this next few days I shall be
very busy, but will you tell me where I am likely to find you."

"Listen," he said, "to-morrow is Mi-Careme, is it not?"

"To-morrow?"

"Yes."

"Well?"

"Are you going to the Opera Ball?"

"Yes and No. Yes, if you will meet me there. No, if I have no object
in going."

"I must go, I am obliged to be there."

"Ah, yes," I said laughing, "I understand, as you said just now, time
heals up the greatest griefs, and your seared heart must be healed."

"You are under a misapprehension, for I shall probably sustain new
tortures by going."

"Then do not go."

"But what is one to do in this world? We cannot always do what we
want; I am dragged thither by fate in spite of myself. I know I had
better not go, and nevertheless I shall go."

"Well, then, to-morrow, at the Opera."

"Yes, agreed."

"At what time?"

"Half-past twelve midnight, if that will suit you."

"And whereabouts?"

"In the _foyer_--at one, I will be in front of the clock."

"That is understood."

We then shook hands and he left the house quickly. It was on the
stroke of twelve.

As for me, I occupied myself all the afternoon and all the next day in
those employments as a man is obliged to undertake on his return from
a lengthened tour.

At half-past twelve o'clock at night I was at the rendezvous.

Louis had been waiting some time--he had been following a mask which
he thought he recognized, but the lady had been lost in the crowd, and
he had not been able to rejoin her.

I wished to speak of Corsica, but Louis was too absent to follow out
such a grave subject of conversation. His eyes were constantly fixed
on the clock, and suddenly he rushed away from my side, exclaiming:

"Ah, there is my bouquet of violets."

He pushed through the crowd to join a woman who, evidently with a
purpose, was holding a large bouquet of violets in her hand.

There were bouquets of every species in the foyer, and I myself was
soon accosted by a bouquet of camellias, which congratulated me upon
my safe return to Paris.

To the camellias succeeded a bouquet of rose-pompons.

To these succeeded a bouquet of heliotrope.

In fact I was engaged with my fifteenth bouquet when I encountered
D----.

"Ah, is it you, _mon cher?_" he cried. "Welcome back; you have
returned just in time. I have a little supper party this
evening--so-and-so and so-and-so--and we shall count upon you."

"A thousand thanks, my dear fellow; but though I am strongly tempted
to accept your invitation, I can't. I am engaged to somebody."

"Yes; but everyone else will bring somebody also," said D----. "It is
quite understood that there are to be six water-bottles, whose destiny
it is to refresh bouquets."

"Ah, you are mistaken. I shall have no bouquet to put in a
water-bottle; I am with a friend."

"Well, you know the proverb, 'Friends of our friends.'"

"It is a young gentleman whom you do not know."

"Well, then, we will make his acquaintance."

"I will tell him of his good fortune."

"Yes, and if he decline, bring him by force."

"I will do what I can, I promise you. At what time?"

"Three o'clock; but as supper will remain on table till six you have
ample margin."

"Very well."

A bouquet of myosotis, which perhaps had heard the latter portion of
our conversation, then took D----'s arm and walked on with him.

Shortly afterwards I met Louis, who had by this time got rid of his
violets.

As the lady who honoured me with her attention just then was a trifle
dull, I despatched her to one of my friends, and took Louis' arm.

"Well," I said, "have you learnt what you wanted to know?"

"Oh, yes! You know that at a masked ball people talk of the very
things they ought to leave you in ignorance of."

"My poor friend," I said, "pardon me for thus addressing you; but it
appears to me that I know you since I have known your brother. Look
here--you are unhappy, are not you? Now what is it?"

"Oh, my goodness! Nothing worth talking about."

I saw that he did not wish to speak on the subject, so I said no more.

We took two or three turns in silence.--I was quite indifferent, for I
expected nobody, but he was anxiously examining every domino that
passed.

At length I said, "Do you know what you might do to-night?"

He started like a man suddenly aroused.

"I! No. I beg your pardon; what did you say?"

"I was about to propose a distraction which it seems to me you need."

"What is it?"

"Come to supper with a friend of mine, with me."

"Oh, no--I am not in a festive humour."

"Bah! They will talk nothing but nonsense, and that will amuse you."

"Well--but I am not invited!"

"You mistake--for you are."

"It is very kind on your part--but 'pon my word I am not worthy of--"

Just then we crossed D----. He seemed very much engaged with his
bouquet of myosotis. Nevertheless he saw me.

"Well," he said, "is it settled? Three o'clock."

"Less settled than ever," I replied--"I cannot join you."

"Go to the Devil, then!"

And with this pious ejaculation he continued his course.

"Who is that gentleman?" inquired Louis.

"That is D----, one of my friends; a very cheerful youth, though he is
the manager of one of our most respectable papers."

"Monsieur D----!" exclaimed Louis. "Do you know _him?_"

"Certainly. I have known him for some years."

"And is he the person with whom you are invited to sup this evening?"

"Yes, the same."

"Then it was to his house you intended to take me?"

"Yes."

"Then that alters the case. I accept, and with very great pleasure."

"All right. That settles the question."

"Perhaps, after all, I ought not to go," muttered Louis, smiling
sadly. "But you remember what I said yesterday about my destiny. Here
is the proof. I should have done better not to have come here this
evening."

At this moment we again encountered D----. "My dear fellow," I said,
"I have changed my mind!"

"And you will join us?"

"Yes."

"Bravo! But I ought to mention one thing."

"That is?"

"That whoever sups with us to-night, sups with us again to-morrow
evening."

"By what law of society is that?"

"By the laws of the wager made with Chateau Renaud."

I felt Louis' arm quiver as it rested on mine--I turned round; but
though his face was deadly pale, it was impassable.

"What is the wager?" I inquired.

"Oh, it would occupy too much time to repeat here, and, besides, some
one interested might overhear, and it might thus be lost."

"What wonderful discretion you possess! At three, then."

"At three!"

Once more we separated, and as I glanced at the clock I saw it then
was thirty-five minutes past two.

"Do you know this M. de Chateau Renaud?" asked Louis, who vainly
attempted to command his voice, and to conceal his emotion.

"Only by sight. I have met him occasionally in society."

"Then he is not a friend of yours?"

"Not even an acquaintance."

"Ah, so much the better," replied Louis.

"Why so?"

"For no particular reason."

"But do you know him?"

"Indirectly."

Notwithstanding this evasive answer, it was easy to perceive that
between Louis and Chateau Renaud there existed one of those mysterious
bonds which could only be forged by a woman. An instinctive feeling
assured me that it would be best for all if he and I returned home
quietly.

"Will you take my advice, Monsieur de Franchi," I said.

"About what? tell me!"

"Do not go to supper at D----'s house."

"Why not? Does he not expect us. Have you not told him that you will
bring a friend?"

"Yes, but that is not the point."

"What is the point then?"

"I am sure you had better not go, that is all!"

"But surely you have some reason to give for your change of opinion;
just now you were insisting on my presence at D----'s against my
will."

"I did not then know that we should meet Chateau Renaud."

"But that is all the better. I believe he is a very pleasant
companion, and I shall be glad to make his acquaintance."

"Very well," I replied--"so be it. Shall we go now?"

We accordingly went downstairs for our paletots.

D---- lived within a short distance of the opera house, the morning
was very fine, and I hoped that the open air would enliven my
companion. So I proposed that we should walk, and this he agreed to.



CHAPTER XIII.

WE found many of my friends assembled--habitues of the opera lobbies
and of the greenroom, and, as I had expected, a few unmasked
"bouquets" anxious for the time to come when the water-bottles would
be used--supper time!

I introduced Louis to several friends, and it is needless to say that
he was politely received and welcomed.

Ten minutes after our arrival D---- entered, accompanied by his
bouquet of myosotis, who unmasked herself with a freedom and precision
which argued a long acquaintance with these sort of parties.

I introduced Louis to D----.

"Now," said B----, "if all the presentations have been made, I suggest
that we present ourselves at table."

"All the presentations are made, but all the guests have not arrived,"
replied D----.

"Who is expected then?"

"Chateau Renaud is still wanting to complete the party."

"Ah, just so. By-the-by, was there not some bet?"

"Yes. We laid a wager of a supper for twelve, that he would not bring
a certain lady here to-night."

"And who is the lady," asked the bouquet of myosotis, "who is so very
shy as to be made the subject of a bet?"

I looked at Louis de Franchi. He was outwardly composed, but pale as a
corpse.

"Faith, I don't know that there is any great harm in telling you her
name, especially as none of you know her I think. She is Madame----"

Louis placed his hand upon D----'s arm.

"Monsieur," he said; "will you grant me a favour? As a new
acquaintance I venture to ask it!"

"What is it, monsieur?"

"Do not name the lady who is expected with M. de Chateau Renaud, you
know she is a married woman!"

"Oh yes, but her husband is at Smyrna, in the East Indies, in Mexico,
or some such place. When a husband lives so far away it is nearly the
same as having no husband at all."

"Her husband will return in a few days. I know him. He is a gallant
fellow. I would wish, if possible, to spare him the chagrin of
learning on his return that his wife had made one at this
supper-party."

"Excuse me, monsieur," said D----, "I was not aware that you are
acquainted with the lady, and I did not think she was married. But
since you know her and her husband----"

"I do know them."

"Then we must exercise greater discretion. Ladies and gentlemen,
whether Chateau Renaud comes or not--whether he wins or loses his bet,
I must beg of you all to keep this adventure secret."

We all promised, not because our moral senses were offended, but
because we were hungry and wished to begin our supper.

"Thank you, monsieur," said Louis to D----, holding out his hand to
him. "I assure you you are acting like a thorough gentleman in this
matter."

We then passed into the supper-room, and each one took his allotted
place. Two chairs were vacant, those reserved for Chateau Renaud and
his expected companion.

The servant was about to remove them.

"No," said the master, "let them remain; Chateau Renaud has got until
four o'clock to decide his wager. At four o'clock if he is not here he
will have lost."

I could not keep my eyes from Louis de Franchi; I saw him watching the
timepiece anxiously. It was then 3.40 A.M.

"Is that clock right?" asked Louis.

"That is not my concern," said D----, laughing. "I set it by Chateau
Renaud's watch, so that there may be no mistake."

"Well, gentlemen," said the bouquet of myosotis, "it seems we cannot
talk of anything but Chateau Renaud and his unknown fair one. We are
getting horribly 'slow,' I think."

"You are quite right, my dear," replied V----. "There are so many
women of whom we can speak, and who are only waiting to be spoken
to----"

"Let us drink their health," cried D----.

So we did, and then the champagne went round briskly; every guest had
a bottle at his or her elbow.

I noticed that Louis scarcely tasted his wine; "Drink, man!" I
whispered: "don't you see that she will not come?"

"It still wants a quarter to four," said he; "at four o'clock, even
though I shall be late in commencing, I promise you I will overtake
some of you."

"Oh, very well!" I replied.

While we had been exchanging these few words in a low tone, the
conversation had become general around the table. Occasionally D----
and Louis glanced at the clock, which ticked regularly on without any
care for the impatience of the two men who were so intent upon its
movements.

At five minutes to four I looked at Louis.

"To your health," I said.

He took his glass, smiled, and raised it to his lips. He had drunk
about half its contents when a ring was heard at the front door.

I did not think it possible that Louis could become any paler than he
was, but I saw my mistake then.

"'Tis he," he muttered.

"Yes, but perhaps he may have come alone," I replied.

"We shall see in a moment."

The sound of the bell had attracted everybody's attention, and the
most profound silence suddenly succeeded the buzz of conversation
which had till then prevailed.

Then the sound of talking was heard in the anteroom.

D---- rose and opened the door.

"I can recognize her voice," said Louis, as he grasped my arm with a
vice-like grip.

"We shall see! wait! be a man!" I answered. "It must be evident that
if she has thus come to supper with a man, of her own will, to the
house of a stranger, she is not worthy your sympathy."

"I beg, madam, that you will enter," said D----'s voice in the outer
room. "We are all friends here I assure you."

"Yes, come in, my dear Emily," said M. de Chateau Renaud, "you need
not take off your mask if you do not wish to do so."

"The wretch," muttered Louis.

At that moment a lady entered, dragged in rather than assisted by
D----, who fancied he was doing the honours, and by Chateau Renaud.

"Three minutes to four," said Chateau Renaud to D----, in a low voice.

"Quite right, my dear fellow, you have won."

"Not yet, monsieur," said the young unknown addressing Chateau Renaud,
and drawing herself up to her full height. "I can now understand your
persistence. You laid a wager that I would sup here. Is that so?"

Chateau Renaud was silent. Then addressing D----, she continued.

"Since this man cannot answer, will you, monsieur, reply. Did not M.
de Chateau Renaud wager that he would bring me here to supper
to-night?"

"I will not hide from you, madame, that he flattered us with that
hope," replied D----.

"Well, then, M. de Chateau Renaud has lost, for I was quite unaware he
was bringing me here. I believed we were to sup at the house of a
friend of my own. So it appears to me that M. de Chateau Renaud has
not won his wager."

"But now you are here, my dear Emily, you may as well remain; won't
you? See, we have a good company and some pleasant young ladies too!"

"Now that I am here," replied the unknown, "I will thank the gentleman
who appears to be the master of the house for the courtesy with which
he has treated me. But as, unfortunately, I cannot accept his polite
invitation I will beg M. Louis de Franchi to see me home."

Louis with a bound placed himself between the speaker and Chateau
Renaud.

"I beg to observe, madam," said the latter between his shut teeth,
"that I brought you hither and consequently I am the proper person to
conduct you home."

"Gentlemen," said the unknown, "you are five, I put myself into your
honourable care. I trust you will defend me from the violence of M. de
Chateau Renaud!"

Chateau Renaud made a movement. We all rose at once.

"Very good, madame," he said. "You are at liberty. I know with whom I
have to reckon."

"If you refer to me, sir," replied Louis de Franchi with an air of
hauteur impossible to describe, "you will find me all day to-morrow at
the Rue du Helder, No. 7."

"Very well, monsieur. Perhaps I shall not have the pleasure to call
upon you myself, but I hope that two friends of mine may be as
cordially received in my place."

"That was all that was necessary," said Louis, shrugging his shoulders
disdainfully. "A challenge before a lady! Come, madame," he continued,
offering his arm. "Believe me, I thank you from the bottom of my heart
for the honour you do me."

And then they left the room, amidst the most profound silence.

"Well, gentlemen, so it seems I have lost," said Chateau Renaud, when
the door closed. "That's all settled! To-morrow evening all of you sup
with me at the Freres Provencaux."



CHAPTER XIV.

THE next day, or rather the same day, at ten o'clock, I called upon M.
Louis de Franchi.

As I was ascending the staircase, I met two young men coming down. One
was evidently a civilian, the other wore the Legion of Honour, and
though in _mufti_ I could see he was an officer.

I had, no doubt, that these gentlemen had just been with M. de
Franchi, and I watched them downstairs. Then I continued my way to
Louis' apartments and rang the bell.

The servant opened the door. His master was in his study.

When the man announced me, Louis, who was writing, looked up and
exclaimed--

"Ah, welcome! I was just writing to you. I am very glad to see you.
Joseph, I am not at home to any one."

The servant went out and left us alone.

"Didn't you meet two gentlemen upon the stairs?" asked Louis, as he
placed a chair.

"Yes, one of them was decorated."

"The same."

"I fancied they had called upon you."

"You are quite right."

"Did they come on behalf of M. de Chateau Renaud?"

"They are his seconds."

"Ah! so he has taken this matter seriously it seems."

"He could scarcely do otherwise," replied Louis.

"So they came to----."

"To request me to name two friends who would confer with them; I
thought of you."

"I am really honoured by your kindness. But I cannot go alone."

"I have also written to ask an old friend, the Baron Giordano
Martelli, to breakfast here. He will come at eleven. We will breakfast
together, and at twelve, perhaps, you will be kind enough to go and
see these gentlemen who have promised to remain at home until three
o'clock. Here are their names and addresses."

Louis handed me two cards as he spoke.

One card represented the Baron Rene de Chateaugrand, the other M.
Adrien de Boissy.

The former lived in the Rue de la Paix, No. 12.

The latter, who I now saw, belonged to the army, was a lieutenant of
Chasseurs d'Afrique, and lived in the Rue de Lille, No. 29.

I turned the cards over and over in my fingers.

"Well, what embarrasses you?" asked Louis.

"I should like to be told frankly if you look upon this as a serious
matter. You know we must mould our conduct upon that."

"Indeed, I do consider it a very serious matter. You heard me place
myself at M. de Chateau Renaud's disposal, he has sent to me. I must
now go with the current."

"Yes, of course, but after all----"

"Go on," said Louis, smilingly.

"After all," I continued, "we must know what you are going to fight
for. We cannot put two men up to cut and slash each other without
having some ground for the encounter."

"Very well, let me tell you in as few words as possible, the head and
front of the offending.

"When I first arrived in Paris I was introduced by a friend of mine, a
captain in the navy, to his wife. She was young and beautiful. She
made a deep impression upon me, and as I was really afraid I might end
by falling in love with her, I very rarely went to my friend's house,
although frequently pressed to do so.

"My friend was rather piqued at my absence, and at last I frankly told
him the truth, that his wife being so charming I was rather afraid to
go to his house. He laughed, shook hands with me, and asked me, even
pressed me, to dine with him that same evening.

"'My dear Louis,' said he, after dinner. 'In a few weeks I shall sail
for Mexico. I may be absent three months, perhaps six--or longer. We
sailors sometimes know when we shall sail, but never when we may
return. To you, I commend Emily during my absence. Emily, I beg of you
to look upon M. Louis de Franchi as a brother.'

"The lady gave me her hand in token of agreement. I was stupefied! I
did not know what to say, and I daresay I appeared very stupid to my
future sister.

"Three weeks after this my friend sailed.

"During those three weeks he insisted that I should dine at least once
a week with them _en famille._

"Emily's mother then came to live with her. I need scarcely say that
her husband's confidence was not abused, and though I loved her dearly
I regarded her simply as a sister.

"Six months elapsed.

"Emily's mother still remained with her, but when he went away, her
husband had entreated her to receive as usual. There was nothing my
poor friend had a greater horror of than to appear as a jealous
husband. He adored Emily and had every confidence in her.

"So Emily continued to receive, and they were very friendly
receptions. But her mother's presence silenced all scandal or cause
for it, and no one could say a word against her reputation.

"At the end of three months or so M. de Chateau Renaud appeared.

"You believe in presentiments, I daresay. When I first saw that man I
disliked him and would not speak to him. I hated him.

"But why I disliked him I cannot tell you. I did!

"Most likely because I saw that even at his first appearance Emily
seemed inclined to like him, and he evidently admired her. Perhaps I
am mistaken, but, as at the bottom of my heart I had never ceased to
love Emily, I suspect I was jealous.

"So on the next occasion I did not lose sight of M. de Chateau Renaud.
Perhaps he noticed my looks and it seemed to me that he was chatting
in undertones to Emily and holding me up to ridicule.

"Had I yielded to my feelings I would have challenged him that
evening, but I reflected that such conduct would be absurd, and
restrained myself.

"Every Wednesday thenceforth was a greater trial than the last.

"M. de Chateau Renaud is quite a man of the world, a dandy--a lion--I
know how superior he is to me in many respects. But it seems to me
that Emily values him more highly than he deserves.

"Soon I found out that I was not the only one who remarked her
preference for M. de Chateau Renaud, and this preference increased to
such an extent and became so obvious that one day Giordano, who like
me was an habitue of the house, spoke to me about it.

"From that moment my resolution was taken. I determined to speak to
Emily on the subject, convinced that she was only acting thoughtlessly
and I had but to call her attention to the matter to have it remedied.

"But to my great astonishment she took my remonstrances in joke,
pretended that I was mad, and that those who agreed with me were as
stupid as I was.

"However, I insisted.

"Emily only replied, that she would leave to my own decision as to
whether a man in love was not necessarily a prejudiced judge.

"I remained perfectly stupefied; her husband must have told her
everything.

"Now you will understand that under these circumstances, and being an
unhappy and jealous lover, and only making myself objectionable to the
lady, I ceased to visit at the house.

"But although I did not go to her parties I did not the less hear the
gossip that was afloat, nor was I the less unhappy, for these reports
were assuming a tangible shape.

"I resolved therefore to write to her, and beg her in the strongest
language of which I was capable, for her own and her husband's sake,
to be careful. She never answered my letter.

"Some time afterwards I heard it publicly stated that Emily was
actually the mistress of Chateau Renaud. What I suffered I cannot
express.

"It was then my poor brother became conscious of my grief.

"Then, after about a fortnight, you came back to Paris. The very day
you called upon me I received an anonymous letter from a lady unknown
appointing a meeting at the Opera Ball.

"This woman said that she had certain information to convey to me
respecting a lady friend of mine, whose Christian name only she would
mention.

"The name was Emily.

"My correspondent said I should recognize her by her carrying a
bouquet of violets.

"I told you at the time that I did not wish to go to the ball, but I
repeat I was hurried thither by fate.

"I went as you know. I found my domino at the place at the hour
indicated. She confirmed what I had already heard respecting Chateau
Renaud and Emily, and if I wished proof, she would give it me, for
Chateau Renaud had made a bet that he would take his new mistress to
supper at M. D----'s house that evening.

"Chance revealed to me that you knew M. D----, you suggested that I
should accompany you. I accepted, you know the rest."

"Now, what more could I do but await and accept the proposals that
were made to me?"

"But," I said, at length, as a sensation of fear crossed my mind, "I
am afraid I heard your brother say that you had never handled a sword
or a pistol."

"That is quite true!"

"Then you are absolutely at the mercy of your adversary!"

"I cannot help it. I am in the hands of Providence."



CHAPTER XV.

AS Louis was speaking, the servant announced the Baron Giordano
Martelli.

He was a young Corsican from Sartene. He had served in the 11th
Regiment, in which his gallantry had secured him promotion at the age
of twenty-three.

"Well," he said, after having bowed to me, "so things have come to a
crisis, and no doubt you will soon have a visit from the seconds of
Monsieur de Chateau Renaud."

"They have been here already."

"I suppose they have left their names and addresses?"

"Here are their cards."

"Good."

"Well, your servant has just told me that breakfast is waiting.
Suppose we sit down, and after breakfast we can return their visit."

We entered the _salle a manger,_ and put aside all business for the
present.

During the meal Louis questioned me closely concerning my journey in
Corsica, and I told him all the incidents with which the reader is
acquainted. He made me repeat, over and over again, all that his
mother and brother had said. He was quite touched, knowing the true
Corsican instincts of Lucien, with the care he had taken to
reconcile the Orlandi and the Colona.

The clock struck twelve.

"I do not wish to hurry you, gentlemen," said Louis, "but I think you
should return the visit of those gentlemen. It will not do to put
ourselves in the wrong."

"Oh, you may be quite easy on that point," I said, "we have plenty of
time before us."

"No matter," said the Baron Giordano, "Louis is right."

"Now," said I, "we must know whether you prefer to fight with sword or
pistol?"

"Ah," he replied, "it is all the same to me; I know as little about
one as the other. Besides, Monsieur de Chateau Renaud will save me all
trouble in choosing; he looks upon himself, no doubt, as the offended
party, and as such will retain the choice of weapons."

"However, the offence is doubtful, you only offered your arm, as you
were asked to do."

"My opinion is," said Louis, "that all discussion should tend towards
a peaceable arrangement of this matter. My tastes are not warlike, as
you know. Far from being a duellist, this is the first affair of the
kind I have had, and just for this very reason I wish to come well out
of it."

"That is very easy to say, my friend, but you have to play for your
life, and you leave to us and before your family the responsibility of
the result."

"Ah, as to that you may make your mind quite easy, I know my mother
and brother well enough; they would only ask whether I had conducted
myself as a brave man, and if you replied in the affirmative they
would be satisfied."

"But, hang it, we must know which arm you prefer."

"Well, if they propose pistols, accept them at once."

"That is my advice, also," said the Baron.

"Very well, then, the pistol be it," I replied, "since that is the
advice of both of you, but the pistol is a horrible weapon."

"Have I time to learn to fence between this and to-morrow?"

"No, unless, perhaps, you studied Grissier, and then you might learn
enough to defend yourself."

Louis smiled.

"Believe me," said he, "that what will happen tomorrow is already
written on high, and whatever we may do we cannot alter that."

We then shook hands with him and went downstairs.

Our first visit was naturally to the nearer of the two gentlemen who
had called on behalf of our adversary.

We, therefore, visited Monsieur Rene de Chateaugrand, who lived, as we
have said, at 12, Rue de la Paix.

Any other visitors were forbidden while we were calling, and we were
at once introduced to his presence.

We found Monsieur de Chateaugrand a perfect man of the world--he would
not for one moment give us the trouble of calling upon Monsieur de
Boissy--he sent his own servant for him.

While we were waiting his appearance, we spoke of everything but the
subject which had brought us thither, and in about ten minutes
Monsieur de Boissy arrived.

The two gentlemen did not advance any pretensions to the choice of
arms, the sword or pistol was equally familiar to M. de Chateau
Renaud. They were quite willing to leave the selection to M. de
Franchi, or to toss up. A louis was thrown into the air, face for
sword, reverse for pistols. The coin came down reverse.

So it was decided. The combat was arranged to take place next morning
at nine o'clock, in the wood of Vincennes, where the adversaries would
be placed at twenty paces, and after the third signal given by
clapping the hands they were to fire.

We returned to convey this decision to Louis de Franchi.

On my return home the same evening, I found the cards of MM. de
Chateaugrand and de Boissy.



CHAPTER XVI.

AT eight o'clock that evening I called upon M. Louis de Franchi, to
inquire whether he had anything to confide to me. But he begged me to
wait till next morning, saying:

"The night will bring counsel with it."

Next morning, therefore, instead of calling at eight, which would have
given us plenty of time to go to the meeting, I called at half-past
seven.

Louis was already writing in his study.

He looked up as I entered, and I noticed how very pale he was.

"Excuse me," he said, "I am writing to my mother. You will find the
morning papers there; if you can amuse yourself with them you will see
a charming feuilleton by M. Mery in the _Presse._"

I took the paper thus indicated, and contrasted the livid pallor of
the speaker with his calm and sweet voice.

I endeavoured to read, but I could not fix my attention, the letters
brought no meaning with them.

In about five minutes Louis said,

"There, I have finished." And he rang for his valet.

"Joseph," said he, "I am at home to no one, not even to the Baron
Giordano. If he calls, ask him to wait in the _salon._ I wish to be
alone with this gentlemen for ten minutes."

The valet shut the door and disappeared.

"Now, my dear Alexander, listen. Giordano is a Corsican, and has
Corsican ideas. I cannot, therefore, confide all I desire to him. I
will ask him to keep the secret, that's all. But as regards yourself,
I wish you, if you will permit me, to request that you will promise to
observe my instructions."

"Certainly. Is not that the duty of a second?"

"A duty more real than you imagine, for you can save our family a
second misfortune if you will."

"A second misfortune!" I exclaimed.

"Wait. Read this letter."

I took the letter addressed to Madame de Franchi, and read as follows,
with growing astonishment:--

"MY DEAREST MOTHER,--

"If I did not know that you possessed Spartan fortitude allied with
Christian submission, I would have used means to prepare you for the
blow in store for you--for when you receive this letter you will have
but one son!

"Lucien, my dear brother, love our mother for _both_ in future.

"For some time I have been suffering from brain fever. I paid no
attention to the premonitory symptoms--the doctor came too late.
Darling mother, there is no hope for me now. I cannot be saved but by
a miracle, and what right have I to suppose that Providence will work
a miracle on my behalf?

"I am writing to you in a lucid interval. If I die, this letter will
be posted immediately after my death; for in the selfishness of my
love for you I wish that you should know that I am dead without
regretting anything in the world except your tenderness and my
brother's.

"Adieu, mother!

"Do not weep for me. It is the soul that lives, not the body, and when
the latter perishes the former will still live and love you.

"Adieu, Lucien! Never leave our mother; and remember that she has you
only to look to now.

  "Your Son,
    "Your Brother,
      "LOUIS DE FRANCHI."

When I had finished the letter I turned to the writer and said--

"Well, and what does this mean?"

"Do you not understand?" he said.

"No!"

"I am going to be shot at ten minutes past nine."

"You are going to be shot?"

"Yes."

"You are mad! Why, what has put such an idea into your head?"

"I am not mad, my dear friend. I have been warned--that's all."

"Warned! By whom?"

"My brother has already told you, I think, that the male members of
our family enjoy a singular privilege?"

"True," I replied, shuddering, in spite of myself. "He spoke to me
about apparitions."

"Quite so. Well, then, my father appeared to me last night. That is
why you find me so pallid. The sight of the dead pales the living!"

I gazed at him with astonishment, not unmixed with terror.

"You saw your father last night, you say?"

"Yes."

"And he spoke to you?"

"He announced my death!"

"Oh, it was some terrible dream!"

"It was a terrible _reality._"

"You were asleep, my friend."

"I was wide awake. Do you not believe that a father can appear to his
son?"

I hung my head, for at the bottom of my heart I _did_ believe in the
possibility.

"What passed between you?" I asked.

"It is a very simple and very natural story. I was reading, expecting
my father--for I knew if any danger threatened that he would appear to
me--and at midnight the lamp burnt low, the door opened slowly, and my
father appeared."

"In what form?" I asked.

"Just as if he were alive--dressed in his usual manner--only he was
very pale, and his eyes were without expression."

"Good heavens!" I ejaculated.

"He slowly approached my bed. I raised myself with my elbow, and said,
'You are welcome, father.'

"He came close, and regarded me fixedly, and it then appeared to me as
if some sort of paternal solicitude was expressed in his face."

"Go on," I said; "this is terrible!"

"Then his lips moved, and, though I could hear no sound, I seemed to
hear his words distinctly, though distant as an echo."

"What did he say?"

"'Think of God, my son!'

"'I shall be killed in this duel, then?' I asked.

"I saw the tears roll down the pallid visage of the spectre.

"'And at what hour?'

"He pointed towards the timepiece. I followed the direction of his
finger. The clock showed ten minutes past nine.

"'So be it, my father,' I said; 'God's will be done. I leave my
mother, but I rejoin you.'

"Then a faint smile passed over his face, he waved me a sign of
farewell and glided away.

"The door opened as he advanced towards it, and when he had
disappeared it shut of its own accord."

This recital was so simply and so naturally told, that it was evident
to me the event had occurred just as de Franchi had related it, or he
was the victim of an illusion, which he had believed to be real in
consequence of the pre-occupation of his mind, and was therefore all
the more terrible.

I wiped the perspiration from my forehead.

"Now," continued Louis; "you know my brother, don't you?"

"Yes."

"What do you think he will do when he learns that I have been killed
in a duel?"

"He will leave Sullacaro at once to challenge the man who has killed
you."

"Just so, and if he is killed in his turn, my mother will be thrice a
widow; widowed by the loss of her husband, widowed by the loss of her
two sons."

"Ah! I understand. This is fearful!"

"Well, this must be avoided, and that is why I have written this
letter. Believing that I have died from brain fever my brother will
not seek to avenge me, and my mother will be the more easily consoled,
knowing it was the will of God, and that I did not fall by the hand of
man. At least----"

"At least what?" I repeated.

"Oh, nothing," replied Louis. "I hope that will not come to pass."

I saw that he was referring to some personal fear, and I did not
insist farther.

At this moment the door opened, and the Baron de Giordano entered.

"My dear de Franchi," he said, "I respect your privacy more than
anything, but it is past eight, and the meeting is appointed for nine;
we have quite a league and a half to drive, and we should start at
once."

"I am ready, my dear fellow," said Louis. "I have told my friend here
all I had to say to him."

He put his finger on his lips as our eyes met.

"For you, my friend," he continued, turning to the table and taking up
a sealed letter, "there is this; if anything should happen to me read
this letter, and I pray you to carry out my request contained in it."

"To the very letter," replied the Baron.

"You were to provide the arms," said Louis.

"Yes," I replied, "but just as I was coming away I found that one of
the dogs did not bark properly, so we shall be obliged to get a case
of pistols from Devisme."

Louis looked at me, smiled, and held out his hand. He knew quite well
that I did not wish to see him killed with my pistols.

"Have you a carriage?" he asked; "if not I will send Joseph for one."

"My coupe is here," said the Baron, "and can carry three at a pinch;
besides, my horses will take us more quickly than a _fiacre._"

"Let us go," said Louis.

We went downstairs. Joseph was waiting at the door.

"Shall I accompany you, sir?" he said.

"No, Joseph," replied his master, "I shall not require your services
to-day."

Then, stepping back a pace and pressing a roll of gold into the man's
hand, he said, "Take this, and if at any time I have appeared brusque
to you, pardon my ill-humour."

"Oh, monsieur!" said Joseph, with tears in his eyes, "what is the
meaning of this?"

"Chut!" said Louis, and he sprang into the carriage.

"He is a good servant," he murmured, "and if either of you can ever be
of use to him I shall be obliged."

"Is he about to leave you?" said the Baron.

"No," said Louis, smiling; "I am leaving him, that is all!"

We stopped at Devismes just long enough to secure a case of pistols,
powder and bullets, and then resumed our way at a brisk trot.



CHAPTER XVII.

WE reached Vincennes at five minutes to nine.

Another carriage, that of Chateau Renaud, arrived at the same time.

We proceeded into the wood by different paths. Our carriages were to
await us in the broad avenue. A few minutes later we met at the
rendezvous.

"Gentlemen," said Louis, "recollect that no arrangement is possible
now."

"Nevertheless----," I said

"Oh, my dear sir," he replied, "after what I have told you, you should
be the last person to think that any reconciliation is possible."

I bowed before this absolute will, which for me was supreme.

We left Louis near the carriages, and advanced towards M. de Boissy
and M. de Chateaugrand.

The Baron de Giordano carried the case of pistols.

The seconds exchanged salutes.

"Gentlemen," said the Baron, "under these circumstances the shortest
compliments are the best, for we may be interrupted any moment. We
were requested to provide weapons--here they are. Examine them if you
please. We have just procured them from the gunsmith, and we give you
our word of honour that M. Louis de Franchi has not even seen them."

"Such an assurance is unnecessary, gentlemen," replied Chateaugrand,
"we know with whom we have to deal," and taking one pistol, while M.
de Boissy took the other, the seconds examined the bore.

"These are ordinary pistols, and have never been used," said the
Baron; "now the question is, how shall the principals fire."

"My advice," said M. de Boissy, "is that they should fire just as they
are accustomed to do, together."

"Very well," said the Baron Giordano, "then all chances are
equalized."

"Will you advise M. de Franchi, then, and we will tell M. de Chateau
Renaud, monsieur."

"Now that is settled, will you have the goodness to load the pistols?"

Each one took a pistol, measured carefully the charges of powder, took
two bullets at hazard, and rammed them home.

While the weapons were being loaded, I approached Louis, who received
me with a smile.

"You won't forget what I asked you?" he said, "and you will obtain
from Giordano a promise that he will say nothing to my mother, or even
to my brother. Will you take care, also, that this affair does not get
into the papers, or, if it does, that no names are mentioned."

"You are still of opinion, then, this duel will prove fatal to you?" I
said.

"I am more than ever convinced of it," he replied, "but you will do me
this justice at least, that I met death like a true Corsican."

"My dear de Franchi, your calmness is so astounding that it gives me
hopes that you yourself are not convinced on this point."

Louis took out his watch.

"I have but seven minutes to live," he said; "here is my watch, keep
it, I beg of you, in remembrance of me." I took the watch, and shook
my friend's hand.

"In eight minutes I hope to restore it to you," I said.

"Don't speak of that," he replied. "See, here are the others."

"Gentlemen," said the Viscount de Chateaugrand, "a little distance
from here, on the right, is an open space where I had a little
practice of my own last year; shall we proceed thither--we shall be
less liable to interruption."

"If you will lead the way," said the Baron Giordano, "we will follow."

The Viscount preceded us to the spot indicated. It was about thirty
paces distant, at the bottom of a gentle slope surrounded on all sides
by a screen of brushwood, and seemed fitted by nature as the theatre
of such an event as was about to take place.

"M. Martelli," said the Viscount, "will you measure the distance by
me?" The Baron assented, and thus side by side he and M. de
Chateaugrand measured twenty ordinary paces.

I was then left for a few seconds alone with M. de Franchi.

"_Apropos,_" he said, "you will find my will on the table where I was
writing when you came in this morning."

"Good," I replied, "you may rest quite easy on that score."

"When you are ready, gentlemen," said the Viscount de Chateaugrand.

"I am here," replied Louis. "Adieu, dear friend! thank you for all the
trouble you have taken for me, without counting all you will have to
do for me later on." I pressed his hand. It was cold, but perfectly
steady.

"Now," I said, "forget the apparition of last night, and aim your
best."

"You remember de Freyschutz?"

"Yes."

"Well, you know, then, that every bullet has its billet. Adieu!"

He met the Baron Giordano, who handed him the pistol; he took it, and,
without looking at it, went and placed himself at the spot marked by
the handkerchief.

M. de Chateau Renaud had already taken up his position.

There was a moment of mournful silence, during which the young men
saluted their seconds, then their adversary's seconds, and finally
each other.

M. de Chateau Renaud appeared perfectly accustomed to these affairs,
and was smiling like a man sure of success; perhaps, also, he was
aware that Louis de Franchi never had fired a pistol in his life.

Louis was calm and collected, his fine head looked almost like a
marble bust.

"Well, gentlemen," said Chateau Renaud, "you see we are waiting."

Louis gave me one last glance, and smiling, raised his eyes to heaven.

"Now, gentlemen, make ready," said Chateaugrand. Then, striking his
hands one against the other, he cried--

"One! Two! Three!"

The two shots made but one detonation.

An instant afterwards I saw Louis de Franchi turn round twice and then
fall upon one knee.

M. de Chateau Renaud remained upright. The lappel of his coat had been
shot through.

I rushed towards Louis de Franchi.

"You are wounded?" I said.

He attempted to reply, but in vain. A red froth appeared upon his
lips.

At the same moment he let fall his pistol, and pressed his hand
against his right side.

On looking closely, we perceived a tiny hole not large enough for the
point of a little finger.

I begged the Baron to hasten to the barracks, and bring the surgeon of
the regiment.

But de Franchi collected all his strength, and stopping Giordano,
signed that all assistance would be useless. This exertion caused him
to fall on both knees.

M. de Chateau Renaud kept at a distance, but his seconds now
approached the wounded man.

Meanwhile, we had opened his coat and torn away his waistcoat and
shirt.

The ball had entered the right side, below the sixth rib, and had come
out a little above the left hip.

At each breath the wounded man drew, the blood welled out. It was
evident he was mortally hurt.

"M. de Franchi," said the Viscount de Chateaugrand, "we regret
extremely the issue of this sad affair. We trust you bear no malice
against M. de Chateau Renaud."

"Yes, yes," murmured the wounded man, "I forgive him."

Then turning towards me with an effort he said,

"Remember your promise!"

"I swear to you I will do all you wish."

"And now," he said, smiling, "look at the watch!"

He breathed a long sigh, and fell back. That sigh was his last.

I looked at the watch, it was exactly ten minutes past nine.

I turned to Louis de Franchi--he was dead.

We took back the body to the Rue de Helder, and while the Baron went
to make the usual declaration to the Commissary of Police, I went
upstairs with Joseph.

The poor lad was weeping bitterly.

As I entered, my eyes unconsciously turned towards the timepiece; it
marked ten minutes past nine.

No doubt he had forgotten to wind it, and it had stopped at that hour.

The Baron Giordano returned almost immediately with the officers, who
put the seals on the property.

The Baron wished to advise the relatives and friends of the affair,
but I begged him, before he did so, to read the letter that Louis had
handed to him before we set out that morning.

The letter contained his request that the cause of his death should be
concealed from his brother, and that his funeral should be as quiet as
possible.

The Baron Giordano charged himself with these details, and I sought
MM. de Boissy and de Chateaugrand, to request their silence respecting
the unhappy affair, and to induce Chateau Renaud to leave Paris for a
time, without mentioning my reason for this last suggestion.

They promised me to do all they could to meet my views, and as I
walked to Chateau Renaud's house I posted the letter to Madame de
Franchi, informing her that her son had died of brain fever.



CHAPTER XVIII.

CONTRARY to custom, the duel was very little talked about; even the
papers were silent on the subject.

A few intimate friends followed the body to Pere la Chaise. Chateau
Renaud refused to quit Paris, although pressed to do so.

At one time I thought of following Louis' letter to Corsica with one
from myself, but although my intentions were good, the misleading
statements I should have to make were so repugnant to me that I did
not do so. Besides, I was quite convinced that Louis himself had fully
weighed before he had decided upon his course of action.

So at the risk of being thought indifferent, or even ungrateful, I
kept silence, and I was sure that the Baron Giordano had done as much.

Five days after the duel, at about eleven o'clock in the evening, I
was seated by my table in a rather melancholy frame of mind, when my
servant entered and shutting the door quickly behind him said, in an
agitated whisper, that M. de Franchi desired to speak with me.

I looked at him steadily; he was quite pale.

"Whom did you say, Victor?" I asked.

"Oh, monsieur, in truth I hardly know myself."

"What M. de Franchi wishes to speak to me?"

"Monsieur's friend. The gentleman who was here two or three times."

"You are mad, my good man. Do you not know that I had the misfortune
to lose my friend five days ago?"

"Yes, sir; and that is the reason I am so upset. He rang, I was in the
ante-chamber, and opened the door, but recoiled at his appearance.
However, he entered, and asked if you were at home. I replied that you
were, and then he said, 'Go and announce M. de Franchi, who wishes to
speak with your master,' and so I came."

"You are stupid, Victor, the ante-chamber is not properly lighted. You
were asleep, no doubt, and did not hear correctly. Go, and ask the
gentleman his name."

"It would be useless, sir. I swear to you I am not deceived. I heard
him, and saw him, distinctly."

"Then go and show him in."

Victor turned tremblingly to the door, opened it, and then standing
still in the room, said--

"Will monsieur be kind enough to come in?"

I immediately heard the footsteps of my visitor crossing the
ante-chamber, and sure enough, at the door there appeared M. de
Franchi.

I confess that I was terrified, and took a step backwards as he
approached.

"I trust you will excuse my appearance so late," said my visitor; "I
only arrived ten minutes ago, and you will understand that I could not
wait till tomorrow without seeing you."

"Oh, my dear Lucien," I exclaimed, advancing quickly, and embracing
him. "Then it is really you." And, in spite of myself, tears really
came into my eyes.

"Yes," he said, "it is I."

I made a calculation of the time that had elapsed, and could scarcely
imagine that he had received the letter--it could hardly have reached
Ajaccio yet.

"Good Heavens! then you do not know what has happened?" I exclaimed.

"I know all," was his reply.

"Victor," I said, turning towards my servant, who was still rather
embarrassed, "leave us, and return in a quarter of an hour with some
supper. You will have something to eat, and will sleep here of
course."

"With great pleasure," he replied. "I have eaten nothing since we left
Auxerre. Then, as to lodgings, as nobody knew me in the Rue de Helder,
or rather," he added, with a sad smile, "as everybody recognized me
there, they declined to let me in, so I left the whole house in a
state of alarm."

"In fact, my dear Lucien, your resemblance to Louis is so very
striking that even I myself was just now taken aback."

"How," exclaimed Victor, who had not yet ventured to leave us. "Is
monsieur the brother----"

"Yes," I replied, "go and get supper."

Victor went out, and we found ourselves alone.

I took Lucien by the hand, and leading him to an easy chair seated
myself near him.

"I suppose (I began) you were on your way to Paris when the fatal news
met you?"

"No, I was at Sullacaro!"

"Impossible! Why your brother's letter could not have reached you."

"You forget the ballad of _Burger,_ my dear Alexander--_the dead
travel fast!_"

I shuddered! "I do not understand," I said.

"Have you forgotten what I told you about the apparitions familiar to
our family?"

"Do you mean to say that you have _seen_ your dead brother?"--
"Yes."--"When?"

"On the night of the 16th inst."

"And he told you everything?"--"All!"

"That he was dead?"

"He told me that he had been killed. The dead never lie!"

"And he said in what way?"

"In a duel."

"By whom?"

"By M. de Chateau Renaud."

"Oh no, Lucien, that cannot be," I exclaimed, "you have obtained your
information in some other way."

"Do you think I am likely to joke at such a time?"

"I beg your pardon. But truly what you tell me is so strange, and
everything that relates to you and your brother so out of ordinary
nature, that----"

"That you hesitate to believe it. Well, I can understand the feeling.
But wait. My brother was hit here," he continued, as he opened his
shirt and showed me the blue mark of the bullet on his flesh, "he was
wounded above the sixth rib on the right side--do you believe that?"

"As a matter of fact," I replied, "that is the very spot where he was
hit."

"And the bullet went out here," continued Lucien, putting his finger
just above his left hip.

"It is miraculous," I exclaimed.

"And now," he went on, "do you wish me to tell you the time he died?"

"Tell me!"

"At ten minutes past nine."

"That will do, Lucien;" I said, "but I lose myself in questions. Give
me a connected narrative of the events. I should prefer it."



CHAPTER XIX.

LUCIEN settled himself comfortably in his arm-chair and looking at me
fixedly, resumed:--

"It is very simple. The day my brother was killed I was riding very
early, and went out to visit the shepherds, when soon after I had
looked at my watch and replaced it in my pocket, I received a blow in
the side, so violent that I fainted. When I recovered I found myself
lying on the ground in the arms of the Orlandini, who was bathing my
face with water. My horse was close by.

"'Well,' said Orlandini, 'what has happened?'

"'I know no more about it than you do. Did you not hear a gun fired?'

"'No.'

"'It appears to me that I have received a ball in the side,' and I put
my hand upon the place where I felt pain.

"'In the first place,' replied he 'there has been no shot fired, and
besides, there is no mark of a bullet on your clothes.'

"'Then,' I replied, 'it must be my brother who is killed.'

"'Ah, indeed,' he replied, 'that is a different thing.' I opened my
coat and I found a mark, only at first it was quite red and not blue
as I showed you just now.

"For an instant I was tempted to return to Sullacaro, feeling so upset
both mentally and bodily, but I thought of my mother, who did not
expect me before supper time, and I should be obliged to give her a
reason for my return, and I had no reason to give.

"On the other hand, I did not wish to announce my brother's death to
her until I was absolutely certain of it. So I continued my way, and
returned home about six o'clock in the evening.

"My poor mother received me as usual. She evidently had no suspicion
that anything was wrong.

"Immediately after supper, I went upstairs, and as I passed through
the corridor the wind blew my candle out.

"I was going downstairs to get a light when, passing my brother's
room, I noticed a gleam within.

"I thought that Griffo had been there and left a lamp burning.

"I pushed open the door; I saw a taper burning near my brother's bed,
and on the bed my brother lay extended, naked and bleeding.

"I remained for an instant, I confess, motionless with terror, then I
approached.

"I touched the body, he was already dead.

"He had received a ball through the body, which had struck in the same
place where I had felt the blow, and some drops of blood were still
falling from the wound.

"It was evident to me that my brother had been shot.

"I fell on my knees, and leaning my head against the bed, I prayed
fervently.

"When I opened my eyes again the room was in total darkness, the taper
had been extinguished, the vision had disappeared.

"I felt all over the bed, it was empty.

"Now I believe I am as brave as most people, but when I tottered out
of that room I declare to you my hair was standing on end and the
perspiration pouring from my forehead.

"I went downstairs for another candle. My mother noticed me, and
uttered a cry of surprise.

"'What is the matter with you,' she said, 'and why are you so pale?'

"'There is nothing the matter,' I replied, as I returned upstairs.

"This time the candle was not extinguished. I looked into my brother's
room; it was empty.

"The taper had completely disappeared, nor was there any trace of the
body on the bed.

"On the ground was my first candle, which I now relighted.

"Notwithstanding this absence of proof, I had seen enough to be
convinced that at ten minutes past nine that morning my brother had
been killed. I went to bed in a very agitated frame of mind.

"As you may imagine, I did not sleep very well, but at length fatigue
conquered my agitation and I got a little rest.

"Then all the circumstances came before me in the form of a dream. I
saw the scene as it had passed. I saw the man who had killed him. I
heard his name. He is called M. de Chateau Renaud."

"Alas! that is all too true," I replied; "but what have you come to
Paris for?"

"I have come to kill the man who has killed my brother."

"To kill him?"

"Oh, you may rest assured, not in the Corsican fashion from behind a
wall or through a hedge, but in the French manner, with white gloves
on, a frilled shirt, and white cuffs."

"And does Madame de Franchi know you have come to Paris with this
intention?"

"She does."

"And she has let you come?"

"She kissed me, and said, 'Go.' My mother is a true Corsican."

"And so you came."

"Here I am."

"But your brother would not wish to be avenged were he alive."

"Well, then," replied Lucien, smiling bitterly, "he must have changed
his mind since he died."

At this moment the valet entered, carrying the supper tray.

Lucien ate like a man without a care in the world.

After supper I showed him to his room. He thanked me, shook me by the
hand, and wished me good-night.

Next morning he came into my room as soon as the servant told him I
was up.

"Will you accompany me to Vincennes?" he said. "If you are engaged I
will go alone."

"Alone!" I replied. "How will you be able to find the spot?"

"Oh, I shall easily recognize it. Do you not remember that I saw it in
my dream?"

I was curious to know how far he was correct in this. "Very well," I
said, "I will go with you."

"Get ready, then, while I write to Giordano. You will let Victor take
the note for me, will you not?"

"He is at your disposal."

"Thank you."

Ten minutes afterwards the letter was despatched. I then sent for a
cabriolet and we drove to Vincennes.

When we reached the cross-paths Lucien said, "We are not far off now,
I think."

"No; twenty paces further on we shall be at the spot where we entered
the forest."

"Here we are," said the young man, as he stopped the carriage.

It was, indeed, the very spot!

Lucien entered the wood without the least hesitation, and as if he had
known the place for years. He walked straight to the dell, and when
there turned to the eastward, and then advancing he stopped at the
place where his brother had fallen: stooping down he perceived the
grass wore the red tinge of blood.

"This is the place," he said.

Then he lightly kissed the spot where his brother had lain.

Rising with flashing eyes he paced the dell to the spot whence Chateau
Renaud had fired.

"This is where he stood," he said, stamping his foot, "and here he
shall lie to-morrow."

"How!" I exclaimed. "To-morrow!"

"Yes, unless he is a coward. For to-morrow he shall give me my
revenge."

"But, my dear Lucien," I said, "the custom in France is, as you are
aware, that a duel cannot take place without a certain reason. Chateau
Renaud called out your brother who had provoked him, but he has had
nothing to do with you."

"Ah, really! So Chateau Renaud had the right to quarrel with my
brother because he offered his arm to a woman whom Chateau Renaud had
scandalously deceived, and according to you he had the right to
challenge my brother. M. de Chateau Renaud killed my brother, who had
never handled a pistol: he shot him with the same sense of security
that a man would shoot a hare; and yet you say I have no right to
challenge Chateau Renaud. Nonsense!"

I bowed without speaking.

"Besides," he continued, "you have nothing to do with it. You may be
quite easy. I wrote to Giordano this morning, and when we return to
Paris all will have been arranged. Do you think that M. de Chateau
Renaud will refuse?"

"M. de Chateau Renaud has unfortunately a reputation for courage which
may serve to remove any doubt you may entertain on that score."

"All the better," said Lucien. "Let us go to breakfast."

We returned to the road, and entering the cabriolet, I told the man to
drive to the Rue Rivoli.

"No," said Lucien, "you shall breakfast with me. Coachman, the _Cafe
de Paris;_ is not that the place where my brother usually dined?"

"I believe so," I replied.

"Well, that is where I requested Giordano to meet us."

"To the Cafe de Paris, then."

In half an hour we were set down at the restaurant.



CHAPTER XX.

LUCIEN'S appearance created quite a sensation in consequence of his
remarkable likeness to his brother.

The news of Louis' death had gone abroad--not, perhaps, in all its
details, but it was known, and Lucien's appearance astonished many.

I requested a private room, saying that we were expecting the Baron
Giordano, and we got a room at the end.

Lucien began to read the papers carelessly, as if he were oblivious of
everything.

While we were seated at breakfast Giordano arrived.

The two young men had not met for four or five years, nevertheless, a
firm clasp of the hand was the only demonstration they permitted
themselves.

"Well, everything is settled," he said.

"Then M. de Chateau Renaud has accepted?"

"Yes, on condition, however, that after he has fought you he shall be
left in peace."

"Oh, he may be quite easy; I am the last of the de Franchi. Have you
seen him, or his seconds?"

"I saw him; he will notify MM. de Boissy and de Chateaugrand. The
weapons, the hour and the place will be the same."

"Capital, sit down and have some breakfast."

The Baron seated himself, and we spoke on indifferent topics.

After breakfast Lucien begged us to introduce him to the Commissioner
of Police, who had sealed up his brother's property, and to the
proprietors of the house at which his brother had lived, for he wished
to sleep that night, the last night that separated him from his
vengeance, in Louis' room.

All these arrangements took up time, so it was not till five o'clock
that Lucien entered his brother's apartment. Respecting his grief, we
left him there alone.

We had arranged to meet him again next morning at eight o'clock, and
he begged me to bring the same pistols, and to buy them if they were
for sale.

I went to Devismes and purchased the weapons. Next morning, at eight
o'clock I was with Lucien.

When I entered, he was seated writing at the same table, where his
brother had sat writing. He smiled when he saw me, but he was very
pale.

"Good morning," he said, "I am writing to my mother."

"I hope you will be able to write her a less doleful letter than poor
Louis wrote eight days ago."

"I have told her that she may rest happy, for her son is avenged."

"How are you able to speak with such certainty?"

"Did not my brother announce to you his own approaching death? Well,
then, I announce to you the death of M. de Chateau Renaud."

He rose as he spoke, and touching me on the temple, said--

"There, that's where I shall put my bullet."

"And yourself?"

"I shall not be touched."

"But, at least, wait for the issue of the duel, before you send your
letter."

"It would be perfectly useless."

He rang, the servant appeared.

"Joseph," said he, "take this letter to the post."

"But have you seen your dead brother?"

"Yes," he answered.

It is a very strange thing the occurrence of these two duels so close
together, and in each of which one of the two combatants was doomed.
While we were talking the Baron Giordano arrived. It was eight
o'clock, so we started.

Lucien was very anxious to arrive first, so we were on the field ten
minutes before the hour.

Our adversaries arrived at nine o'clock punctually. They came on
horseback, followed by a groom also on horseback.

M. de Chateau Renaud had his hand in the breast of his coat. I at
first thought he was carrying his arm in a sling.

The gentlemen dismounted twenty paces from us, and gave their bridles
to the groom.

Monsieur de Chateau Renaud remained apart, but looked steadfastly at
Lucien, and I thought he became paler. He turned aside and amused
himself knocking off the little flowers with his riding whip.

"Well, gentlemen, here we are!" said MM. de Chateaugrand and de
Boissy, "but you know our conditions. This duel is to be the last, and
no matter what the issue may be, M. de Chateau Renaud shall not have
to answer to any one for the double result."

"That is understood," we replied. Then Lucien bowed assent.

"You have the weapons, gentlemen?" said the Viscount.

"Here are the same pistols."

"And they are unknown to M. de Franchi?"

"Less known to him than to M. de Chateau Renaud who has already used
them once. M. de Franchi has not even seen them."

"That is sufficient, gentlemen. Come, Chateau Renaud!"

We immediately entered the wood, and each one felt, as he revisited
the fatal spot, that a tragedy more terrible still was about to be
enacted.

We soon arrived in the little dell.

M. de Chateau Renaud, thanks to his great self-command, appeared quite
calm, but those who had seen both encounters could appreciate the
difference.

From time to time he glanced under his lids at Lucien, and his furtive
looks denoted a disquietude approaching to fear.

Perhaps it was the great resemblance between the brothers that struck
him, and he thought he saw in Lucien the avenging shade of Louis.

While they were loading the pistols I saw him draw his hand from the
breast of his coat. The fingers were enveloped in a handkerchief as if
to prevent their twitching.

Lucien waited calmly, like a man who was sure of his vengeance.

Without being told, Lucien walked to the place his brother had
occupied, which compelled Chateau Renaud to take up his position as
before.

Lucien received his weapon with a joyous smile.

When Chateau Renaud took his pistol he became deadly pale. Then he
passed his hand between his cravat and his neck as if he were
suffocating.

No one can conceive with what feelings of terror I regarded this young
man, handsome, rich, and elegant, who but yesterday believed he had
many years still before him, and who to-day, with the sweat on his
brow and agony at his heart, felt he was condemned.

"Are you ready, gentlemen?" asked M. de Chateaugrand.

"Yes," replied Lucien.

M. de Chateau Renaud made a sign in the affirmative.

As for me I was obliged to turn away, not daring to look upon the
scene.

I heard the two successive clappings of the hands, and at the third
the simultaneous reports of the pistols. I turned round.

Chateau Renaud was lying on the ground, stark dead; he had not uttered
a sound nor made a movement.

I approached the body, impelled by that invincible curiosity which
compels one to see the end of a catastrophe.

The bullet had entered the dead man's temple, at the very spot that
Lucien had indicated to me previously.

I ran to him, he was calm and motionless, but seeing me coming towards
him he let fall the pistol, and threw himself into my arms.

"Ah, my brother, my poor brother!" he cried as he burst into a passion
of sobs.

These were the first tears that the young man had shed.

__________

Woodfall & Kinder, Printers, Milford Lane, Strand, London, W.C.