[1] Starving oneself to force a debtor to pay.

[2] Fixture.




CHAPTER XII.

THE ONE WHO WAS TAKEN.

"Have you cleared out a tent for the Rani, Bob?  I was going to ask you
to do it, but when I looked for you, you had disappeared."

"Yes, she and her women are safely secluded.  But what I really made
myself scarce for was to secure the guns."

"Old boy, you are a genius!  They won't dare to try and stop us now."

"Us?  That sounds good.  I hoped you would see the folly of ramming
your head into the lion's mouth by going back to Agpur with Sher Singh."

"He's uncommon anxious that I should--been trying to persuade me all
this time.  First he followed me himself, and then he sent the fakir,
and then Ibrahim Khan."

"I'm not surprised.  You would be a particularly welcome guest at Agpur
just now, but whether the visit would be quite as agreeable to you as
to your entertainers, I take leave to doubt.  Have you forgot that you
know the secret of the treasury, and Sher Singh don't?"

"I had forgotten.  As a matter of fact, I have promised to go back as
soon as I have seen the Rani to Ranjitgarh."

"I believe you, my boy!  But I wonder whether Sher Singh does.  By the
way, what becomes of our oaths, and the treasure, now that Kharrak
Singh, whom it was intended to benefit, is no more?"

"I really don't know.  The question did not arise."

"Well, my base material mind would have asked it first thing.  Can
hardly go to the Rani, I suppose, can it? or be divided between two
deserving young officers in the Company's army?  Perhaps in time to
come Sher Singh may leave a descendant to whom we can honourably
confide the secret.  But meanwhile, Sher Singh has his accomplices to
pay, and the treasure would come in very handy.  I suppose you ain't
labouring under any romantic delusion as to his innocence?"

"It would be hopeless, I fear.  If he had merely planned the murder
from here, he would certainly have accorded me the interview I asked
for, so as to secure an unassailable alibi.  But I can't help seeing
that unless one of the accomplices confesses, which is highly unlikely,
it will be next to impossible to bring it home to him.  Poor little
Kharrak Singh!  I give you my word, Bob, I really was most uncommon
fond of that little chap.  He used to sit opposite me like little
Dombey--I showed him the picture when last mail came in, and he laughed
like anything--and say the most old-fashioned things.  I'm glad Antony
ain't likely to send me back to Agpur.  I should be thinking that I saw
him all about the place."

"I'm jolly glad you don't feel yourself pledged to return."

"Sort of nineteenth-century Regulus?  Well, that'll depend upon my
orders, of course, and I don't take 'em from Sher Singh.  Not that we
have had any rupture.  I told him quite politely that I could hold no
further communication with him until the Rani was safe at Ranjitgarh,
and that we start to-morrow morning."

"Quite so.  Hal, a minute or two ago you paid me a very handsome
compliment.  Hang compliments! says I, and show a little confidence.
Will you take my advice, and while making elaborate, even ostentatious,
preparations for starting to-morrow morning, set off tonight instead?"

"My dear fellow, have you gone quite mad?"

"There's a prodigious deal of method in my madness.  Say that Sher
Singh, in confab with his friends, or his own uneasy conscience, begins
to perceive the extreme improbability of your returning quietly into
the lion's mouth once you are safely out of it.  Do you think he won't
harden his heart like Pharaoh, and refuse to let you go?"

"It's possible, of course.  But I fail to see how you would conduct a
moonlight flitting from the heart of his camp."

"That's my artfulness, my dear Hal.  We can't hope to slip away
unnoticed, I grant you.  But I do believe we can take 'em by surprise,
and walk out before they can combine to stop us.  We have the guns, and
the hotties, which would be useful in breaking a path, and those two
facts may even induce them to let us go without a fuss.  Otherwise I
should have proposed spiking the guns, which are in a state of
rottenness calculated to do more harm to us than to the enemy, and
leaving the hotties, taking the women behind us on our horses.  But if
by making an awe-inspiring impression we can get away without a fight,
it's just as well under the circumstances--especially as the Rani has
promised us our fill of gore later on.  I should say, start as soon as
the moon rises, in two hours or so.  We can't go at once, because the
Rani's hotty and the one we have been using all day will require a
little rest, or I should have advised that."

"But Sher Singh will simply follow and attack us on the march, and he
has the big battalions."

"Now look here, Hal.  You'll allow that I know something of the country
through which I came two days ago?  Two marches will take us well into
Darwan, where Sher Singh don't dare follow us, or he will have the
Darwanis up round him like a hive of bees.  The place where he will try
to stop us is a rough jungly bit about half-way--one of the disputed
boundary districts.  We must get through it by daylight.  Six hours'
forced march to-night will bring us nearly to it.  We halt for another
two hours' rest, and then press on at once.  Once through that bit we
are practically safe.  Marching morning and afternoon we should not
reach it till evening, and during the night Sher Singh would have ample
time to lay an ambush for us.  If we take him by surprise, any
thoughtful preparations on his part must be fairly sketchy in
character."

"I see your point.  But no one can help knowing we are starting at once
when they see the tents being struck."

"Then leave 'em standing.  You can take your clothes and your papers
and your hair-brushes, and sacrifice the rest.  Oh, I know you are
still dragging about with you the chest of drawers you got for the
cabin when we came out, and the long chair you bought at Madeira----"

"Nonsense!" said Gerrard, rather vexed.  "But I like my own things
about me, I confess."

"The very reason why you should be deprived of 'em!  You won't know the
proper wilderness spirit till you are.  What's a chair?  Something to
sit on when the ground's dirty or swampy.  A table?  Something to eat
off or write at when there ain't a flat rock handy.  Not friends--not
pieces of yourself--which is what you make of 'em.  Release yourself
from this tyranny of material things--as your pater used to quote
Socrates or some other old codger as saying.  We don't want tents, and
the women must do with the howdah."

"All right; have it your own way.  We'll start to-night."

"Give your secret orders to that effect to Badan Hazari, then.  You'll
find that my Darwanis have been already tipped the wink, and the women
too, and the fires are being kept low so as not to shed too much light
upon our movements."

"I am much honoured in placing myself at the disposal of so far-sighted
a commander," said Gerrard, a little stiffly, as he saluted.  Charteris
laughed, and clapped him on the back with a friendly force no stiffness
could survive.

"Ain't we too old friends to stand on our dignity with each other, Hal?
I have taken a lot upon myself, I confess it, but you are in command
here, and I know it as well as you do.  Jolly cheeky of me to offer you
advice, of course, but I couldn't see you rushing into destruction
without hinting at the fact."

"I know.  It's all right, old boy.  Well now, will you lead the
advance, as a favour to me?"

"Hal, you're a brick.  No, I won't.  You go first, with your own
Granthis, whom you have well in hand, I suppose? at any rate, they
won't fire unless you give the word.  Then Rukn-ud-din, with the guns
and hotties--and incidentally the women--and then your humble servant
with the Darwanis.  If they led, they would fire right and left for
pure devilry, but being in the rear, I think I can make them see the
necessity of waiting till they are attacked."

The evening meal had been hurriedly despatched during the course of
this conversation, and Gerrard now went out to summon Badan Hazari and
give him his orders, while Charteris saw to the packing of such of
their joint possessions as were not too heavy to impede a hasty flight.
The moon had barely risen when the column formed up for the march,
Gerrard and his men leading, the Agpuris, with the women, elephants,
guns and baggage in the centre, and Charteris with his Darwanis
bringing up the rear.  He had taken the precaution to warn the sentries
round the tents to turn back any coolie who might try to creep out and
carry information to the main camp, while any outsider dropping in for
a little friendly conversation was to be gently but firmly detained,
and this, with the ruse of leaving the tents standing, kept Sher
Singh's men completely in the dark.  There was a wild scene of
confusion when they realised what was happening, tomtoms beating,
trumpets sounding, and men rushing together, but the compact body of
matchlockmen with their matches lighted, and troopers with drawn
swords, looked so formidable that beyond firing a stray shot or two,
the army made no opposition to their progress.  The Darwanis were
wildly desirous to reply to the random shots with a volley, but
Charteris succeeded in keeping them in hand, and the column ploughed
its way steadily across the sand of the river-bed, and up the bank on
the opposite side.  The country was fairly open here, but Gerrard sent
out scouts in front and flanking-parties on either side, to guard
against a determined rush, which might be deadly in its result if Sher
Singh were less easily hoodwinked than he seemed.  Two of the Darwanis
who knew the country well from past raids, and had guided Charteris as
he came, rode ahead to show the way, and the column tramped on doggedly
in the moonlight, the great lurching forms of the elephants casting
strange shadows by the way.

After a long day's hunting, and an evening so full of excitement,
Gerrard found it difficult not to sleep as he rode.  In fact, his mind
was asleep, though his eyes were open and keenly surveying the
landmarks, which persisted in assuming the form of advancing masses of
troops, or exhibiting lights where no lights were.  He found relief
occasionally in riding back a little to whip up stragglers, but it gave
him unfeigned pleasure when, after what seemed untold hours of
marching, Charteris pricked forward to tell him that they were now
within a mile of the "bad bit," and had better halt where they were
until dawn.  But Gerrard had no mind to give in too soon.

"You don't think it would be well to press on and push through at one
go, Bob?  The men don't seem at all done up," he felt it his duty to
say.

Charteris hesitated a moment.  "No, I don't," he said.  "If Sher Singh
is occupying the bad bit at all, his men are there already--sent off
probably while he kept you in talk after the big flare-up--for it would
be no good despatching them after we had started.  Don't it strike you
as queer that they have made no motion to harass our rear?  I imagine
they are holding back till they can catch us between two fires.  If you
agree with me, let us give the beasts a rest and a feed here, and send
two or three of my beggars scouting ahead."

Gerrard consented, and they saw that the horses were picketed so as to
provide a barrier against a sudden rush, made the men lie down with
their weapons beside them, posted sentries all round the bivouac, and
agreed to keep watch for an hour each, to ensure the sentries not going
calmly to sleep.  Gerrard, who felt wide-awake again now after talking
and walking about, insisted on taking the first watch, which passed
uneventfully.  Then he called Charteris, and dropping into the hollow
which the latter had scooped for himself in the sand, was asleep in a
moment, only to be waked, as it seemed, in another moment, by his
friend's shaking him vigorously.

"Time to get up, Hal!  No shaving-water, so don't look round in that
bewildered way.  You'd arrive at Ranjitgarh with a beard--a fine,
flowing, patriarchal, even prophetic beard, like what Ronaldson has
taken to sport--if this sort of thing went on long.  He paid me a visit
when he was passing through to his district, and I assure you I was
immensely taken with his new adornment.  It would be perfectly killing
among the ladies, I'm sure--throw our poor whiskers and moustaches
horribly into the shade.  Talk of owls!  I never saw any one stare like
you.  This, my young friend, is a cup of tea, and this is a hard-boiled
egg--the best _choti haziri_ our chaps can manage--and the animal
beside you, looking astonished at your laziness, is your horse,
vulgarly termed a quad.  But give me your hand, old boy, and let me
haul you up to take part in this epicurean meal."

"You're in spirits to-day, Bob," observed Gerrard, with a mighty yawn,
as he accepted the tin cup.

"Ray-ther, just a few!  There's a rare good fight in front of us,
Hal--or else a very fine piece of strategy, which is almost as
satisfactory when you have women to look after.  Sher Singh's fellows
are in occupation of the bad bit, as I suspected--posted on both sides
of the track.  But--and here comes in the possibility of
strategy--there's another path besides that one, and I told my scouts
to investigate its practicability.  They report that it's passable for
hotties, which is what I was inclined to doubt, but they don't think we
shall ever get the guns up there.  Here's your problem, then, my
budding Wellington.  Do we fight our way through by the ordinary
track--in view of the condition of our guns I omit the alternative of
shelling the enemy out of their hiding-places first--or do we take up
position with the guns before the mouth of the defile and make a feint
there, while the hotties are going round the other way?  We might even
fire the guns once or twice with reduced charges before spiking them
and leaving them there to cumber the ground, while we make ourselves
scarce and overtake the rest."

"You know which it must be before asking me," said Gerrard mournfully.
"We daren't risk taking the women through a running fight in the
defile, especially if, as you said last night, Sher Singh is hanging on
our heels as well.  I'll take the guns and my Granthis and look after
the feigned attack, while you get the women through behind the enemy's
back, and are ready to support us with the Darwanis if Sher Singh turns
up."

"All right," said Charteris shortly.

"You want the fight, I know.  But would you be satisfied with a feint
so long as the guns didn't burst?  Not you, old boy; I know you.  You
would hang on to that defile, or more probably get half-way through it,
until Sher Singh came up behind you and your retreat was cut off.  You
shall do rear-guard again when we rejoin, and as that is when the real
fight will probably come, I can't do better for you."

It was still only twilight when Gerrard and his men, with the two
field-pieces drawn by bullocks, left the bivouac for the mouth of the
defile, with one of the Darwani guides to pioneer for them.  Another of
these men was to remain on the hillock where the halt had been made, to
watch for any sign of pursuit from the Adamkot direction, and bring the
news instantly if any appeared.  Charteris and the main body, with the
elephants, struck to the right of Gerrard's line of march to gain the
other path, and that their intention might not become apparent to the
liers-in-wait, Gerrard halted his guns as soon as he was within
possible range of the mouth of the defile, and with fear and trembling
discharged them both, by way of giving the enemy something to think
about.  The guns did not burst, and though the shot fell far short, in
consequence of the reduced charges, they drew an excited matchlock fire
from the men in ambush, which did no harm, but showed their positions.
The guns moved on, and Gerrard found excellent places for them in some
rocky ground thick with thorny bushes, while his matchlockmen exchanged
long shots with the concealed enemy.  The fire of the field-pieces
seemed to have an impressive moral effect, preventing any desire of
coming out into the open on the enemy's part, but was unsuccessful in
turning them out of their hiding-places, which were in the cliffs
overlooking the track.  Gerrard advanced his sharp-shooters and changed
the position of the guns from time to time, but the sun was growing
hot, his men were grumbling loudly because he would not allow them to
charge the defenders, and he was glad to see that the time he had fixed
with Charteris for his withdrawal was approaching.  His men were
recalled from the front two or three at a time, the remainder keeping
up a brisk fire to delude the enemy and divert their minds, and when
all were withdrawn, the two cannon were spiked, and a start made across
the rocky ground towards the right.  Before they had gone far, the
scout left at the bivouac came riding in hot haste to say that he had
seen a great cloud of dust advancing from the direction of Adamkot, and
evidently concealing a large force of horsemen hastening towards the
sound of the firing.  This was vexatious, as they would probably arrive
at the spiked field-pieces and divine the truth long before the ambush
in the defile would be emboldened by the silence to creep down and see
what had happened, and Gerrard hurried his men on.  It was difficult to
hasten, however, over the rough ground and through the thorny bushes,
while it was inadvisable to venture out upon the plain lest they should
be seen, and the horsemen sweep down upon them.  The cloud of dust was
quite visible now, whenever a break in the jungle gave a view of the
plain, and Gerrard found himself wondering whether the pursuers had a
man of Charteris's type or of his own in command of them.  He could not
help hoping it might prove to be his own.

Before it seemed possible that the deserted guns could have been found,
examined, and the correct deductions drawn, the shouts of the pursuing
horsemen could be heard as they raced along the level ground of the
plain, seeking for their prey.  It was impossible that they should not
discern the movements of Gerrard's men, but they could not charge
through the jungle, and when they came near enough, he halted and gave
them a volley.  The sight of horses and men rolling over checked them
for a moment, but he wondered how long it would be before they thought
of pushing forward a party to intercept him in front.  Almost as the
idea crossed his mind, a dropping fire broke out from among the bushes
in advance, and he realised that Charteris was waiting for him.  The
horsemen drew off when they saw they were opposed by a larger body than
they expected, and Charteris emerged from a lair in the bushes and came
up to his friend.

"On with you, Hal!" he cried cheerily.  "Rukn-ud-din and the hotties
are halted till you come up, for fear the enemy should be waiting for
them at the other end of the defile.  I'll retreat upon you gradually,
and keep these beggars back."

"All right!" and Gerrard and his men, now on more open ground, were
able to urge their horses to something beyond a walk.  The so-called
path was very rugged, and he wondered how they had been able to get the
elephants along it at all.  Indeed, when he reached them, the mahouts
were complaining loudly, and making much display of the wounded feet of
their charges.  The nearer sound of firing behind showed that
Charteris's force was nearly up, and Gerrard, sending back a messenger
to see whether he was hard pressed, led the main body on, disregarding
the grumblers.  Charteris returned answer that he was getting along all
right, but warned Gerrard again of a possible rush when the end of the
path was reached, and he sent forward scouts to examine the ground.  A
burst of firing ahead was his first intimation that Charteris's fears
were justified, and two out of the five scouts came scurrying back to
say that the enemy had evidently evacuated the defile, and were
awaiting the fugitives here.  As there was no narrow mouth to hold,
however, they could not command the path from above, and were merely
lying hidden among the rocks and bushes on either side.  Gerrard
ordered his men to hold their fire in case of a rush, and was glad he
had done so--unpleasant as was the storm of bullets drawn upon the
column by the easy mark offered by the elephants--when he saw that a
body of the enemy were actually posted in front to block his way.  Only
one plan was now possible, and he gave orders to Rukn-ud-din and Badan
Hazari that when the proper moment came, the horsemen should open out
and allow the elephants to break a path.  At the sound of his whistle
the horsemen faced outwards, and on either side fired a volley into the
bushes, while the elephants were urged on.  For a moment the enemy
stood their ground, and the bullets which met the great beasts maddened
them.  Trumpeting loudly, they rushed through the opposing ranks, all
but one, and the rout was completed by the swords of the horsemen who
followed.

It was the hunting-elephant, driven frantic by a bullet in a specially
tender spot, which broke the line and turned sideways, overthrowing two
Granthis and their horses as she did so.  The mahout, with voice and
goad, tried manfully to get her back into the path, but there was a
moment's wild confusion, in the midst of which Gerrard became aware of
a mob of wild Darwanis, their garments flying, charging down upon his
rear.

"They have broken through!  Our Sahib is slain--Chatar Sahib--the Red
Sahib!" they yelled.  "Fly for your lives!"

Gerrard spurred back impetuously to stop them, under a hail of bullets
from the enemy rallying in the bushes.  A sudden numbing pain in his
arm made him drop the reins, and he had only time to realise that Sher
Singh's pursuing horsemen were on the heels of the fugitives before
their rush swept him from the saddle, and he went down into a cruel
welter of hoofs.  Then all was silence.

When he recovered consciousness, he was lying helpless, and as he
thought bound, in an elephant's howdah.  An attempt at movement showed
him that he was not bound, but bruised and wounded from head to heel.

"Heaven-born!" said a voice at his side, and he distinguished the tones
of Munshi Somwar Mal.  "Now do the roses bloom again in the garden of
joy, since your honour lives!"

"But Charteris Sahib--the Rani--every one?" murmured Gerrard, trying to
remember what had happened.

"The Rani Sahiba saw your honour fall, and herself took command of the
soldiers, bidding them die rather than fail to recover your body.
Sirdar Badan Hazari was killed, fighting very valiantly, and the
Komadan Sahib Rukn-ud-din now leads the troops."

"But Charteris Sahib--what of him, I say?"

"Alas, sahib!  The Rani Sahiba bade return to look for him when the foe
were driven back, but none were found alive save a wounded Darwani, who
had seen Chatar Sahib's body thrown over a horse and carried away."




CHAPTER XIII.

THE ONE WHO WAS LEFT.

"My dear, I wish you would take that unfortunate young Gerrard in
hand."  Mr James Antony, acting-Resident at Ranjitgarh owing to the
absence of his brother on sick-leave, wore a worried look as he entered
his wife's room.

"I will do what I can, love, but I am never quite sure how to approach
these young men.  If only dear Theodora were here----"  Mrs James was
alluding to her sister-in-law, Mrs Edmund Antony.

"Oh, if Ned and his wife were here, the trouble would be at an end,"
said James Antony, with his big laugh.  "I can't begin an interview by
blowing a man up sky-high, and end it by falling on his neck, as Ned
does.  I have done my best for Gerrard--more than Ned would have done,
too--in commending his conduct throughout this unfortunate affair, but
it don't seem to make him any happier."

"But you cannot think your brother would have taken the part of that
dreadful Sher Singh, love?"

"Ned would have seen the matter so wholly from Sher Singh's point of
view as to consider him justified in killing not only poor Charteris,
but Gerrard as well, for the offence of abducting his stepmother."

"Then when Edmund returns, will he insist on forcing the unfortunate
woman to go back?"

"No, my dear, he won't, for the very good reason that I have already
passed her safely across the Ghara.  But he will have a rod in pickle
for poor Gerrard, who seems to me to have quite enough to bear
already--what with his wounds and the loss of all his belongings, to
say nothing of the death of his friend."

"You don't think, James, that he feels himself to blame for poor Mr
Charteris's death?"

"He's an unreasonable idiot if he does," testily.  "As if he hadn't
done all that he could when he heard of it--insisting on mounting a
horse and going back to look for him!  When he very naturally fainted
again, his people were uncommon wise in continuing the journey and
bringing him here, and it's no reason for him to pull a long face.  A
broken arm and a complete suit of bruises ain't pleasant wear, but they
are mending, and the beggar has no business to mope as he does.  If
he's still in love with old Cinnamond's daughter, his path is clear
now, but they tell me he has made no attempt to see her."

"Ah!" said Mrs James thoughtfully.  "But he shall see her.  Leave it to
me, love.  Don't you think," with extreme innocence, "that it would be
cheering for the poor fellow if you invited him to sit in your
_dufter_[1] this evening?  He would not be in spirits to join the
party, of course, but the music might soothe him, and his friends could
go in and talk to him from time to time."

"He will be a sad kill-joy, my dear.  But consider the room at your
disposal for any nefarious projects of the kind."

"Nay, James, you must do your part.  Pray convey my compliments to him,
and tell him I shall be sadly vexed if he refuses to come.  He shall be
in complete retirement there, you may say, and can slip away when he
chooses."

"I will give him his orders.  Pray, is Miss Cinnamond's name to be
mentioned?"

"I think not.  I wish I could leave it to your discretion, love, but a
fine tact is not one of your shining virtues, is it?"

"No, ma'am."  James Antony was not at all aggrieved.  "To tell the
truth without fear or favour is enough for me."

"Then say nothing.  Stay--could you contrive to intimate that Sir
Arthur and his lady will be among the company?  That should serve to
prepare the young man's mind."

"I imagine I am capable of that, my dear."

And in truth, James Antony made the announcement with so much emphasis,
and in so meaning a tone, that Gerrard would have been dull indeed had
he missed its significance.  Before it came he had been fighting
against the duty of accepting Mrs Antony's invitation, but now his
opposition collapsed suddenly.  The rage for charades, which had
devastated English society for ten years or more, prevailed also in
India, and "Charades and Music" were promised in the corner of this
evening's card.  The host spoke his mind quite frankly on the nature of
the entertainment, which he termed "a set of young fools dressing up
and acting silly questions for old fools to answer," and assured
Gerrard that he thought no worse of him for holding back.  By way of
building a bridge for his retreat, however, he informed him that no
sight or sound of the charades could reach the _dufter_, and he wished
he himself could spend the evening there with him in peace and
quietness.  On receiving the tardy acceptance he departed hastily, much
pleased with the results of his diplomacy--which would hardly have been
the case had he been able to read the young man's mind.  One thing had
been plain to Gerrard from the first moment in which he realised fully
what Charteris's death would mean to him.  It set an absolute barrier
between Honour and himself.  He could no more take advantage of Bob's
removal from the field by an accident than if he had slain him with his
own hand.  Having assured himself of this night and day, in waking and
dreaming and semi-delirious moments, it had become such an immutable
fact that he felt it was time to make Honour aware of it.  He felt an
unaccountable pang on realising that she would immediately perceive its
reasonableness.

His first visitor in his retirement that evening was not Honour, but
Mrs Jardine, who believed honestly that she had a special gift for
cheering the sick.  Gerrard had always been her favourite of Honour's
two persistent suitors, and though she could not well in so many words
congratulate him on being left without a rival, there were a good many
heartening things that she could and did say.  After deprecating any
possible embarrassment on his part by assuring him that she came not
because she liked him, but because when one had a gift it was a duty to
use it, and it was a privilege to turn a gay and too probably heartless
occasion of this kind into a means of doing good, she passed to her
main object with a suddenness which would have seemed to some a little
abrupt.

"And you have not caught one glimpse of a certain young lady yet?"
Nods and becks and a mysterious archness of expression pointed the
question.  "My dear Mr Gerrard, she is handsomer than ever--in her own
style, of course; you may take an old woman's word for it."

"But where shall I find the old woman?" inquired Gerrard, in a
desperate attempt to do what was expected of him.

Highly pleased, Mrs Jardine gave him a tap with her fan.  "Oh, you
quiet young men are just as naughty as the rest--with your compliments,
indeed!  But if I were to repeat to you what a little bird told me, you
would never, never betray me?"  Earnest assurances on Gerrard's part.
"Well, then, I hear that Miss Cinnamond is not very happy at home!"

"I am sorry to hear it," said Gerrard mechanically.

Mrs Jardine looked a little nonplussed.  "Of course it is very sad,"
she admitted.  "But surely it has its brighter side?  The fact is, the
General and dear Lady Cinnamond are _everything_ to each other.  There
is really no place for the poor girl.  I confess she has made her
mother wear caps like other people--makes them for her herself, I
believe--instead of that extraordinary Popish veil--so like a nun's, I
call it--though even she has not been able to get her to do anything to
her hair."  Like most of her contemporaries, Mrs Jardine regarded it as
almost indecent to display grey or white hair, and herself wore a
"front" which could hardly be considered an attempt at deception, so
transparently artificial was it.

"You were saying something about caps?" hazarded Gerrard, as Mrs
Jardine remained silent, apparently sunk in contemplation of the
persistent defects of Lady Cinnamond's appearance.

"Oh yes, of course.  Dear me, what was it?  Oh, I remember.  Well, you
see, though it is very good and loving of her to do it"--Gerrard had to
cast his mind back to discover what "it" was--"and must be a great
saving of expense, with the Calcutta shops so frightfully dear, and
boxes from home quite out of the question--though on the General's pay
and allowances, of course----  Still, as I was saying, no parents with
any proper feeling would wish a girl to remain single just for that
reason, would they?  And she has had so many offers--which is only
natural in a society like this, with Sir Arthur's position and title
and everything.  It must be a great blow to him, I am sure, this honour
conferred on Colonel Antony."  Gerrard looked, as he felt, bewildered,
not seeing the connection, since Colonel Antony had no marriageable
daughter.  "Oh, you haven't heard that the dear Colonel has got his
K.C.B.?  They are all talking about it to-night--it was in the mail
that came in this afternoon."

"I have not had time to open any newspapers," said Gerrard wearily.  "I
am glad to hear it, if the Antonys are pleased."

"Of course a mere worldly distinction of that sort could never make any
real difference to dear Colonel Antony--Sir Edmund, I should say."  Mrs
Jardine's tone was severe.  "But as a token of his Sovereign's
approbation, it must raise his position among the people here."

"Nothing could ever raise Colonel Antony higher in the minds of the
people who really know him," said Gerrard.

"All the more reason that he should have this honour to recommend him
to those who do not," retorted Mrs Jardine triumphantly.  "That is
exactly what I was saying----  Dear me! what was I saying?  Oh, I
remember; we were discussing Lady Cinnamond's assumption of
superiority--just a little out of place in the case of a foreigner--you
agree with me?  Well, what I was going to say was, why should Miss
Cinnamond, who is not happy at home, refuse so many eligible suitors,
if it was not that her heart is already engaged?  There!  I mustn't
bore you any longer.  Why, you are looking quite excited!  Have I given
you just one little tiny crumb of comfort?  Don't thank me; doing
kindnesses is my only pleasure."

The lavender _moiré antique_ squeezed through the doorway with much
crackling of unseen starched flounces, but Gerrard had no time to
analyse the effect upon himself of the news he had received.  Sir
Arthur Cinnamond was his next visitor, confirming the news of Colonel
Antony's knighthood, and then came Captain Cowper to tell his chief
that the acting-Resident was asking for him, and lingering to thank
Gerrard, in the name of the whole Ranjitgarh force, for setting on foot
such a capital little war as that with Agpur was bound to prove.  The
officer sent to bring Sher Singh to book could get no satisfaction from
him, and was being kept fuming on the Agpur frontier in a most improper
way, so that a punitive expedition was a practical certainty, and if
Sir Arthur did not take the field in person, his son-in-law meant to
get himself attached to some one who did, even if he had to go back to
regimental employment.

"Marian is looking for you to take your part in this next syllable,
Charles," said a voice in the doorway, and Gerrard looked up with a
start to meet Honour's clear eyes.  Mrs Jardine's confidences had
inspired him with a wild hope that he might find in them something he
had not seen there before, but they met his with their usual bright
frankness.  He ought to have rejoiced, having regard to the compact he
had made with himself and with Charteris's memory, but such is the
inconsistency of human nature, that he did not.

"Horrid bore!" drawled Captain Cowper.  "Who would ever have thought of
their hunting me out here?  But I shall leave my sister-in-law to amuse
you, Gerrard, so you'll be the gainer."

There was no embarrassment in Honour's manner as she took the vacated
seat.  "I have been so very sorry to hear of your trouble," she said
gently, only waiting for Captain Cowper to depart.

She understood, then!  Was there any other girl in the world who would
have understood--that not the removal of a rival, but the loss of a
friend, was the dominant thought in Gerrard's mind?  He murmured his
thanks with difficulty.

"Would it hurt you to tell me about it?" she asked, and the flood-gates
were opened.  All the rankling memories which Gerrard could no more
have confided to James Antony than that worthy man could have
comprehended them if he had, all the unavailing self-reproach--"If I
had only done this!" "If I had not said that!"--all the
self-depreciation which the persistent dwelling on Charteris's
qualities produced naturally in the man who differed so much from him,
were poured into Honour's ear.

"And the very last evening I was fool enough to take offence because he
saw quicker than I did what was the right thing to be done!  Do you
think he turned rusty?  Not a bit of it.  He took it like a
brick--actually apologised for offering me advice!  There was never any
one like him."

"No, I suppose not," said Honour softly.  There were tears in her eyes,
but she did not ask herself whether Charteris's virtues or Gerrard's
account of them had brought them there.  She took it for granted that
it was the former, and spoke accordingly.

"And the worst of it is, we don't realise what our friends are until we
lose them," she murmured.

"No, indeed we don't.  One sees one's own unworthiness now, when it is
too late--when the remembrance of what he was makes a barrier for
ever----"

"A barrier--yes, of course; but a bond, too."  This was a state of mind
which Honour could thoroughly understand and appreciate.  A life-long
romantic friendship, absolutely precluded from becoming anything more,
was just what appealed to her.  It suggested what may be termed the
Rolandseck ideal--the hero retiring from the world to an eligible
hermitage, affording an extensive view of a desirably situated nunnery,
where the heroine was similarly secluded--which, with its peculiar
blending of religion and sentimentality, animated so many of her
favourite books.  "We can never forget that we have both known him, can
we?  You will tell me more about him, and we will keep his memory alive
when all the world has forgotten him."

Whether the relief of unburdening his mind had served to clear her
hearer's vision, or merely that the thought of the real Bob Charteris,
most unsentimental of men, obtruded itself in all its incongruity with
Honour's scheme for commemorating him, certain it is that instead of
being grateful to her for falling in so exactly with his wishes,
Gerrard was conscious of a distinct impatience.  Was there no flesh and
blood about the girl--no feeling, but merely sentiment?  All unknown to
himself, Gerrard had not been intending to suffer alone, and it was a
blow to discover that what had meant to him a real and terrible
renunciation was to her a mere matter of course, rather pleasurable
than otherwise.  He groaned as the truth forced itself upon him, and
Honour looked up in alarm.

"I have done you harm--tired you," she said anxiously.  "We must have
another talk when you are better.  I see my mother looking for me."

"Honour, it is time for us to go, dear," said Lady Cinnamond, coming
in, and looking "like other people," as Mrs Jardine had said, in a huge
halo of net and ribbon and flowers and blonde.  Honour might make her
mother's caps, but they had to be submitted for Sir Arthur's
approbation, and as he was strongly of the opinion that there was
nothing like roses for setting off a pretty face, the style was apt to
incline to the decorated rather than the classical.  Lady Cinnamond
spoke kindly to Gerrard, and expressed the hope that he would look in
now and then, glancing the while from him to Honour as though anxious
to find something in their faces that might guide her what to say, but
in vain.  In sheer bewilderment she appealed to her daughter when they
were alone.

"Tell me, Onora, did the poor fellow plead with you again to marry him?"

Honour turned quickly.  "Oh no, mamma--how could he?  Neither of us
could ever think of it now."

"That was what made you cry, then?"

"Mamma! why should it?  He was telling me about poor Mr Charteris, and
I realised how little I had known him.  I can say it to you, mamma--it
is a privilege to feel that such a man has cared for one."

"Then if he had lived you would have married him, my poor little one?"
cried her mother in dismay.

"How can I tell, mamma?  One finds out these things too late.  It is
always so, isn't it?"

"And the poor young man who is not dead?" there was a hint of
exasperation in Lady Cinnamond's voice.

"He doesn't dream of that sort of thing now.  We shall always be
friends, but never anything more."

"My dearest little foolish one, there are moments when I would gladly
take you by the shoulders and shake you!" cried Lady Cinnamond in
vehement Spanish.  Catching her daughter's astonished eye, she calmed
herself forcibly and spoke in English.  "If you had seen that poor
young man's face as you left the room, as I did, Honour, you would know
what nonsense you are talking.  Refuse him if you must, but don't keep
him in torture."

"Dear mamma, you don't understand.  Things are different now----"

"From what they were when I was a girl?  I agree!  And I prefer them as
they used to be.  There were your father and I, and his friends and my
family trying to prevent our marriage.  There were other men in the
world, doubtless, but for me they simply did not exist.  And we
married, and people considered us very romantic.  But to be romantic
now, it seems, you must persist in remaining unmarried for the sake of
a very worthy young man for whom you cared not a straw when he was
alive!"

"I can't explain it, mamma.  But one has one's feelings----"

"Quite so.  And the poor Mr Gerrard has his also.  But those you do not
consider."

Gerrard's ill-used feelings were still unhealed a week later, when Sir
Edmund Antony, learning of the imminent danger of war with Agpur,
descended from the hills like a whirlwind to take command of the
situation, and incidentally to upset as many as possible of his
brother's arrangements.  Having learnt all that Gerrard could tell him
of the circumstances, he took occasion, while his secretary was at work
on the fresh orders he had hastily drafted to Nisbet, the political
officer in charge of the negociations with Sher Singh, to speak on more
personal matters.

"I am sorry to see this continued depression of spirits on your part,
Gerrard.  The sin of despondency is one to which I myself am so
conspicuously prone that I dare lose no opportunity of warning others
against it."

"Forgive me, sir.  Our conversation has led me to recall things so
vividly----"

"True.  But you feel, as you have assured me, that our friend Charteris
fell in a good cause?"

"There could be no better, sir.  But if only I could have died instead
of him!"

Sir Edmund frowned.  "These things are not in our hands.  If
Charteris's work was done, no efforts of yours or mine could have saved
him.  If your work is not done, all the powers of hell could not
prevail to bring about your death."

"But his work was not complete, sir.  There was so much in him that no
one realised--he had had no opportunity to display it.  You and I, and
one other person, have some faint idea of what he really was, but no
one else can possibly know--the world can never know."

Colonel Antony pushed back his papers.  "And what then?" he asked
sharply.  "How dare you say that his work was not complete because the
world knew nothing of it?  The world!  The world does not make a man
great, any more than it is the world's recognition that makes his work
valuable.  The value of the work lies in the spirit in which it is
done.  I tell you"--he spoke as though to himself, with a far-away look
in his eyes--"I have seen something of work and the world's recognition
of it.  You know the interest that I take in the history of our people
in India, how my wife and I are always poking and prying among old
manuscripts and records wherever we go.  I have found there the
histories of scores of forgotten heroes--men whose names, in any other
service or any other country, would have been inscribed upon the
nation's roll of honour.  They marched half across India--hostile
country, every foot of the way--at the head of a few hundred men, and
faced and fought the might of empires at the end.  They captured cities
single-handed, and ruled them afterwards, and they pacified whole
provinces, in spite of famine and plague and fever.  Oh, they got their
recognition--the thanks of the Directors, sometimes even of Parliament,
swords of honour and trash of that kind.  But who remembers even their
names now?  You will find their graves sometimes, neglected and
defaced, in deserted cantonments, or the remains of their great
bungalows grown over with jungle, and perhaps a legend or two will be
hanging about among the natives--silly superstitious things, of no
value in recalling the man as he was.  They did their work, and good
work--completed work, as you would say--and they had their recognition,
but they are no more remembered now than Charteris will be next year,
except by you and one or two more.  Ah, Gerrard, we are all very
anxious to see our names carved on the stones that men may remember us,
but we have to learn that it is enough if God deigns even to build our
bodies into the wall.  If Charteris did well what he was permitted to
do, he could have done no more if he had lived a hundred years."

The rapt gaze faltered, and the soldier-mystic became the keen
administrator once more.

"How much longer are you to be on the sick-list, Gerrard?  I am going
to send you to Darwan."

"I shall not be able to use this arm for some time, sir.  Otherwise the
doctor said he would let me off in another week.  But you were not
suggesting that I should take up Charteris's work?"

"That is exactly what I do suggest.  I have no other man to send, and
no other place at this moment that is crying out for you.  I should not
send you to Agpur again, and you would hardly wish to go, I imagine.
What is your objection to Darwan?"

"Simply that it was his work, sir.  We were so different in every
way--I had rather try almost anything else----"

"Do you wish to decline the post?"

"If you send me to Darwan, sir, I shall go."

"I am not going to order you to Darwan.  There is another post, by the
bye, that you can have if you choose, with less responsibility and an
easier life.  Old Sadiq Ali of Habshiabad has been plaguing me for an
officer to help him to train his army and pull the state together
generally.  He is a stiff-necked old ruffian, but it is a soft berth
compared with Darwan.  You are at liberty to choose that if you please,
but if you are the man I take you for you will select Darwan and carry
on the work that Charteris began.  I leave it in your hands."

"I will take Darwan, sir.  I don't expect to succeed, but I will do my
best."



[1] Office, study.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE IDEAL AND THE REAL.

The secretary came in with his hands full of papers, and Gerrard left
the office, hardly knowing whither he went.  James Antony, sitting in
his shirt-sleeves among the records of his interrupted labours in
another room, took a huge cheroot out of his mouth and called to him as
he passed, but he muttered something unintelligible and hurried on.  Up
and down the stone-paved courtyard he paced, much to the perturbation
of the sentry at the gateway, who found the form of madness with which
the Sahib must be afflicted difficult to classify.  Gerrard was
wrestling with himself and with the impulse to throw up political
employment altogether and go back to the routine work of his
profession.  When he and Charteris left Ranjitgarh together, he had
envied his friend, and wished that his work also lay in the open air
and among unsophisticated children of nature.  But now the environment
in which he had spent the past year had left its traces on him,
heightening his natural tendency to proceed by sap and mine rather than
by direct assault, and rendering him still less ready than before to
cut Gordian knots when by any conceivable expenditure of time and
patience they might ultimately be undone.  In other words, his Agpur
training had improved his fitness for work of the same kind, but left
him worse adapted than before for the rough and ready methods necessary
for the ruler of Darwan.  And he was to succeed Charteris, whose
success in these very rough and ready methods had been pre-eminent, and
who would much have preferred to do the wrong thing at once rather than
the right thing after a lengthy pause.

So much engrossed was Gerrard in his meditations that the jingling and
clanking that told of the arrival of a party of horsemen at the gate of
the Residency failed to attract his notice, and it was not until, as he
turned in his backward and forward march, he came face to face with Bob
Charteris sitting on his horse in the moonlight and solemnly regarding
him, that he realised he was no longer alone.  He stood speechless.

"Thought I'd wait and see how long you could keep it up--brown study as
usual!" cried Charteris.  "Why, I believe the beggar takes me for a
ghost!  Hal, old boy!" bending from the saddle he bestowed on Gerrard a
most unghostly clap on the shoulder.  "I'm come back to plague you; do
you twig--eh?"

"Bob!" cried Gerrard, shaking hands with him rapturously.  "My dear old
fellow, I never was so glad in my life!"

"And I believe the fool really is glad, instead of having been thankful
that his hated rival was safely out of the way," said Charteris
compassionately.

"Glad is no word for it," said Gerrard.  "Come and tell me all about
yourself.  I'm in the old place--you'll chum with me as usual, of
course?"

"I believe you, my boy!  But I must satisfy the natural curiosity of
the higher powers first.  I suppose it's true, as they told me at the
gate, that the Colonel has come down like a wolf on the fold, and
sneaked the conduct of affairs out of the hands of our Mr James?"

"Yes, he is here.  You know he's got his K.C.B.?"

"Wish he had stayed up in the hills with it, then.  I don't admire
James Antony's taste in jokes, but his heavy hand appeals to me in
connection with Sher Singh.  Now I am afraid the erring brother will be
received with tears of joy and forgiven on the spot and coddled
afterwards, and I wanted him kept in suspense for a bit and then put on
probation.  He has given me some precious unpleasant moments, I can
tell you.  Well, you go off and prepare fatted calf and any other
suitably symbolical prog you may have at hand, and I'll turn up as soon
as I can."

Munshi Somwar Mal was in waiting to escort Charteris to his quarters
when he emerged from his interview with the Resident, and greeted him
with genuine pleasure.

"Now do the nightingales sing once more in the groves of friendship!"
he remarked.  "Verily for Jirad Sahib the flame of joy has of late
burned low in the lamp of life, but now the oil of Chatar Sahib's
presence will replenish it until it illuminates all Granthistan."

With similar flowery compliments he beguiled the whole way, and
Charteris noted with admiration that he did not once repeat his
metaphors.  On the well-remembered verandah Gerrard's servant was
putting the finishing touches to the supper-table, to furnish which he
had raided the Resident's larder and suborned his cook, and Charteris
threw himself into a chair with a sigh of satisfaction.  Gerrard,
moving things about energetically inside to make room for him, called
out that he would come in a moment, and presently emerged and sat down
opposite him.

"Well, this is just what I like--and a few over," remarked Charteris
contentedly.  "So I hear you are going to sneak my job, old boy?"

"I shall hand it back to you with the utmost pleasure, Bob, as you can
well guess.  But tell me how it is you are here at all."

Charteris assumed a deeply sententious manner.  "You are not wholly
unacquainted with the literature of our vivacious kindred across the
Atlantic, I believe, Hal?  Well, do you know the expression 'playing
possum'? because that's what I did.  I got a glancing bullet across my
forehead, where this imposing scar is, just here, which stunned me at
first, and must have made a ghastly-looking wound, but the
unconsciousness didn't last more than a minute or two.  At least,
that's what I gather from seeing my precious Darwanis in full flight
when I got the blood out of my eyes.  Their way of conducting a retreat
was always to fire a volley and then run away helter-skelter, and
though I had been teaching them better manners, I always knew they
would break if I wasn't there to stiffen them.  I was a good deal
knocked about, besides the wound on the head, and before I could manage
to roll into the bushes, Sher Singh's men were back.  I thought it well
to appear more dead than I was, especially when I saw them going round
and finishing off all our wounded that they could find.  They were in a
great hurry, and I gathered that your men had driven them off, and they
felt it advisable to make themselves scarce.  I was in full view,
unluckily, and expected to get the _coup de grâce_ every moment, but
when they came to me they took me up without troubling to see whether I
was alive or not, and threw me over a horse.  It was not what you would
call a luxurious mode of travelling, and twice I managed to drop off,
feet first, hoping they would leave me lying where I was and go on in
disgust.  They were disgusted--highly, but their remarks made it clear
that Sher Singh had ordered you and me to be brought in dead or alive,
preferably alive, so I condescended to exhibit signs of life, and they
hoisted me up behind one of them.  That was an uncommon disagreeable
ride, I can tell you."

"I started to come back and look for you, Bob, but I couldn't get far
enough."

"Of course you couldn't.  Why, this alone"--he touched the sling of
Gerrard's broken arm--"shows that you were much worse hurt than I was.
But I was pretty well done for, and a most gruesome object, when we
came up with Sher Singh.  His manners ain't exactly ingratiating at the
best of times, as you have more than once remarked to me, but when he
saw my unlucky hair, his language was positively improper.  You see, it
was my misfortune--and your very good fortune, I'm inclined to
think--that I wasn't you.  He even sent for water and had some of the
blood washed off my face, to make sure, I suppose, that we hadn't
exchanged wigs in the hope of deceiving him, and when he was quite sure
who I wasn't, I expected nothing better than to be cut into little bits
there and then.  But some one ventured to suggest something, and he
came at me with great fury and demanded whether I knew where Partab
Singh's hidden treasure was.  I know I ought to have struck a heroic
attitude and refused to speak, but as a matter of fact, I fainted.  It
was horribly ill-timed, for Sher Singh is bound to believe for ever
that it was sheer terror of his alarming aspect that did it, but it was
precious fortunate for me, for when I woke up I was in a palanquin, and
they had tied up my head and looked after me a bit.  Dear, good,
sympathetic souls! how they did try to make things pleasant for
me--always dinning into my ears that Sher Singh was fattening me for
the slaughter--the torture, I mean!  They used to congregate outside
and discuss tortures in the halts, when I might have had a chance to
get a little sleep if there had been any air, like a whole regiment of
Fat Boys."

"If we had only known you were alive, Bob!"

"Oh, don't think _I'm_ trying to make your flesh creep.  All's well
that ends well, and it's a useful experience to have been through.
Shows a fellow he can stand a good deal more than he ever thought he
could, I mean.  But perhaps it was just as well it was me and not you."

"Complimentary, as usual!"  Gerrard's laugh was a little forced.

"It's merely a question of nerves, old boy.  You would have been
picturing the details over and over again when the beggars were not
talking about 'em, whereas I was able to put them out of my mind.
Well, we got to Agpur at last, and once in the palace, Sher Singh set
to work to try kindness.  He let me take up my quarters--watched day
and night, of course--in your old Residency, which looks a good deal
the worse for wear since you left it.  The servants you left in charge
seem to have taken first choice when they heard you were hardly likely
to come back, and then the palace servants and the guards had their
turn.  Your books were all torn to pieces--they must have thought you
had gold-leaf hidden between the pages--and scattered all about the
place.  I camped in the ruins, and Sher Singh came to see me twice.  He
talked to me like a man and a brother, pointed out how important it was
for him to find the treasure, what a guarantee of peace it would be,
and how he was obviously the rightful owner now that his father and
brother were dead.  I agreed with him in everything, but declined
respectfully to say whether I knew where it was or not.  When he
proceeded to threats, I told him that he must think me as big a fool as
I was beginning to consider him.  I was not going to tell him whether I
knew the secret, because if I did know it, he would at once begin to
make things very unpleasant for me, and if I didn't, he might kill me
as useless.  On the other hand, he could not proceed to extremities
while he was still uncertain, because if I knew the hiding-place, he
would have killed the goose that laid the golden eggs, and if I didn't,
he would have thrown away uselessly his one chance of placating Antony.
That was just when Nisbet was beginning to thunder at the gates of
Agpur--or rather, a good way off them--so it appealed to him.  Of
course the flaw in the argument was that if he knew his business, his
torturer might contrive to extract the answer to the question, and the
secret, without killing me, but I had to treat that possibility as
absolutely non-existent.  Still, he found out the secret at last."

"Bob!" cried Gerrard anxiously.

"Sold again.  This was how he did it.  After dogging me all over the
place, trying to discover by my face where the treasure might be
hidden, they hit upon a new plan, by which, if the worst came to the
worst, they could produce my body quite free from marks of violence,
and so satisfy Antony.  It was a fiendish thing, Hal.  As soon as ever
I went to sleep, day or night, they woke me up, and asked me if I knew
where the treasure was.  I stood it for two days and nights, but if it
had gone on, I swear to you I must have given in; I was pretty near mad
then.  But curiously enough, Sher Singh discovered the treasury for
himself in an odd sort of way.  You know the great tank where the lotus
grows?  Well, one of Sher Singh's ladies brought some gold-fish with
her from Adamkot and turned them into it.  The fish all died--change of
diet, I suppose, but she swore that the deaf and dumb boatman had
killed them.  It was clearly a case of 'Off with his head!' for the
poor wretch couldn't defend himself, but he made signs that if they
would let him off he would show them something.  They were open to a
deal, and he took them across to the thicket of bamboos, and showed
them the door in the wall, making them understand somehow that old
Partab Singh used to go that way often at night.  They lost the scent
when they found that the door only led down to the wild beasts' pit,
but picked it up again by a very pretty bit of deduction.  It was quite
certain that the treasury couldn't be under the pit or under the tank,
so that the passage leading to it must pass between them, and it must
lie in the direction either of the palace or the Residency.  They broke
ground in the Residency direction first, sinking two or three shafts in
likely places, while I watched them with great interest, and asked
intelligent questions.  It was the one way I had of getting a little
bit even with them for what they were doing to me.  They held to the
Residency theory because they couldn't see otherwise how you managed to
get at the treasure for paying the soldiers without being discovered,
but Sher Singh never believed in it much.  Once when he was a small boy
his father let him come with him into the ordinary treasury under the
zenana, and he heard what sounded to him like men working underground
not very far off.  He couldn't make out where the sound came from, and
his father diddled him with some fairy-tale to account for it, but now
he remembered.  So he had every inch of the treasury walls examined,
and they came on the air-hole looking into the passage.  Then they had
only to break down the wall between, and there they were--and I give
you my word for it, Hal, I was thankful!  When they were all busy
watching what was being done, and the gold was being handed up through
a shaft that they dug, I just dropped down and went to sleep.  It
wasn't for long, but when I woke up I felt fit to face Sher Singh or
the devil himself."

"Pretty much the same thing, after all," said Gerrard grimly.

"I should rayther think so!  But the worst was over.  It seems that
they were uncommon disappointed in the amount of the treasure.  They
expected sufficient to make them all rich for life, and there was only
just about enough to settle Sher Singh comfortably on the _gaddi_."

"Just what I calculated--only it was for poor little Kharrak Singh."

"Well, they held palaver upon palaver to decide whether they should
hang the expense and plump for immediate war, beginning upon me.
Everybody talked very big about wanting to fight, but nobody really
cared about it.  The army have plenty of money left for the present,
and want to spend it, and the secret messengers sent to see whether the
Granthis generally would join in a rising against the English were not
encouraging.  It'll be just as well for Antony to know that they look
forward to a shindy before very long, but they ain't equal to kicking
it up in cold blood just yet.  The council had no illusions as to the
possibility of the Agpuris making head against us without allies, and
your old friend Dwarika Nath, who has come back as Diwan, was very
strong on the need of prudence."

"The old reprobate!" cried Gerrard.  "Master and man are pretty well
matched."

"So I should guess.  At last they did me the honour to call me into
consultation.  There was no parade of tenderness for my feelings, but
they did make it clear that while every man of them would have made it
his particular business to see that you underwent the longest and most
uncomfortable death that could be had, they considered me not half a
bad sort.  Therefore they did their best to frighten me into promising
them all sorts of concessions in Antony's name, and all I could do was
to invite them to kill me at once, since that would be far less painful
to my feelings than the consequences that would follow if I attempted
to negotiate treaties on my own responsibility.  At the same time I
dropped a hint that since the murder of a British officer was a
prominent count in the bill Nisbet was presenting, it would undoubtedly
be an extenuating circumstance if the said officer could be produced
alive and only superficially damaged.  We wrangled a good bit, but at
last I agreed to act as mediator on the basis of the execution of
Kharrak Singh's murderers, the retention by the Rani of her _jaghirs_
or their equivalent in cash, and a settlement of the frontier
question--all of them bitter pills for the Agpuris to swallow, but
indispensable, I assured them, if their professions of goodwill were to
be accepted."

"The execution of Kharrak Singh's murderers!  You were pretty cool to
demand that, and they must have been mad, or pretty well desperate, to
grant it."

"Why, you have picked out the easiest condition of the lot.  His
official murderers, I mean.  They confessed, four of them--what they
were paid for doing it I don't know--and I saw them blown from guns
myself.  But paying the Rani's jointure--that was a bitter pill, I
grant you.  I had to engage that any jewels or cash in her possession
when she dies--a natural death, of course, understood--shall return to
Sher Singh, before he would promise, and even then it was like bleeding
him white.  And the rectification of the frontier, on which Antony laid
such stress in his instructions to Nisbet, will be opposed by all Agpur
when they hear of it.  I hope our Mr James may be in power again when
it comes to be settled, to carry it through by sheer strength of will,
for I should be very sorry to be in charge of the negotiations unless I
had overwhelming force at hand in support."

"I suppose there's no doubt that Sir Edmund will accept Sher Singh's
submission on these terms?" asked Gerrard gloomily.

"None whatever, I should say, judging by the way he received them just
now."

"And this is the end of it, then!  Sher Singh gets all he wanted at the
price of a few rupees to the heirs of the _badmashes_ he has bribed to
take his guilt upon them."

"My dear fellow, you can prove nothing against him, and we have no
power to bring him to trial.  I believe you and I are fated to be the
instruments of exemplary vengeance upon him eventually, ain't we,
according to the Rani?  Till then we must be content to see him
flourishing like the green bay-tree."

"But we need not supply the bay-tree with water and the soil that suits
it, and with a gardener to look after it and railings to keep off the
goats," grumbled Gerrard.

"Oh, you are getting too horrid technical for me," said Charteris, with
a yawn.  "I don't know what you feel about turning in, Hal, but your
unfortunate servants will certainly think they ain't going home till
morning.  I have been riding all day, you know."

Gerrard laughed, and the sitting broke up.  The two friends hardly saw
each other the next day, so closely was Charteris closeted with Sir
Edmund Antony and his brother, discussing the affairs of Agpur, and
when he was released, Gerrard was sent for, to throw the light of his
experience on the present situation.  It was dark when he got back to
his quarters, and he started when Charteris bounced up out of the
depths of a long chair.

"I thought you were never coming!  Hal, I've seen her."

His tone was so instinct with rapture that Gerrard's heart stood still.
"Where?" he asked hoarsely.

"At the band.  Driving with her mother.  Lady Cinnamond was uncommon
kind--let me ride on her side of the carriage.  Hal, she
blushed--blushed when she saw me!  She was looking stunning--so pale
and cool; she never has much colour in her cheeks, has she?  She had on
one of those worked muslin gowns, and a big floppy hat with black
streamers to it, and black velvet round her neck--nothing pink or blue
to take your eyes from her face."

"Yes?" muttered Gerrard, as Charteris paused in blissful contemplation
of the picture he had evoked.

"Yes? oh, that was all.  I rode beside her, and looked at her, and her
hand lay on the side of the carriage quite close to me--I wanted to
kiss it, but I didn't dare.  And she let me hold it for a moment when I
bade them good-day--at least, perhaps she didn't let me, but I did,
anyhow--and she blushed, blushed divinely."

Gerrard sprang up and paced the verandah hastily.  Charteris woke from
his dream of bliss.

"Old boy, I'm sorry--'pon my word I am.  But after all, she is free to
choose, ain't she?  With any other girl one wouldn't think much of a
blush.  But one never sees her change colour, and I came upon her
suddenly, so she couldn't have been thinking of me before.  I thought
old Sir Arthur would never have done with congratulating me on my
escape, and that sort of thing--and a man can't be rude to his
prospective papa-in-law, can he?  But when I saw the greys coming down
the drive, and the two parasols in the carriage--why, I made myself
scarce in no time, and the old boy positively beamed upon my departure."

"And having made sure of the lady and her parents both, when do you
propose to clinch the matter?" demanded Gerrard savagely.

Charteris looked at him in surprise.  "Why, Hal, you don't imagine that
I meant to run away from our compact?  We'll draw lots who shall speak
first exactly as we arranged.  Unless"--with sudden fierce
suspicion--"you took your opportunity when you thought I was dead?"

"Bob!" cried Gerrard, so reproachfully that his friend could not doubt
him.  "I had given up all thoughts of it.  I never went near her
without talking of you."

"Oh!" said Charteris rather blankly.  "I hope you haven't made her
think I'm like a brute in a poetry-book?  Because if so, she'll be
disappointed."

"I can't help what she thinks," growled Gerrard.  "I told her nothing
that wasn't true."

"I don't suppose you did.  But it's the finishing touches that count in
these things, my boy.  And if she chooses to fit me out with a halo and
a pedestal--why, when she discovers the truth, I shall really be
_finished off_.  But after all," with reviving cheerfulness, "it ain't
my fault if she is kind enough to endow me with imaginary virtues.  She
blushed, anyhow.  And when a girl accepts a man, it's as if she gave
him leave to teach her the difference between creatures in books, and
fellows as they are.  And if she's agreeable, why, so am I; with all my
heart, says I.  That's my theory."

"Bob, you are really in earnest?  It isn't one of your jokes?"

"Jokes, indeed!" said Charteris, in high dudgeon.  "I'll show you how
much in earnest I am, Lieutenant Henry Gerrard.  We'll go to business
to-morrow, if you please."

"Then you wish to draw the lots to-night?"

"No, don't let us have any melodramatic nonsense with straws, or bits
of wood of different lengths.  We'll go down to the gateway to-morrow
between one and two, when there's scarcely a creature about, and one
shall look up the street, and the other down.  Whoever can count twenty
human beings first shall have first right to speak.  Are you agreeable?"

"All serene.  But what if we both call out at once?"

"Try again, of course.  It ain't likely to happen twice.  The sentry
will think we have got a wager on, so there won't be any fuss."



Charteris proved successful in the counting competition, announcing his
twenty while Gerrard had only reached seventeen.  As he was dining with
the Cinnamonds that night, the fates seemed to be propitious.  But when
Gerrard came back from supping with the James Antonys, he found his
friend reclining on the verandah, in an attitude suggestive of
despondency.

"Sold again!" said a sepulchral voice from the recesses of the long
chair.

"You don't mean that she has refused you, Bob?"

"Oh, don't I?" the voice suggested something more than sulkiness.  "If
I don't, I'm very much mistaken.  She told me that I wasn't what she
expected, in a way that implied I was a very poor creature indeed.  If
that was acceptance, all I can say is, I hope you may be accepted too!"




CHAPTER XV.

MUTTERINGS OF THE STORM.

"Onora, my dearest little one, have you anything to tell me?"  Unable
to bear the suspense any longer, Lady Cinnamond had pursued her
daughter to her room.

"No, mamma; only that he is gone."

"But you have not sent him away?"

"I told him again that I could not marry him."

"But I thought you cared for him!"  Lady Cinnamond's regret was not
unmixed with indignation.  "When you thought he was dead, you said----"

It was Honour's turn to be indignant.  "I said I couldn't tell, mamma.
And I don't like him as much now as I did when I thought he was dead."

"These poor young men!" lamented her mother.  "Then is the unfortunate
Mr Gerrard to be made happy at last?  Or is it some one else?"

"It isn't any one!" cried Honour hotly.  "Is it my fault if they will
want to marry me?  I am sure I have made it clear to them over and over
again that I don't want to marry anybody."

"My child, that is a thing that nothing will make clear to a man," said
her mother solemnly--"especially when it is plain that you take
pleasure in his society."

"But I don't.  Mamma, I never told you, but long ago, more than a year,
I lent _Sintram_ to Mr Charteris, without telling him how fond I was of
it.  He gave it back to me all smelling of smoke, and said that he
couldn't make head or tail of it, but it struck him as uncommon silly."

"But, my dear, surely that ought to have warned you that your tastes
were not congenial.  What can have made you think your feelings had
changed?"

"Oh, mamma, I don't know."  Honour paused for a moment, then hurried
on.  "One doesn't remember that kind of thing when a person is dead,
you know.  And there seemed to be so many nice points about him that I
had never guessed----"

"But which Mr Gerrard brought out?  Well, your objection can't
apply----"  Lady Cinnamond broke off hastily.  "I won't worry you any
more to-night, dear."

"Good-night, mamma.  I am sorry I was cross."

Lady Cinnamond left her reluctantly, for the rest of the family were on
the tiptoe of expectation to hear what had happened, and she had
earnestly hoped to be able to silence their jeers with the announcement
that Honour was engaged like other people.

"Well, mamma, is he coming to see papa in the morning?" demanded Mrs
Cowper eagerly, as soon as her mother appeared.

"No, dear; I am sorry to say she has refused him again."

"Fastidious little puss!" chuckled Sir Arthur.  "Faith! it'll be the
other that will come to-morrow."

"Isn't Honour a queer quizzical sort of girl?" inquired Mrs Cowper
earnestly of her parents.  "Do you think she will accept Mr Gerrard,
mamma?"

"My dear, I am afraid to say, but I should fear not."

"Why should she, if she don't want him?" said Sir Arthur briskly.
"Rosita, I don't like to see this eagerness to get rid of your
daughters.  It reflects badly upon your bringing-up of them, ma'am."

"Oh no, papa; how can you say so?  It speaks well for mamma's happiness
in her married life."

"I see Charles hasn't cured you of your pertness yet, miss--ma'am, I
should say.  Poor fellow!  I wonder if I ought to have told him what he
was bringing upon himself?"

Justice demanded that Marian should immediately rise and pull her
father's hair, but in the middle of the operation she paused
tragically.  "Something has just struck me," she said.  "Why do we all
take it for granted that Honour must end by marrying one of these two
men?  It may be some one we have never thought of that she really cares
for."

"My dear, don't imagine fresh complications," said her mother in alarm.
"All the available young men have proposed, so that she could have had
any one she liked."

"Perhaps she was afraid of her cruel father," suggested Mrs Cowper,
deftly arranging Sir Arthur's hair into a curl in the middle of his
forehead.  "Don't touch that, papa, whatever you do.  I want Charley to
see it; it will give him a new view of your character.  Of course it is
the persistence of these two men that makes you feel that one of them
is fated to succeed.  Others come and others go, but they go on for
ever."

"Perhaps it would be as well to forbid them both the house," suggested
her victimised father.

"Not both at once, papa!  Why, neither we nor Honour should ever know
which was the right one, if they were both shut out together.  You must
do it in turn."

"And after making one welcome for a week or so, pick a quarrel with him
and install the other?  Precious undignified, my dear child, but a man
must make sacrifices for the sake of his family."

"Ah, but that's just what you don't do!" cried Marian, roused to
recollection of a grievance of her own.  "How could you all but promise
Charley that if a peaceful mission was sent to Agpur, he should command
the escort?"

"But surely, my dear, I was sacrificing my own comfort in promising to
spare him?"

"No, you were sacrificing me!" pouted his daughter.  "I was making
signs to you the whole time, not to let him go unless he would take me
with him, and he won't.  He has been horrid about it."

"My dear Marian, you could not possibly go, with the hot weather coming
on!" cried her mother, aghast.

"Nor in any weather whatever," said Sir Arthur firmly.  "Your signals
were lost on me, Marian, but nothing would induce me to consent to your
going to Agpur.  The place is clearly in a most disturbed state, and
the good faith of the new Rajah extremely doubtful."

"Then don't let Charley go," was the prompt rejoinder.

Sir Arthur raised his eyebrows.  "You must settle that with your
husband yourself, my dear.  I have promised to allow him leave for the
purpose if he wishes it."

"And he will say that you are depending on him to command the escort,
and I must settle it with you!" complained Marian.  "And nobody really
thinks about me at all."

"My dear, it will be an excellent opportunity for Charles to bring
himself into notice, whether the progress of the mission is peaceable
or not.  And if he goes, you and Honour shall have a run up to the
hills, if Lady Antony will be so good as to look after you.  But at
present it is quite uncertain whether a mission will be despatched at
all.  We may have war instead."

"Well, I think you might send one of Honour's young men, papa," said
Marian, half crying.  "She doesn't care about either of them, and if
anything happened to Charley I should die."

"Oh, my dear, we will hope she cares for Mr Gerrard," interposed Lady
Cinnamond hastily, seeing her husband's brow grow thunderous.  Marian
had transgressed the unwritten law which forbade the General's
womankind to meddle in the slightest degree with his professional
appointments, and had added to her misdeeds by weeping.

"She doesn't.  I don't believe she has it in her.  You'll see,
to-morrow," and with this Parthian shot Mrs Cowper quitted the room in
tears, meanly leaving her mother to allay the tempest she had raised.
On the morrow poor Lady Cinnamond was almost tempted to think as she
did with regard to Honour, for Gerrard, putting his fortune to the
touch without, as he assured himself, the slightest hope of success,
met the same fate as his friend.  Perhaps his way of broaching the
subject was unfortunate.

"Our lamentations over Charteris were rather premature, weren't they?"
he asked her, with an assumption of lightness which suited her mood as
little as his.

"How could you mislead me so dreadfully about him?" demanded Honour,
moved to indignation by her wrongs.

"Mislead you?  Why, I never said a word that wasn't true!"  Gerrard was
unfeignedly surprised.

"I suppose not," she admitted unwillingly.  "But you dwelt only on his
good points, and I--I almost thought I had misjudged him.  But when I
saw him there was no difference.  He brought a smell of smoke into the
room with him, and talked slang, just as he always did."

"But why should one recall obvious things like that?  Would you have
had me try to belittle him to you--if you must think worse of a man for
such trifles as smoking and using slang?"

"Trifles in your estimation, perhaps; not in mine."

"Well, at any rate it shows you can't care for him," said Gerrard
despairingly, "or you wouldn't notice them."

"I consider that remark extremely rude and uncalled-for," said Honour,
with spirit.  "You have no right whatever to pass judgment upon my
feelings."

"Pardon me, but how can I help it?  Perhaps you mean that if Bob left
off slang and smoking he would be all right?"

"And if I did, how would it concern you?"

"Oh, merely that I think you ought to tell him, or let me."

"You think he would do it?"

"Like winkin'.  Oh, I _beg_ your pardon.  I would, I know, just as I
would do any mortal thing you cared to ask me.  Ask me, Honour.  Can't
you give me a bit of hope?"

"How can I?  You would not be satisfied--either of you--if I said I
would marry you just to escape from unpleasantness of this kind.  I
mean"--hastily, as she caught sight of his face--"I dislike so much
hurting people's feelings, but with you and Mr Charteris I seem able to
do nothing else.  If you would only both take my answer as final, and
let us all be happy and friendly together as we were before this idea
came into your minds!"

"We weren't," said Gerrard doggedly.  "I was introduced to you two days
before Charteris was, and all that time I was in terror, guessing what
would happen as soon as he saw you.  And sure enough, he raved about
you all night, until I put a stop to it by throwing things across the
room."

"Please don't tell me things of that kind," said Honour, her colour
rising.  "They do not interest me.  You have a great influence over Mr
Charteris.  Why not use it to make him see things sensibly, and give up
these attempts?"

"Because I wouldn't do it myself.  If you could say that you felt the
least kindness towards one of us, then the other would withdraw--or
towards any one else, then both of us, I hope, would do the proper
thing and leave him in peace.  But while there's still a fair
chance--why, I shall hold on, and so will old Bob, if I know anything
of him."

"That is exactly what Mr Charteris said," remarked Honour musingly.
"Well, I am very sorry, and I wish I could get you to look at things
more sensibly, but really it is not my fault."

"You can't even hold out any hope for the future?"

"It would merely be unkindness if I did.  If you would only----"

"No, please, that's enough," said Gerrard, and withdrew.  Charteris was
waiting for him on their verandah.

"By the look of gloom on your ingenuous countenance, Hal----" he began.

"Oh, _bus, bus_[1]!" said Gerrard wearily.  "Yes, old boy, we're in the
same boat, as before."

"There's one comfort, she won't get her bachelor Governor-General for
some time," remarked Charteris; "for this man Blairgowrie that they're
sending out is married."

"I hate stale jokes!" muttered Gerrard.

"You seem to have come off rather worse than I did.  Look here, Hal;
I'm going to propose a modification of our agreement.  I've had first
try this time, and next time you shall have it, without drawing lots.
It's precious hard on you, if you are the right man, that you should
only be able to approach her when she's already been rubbed the wrong
way by my impudent pretensions."

"I ain't the right man.  No one is.  But you're a good chap, Bob, and
I'm not too proud to accept with thanks.  At this moment, I confess it,
I don't feel as if I should ever summon up courage to come to the
scratch again, but no doubt it'll be different in a year or so."

"I believe you, my boy--especially when you know that if you don't take
your chance, I shall.  But what stately form comes this way?  Our Mr
James, as I live!"

"I happened to be passing, and I thought I would look in to tell you
that it has been settled about Agpur," said James Antony, depositing
his massive form in the chair vacated for him.  "What! ain't there room
for me unless you stand, Charteris?  Shocking the luxury in which you
young fellows live nowadays!  Well, I'm glad the business is finished
somehow, since my brother will perhaps be contented to trot peaceably
back to the hills, but I can't say that your friend Sher Singh has got
anything like his deserts.  He is to be recognised and, within
reasonable limits, supported, provided he fulfils certain not very
onerous conditions.  Nisbet is to visit Agpur City and settle the
preliminaries of the frontier business and the affair of the Rani Gulab
Kur's jointure, and will probably remain there as Resident.  Well,
well! if Sher Singh ain't loyal to us in future, he ought to be!"

"I hope Nisbet will have a strong escort, sir," Gerrard ventured to
say, emboldened by the speaker's evident, though unexpressed,
dissatisfaction with the arrangement.  James Antony looked at him
severely from under bushy brows.  His loyalty to his more brilliant
brother never permitted him the luxury of criticising his decisions in
public, and he had gone farther than he intended in allowing his
feelings to appear.

"The escort will be sufficient, of course.  Charley Cowper goes in
command--has special leave for the purpose.  They start next week."

"Then I shall have to hurry back to Darwan," said Charteris.

"Just as well you should be on the spot," agreed James Antony.  "You go
to Habshiabad, I suppose, Gerrard?"

"I suppose so, sir."

"Precious little enthusiasm over the prospect, I see.  Well, it is a
come-down for the acting-Resident of Agpur."

"That was entirely a thing out of the usual run, sir." Gerrard roused
himself in self-defence.  "I was warned not to expect to continue on
that footing, and I didn't for a moment."

"I can find you plenty of work here, if you prefer it.  Ah, I see," he
laughed.  "The woman is spoiling Eden, as usual.  Get married, get
married, and you'll think no more about her."

"Thank you for your advice, sir.  Your own experience?" asked Charteris.

James Antony looked first furious, then almost contrite, and finally
gave way to a huge burst of laughter.  "Curious how one falls in with
other people's way of talking, when one knows it is absolutely false!"
he said.  "No, it is not my experience, and you know it, you young dog.
I married my wife because I couldn't do without her, and it has been
the same story from that day to this.  That's my experience, and you
can't do better than follow it."

"But then one of us would have to put the other out of the way--eh,
Hal?" said Charteris dolefully, as Mr James departed, his great
shoulders still heaving with laughter.



When Mr Nisbet and Captain Cowper left Ranjitgarh the following week,
Gerrard went part of the way with them.  They travelled by water, their
respective escorts marching by land, and he would have a day or two to
wait at one of the riverside towns until his men came up.  The hot
weather would soon begin, and the river was low, so that the progress
of the boats was agreeably diversified by frequent groundings, now on
the shore and now on a sandbank, and the heat and the glare of the
water furnished an excuse for much grumbling.  Nisbet was a quiet,
inoffensive man, who found perpetual occupation and solace in writing,
reading, re-reading and annotating innumerable documents, of which he
seemed to carry a whole library about with him, but his contentment was
powerless to infect his companions.  Captain Cowper was low-spirited
owing to the parting from his wife, for after inducing Sir Edmund and
Lady Antony to postpone their return to the hills for two days that she
might see him off, Marian had disgraced herself and her parents by
making a scene--though happily not in public--at her husband's
departure.  Her frantic entreaties to him not to go, or if he must go,
to take her with him, her dire forebodings of evil, had made it very
hard for him to leave her; and when neither her father's anger, nor
Lady Cinnamond's warnings that she would do herself harm, were able to
quiet her sobs, Captain Cowper had been obliged to tear himself away
from her clinging hands without a proper farewell.  It was no comfort
to picture her lonely misery in the hills, with no one but Honour, of
whose tenderness he had the very lowest opinion, to act as confidant,
and her husband spent many hours daily in writing letters, and making
sketches of any object of interest that offered itself, for her benefit.

Little as he had in common with his two companions, Gerrard dreaded the
moment when he would step ashore on the left bank of the Bari, thence
to strike southwards and take up his new work at Habshiabad.  The
absolute isolation from men of his own colour which this would entail
was not a prospect he could face with any pleasure.  From Charteris he
would now be separated by the whole breadth of Agpur, unless they both
journeyed far to the south-west, where for a short distance the
boundaries of Darwan and Habshiabad ran along opposite banks of the
river Tindar, while of Nisbet and Cowper in Agpur itself it was
unlikely that he would see anything, as the frontier dispute with which
they were to deal concerned the other side of the state.  Moreover, it
was impossible not to feel that his work had been taken out of his
hands and given to them to do.  Whatever the situation in Agpur might
be, he had contributed, however involuntarily, to make it what it was,
and others were now about to take it in hand, without the advantage of
his past experience, and with the drawback of inheriting whatever odium
attached to him.

The evening before they were to reach Naoghat, Nawab Sadiq Ali's port
on the Bari, and separate, they fastened up to the bank at a spot where
there was no village, but only a few poor huts, and where a patch of
marshy jungle held out the promise of wildfowl.  Nisbet was busy with
his office Munshi, completing a catalogue of papers relating to the
affairs of Agpur, but Captain Cowper and Gerrard took their guns, and
set off along the bank in opposite directions.  The sport was poor, and
after shooting a brace and a half of birds and walking a long distance,
Gerrard was warned by the gathering darkness to retrace his steps.  A
white mass at the foot of a tree in one of the drier parts of the bog
attracted his attention in the distance, and on coming near enough to
see distinctly he found it was a respectably dressed elderly man
sitting there motionless.  As Gerrard approached, the old man rose and
salaamed courteously, and disclosed himself as the scribe of the Rani
Gulab Kur.

"O master of many hands, how is it I find you here?" asked Gerrard in
surprise.  "Are you waiting for a tiger to come and make a meal of you?"

"Nay, sahib, it is your honour I am awaiting.  I bear a message from my
mistress for your ear alone."

"But is her Highness in this neighbourhood?  I should wish to wait on
her and pay my respects."

"Her Highness is far away, sahib, but she does not forget the gratitude
due to your honour for your faithfulness to the dead.  When we passed
through Ranjitgarh, it was told her that there was a project of
marriage between your honour and the daughter of the General Sahib with
the white hair, and she bade this slave note down the name, that she
might, if opportunity offered, do good to the General Sahib and his
family for your honour's sake.  Hearing, then, that the Sahib who
commands the troops going to Agpur is sister's husband to the daughter
of the General Sahib, she judged it well to send a warning."

"Her Highness can hardly be so far away, after all, if she heard this
news in time to send you to meet me here, O venerable one," said
Gerrard.

"I speak but as I am bidden, sahib.  Her Highness entreats you to warn
that Sahib and his friend to put no trust in the fair words of Sher
Singh--and this not so much because he is treacherous, though
treacherous he is to the very depths of hell, as because he is weak.
He sees it is not to his interest to provoke a war with the English at
this moment, but he is entirely dependent on his Sirdars--by reason of
his faulty title to the throne, and his non-fulfilment of the promises
made to them before his accession--and they have no care for him and
his safety.  They have sent out messengers again, since those sent
throughout Granthistan returned without promises of help, and are
seeking to enlist Abd-ur-Rashid Khan of Ethiopia, promising him the
city of Shah Bagh, which is to him as the apple of his eye, if he will
invade Granthistan from the north when the rising begins.  Let the
Sahibs then beware, for blood once shed is not to be gathered up from
the ground, and Sher Singh is not the man to defend his guests if the
city be howling for their death."

"I will warn them," said Gerrard.  "And now come and lodge in our camp
for this night, and in the morning go your way and carry my respectful
thanks to her Highness."

"It is forbidden, sahib.  I depart immediately, to report to my
mistress that I have performed her errand."

"So be it, then.  Carry my deepest salaams to her Highness," and
Gerrard went on towards the camp.  After supper he told Nisbet and
Cowper of the warning he had received for them.  It caused no surprise.

"It's quite true about Abd-ur-Rashid," said Nisbet.  "Ronaldson caught
one of his messengers sneaking about in his camp near Shah Bagh, trying
to corrupt his escort.  That may have been in view of this very plan
for a general rising, but he thought it was one of the usual schemes
for getting hold of Shah Bagh again."

"If Abd-ur-Rashid and the Granthis can manage to agree, we are likely
to come off badly," said Cowper.

"But they won't," said Nisbet.  "The thieves are bound to fall out."

"After a time," said Gerrard, "but they may make it very unpleasant for
you first.  And suppose your Granthis take sides with the Agpuris?  I
took Granthis into Agpur and brought them out again, but then I had had
them for some time first.  I wish you knew more of your escort, and
they of you."

"My dear fellow," said Cowper, yawning, "we know at least that no
Granthi is to be trusted.  They are a set of _nimuk harams_,[2] and we
shan't trust them.  Sir Edmund chooses to trust Sher Singh, as he would
any native that ever walked, but that's all the goodness of his heart,
and we ain't going to be led away by it.  Forewarned is forearmed."



[1] Enough.

[2] Perfidious, false to their salt.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE MILD CONCERNS OF ORDINARY LIFE.

All too soon came the hour when Gerrard stood on the dilapidated
landing-stage at Naoghat, and waved farewell to his travelling
companions, after receiving Nisbet's urgent directions to send on at
once any despatches that might arrive while he remained there, and
Cowper's parting request to give his compliments to the old Habshi.
This disrespectful term applied to Nawab Sadiq Ali, who traced his
descent to a famous naval commander, a Habshi or Abyssinian, in the
service of one of the Mogul Emperors.  So much did the Badshah
appreciate the society of his admiral that he grudged him to the sea,
but compromised matters by bestowing on him a _jaghir_ with a river
frontage, which the Habshi's descendants, in the break-up of the
empire, contrived to erect into the independent state of Habshiabad.
Sadiq Ali was proud to reckon himself an old ally of the British, his
father having stood fast by them during the Mahratta troubles of the
early years of the nineteenth century, and a hostility equally ancient
existed between him and his Granthi neighbours across the Bari, more
especially those in Agpur.  Partab Singh and he had enjoyed many a
sharp tussle before they relapsed into reluctant peace, owing to the
fact that their forces were so nearly matched as to render it useless
for either to attack the other, and to the absence of border fighting
during late years the Kawab attributed the deterioration observable in
the spirit of his subjects.  A kind of dry-rot appeared to have set in,
under the influence of which the state was suffering, not only in
military, but also in civil matters, and this had culminated in a
regrettable incident which had only recently occurred.

When the Granthi War broke out, Sadiq Ali, equally unexpected and
undesired, hastened to join the banners of the Commander-in-Chief with
his horde of undisciplined followers, never doubting that he would be
received with the delight such an accession of strength would have
caused forty years before.  But the military affairs of British India
were differently organised nowadays, and native princes as allies were
regarded with disappointing indifference, so that the bad condition of
the Nawab's troops, rather than the good feeling he had displayed,
attracted attention.  When at a critical moment the advance of a
British brigade was delayed by the Habshiabadis' plundering in its
front, the Commander-in-Chief, who had learnt his soldiering in the
Peninsula, lost his temper and swore at Sadiq Ali--who understood his
meaning, if not his words--and threatened to clear his men out of the
way with grape.  The insulted Nawab withdrew his troops at once, and
was making the best of his way with them to the enemy's camp, when he
was overtaken by Major Edmund Antony, who, foreseeing the danger that
would be caused by his defection, took upon himself the responsibility
of speaking him fair and persuading him to delay.  No other man in
India could have induced Sadiq Ali to consent to spoil the effect of
his dramatic reprisals by encamping for one night instead of carrying
his indignation and his army over immediately to his hereditary
enemies.  Even the political officer whom all natives revered was
obliged to take his stand alone before the advancing cavalry, and to
warn the Nawab that if he joined the Granthi headquarters that night,
it must be over his body, but he succeeded in his mission.  The tents
were pitched, and all night Major Antony rode backwards and forwards
between the two peppery veterans, each of whom began by vowing that he
was well pleased to see the last of the other, and would never exchange
a word with him again.  Since they both assured Major Antony that he
was the sole human being they would have permitted to address a
remonstrance to them on the subject, it was clear that they were agreed
on one point, and the emissary laboured, not without success, to extend
the area of agreement.  With what every one in the British camp averred
was superhuman ingenuity, he induced the Commander-in-Chief to
apologise for his language, and to soothe the Nawab's wounded feelings
by a reference in general orders, while Sadiq Ali voluntarily placed a
body of picked troops under British command, and withdrew with the rest
to his state.  In the moment of his success Major Antony held out hopes
that an officer might eventually be spared to reorganise and train the
Habshiabad army, and since he had been at Ranjitgarh Sadiq Ali had
reminded him of his promise at least five times before he had any one
to send.  Now at last Gerrard was available, and a deputation of high
officials received him at Naoghat to express the Nawab's delight in his
arrival.

Sadiq Ali's impatience to behold his new adviser could scarcely brook
the delay caused by waiting for the escort to come up, and Gerrard
became accustomed to the sight of exhausted messengers clattering in in
clouds of dust to demand that he should start at once.  But his dignity
as Sir Edmund Antony's representative forbade this, and when he rode
into Habshiabad at last it was in the midst of his picked troop of
Granthis, who were obviously scornful of the military display with
which the Nawab was prepared to welcome them.  In his anxiety to
improve his army, poor old Sadiq Ali had handed it over of late to a
drunken European adventurer, who asserted that he had been in Ajit
Singh's service, but whom Gerrard suspected, from certain peculiarities
of equipment that he had introduced, of being a deserter from some
Scottish regiment.  This suspicion was deepened when it appeared that
General Desdichado, as he called himself, had recently been seized with
illness of such a severe character that it confined him entirely to his
house, and even to his zenana--whither, of course, no intrusive visitor
could follow him.  After vain attempts to obtain an interview, Gerrard
thought it well to leave his predecessor in peace with his
arrack-bottle, and take the army in hand from the beginning.  He had
not expected, when he heard they had a European instructor, to find
them ignorant even of the rudiments of drill as he understood it, and
he was confronted with the difficulty that he could not possibly drill
them all himself, and nothing would induce them to take orders from any
of his Granthis.  He thought of asking for a few Mohammedan
non-commissioned officers from the force at Ranjitgarh, but before he
could do so, Sadiq Ali, who followed him about in a state of admiring
wonder and affection, learned his difficulty and promised to meet it.

Gerrard had no very high hopes in this direction when he appeared at
the grand review arranged in honour of Queen Victoria's birthday, and
attended by all the Nawab's subsidiary chiefs and their followers as
well as by his own army, but his eye was quickly caught by a large body
of mounted men whose ordered movements contrasted strongly with the
free and easy methods of the Habshiabadis.  There was something
familiar in the aspect of the leader, and when he rode past the
saluting-point Gerrard recognised him at once.  It was Rukn-ud-din, and
of the two companies which he led one was composed of Rajputs, and the
other of the faithful remnant of the Agpur bodyguard.  Sadiq Ali smiled
to behold his ally's surprise, but declined mysteriously to say what
Rukn-ud-din and his men were doing on his parade-ground.  Jirad Sahib
would doubtless wish to make inquiries for himself, he said, and
Komadan Rukn-ud-din had already asked leave to pay his respects to him.
In the interval between the review and the banquet which was to wind up
the day, therefore, a gorgeous band of horsemen thronged the approach
to Gerrard's quarters, and Rukn-ud-din presented his officers, the
chief of whom was the Rajput Amrodh Chand, who was a cousin of the
Rani's.  Gerrard touched the sword-hilts they held forth, entertained
them with coffee and conversation of a strictly non-committal
character, and then withdrew from the verandah into his office for a
few moments' confidential talk with their leader.

"You are surely not one of the Nawab's Komadans, Rukn-ud-din?" he asked
him eagerly.

"Nay, sahib.  I still eat the salt of the widow of my master."

"Then it is the Rani Sahiba who is entertaining these troops of yours?
But is she not far away?"

"So far away as to be between this place and the river that parts it
from Agpur, sahib."

"This is very serious."  It was quite certain that Mr James Antony
would not approve of the Rani's taking up her residence so close to her
former capital, when she was supposed to be at Benares.  "You know that
I must report it to the Resident Sahib at Ranjitgarh?"

"Your honour will do as it is decreed you should do," said the
Mohammedan tranquilly.

"But what is her Highness's object?"

"To avenge the blood of her house, sahib.  She devotes herself wholly
to the practice of austerities, after the manner of the idolaters.  The
women say that to behold her is to behold the corpse of one that has
died in famine-time."

"You cannot mean that she is wholly destitute?  Yet what is she living
upon?  Her allowance has not been paid to her, because she has not
subscribed to the conditions upon which it was granted."

"Her Highness will never subscribe to those conditions, sahib.  She
will neither receive money at the hand of the murderer, nor covenant to
bequeath him a single anna that she possesses.  For her maintenance,
she received from Antni Sahib's brother at Ranjitgarh the ten thousand
rupees your honour carried with you to Adamkot from the treasury, and
of his grace he added to them, by way of an advance, a sum sufficient
to enable her to perform her pilgrimage to Kashi."  Gerrard suppressed
a smile when he realised that James Antony's eagerness to avert
political complications by getting the Rani safely out of Granthistan
had thus over-reached itself by giving her the means of remaining on
its borders.  "The sum was not a great one, to maintain the warriors
from her father's state who have vowed their swords to her vengeance,
as well as those who have remained faithful to their lord's memory, but
it will suffice for a month or two longer," added Rukn-ud-din; "and it
is the word of her Highness that this will be long enough.  The time is
near at hand."

"Will her Highness receive me?" asked Gerrard hastily, planning strong
remonstrances in his mind.  "You say she has returned to _pardah_?"

"She broke _pardah_ once, sahib, designing to expiate her shame when
she had seen justice done, but death and justice were alike denied her.
She will break it again when she leads her troops in the field against
the murderer, and that day she will rejoin her lord."

"Now look here, Rukn-ud-din; you are a sensible man and a follower of
Islam.  I want you to do your best to induce her Highness to allow me
to pay my respects through the curtain, so that I may try to get her to
lay aside these intentions."

"How could she do other than as she plans, sahib?  It is well for each
to observe the customs of his own people.  But I have a word for you
from her Highness's mouth.  'Entreat Jirad Sahib not to give me the
pain of shutting my gates against him, for I have no mind to be teased
with formulas of ceremony.  But when he takes the field against him
that may not be named, then let him send for me without apology, and I
will come at the head of my troops.  Until then let him use them as he
will in fitting the Nawab's army for the fight.'"

"And right glad I should be to have you," said Gerrard heartily.  "But
I cannot keep the Rani's residence a secret from Antony Sahib and his
brother.  At any moment Sher Singh may discover it, and accuse them,
though guiltless, of playing him false."

"I think he will not discover it, sahib.  We have a short way with
spies in Habshiabad.  But your honour will do as you think best, and
the men of my company are at your disposal to do with as you will."

The question was a perplexing one, and after dismissing Rukn-ud-din,
Gerrard considered it carefully.  He decided at last to write to James
Antony that it had come to his knowledge that the Rani was residing in
the Habshiabad state, and that he could if necessary convey to her the
documents awaiting her signature, though she refused to admit him to
her presence.  Having thus transferred the burden of responsibility to
other and eminently capable shoulders, he turned with an easier
conscience to take advantage of the help offered him in his task.  On
the very day after the review, Sadiq Ali's regiments, some swollen to
unwieldy size, others depleted to mere skeletons, were thoroughly
overhauled, and the ten smartest men picked out of each hundred.  These
were turned over to Rukn-ud-din's Mohammedans to be drilled, and after
a preliminary course set to drill their fellows.  The higher education
of the picked men proceeded side by side with the elementary training
of the rank and file, while Gerrard's Granthis and the Rani's Rajputs,
debarred from serving as instructors, proved most useful in
representing alternately hostile armies and better disciplined allies,
when something resembling manoeuvres was attempted.  The work was hard
and incessant, especially as the hot weather was now running its
course, but Gerrard welcomed it as tending to divert his mind from the
unsatisfactory state of his personal affairs.  The Nawab was overjoyed
to see his army really being licked into shape, and took to attending
the training in disguise--invariably discovering himself by frantic
abuse and promises of horrible punishment when anything went wrong.
Even General Desdichado, still officially confined to his bed and
unable to receive even a visit of condolence, mounted a telescope on
his roof, so it was whispered to Gerrard, and watched the proceedings
with breathless interest.  This war-fever could hardly last, and
Gerrard wondered when it would begin to die down.  The expected
outbreak at Agpur had not occurred, and in a short time Cowper's leave
would be up and another man would take his place as commander of the
escort.  Both James Antony's political forebodings and the Rani's
prophecies were proving unfounded.

Now came a messenger with a letter from Charteris, written in that
extreme south-western corner of his dominions where Darwan and
Habshiabad faced one another across the Tindar.


"Here I am, old boy, gazing hungrily across to you, while Tindar rolls
between.  Come and pay me a flying visit, I adjure you.  You shall
sleep each night on your own bank of the river if your scrupulous
conscience won't let you quit your own state without leave, but take
pity on an unfortunate chum doomed to go crusading--castle-destroying,
that is--in the hot weather.  I promised you one of Vixen's pups--as
nice little beggars all of them as you could wish to behold--and who am
I to presume to choose for you?  I am entertaining so many dogs
nowadays that I expect to be eaten out of house and home, so it's
serious, you see.  Happy thought--start a pack of hounds!  That's
another reason why you should come.  I can't offer to show you at the
present season 'the sport of kings, the image of war without its guilt,
and only five-and-twenty per cent. of its danger,' but at least we can
draw up an uncommon fine constitution for the hunt.  I know you'll
object that the conjunction of two such stars of chivalry as yourself
and yours truly in the same firmament has hitherto boded war, red war,
but was that our fault?  Surely it was merely a proof of our innate
foreknowledge of events that we managed to be in each other's
neighbourhood just when united action was needed.  Besides, there's no
combustible material in these parts.  That's waiting for the week after
next, when the Agpur frontier business comes up for settlement, and I
have to be back in the Adamkot direction.  Come and see me, Hal, if
it's only for a talk and a smoke.  Upon my word, I am des-s-s-perately
lonely!  Bring a tail as long as MacTavish's if you like, and we'll
indoctrinate them with the science of fox-hunting.  Your old Hubshee
would be something of a Jorrocks figure if we stuck him into a hunt
uniform, I'll be bound,--Yours,

ROBERT.

"_P.S._--Admire my self-restraint in keeping back so far the
all-important information that mine will of course be a _Bobbery_ pack."


Neither his friend's pathetic loneliness, nor the inducements he so
lavishly offered, would have tempted Gerrard to leave the capital had
it not been that he had ascertained from the Nawab that the _jaghir_
which he had granted to Rukn-ud-din as the Rani's representative lay in
the direction in which Charteris was now to be found.  James Antony had
replied with considerable asperity to the letter giving news of her
whereabouts, as was only natural, since his agents had for a month been
searching for her vainly in the neighbourhood of Benares.  He sent the
document which had been prepared for her signature, and directed
Gerrard to use all possible means to obtain a personal interview, in
which he was to assure her that no further steps would be taken to
secure the payment of her jointure until she disbanded her troops and
withdrew into British territory, where a suitable residence would be
provided for her.  This, as the natives would have phrased it, was an
order, and Gerrard prepared to carry it out immediately, though without
much hope of success.  The Nawab acquiesced reluctantly in his leaving
the city for a week, but was consoled by the prospect of his finding a
noticeable improvement in the army on his return, and he calculated
that by travelling chiefly at night he could do the journey
comfortably, and secure a day or more with Charteris.

The Rani's reception of Mr Antony's messenger was much what he had
expected.  She had taken up her abode in a half-ruined fort, which had
been repaired sufficiently for the purposes of defence, and was
garrisoned by a second company of Rajputs, and Gerrard was refused
admission at the closed gates.  His urgent messages brought the old
scribe down to parley with him, but the reproaches he addressed to the
Rani for neglecting the monitions of her husband's chosen councillor
were met by counter-upbraidings on the score of his neglect of the
Rani's own expressed wish to be left unmolested.  She would not receive
him, she would not disband her troops nor retire into British
territory, and least of all would she sign the document which was to
obtain from Sher Singh the payment of her jointure in return for her
promise to leave to him any savings of which she might die possessed.
In these circumstances, all that Gerrard could do was to leave the
paper for her consideration, with the most persuasive letter that he
and Munshi Somwar Mal could frame in collaboration, and announce that
he hoped to find her Highness in a better mind when he returned in
three or four days' time.

If his reception here was disappointing, there was nothing lacking in
the warmth of Charteris's welcome when he landed at his camp from the
undignified conveyance of a charpoy supported on _mashaks_[1]--a small
fleet of these vessels being in readiness to carry him and his train
across the river.  The puppies were duly exhibited after supper, and
Gerrard made his choice, and then, though it was still early, for the
crossing had to be made by daylight, Charteris dismissed him to sleep
off his fatigues, promising that he should be called well in the middle
of the night.

"To-morrow is a blank day as far as the administration of justice is
concerned," he said.  "I have threatened all my petitioners with
atrocious pains and penalties if they so much as show their noses in
camp, and you and I will go for a picnic.  I know a bank where the wild
thyme don't grow, but where one of my reformed robbers has a garden and
a spring of sweet water, and will make us welcome to enjoy _kaf_[2] for
a while."

Gerrard had his doubts as to the feasibility of this programme when he
was dressing the next morning by the light of a candle-end stuck into
the neck of a bottle.  A whisper outside the tent reached his ears.

"Brother, is the Sahib awake?"

"Which Sahib, O foolish one?"

"Our Sahib, the red Sahib, the mad Sahib."

"Aye, he is awake, but he rides forth before dawn."

"Bad for Bob!" thought Gerrard, as a rustle denoted the withdrawal of
the questioner, but he had not the heart to tell his friend of his
fears when they met for _choti haziri_, and he saw his high spirits.

"We'll take the dogs with us a little way--do the beggars no end of
good--and send 'em back to camp before the sun's up," said Charteris,
as they mounted.  "'Give the hounds a trot out by way of exercise'--eh?"

"Well, I hope it won't end in 'Dinner lost! 'ounds lost! self lost--all
lost together!'  What d'ye think of calling the hunt, old boy?"

"The Cut-'em-downs, if you're going to ride over my hounds," said
Charteris, as a heedless puppy blundered in front of Gerrard's horse.
"And call you Crasher."

"All right, Brusher!" laughed Gerrard, as they rode out into the cool
darkness, an anxious dog-boy having extricated his charge.  But before
they reached the outskirts of the camp, the way was barred by a row of
silent natives, some of them holding out papers, others extending empty
hands.

"What's this?" demanded Charteris ferociously.

"_Dohai_, sahib, _dohai_[3]!" was the general cry.

"Well, I'll do you justice to-morrow, as I told you.  Didn't I forbid
you to come to me to-day?"

"Alas, sahib, a day is but as a moment to the great, but to the poor it
is even as eternity," said an old man, who seemed to be regarded as
spokesman.

"It would be a different tale if I wanted you to do anything for me in
a hurry," growled Charteris.  "What do you say, Hal?"

"Oh, you have spoilt your subjects by dealing out justice too easily,"
said Gerrard, "so you can't in conscience refuse it them now.  Let us
have our ride, and go back at your usual hour.  The picnic must go.
You can accommodate me with a seat on the bench, and I'll pick holes in
your law."

"That you may well do."  Charteris paused to give the necessary
directions to the suppliants and his Munshis, and resumed as they rode
on.  "My law has too much common-sense about it to recommend itself to
your conventional mind.  Why, t'other day I had to decide the ownership
of a disputed piece of ground--as hard swearing as ever I heard, and
trains of mounted adherents and sympathisers riding with us to view the
plot, and perjuring themselves for their respective sides.  I saw it
was six of one and half-a-dozen of t'other, so when we were returning,
precious slow and stately, I gave a sudden view-halloa! and started
off.  They were bound to come too, and I should have died of laughing
to see those old liars bumping along and running foul of one another if
I hadn't been too busy.  I had the claimants one on each side of me,
and by judiciously boring either quad. when it seemed inclined to draw
ahead, I kept 'em fairly level.  When they had had as much as I thought
good for them, I pulled up, and several old codgers went over their
nags' heads, of course.  But all I said was that as the claimants had
come in level, it was clear the land was to be divided between them,
and we went back and did it there and then.  They had a shawl apiece to
sweeten the bargain, and I made a feast for the hangers-on, so
everybody was pleased."

"That's the sort of thing that makes them call you the mad sahib," said
Gerrard.  "Wonder they care to depend on you."

"That's only because you forget that 'mad' don't mean the same to them
as to us.  All Sahibs are mad, of course--and say that I am a little
madder than most.  But all mad people are directly inspired by Heaven.
Therefore the madder I am, the more surely am I inspired.  Twig?"

"It's a pretty deduction.  I wonder if Sadiq Ali would set me down as
inspired if I stood on my head before him when I go back?"

"No, because you couldn't do it!" said Charteris wickedly.  "Takes some
practice even to be effectively mad, my boy."

Whereupon Gerrard rode at him with upraised whip, and sensible
conversation was at a discount until they returned to camp.  Then the
long hot morning was devoted to hearing petitions and trying cases.
Charteris and Gerrard sat in one of the tents, with the complainants
under the awning before them, and the Munshis on the ground at the
side, while the witnesses perjured themselves and contradicted each
other with equal gusto.  In the course of the proceedings a panting
messenger pushed his way through the throng carrying a red official
bag, the colour showing that the letter it contained was urgent.
Charteris opened it, and it seemed to Gerrard that his tanned face
paled ever so little as he read.  Then he looked up sharply at the
messenger, whose eyes were fixed eagerly upon him.

"Sit down in the corner there, and wait until this case is finished,"
he said.  "Hal, I daresay you will like to look at this."  He passed
the letter lightly to Gerrard, but gave his fingers a warning grip
under cover of the paper.



[1] Inflated skins.

[2] Perfect leisure.

[3] Justice!




CHAPTER XVII.

THE ISSUES OF AN AWFUL MOMENT.

The letter was written roughly in pencil on a large sheet of rough and
discoloured paper:--


"To Lieutenant Robert Charteris, at Dera Gauleeb Khan or wherever he
may be.

"MY DEAR CHARTERIS,--I am sorry to say that the fat's in the fire at
last.  This morning the Rajah invited us to go out with him to his
garden-house, but did not send an elephant for us, as we expected.
However, we rode to meet him, with a small escort.  Honestly, I cannot
tell whether he is to blame for what happened, or not, but at the
beginning it certainly looked like an accident.  There was a certain
amount of confusion when we met on the way to the city gate, and the
respective escorts found some difficulty in clearing a path through the
crowds.  Suddenly a wild fanatic of some sort--an Akaulee I should
say--dashed at me from behind with a sword, and fairly knocked me off
my horse.  I have a cut on the head, but my hat turned the blade.
There was a horrid tumult, and soldiers and people were pressed this
way and that, forcing Cowper away from me.  I got two or three more
blows as I lay on the ground, but one of our horsemen dragged me to my
feet.  I saw that Sher Sing's hotties had turned tail and were in full
retreat, but it did not occur to me he was leaving us to our fate until
his horsemen charged back through the crowd and made straight for
Cowper.  He was cut down in an instant, and I saw them hacking at him
before I could rally the escort.  When we got through to him things
looked pretty bad, for the horsemen withdrew only to come down on us
afresh, and the crowd were siding with them, while all sorts of
missiles began to rain from the roofs.  Then old Sudda Sookhee turned
up and threw himself into the breach--ordered the troops back,
harangued the mob, and took us up on his own hotty.  He thought it
unsafe for us to go back to the Residency, in which I quite agreed with
him, in view of the attitude of Sher Sing and his guards, so I decided
that we should throw ourselves into the tomb of Rutton Sing outside the
walls, and hold it till assistance arrived.  Without Sudda Sookhee's
support we could never have got through the gate, and as it was, they
fired at us with matchlocks from the walls.  He took us straight to the
tomb, and then hurried back to see how things were going at the
Residency.  Before noon we were joined by the rest of our escort, who
had been turned out of the fort without ceremony, but allowed to march
through the city unmolested.  The native apothecary has done his best
for poor Cowper and me.  My hurts are merely scratches, but he is badly
cut about, though quite cheerful.  I need not ask you to relieve us as
soon as possible, as you will know that Rutton Sing's tomb is not a
first-rate position for defence.  I have sent a warm remonstrance to
the Rajah, demanding that he shall visit us in person and express his
regret for the outrage, but I repeat frankly that I do not understand
his attitude.  Still, you will see the importance of keeping a stiff
upper lip.  Cowper begs that Mrs Cowper may not be alarmed about him,
as he expects (he says) to be up and about again before you turn up.
We rely on you to arrive with all convenient speed.  It is possible
that the situation is more serious than appears.--Very sincerely yours,

RICHD. NISBET."


Gerrard read the letter through, turning the paper this way and that to
find the carefully numbered additions written in the margin or crossing
the sheet.  Poor Nisbet! how thoroughly he must have been thrown off
his balance before he would consent to send off a rough draft like this
instead of making a fair copy--such was his first involuntary
reflection.  Then his mind awakened suddenly to a realisation of the
perilous plight of the two men and their escort.  Ratan Singh's tomb!
it was the very tomb in the grove, within sight of the walls of Agpur,
where he himself had purposed to make a hopeless stand over Rajah
Partab Singh's dead body, in defence of Partab Singh's wife and son,
and where Charteris had appeared in the nick of time to save him.  The
place could not be held, there was no hope of that, even if it were
properly provisioned, and the letter was dated two days ago.  If Sher
Singh were indeed a traitor--and his conduct would need a good deal of
explanation if it was to be ascribed to mere cowardice--Nisbet and
Cowper's position was more than serious, it was desperate.  And there
sat Charteris, listening with knitted brows to the lucubrations of the
witnesses in this dispute over stolen cattle, pulling them up sharply
when their flights of imagination became more than usually daring, and
apparently oblivious alike of the disappointed messenger squatting in
the corner and of the men relying upon him outside Agpur.  Gerrard's
breath came faster, and he wondered whether he could frame a plausible
excuse for getting out of the tent and starting immediately on his
return journey to Habshiabad.  If Charteris was at a loss what to do,
Sadiq Ali and the Rani would joyfully send every fighting man they
possessed to deal a blow at Sher Singh.  Suddenly Charteris turned
round.

"You are precious bored by all this, I can see," he said casually.
"Never mind; it will soon be over now.  Take a cigar," and as he held
out the case, his fingers again met Gerrard's with that warning
pressure.  His friend accepted the cheroot, and resigned himself to
further waiting.  It was not for long.  Charteris's brief summing-up
was masterly, so incisive, so searching, so constantly punctuated with
popular proverbs and familiar references to the domestic affairs of the
litigants, that it drew applause from both sides.  Then he pronounced
judgment, and the winning side rent the air with their shouts, while
the losing party threw dust on their heads and lamented that they had
ever been born.  They went off peacefully enough, however, and
fraternised with their late opponents over a sheep sent out to them by
Charteris, while the two Englishmen, alone at last, faced one another
in the hot shade of the tent.

"Bob, I don't think you realise how bad it is," said Gerrard hurriedly.
"They can't hold out in Ratan Singh's tomb if they are attacked with
anything like vigour.  We have lost too much time already."

"Steady, old boy.  No harm done.  There's no starting until just before
sunset, unless you think sunstroke all round would improve the
efficiency of the relieving force.  We have all afternoon for making
arrangements."

"But we have wasted a full hour when we might have been laying our
plans."

"Plans are laid all right.  Got 'em here," said Charteris, tapping his
forehead.  "What! you thought I was wholly engrossed in my family of
perjurers?  Purely mechanical, my boy--interest and interruptions and
all.  Brain working like clockwork at more than railroad speed the
entire time.  Everything cut and dried.  Start to-night for Dera Galib
to pick up my men.  But those two poor chaps must have a letter to
hearten them up at once.  The _kasid_ can move faster than we can, so
we'll have him in and question him a little before writing.  Must pay
our Mr James the compliment of passing on the news, and enlightening
him as to our intentions, too."

"Just tell me first what part you have given me.  Am I to accompany you
with such men as I have?"

"No, you are to ride back to Habshiabad hell-for-leather, and create a
diversion by crossing the Ghara with every man you can lay your hands
on.  Even if I get to the city in time, I shall have to fight my way
back through hostile country, so if you can draw off the army by an
imposing demonstration in the other direction, it may save all our
lives."

"Old boy, I did you an injustice," said Gerrard.

"Don't apologise, my boy--quite used to it.  Knew I could depend on
you, though."

The messenger, summoned into the tent, could do little more than
confirm the contents of the letter, though he was able to add that of
late the Agpuris had been urged by various fanatics to resist the
impending rectification of frontier, and that much bad feeling had been
displayed towards the Feringhees.  He added that when the escort were
turned out of the fort, rumour said that a conference was going on at
the palace, in which the war party were making every effort to bring
over Sher Singh completely to their side, assuring him that he had gone
too far to retreat when he left the two wounded Englishmen to the
tender mercies of his guards and the mob.

The hot hours of the afternoon were spent in issuing orders and in
writing.  A letter to Nisbet and Cowper, assuring them that immediate
help was on its way, and adjuring them in no circumstances to surrender
themselves to Sher Singh; a report addressed to James Antony, detailing
the alarming news, and adding that Charteris was on the point of
crossing the Tindar with a relieving force, and had requested support
from Habshiabad; a formal invitation to Sadiq Ali to allow his troops
to co-operate in the rescue of the Englishmen, and to Gerrard to
accompany them; a proclamation to be made throughout Darwan, announcing
the treachery of Sher Singh, and inviting suitable men to enlist for
the purpose of punishing it; orders to the subordinate officials in
various parts of the province to be on their guard against Agpuri
emissaries, and to enrol and train any native Darwanis who applied to
them; and--though these, indeed, were despatched first of
all--directions to the troops Charteris intended to take with him to be
ready to start at any hour.  As the news of the preparations leaked
out, deputations began to come in from villages and tribes to assure
Charteris of their loyalty and entreat him to lead them against the
perjured Sher Singh, and these had to be received, entertained by
proxy, and dismissed, at the cost of much impatience and loss of
precious time.  But while Charteris was thus engaged, Gerrard and the
Munshis prepared papers for his signature, and the writing work was all
finished before Gerrard and his followers went down to the river on
their return journey.  Charteris could not even come down to see him
off, much less accompany him across and ride a little way with him, as
he had intended, but they promised themselves a speedy meeting before
Agpur--perhaps even in the palace itself, if the Rani's prophecy was
about to be fulfilled.

The men who paddled the _mashaks_ were stimulated to unwonted exertion
by the promise of large rewards, and the party, swimming their horses
by the bridles, crossed in less time than Gerrard had dared to hope.  A
brief halt to arrange loads, inspect girths and snatch a mouthful of
food, and Gerrard and his men were in the saddle, and riding steadily
into the gathering darkness.  The men would have ridden at top speed in
their eagerness to carry the news and hasten the vengeance, but Gerrard
held them back.  They had a long way to go, and hard work to do, and
the life of every horse, as well as of every trained man, might be of
inestimable value in the days to come.  When they had ridden for nearly
three hours, he called another halt, that the horses might be rubbed
down and have their mouths washed out with water, and the troopers
refresh themselves hastily with fragments of _chapati_.  The men were
mounted again, and he was about to give the order to march, when a
distant sound became audible--the sound of horses' hoofs in the
direction from which they had come.

"One man--or at most two.  Surely it is a messenger, sahib," said the
Granthi in command of the escort.

"We will wait to hear what news he brings.  It may be that the Rajah
has submitted already," said Gerrard, and was answered by a groan of
dismay from his men.  "Let two shots be fired at intervals," he went
on, "that the messenger may know where to find us."

The well-known border signal proved effectual, and the horsemen--it was
now clear that there were two of them--approached rapidly.  Gerrard
uttered an exclamation of astonishment as he saw by the moonlight that
one of them was a European, and rode back to meet him.

"Bob!" he exclaimed, in utter surprise, as Charteris slipped from his
exhausted horse.  "What is it?"

"Bad news.  No use going on."

"What!  They are not dead?"

"Murdered--both of 'em.  Tomb was shelled, but they held out.  Then
Sher Singh sent messengers to the escort--promised 'em double pay to
join him--pair of gold bracelets to Nihal Singh.  They accepted and
went over--left Nisbet and Cowper all alone, except for a few faithful
servants.  Cowper was too badly wounded to get up, he was lying on his
cot, and Nisbet sat beside him holding his hand.  There was no hope of
further resistance, and they told the servants to escape if they could.
One of 'em hid, and brought the news to me just now.  Sher Singh's men
burst in, with old Sarfaraz Khan at their head, shouting all the
wickedness he could lay his filthy old tongue to.  Nisbet told him he
might kill them, as they were only two to thousands, but that he might
be sure thousands of English would come and destroy Sher Singh and his
city."

"And they killed them?"

"Hacked 'em to pieces, and took their heads to Sher Singh."
Charteris's face twitched, and he turned away angrily.

"There's no possibility that the servant's tale is false, I suppose?"

"I wish to Heaven there were.  But why should Sher Singh make things
out worse when they were bad enough already?  Besides, I questioned the
fellow pretty sharply, and he was not to be shaken.  So I started at
once to catch you up."

"Thanks," said Gerrard absently.  "That poor little woman, Bob!  How
will she ever stand it?"

"Doesn't bear thinking of," said Charteris brusquely.  "Question is,
what are we going to do?"

"Why, what can we do?  Rescue their bodies, do you mean?"

"Not a bit of it.  Look here, Hal; I've been thinking it out as I came
along.  Sher Singh has drawn the sword and thrown away the scabbard
now--burnt his boats, in fact.  He can't stop where he is and take his
punishment quietly; he must call upon the Granthis generally to back
him up.  Remember, they wouldn't rise against us in cold blood, but now
that he has plucked up courage to give them a lead they'll go.  The
servant tells me that they called upon the escort to join them in the
name of God and the Guru, and the murderers were calling out _Wa Guru!_
and _Guru-ji ki Fatih!_ as they rushed in.  They'll make a religious
business of it, and every Granthi in Granthistan will join Sher Singh
unless he is nipped in the bud."

"Well, but he is nearer Granthistan than we are.  Who is going to nip
him in the bud?"

"You and I, if you are game."

"Oh, I'm game to do anything that's feasible."

"Are you game to take a big risk?  If Sher Singh is to be kept from
overrunning Granthistan, he must be stopped at once.  I believe that
you and I can do it."

"But how? with merely the Habshiabadis and your troops?"

"Precisely.  If we march on Agpur, they daren't leave the city
undefended with us in their rear.  They have no military genius to see
that the only chance lies in snapping us up before we can unite, and
straining every nerve to do it, and we can get together a large enough
force to give a very good account of anything less than the whole Agpur
army.  If we find ourselves faced with that, and luck's against us, we
shall probably go down, but we shall have done it more damage than Sher
Singh can repair before he finds a British force in his country."

"Honestly, Bob, I don't know what to say.  Your plan sounds reasonable
enough, but you must see that it's subversive of every rule of military
science."

"Hang military science!  If we can confine Sher Singh within the bounds
of his own state, prevent him from throwing down the gauntlet to
British power by invading Granthistan, and make him so anxious about
the safety of Agpur that we keep him there until we can get a siege
train from Farishtabad to batter the walls about his ears, ain't it
worth it?"

"I believe you, my boy! but can we do it?  If we try and fail, it means
ruin, utter and complete, for both of us."

"And if we try and succeed, it will save England and India a second
Granthi War."

"Right, Bob; I'll do it.  Give us your fist, old boy."

Charteris drew a long breath as they shook hands.  "I don't mind
telling you that if you wouldn't come in, I had made up my mind to try
it by myself," he said.  "And then, Hal, you might well have talked
about ruin utter and complete.  But as it is, why, I am proud to serve
under you, old boy, and if my Darwanis don't give a good account of
themselves under your command, you may call me a Dutchman."

"Under my command?  Nonsense, Bob!  I am going to serve under you, of
course.  Why, you are the man on the spot, holding a commission from
the Granthi Durbar, and obviously the proper person to punish its
rebellious vassal.  I am merely accompanying the troops of a friendly
state as a matter of curiosity."

"My dear Hal, it's no end good of you, but I am perfectly content.  You
have always been top-sawyer, you know."

"And a precious mess I should have made of things more than once, if
you had not been at hand.  Why, Bob, I couldn't conscientiously take
command in an affair like this.  It's your idea; I should not have
thought of it, and it isn't likely I should carry it out properly.  You
see your point and go straight at it through thick and thin, while I
plot out a plan for getting there on the lines of the best commanders,
with proper care for communications and supplies.  But if you will give
your orders, I'll carry them out or burst.  If I don't agree with 'em,
I promise you you shall hear about it."

"No doubt whatever about that.  Well, Hal, so be it.  Even if you don't
agree, you'll obey orders, I know.  Just a minute or two to worry out
our immediate moves, then back I go.  Got a light?  Take a squint at
this map of mine.  I propose to cross the Tindar about Kardi, so as to
threaten Agpur from the south-west, throw up such entrenchments as time
allows, and wait there for you.  You will cross the Ghara wherever you
find most convenient--the Habshi with his local knowledge will advise
you best there--remembering that if you can get far enough to the east
to give the impression of threatening the city from another side, so
much the better, but remembering also that unless you come up quickly,
I may have the whole Agpur army launched against me."

"My dear Bob, you forget the distance I shall have to march.  You will
be annihilated before I can reach you."

"Not if I know you, or myself and my Darwanis.  If I can hold the
Agpuris in front, while you come up and deliver a flank attack, I will,
but that circumstances must decide.  We will keep open communications
by means of _kasids_ if we can, but it is quite possible we may have to
act independently.  At any rate, I will not leave Kardi alive without
letting you know, and you won't let anything short of a signed message
from me persuade you that I have abandoned it?"

"Trust me.  But I wish we could both have made forced marches and met
at a point on the Ranjitgarh side of Agpur."

"So do I.  But if wishes were horses----!  The meanest intelligence,
even Sher Singh's, couldn't miss the propriety of attacking us in
detail if we trailed our toy armies separately past him with the force
we possess.  Don't think I labour under any delusion as to our powers.
We can't push Sher Singh back; we can only hold him back by fear for
the city.  We can't hope to conquer him, but we may make it impossible
for him to move until a British brigade with battering guns arrives to
eat him up."

"I see.  Less glorious, but possibly quite as useful."

"Just so.  And there's a private and personal advantage for us in being
on this side of the city rather than the other.  Our Mr James will
readily acknowledge that while there was a chance of rescuing our poor
fellows we were bound to cross into Agpur.  But when he hears they are
dead, I have a foreboding--I feel it in my bones--that he will
instantly order us back.  Of course I shall send him all
particulars--my reasons for invading the country, our force, our
anticipations of success, the exact reinforcement we need to finish the
job in style, and you will do the same before leaving Habshiabad.  But
it is a good long way for the messengers to go, both in your case and
mine, and it is also a good long way back, and the same address may not
always find us.  Therefore I trust that when we get our orders for
retreat, we shall be so far into Agpur that it is impossible to obey.
Even James Antony would allow a man a little discretion when to go
forward is safety, and to go back would mean destruction."

"You old fox!" cried Gerrard.  "I'll back you up, don't be afraid.
We'll put the telescope to the blind eye, and our careers may go hang!"

"That's the style.  We shall have you a swaggering dare-devil yet, old
boy.  And now it's boot and saddle again.  Good-bye, and come up in
time."

"Good-bye.  Take care of yourself, Bob."

Charteris laughed as he swung himself into the saddle.  He and his
orderly clattered off into the night, and the campaign of vengeance had
begun.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE CAMPAIGN OF VENGEANCE.

"To Lieutenant Henry Gerrard, wherever he may be.

"DEAR HAL,--For Heaven's sake bring up your guns by five o'clock
to-morrow afternoon.  I have nothing but zumboorucks,[1] and Chund Sing
with all the Augpoor artillery is in front of me.  I will maintain my
position at all costs till five, but if you have not come up then I
must retreat across the river--and my Grunthees will stay on this side
of it.--Yours,

R. CHARTERIS."


Charteris wrote the message in Greek characters, forming the letters
stiffly with unaccustomed fingers, and pausing now and then for
recollection.  Gerrard would be able to read it, but no native in India
could do so.  He made three copies, and despatched them by separate
messengers along different routes--by the river-bank, to the south and
to the south-east respectively--in the hope that one of them would
succeed in reaching his friend.

Charteris looked older and thinner than when he had parted from Gerrard
a fortnight before, and his face was tanned to a more pronounced red
than ever.  Many hours of gloom had been encountered in the fulfilment
of the task willed in that hour of insight.  Unforeseen difficulties of
various kinds had hindered him, and it was also quite certain that he
had underestimated the time necessary for Gerrard's arrival from
Habshiabad with the reinforcements.  On returning to his camp that
first evening, he had mounted a fresh horse, and ridden on at once
towards his headquarters at Dera Galib Khan, whither his messengers had
preceded him, warning the Granthi troops there to be ready to take the
field at once.  Fast though he travelled, however, reaching Dera Galib
in two nights of hard riding, he had been outstripped.  Emissaries from
Sher Singh had already been at work among the Granthis, calling upon
them to join their brethren who had betrayed Nisbet and Cowper, and
fight the English for the sake of God and the Guru.  Valuable gifts,
and the promise of doubled pay and unlimited loot, strengthened the
effect of the appeal, and the men were seething with disaffection when
Charteris came to them.  They had not quite arrived at the point of
murdering him and his lieutenants and marching to join Sher Singh, but
the thing was openly discussed, and very little was needed to
precipitate matters.  In face of this heavy blow, Charteris acted with
his customary despatch.  The disaffected infantry he took with him,
deciding that under his own eye they would be as safe on active service
as anywhere, but the artillery he left with a heavy heart at Dera
Galib.  He had counted much on their services, but he durst not take
the gunners where a bribe or two would double Sher Singh's present
strength, and there was no time to extemporise artillerists from among
the Darwanis.  These wild men rushed to his standard joyfully as soon
as they heard he needed recruits, and the robbers whom he had fined and
whose forts he had destroyed forsook the pursuits of peace and declared
themselves ready to follow him to the gates of hell if necessary.  Of
them he chose out those who already had relatives or fellow-clansmen in
his irregular corps to accompany him at once, leaving the rest under
the command of his subordinate Carpenter at Dera Galib, nominally for
drill, but also to serve as a check upon the disaffected artillery.

With his untrustworthy Granthis and his half-trained auxiliaries he
crossed the Tindar at Kardi, as he had intended, and employed the
former, to their intense disgust, in throwing up rough entrenchments
round the camp.  The Darwanis he sent out in raiding-parties (this
operation appeared under the more decorous name of "making
reconnaissances" in his reports to Ranjitgarh), with orders not to
penetrate more than a certain distance into the country, but to do as
much damage as possible, and bring back supplies for the force.  These
tactics had the result he anticipated.  Sher Singh's army, which was
organising itself, with much squabbling and mutual recrimination, for a
dash across the frontier, found its rear threatened, and perceived that
unless the capital was to be left open to attack, these impudent
intruders must be driven back to their own side of the river.  The
matter was complicated by the speedy appearance of the Habshiabad
troops in the south of the state, where Gerrard seized one of the
riverside towns, and held it by means of Rukn-ud-din's men and the most
serviceable of the Nawab's batteries of artillery, while he laboured
day and night, with Sadiq Ali, almost beside himself with joy,
hindering as much as helping him, to get the army into the field.
Happily the problem was not so complicated as it would have been in the
case of European troops, and the Nawab and his soldiers alike would
have scouted the idea of obtaining supplies otherwise than from the
country traversed, but weapons for the men and transport for the guns,
and ammunition for both, were necessaries difficult to improvise on the
spur of the moment.  The Habshiabadis took the field at last, in a
state that would have made a European commander tear his hair, and
Gerrard hustled them on, blooding them by a smart little engagement
with a force sent by Sher Singh's nearest governor to dispute their
passage.  The Rani joined them with every man she could bring as soon
as they were ready to cross the Ghara, but left the command of her
contingent to Rukn-ud-din, maintaining rigid seclusion on her elephant
with one or two faithful attendants.

Thus far, then, Charteris's bold scheme was justified.  Sher Singh's
power for mischief beyond his own borders was largely neutralised for
the present, and for so long as an active enemy remained in arms upon
his soil.  But the march from the Habshiabad frontier to Kardi was a
matter of seven days in favourable circumstances, and this was the hot
weather, and the partially trained troops disgraced their leader by
straggling, making unauthorised expeditions for the sake of plunder,
demanding longer halts and more frequent opportunities of meeting the
foe, and all manner of other military crimes.  The high officers who
accompanied them on gorgeous elephants, with long trains of attendants
and baggage-animals, were quite useless as an aid to discipline, and
Gerrard fell into the habit of issuing his orders first, and then
sending a special copy to be handed round among them.  It was not at
all the fulfilment of the ideal he had set before himself, the
reformation of the army through and with the help of its leaders, but
time was pressing, and far ahead, at Kardi, Bob Charteris was looking
out for him and wondering why he did not come.

The elements seemed to combine with troublesome humanity against
Charteris at this moment.  A sudden rise of the river, a week before
the usual date, flooded him out of his entrenchments and obliged him to
take up a less satisfactory position.  Moreover, at the same time,
Chand Singh, the Agpur general, after some painful vacillation as to
whether he should annihilate the western or the southern intruder
first, made up his mind suddenly, and marched with quite unexpected
speed upon Kardi, driving in the Darwani raiding-parties before him.
One fortunate result of his haste was that his guns were left behind,
and he was obliged to wait for them, but his army held the whole range
of ground in front of Charteris.  Charteris had requisitioned every
boat that could be found on the Darwan side, and kept them safely
guarded, but it would be quite easy to obtain others if Chand Singh
cared to try a naval action.  This he would probably combine with a
frontal attack all along the line as soon as his artillery arrived,
with the result that Charteris's force must choose between destruction
and being driven into the river, unless they retreated in time.  But
everything forbade this last course.  It would leave Gerrard's force
exposed to the full onslaught of the Agpur army, and even if they
succeeded in escaping across the river, would set Sher Singh free to
pursue his larger designs, which would probably begin with an invasion
of Darwan, and a joyful reception from the unsettled Granthi artillery
at Dera Galib.  Moreover, Charteris had a shrewd idea that somewhere on
that other bank would be lying in wait for him that despatch from
Ranjitgarh, the receipt of which he had hitherto successfully evaded,
but which was practically certain to contain a sharp order to return at
once into his own province.  Every possible consideration, therefore,
urged him to hold out at Kardi at all costs, but when on this
particular evening he wrote his notes to Gerrard, of whose whereabouts
and approach he had for several days received only vague rumours, he
was face to face with the necessity of retiring unless relieved.

This necessity was not to be made public, either to the unsatisfactory
Granthis or to the dispirited Darwanis, who were perpetually entreating
to be let loose against Chand Singh's array, which they were quite
certain they could drive away, if not destroy.  Charteris said nothing
of it, even to his sole European companion, whom Carpenter had
unselfishly sent to his assistance with a small reinforcement.  But in
view of the morrow even his iron nerve gave way, and he found himself
noting narrowly the colloguing of the Granthis round their camp-fires,
and their sudden silence when he approached, and wondering whether a
murderous attack in the night would be the end of it after all.  He
pulled himself together quickly.  He had done the best he could, what
he thought was right, and it had at any rate delayed Sher Singh long
enough to prevent his taking the British in Granthistan by surprise,
and when he did it he had known that he staked his life on the result.
To-morrow was bound to be a hard day, whatever happened, and he would
want every ounce of force that he possessed.  What folly to be sitting
up listening for murderers!  He added hastily the concluding words to
the report so scrupulously sent off day by day to James Antony, bade
Vixen keep guard, and lay down and slept.  Gerrard would not have been
able to sleep in these circumstances, and Charteris's lieutenant was
equally destitute of the capacity for repose.  He roused his chief
quite unnecessarily early in the morning, his flushed face and haggard
eyes telling of vain attempts at slumber, though he merely guessed at
what Charteris knew.

"Chand Singh's guns are beginning to come into camp," he announced
dramatically.

"Oh, all right.  Bound to come some time," was the sleepy response.
But Warner was not to be put off.

"The Granthis are all standing to arms already, and Bishen Ram is
sporting a pair of gold bracelets."

"Ah!" said Charteris sharply.  This was news indeed, for it was a gift
of gold bracelets to their commandant that had heralded the defection
of Nisbet and Cowper's escort to Sher Singh.  "Keep an eye on them from
the door here while I dress, Warner.  I have the _zamburaks_ trained on
them, so they can't take us by surprise."

Having succeeded in producing an impression, Warner was emboldened to
go further.  Nothing but making Charteris as nervous as himself would
have satisfied him, and yet it was not fear, but overwork and want of
sleep, that combined with anxiety to keep him tramping restlessly
about.  "I suppose you have full confidence in Gerrard?" he hazarded.

"Full confidence?" Charteris's voice, inside the tent, evidently issued
from the folds of a towel.  "Why, of course.  Every confidence that a
man could have in another."

"There was a story that you and he had quarrelled----"

"Well?" the word snapped out.

"Er--about some girl, I believe.  But quarrelled, anyhow.  You don't
think he would take this opportunity----?"

"To pay me out?  I would as soon believe that you had been bribed by
Chand Singh to try and discourage me."

"Well, that's pretty strong, I must say."  Warner's tone was injured.

"It is; and if you want it stronger, I'll say that I would sooner
believe it."  Charteris emerged from the tent as he spoke and looked
keenly at his subordinate.  "My dear fellow, your nerves are all to
pieces.  Steady, steady!  This is going to be one of the worst days you
ever had, and I mean you to come out of it with credit.  Take a couple
of orderlies to keep guard, and go down and get a good swim.  If you
feel inclined for a snooze afterwards, take an hour or two with my
blessing.  I will be responsible for this mighty array meanwhile.  No,
I really mean it.  Be off with you!"

Slightly ashamed, Warner obeyed, and Charteris rode through the Darwani
bivouac, and backed up the _zamburaks_ with a line of musketmen.
Passing on to where the Granthis had slept, he found them, as Warner
had said, standing to their arms, but there was evident to his eye a
certain amount of hesitation, as though his most recent precaution was
not entirely to their liking.  Without betraying any suspicion, he rode
straight up to Bishen Ram, the Sirdar, and complimented him upon the
alertness of his men.

"My Darwanis I must rouse, keen fighters though they are," he said,
"but I find my Granthis in arms before the order is even issued.  Well
for the commander who has such men under him!  And why are we so brave
to-day, Sirdar-ji?"

He indicated the bracelets upon the sinewy arms, and was aware of a
savage grin, instantly repressed, upon the faces of the men nearest at
hand.  Bishen Ram replied without the slightest embarrassment.  "It
appears to your honour's servants that to-day there will be a fight to
the death, and it is the custom of my unworthy house to meet death clad
as beseems a gentleman."

"A good custom indeed! and no ornament could better become a loyal
soldier," said Charteris, with just sufficient meaning in his voice to
leave the traitors uncertain whether he had penetrated their designs or
not.  He took advantage of their uncertainty to ride back in safety,
knowing that he was in most danger when he had his back to them, and
reached his tent unharmed, but persuaded of the critical nature of the
situation.  The treachery of the Granthis, whether actual or only
potential, practically neutralised the powers of the rest of his force.
If he ordered them to advance, they would promptly fraternise with the
foe, if he kept them in reserve, they would fall upon his rear, and if
he led the whole line into battle, they would turn their arms against
their comrades.  A day of inglorious waiting, with one half of his
force--for the better training of the Granthis compensated for the
smallness of their numbers--in arms against the other half, until
either Chand Singh came on in overwhelming strength or Gerrard
appeared, seemed to lie before him.

And so it turned out.  Throughout the sultry hours he held his
position, not daring to move his men save to drive back tentative
advances on the part of the enemy, which he knew were designed to cover
the movements of their artillery.  He could not press his attack home,
far less penetrate to the guns, and the range of his musketry would of
course be hopelessly inadequate when Chand Singh chose to begin to
pound him from a distance.  He did choose at last, about half-way
through the day, and to the tortures of inaction were added the lively
reproaches of the force.  Lying down to be a target for artillery fire
was not an exercise that commended itself to the native mind, and
Charteris became the unwilling centre of a group of protesting Granthis
and Darwanis, who had each of them his special plan for making the day
more interesting, and plucked at the European's sleeve when they were
tired of shrieking into his ears.  It was with a certain grim pleasure
that he received the remonstrances of the Granthis, whose plans must
all have been disarranged by his unexpected immobility.  Chand Singh's
cannon-balls fell as impartially among them as among their fellows,
perhaps as a gentle hint that if they were going to change sides they
might as well do it at once, but the distance that separated the armies
was sufficient to account for a good many of them if they were exposed
to Charteris's fire.  Yes, the Granthis deserved all they got, but his
heart bled for his Darwanis.  Less fitted, both by nature and training,
for passive endurance, they could not understand his inertness.
"Sahib, can you expect us to endure this?" they cried reproachfully, as
the round-shot crashed among them.  "We are here to die, but let us die
fighting, not crouching on the ground!"

Not until four o'clock was he able to seem to listen to their appeals,
and this was only because Chand Singh, apparently emboldened by the
passivity of his foe, deliberately advanced four guns to a spot little
beyond the reach of their musketry, and began to try the range.
Charteris detected at once the bait which was to draw him from his
position and give the Granthis their long-sought opportunity, and set
his teeth hard.  The line should not advance.  Turning his back on
Bishen Ram, whose protests were very nearly becoming threats, he called
up the heads of two Darwani clans, of late the fiercest and most
troublesome of his robber-vassals.

"You are willing to ride to death, brothers?"

A great shout answered him.  "Into hell itself, sahib!"

"I knew it.  But are you willing to turn back half-way, and return?"

"Never, sahib; never!"

"Then you are not the men for me."  He turned away with ostentatious
disappointment, only to feel his sleeves gripped on either side by
eager hands.

"We will do it, sahib, though it be more bitter than death."

"I thought I could count on you.  Listen then, brothers.  I want those
four guns dismounted, and rolled into the marsh near at hand.  We will
cover your charge by advancing within musket-shot of the guns, but
further we cannot go.  Can I trust you to return when your work is
done, without attempting to ride further?"

"Highness, you can."

"It is well.  The one who returns first, bringing his men with him,
shall receive my revolving pistol; to the other I will give my watch."

"The gifts of the Sahib are great as his fame," said the two Darwanis
together, as they raced off to their followers.  Charteris made his
dispositions hurriedly.  Twenty men, his best shots, were sent out
under Warner to wriggle through the long grass to within range of the
guns, and pick off the gunners when they attempted to fire.  The rest
of the Darwanis--such as possessed fire-arms, at least--were ordered to
load, but remain where they were, and the Granthis to fall back a
hundred yards.  The eyes of all were fixed upon the favoured few, who,
with upraised hands, were repeating the _Kalima_[2] before they set
forth upon their perilous ride, but Charteris managed to convey a brief
warning to the Darwani chiefs and officers near him.  The forlorn hope
burst forth from the low jungle that had served as cover all
day--starting on the left of the advanced party, so as not to mask its
fire, and as their progress was marked with shouts by their fellows,
his ear caught the sound he had expected, the ring of ramrods behind
him on the right.  The Granthis were loading without orders.

"To the right, turn.  Ready.  Present."  His voice rang out, and the
Darwanis nearest him looked to see if he had gone mad, that he should
bid them turn away from watching their champions' ride.  But as his
whistle reinforced the order, the chiefs whose minds he had prepared
rushed among their followers, and by voice and blows forced them to
obey.  The sight of the Granthis at work with their ramrods betrayed
the truth at once, and the wild men took a step forward with a howl,
and would have precipitated themselves upon their hereditary foes if
Charteris had not stopped them.  The Granthis, deprived of the
advantage they had anticipated, of pouring in a volley from behind on
their unsuspecting allies, looked foolish, and Charteris rode forward
and rated Bishen Ram, and bade him order his men to withdraw their
charges.  For a moment they hesitated whether to direct their fire on
him--the forlorn hope was happily out of range of their present
position--but the habit of discipline combined with the knowledge that
the Darwanis were thirsting to fire to induce them to obey.  The mask
was worn very thin now, however, and Charteris hardly dared turn his
eyes from them even to receive his returning heroes, who had duly
dashed at the guns, dismounted them and tumbled them into the swamp,
and ridden back--all that were left of them--under a heavy fire from
the concealed matchlockmen on the other side.  The promised rewards
were duly bestowed on two gory figures, and Charteris returned to the
bush which had afforded him partial shelter at intervals during the
day, and wondered how long the Granthis would maintain even the
pretence of obedience if Gerrard did not come.

As the thought passed through his mind, it seemed to him that a deeper
and more distant boom mingled with the sound of Chand Singh's cannon,
and the nearer popping of his musketry, and when he listened he heard
it again.  The two signal shots!  Yes, Gerrard was coming, was
evidently attacking the enemy's left, where their main camp was
situated.  At first there was no cessation either in the cannonade
poured into Charteris's force or in the musketry-fire, but gradually
both slackened.  Evidently Chand Singh was withdrawing his forces from
this front, but whether it was to employ them against Gerrard or to
make good his retreat there was no means of knowing.  The trying thing
was that even now Charteris could not venture to loose his Darwanis on
the foe, for the accession of the Granthis to Chand Singh's ranks might
turn the tide in the enemy's favour, and he was not sanguine enough to
hope that they would consent to remain neutral.  He could only trust
that the Habshiabadis were in a better condition to pursue--but when he
and Gerrard met he learned that it was not so.  On receiving
Charteris's message, Gerrard had come on with his artillery and an
escort, leaving the rest of his force to hold a detachment sent against
him by Chand Singh.

"Talk about the rules of military science, indeed!  Think of your
trailing cow-guns unsupported through a hostile country!" cried
Charteris.  "But it was a regular case of night or Blücher, old boy,
and I knew what a brick you were."

"A brick!  I feel like one," laughed Gerrard.  He and Charteris looked
at one another and laughed again.  They had both discarded their tunics
in favour of what they called blouses, loose holland garments like long
Norfolk jackets, and Gerrard had exchanged his cap for a hat of white
feathers lined with green, the precursor of the sun-helmet.

"Good job we ain't in Khemistan.  Old Harry Lennox would have
court-martialled us like winkin'," said Charteris.  "He wouldn't even
consider it an extenuating circumstance that we've won."

"Not very much of a win, since we can't follow it up."

"Well, I don't know.  Another fight like this will bring us in sight of
Agpur."



[1] Guns mounted on the backs of camels.

[2] The Mohammedan creed.




CHAPTER XIX.

AS OTHERS SEE US.

"I can't think why there was no letter for me!" lamented Marian Cowper.

"Perhaps it will come by a special runner to-morrow," suggested Honour.
"Papa would send it on, I am sure."

"But it ought to have come to-day.  Charley has never missed his proper
day before."

"Perhaps he was too busy to write."

"Too busy!  As if he would let anything keep him from writing to me!"

"I didn't mean that he would not wish to write, but that he might not
be able," explained Honour with care.

"Of course.  You needn't apologize for Charley to me, thank you.  If he
doesn't write it's because he can't, and any one else would understand
how I feel about it--especially when it is getting so near the time for
him to come back."  Marian's nerves were evidently on edge, as she
moved restlessly about the room, and shot out her sentences at her
sister like darts.  "I wish you wouldn't sit there so quietly.  You
don't sympathize a bit.  If Charley doesn't come up here next month as
he promised, I don't know what I shall do.  At any rate, if anything
happens it will be his fault."

"Oh, Marian, how can you be so unfair?" cried Honour, with her usual
earnestness.  "You know poor Charles will come if he possibly can.  And
how dreadful to say it would be his fault if anything went wrong!"

"I didn't say 'if anything went wrong'; I said 'if anything happened,'"
corrected Marian pettishly.  "And I don't know why you should say 'poor
Charles.'  He would be perfectly happy if he was here with me, and so
should I.  He understands things--oh, I do want him so!"

"Oh, don't cry," entreated Honour in alarm.  "Dear Marian, you will
only do yourself harm, you know, and you were so anxious he should find
you well and cheerful.  Just finish your letter to him, and then let us
sit out on the verandah a little before going to bed.  The Antonys'
guests will be leaving, and you know how pretty the torches look among
the hills."

"How can I finish my letter when I don't know whether there is anything
in his to answer?" complained Marian.  "Well, I will leave it unsealed,
and put in an extra sheet if necessary.  I'll come out in a minute.
I'm sorry I am so cross, Honour.  After all it isn't your fault that
you are not Charley."

"Of course not," said Honour indignantly, and there was more than a
suggestion of what was known, in those days of distended skirts, as
"flouncing" in the quick rustle with which she left the room.  Somehow
Marian and she seemed perpetually to rub one another the wrong way, and
every one thought it was her fault, because Marian was always so bright
and pleasant in public.  Marian received plenty of sympathy and wanted
more, but Honour felt that a little would be very pleasant to herself.
Yet why should her thoughts in this connection be suddenly discovered
to have flown to Gerrard?  "He understands," she said to herself, and
blushed hotly in the darkness to remember that these were the very
words Marian had used of her husband.  Giving herself a little shake,
as though to get rid of the momentary foolishness, she bent her
thoughts sternly to the subject of Sir Edmund and Lady Antony's
dinner-party.  Ladies in the hills whose husbands were on service did
not accept invitations in those benighted days, and Honour had
naturally remained with her sister.  Their bungalow stood a little
higher than the Resident's Lodge, and the effect of the torches by
which all the guests were lighted along the hill-paths was very pretty
from their verandah.

"Marian," she called out, "the people are beginning to leave.  Some one
is coming up our path."

"Oh, it is only the new people--a judge or something and his wife--who
have taken Hilltop Hall.  But I shall have finished before they pass
the gate.  I should like to see what they are like."

But long before the usual procession--a gentleman on a pony, a lady in
a _jampan_, and torchbearers and servants _ad libitum_--which Honour
was expecting could have reached the gate, it was opened and two people
came up the steep path to the bungalow.  By the light of the torch
carried before them by a servant, Honour recognised Lady Antony, with a
burnouse thrown over her evening dress, and her husband.  Her heart
stood still, for such a visit could only mean bad news.  Sir Edmund and
his wife were fond of dropping in informally on their young neighbours,
but to leave their guests, at an important entertainment in their own
house--this was unheard of.  Honour ran to the top of the steps to meet
them.

"Oh, what is it?" she cried, lowering her voice so that it should not
reach Marian.  "Is it papa?"

"Sir Arthur is well.  I have a letter from him," said Sir Edmund.
"Your mother is also in good health."

"Then who is it?" demanded Honour fearfully.  "Is it either of my
brothers?  Oh, not--not Charles?"

"Hush! let me break it to her," said Lady Antony, as Marian's pretty
sparkling face, the eyes wide with astonishment, appeared at the
window.  "Dear Marian," she took the girl's arm and led her back into
the room, "I have something to say to you."

"What was it--cholera?"  Honour was asking with dry lips of Sir Edmund
as they stood on the verandah.

"No, unfortunately."  Honour's eyes met his in perplexity.  "It was
murder.  This morning I received news that Captain Cowper and Mr Nisbet
had been wounded in a street-tumult at Agpur, but that Cowper's
injuries were so slight he did not wish his wife alarmed about them.
To-night your father sends a runner to say that the poor fellows were
pursued and murdered outside the city."

"How dreadful!" was all Honour could say.

"Dreadful indeed," said Sir Edmund gloomily.  "I have no doubt that
Sher Singh will be able to clear himself of any complicity in the
crime, but I fear he must have shown culpable weakness.  And weakness
is difficult to distinguish from wickedness at a time when men's
passions are excited, as they are bound to be by this news."

"But what does it signify about Sher Singh?  It is poor Charles we have
to think of, and poor, poor Marian!" cried Honour indignantly.  Sir
Edmund's eyes looked beyond her.

"Pardon me; we have the whole question of the treatment of native
states, the whole principle of justice to the native, to think of.
Eyes blinded by the natural, though unholy, desire for revenge are
little fitted to see clearly.  There is grave reason to fear that even
now hasty steps have been taken, which may compromise our future
action.  I understand that young Charteris crossed the frontier, or was
about to cross it, on the news of the outbreak.  My brother reports
that he has ordered him to return immediately, but it is almost
impossible that the harm has not been done."

"What harm?" demanded Honour.  "Mr Charteris hoped to save poor
Charles, of course.  Then, when he knew he was too late for that, he
would try to rescue his body."

Sir Edmund looked at her with a kind of despair for her feminine
obtuseness.  "That is quite out of the question," he said, "and
Charteris knows it.  If he went on, it would be----"

"You don't mean that Marian will never know where her husband is
buried--never be able to visit his grave?"

"It is highly probable.  My dear young lady, what can it signify where
our vile bodies lie?  They are in God's keeping, whether cast out on
the face of the ground or laid in a churchyard at home."

"Oh, don't!"  Honour could have shaken Sir Edmund.  "Can't you see?
Oh, please don't say anything of that kind to Marian, as if she had not
enough to bear already."

"I do not think I introduced the subject----"

"I must see how poor Marian is," interrupted Honour, and left him
hastily.  She had a momentary vision of her sister sobbing in Lady
Antony's arms, but a warning hand upraised forbade her to enter the
room, and she returned unwillingly to Sir Edmund, who had forgotten all
about the difference of opinion in the hurry of his thoughts.

"I shall go down to-morrow night," he said, as though speaking to
himself.  "I cannot be sure of James when it is a question of keeping
these young fellows in order.  Charteris must return at once, of
course, and one can only hope that he may not have done irreparable
harm."

"What harm could he do, with only a few men, against Sher Singh's whole
army?" demanded Honour.

"The harm of making it appear that the case has been prejudged.  Sher
Singh may have been innocent of all but cowardice, but to send an army
against him without inquiry will force him in self-defence to throw
himself into the arms of the war-party.  He must be approached without
show of force, and his life guaranteed to him if he will consent to
submit his conduct to an impartial court of inquiry--such as the Durbar
here."

"You think only of Sher Singh!" cried Honour hotly.  "I think of poor
Charley murdered, without a finger raised to save him.  I want Sher
Singh punished--do you hear?" with a stamp of her foot--"and I hope Mr
Charteris will do it, and not care what orders you send him!"

Sir Edmund had been looking at her as though she were a pigmy viewed
from a mountain-top, so she told herself indignantly, but now his eyes
flashed, and a tinge of colour crept into his sallow, haggard face.
"If, as I understand, you have some influence with Mr Charteris, I
would advise you, for his sake, not to make him acquainted with your
views, Miss Cinnamond," he said coldly.  "The natural warmth of a young
man's constitution is sufficiently powerful to lead him astray, without
being raised to fever-heat by the uninstructed interference of
sentimental females."

"I shall certainly not attempt to influence Mr Charteris, but I hope to
hear that he has acted as I would wish him without that," Honour
managed to say before the lump in her throat prevented her speaking.
With her head held very high, she walked away to the end of the
verandah, and finding a seat in the shadow of the creepers, hid herself
there and wept silently--for Charley Cowper lying unburied outside the
walls of Agpur, for Marian, bereaved of love and hope at nineteen, for
the child that its father would never see, and a little for Honour
Cinnamond, who had intended to do such great things, and was such a
failure all round.  Sir Edmund forgot her existence, as she knew he
would, and walked up and down the verandah with bent head and hands
clasped behind his back.  Sometimes he trod firmly and even whistled in
a meditative way, and then he would pull himself up suddenly and creep
backwards and forwards in silence, remembering the task in which his
wife was engaged.  It was long before Lady Antony came out, with
swollen eyes, and called softly to Honour before taking her husband's
offered arm.

"I have persuaded your sister to go to bed, and it would be kinder not
to disturb her again to-night.  Her good old ayah is with her, and I
hope she may get some rest."

"But I must go to her!" protested Honour.  "She would think it so
unkind."

"Better not, dear, I think.  In fact, I may say she begged not to be
disturbed.  I did not tell her, lest something should happen to prevent
it, but you will be glad to hear that the runner had orders to lay a
double _dâk_ for the Lady Memsahib at all the stations as he came, so I
hope we shall see your dear mother here some time to-morrow."

The news was inexpressibly welcome, but Honour bade good-night to Lady
Antony with distinct resentment.  As though Marian would not choose to
have her own sister beside her at this time of desolation instead of a
servant!  For a moment she thought of taking things into her own hands,
and bidding the ayah go to bed while she would watch, but peeping into
Marian's room she saw her lying exhausted on the bed, a tired sob
breaking from her at intervals, while the old Goanese woman rubbed her
mistress's feet gently, crooning a soft unintelligible song.  She could
not be banished, certainly, but at least Honour might share the watch,
and presently she made her appearance armed with pillows and a
coverlet, intending to lie down on the sofa in her sister's room.  Old
Anna looked at her warningly as she entered, but Marian heard the
rustling of the bedclothes and glanced up sharply.

"Please go to bed properly in your own room, Honour.  I want nobody but
Nanna."

"I will only lie down here, in case you call.  I won't say a word,"
said Honour, unmoved by the glitter in her sister's eyes, from which
the film of weariness had vanished.  Marian raised herself on her elbow.

"I will send Nanna if I want you.  Please go."  As Honour still
hesitated, her voice rose higher.  "Go, go!  I don't want you here.
You never appreciated my dear Charley."

"Go, missy, go!" entreated the old woman.  "Missus not know what she
done say."  But Honour was too deeply hurt.

"Oh, Marian, how can you say such a thing?  Why, if I had not liked him
for himself, I should have loved him because he was so fond of you,
dear fellow!"

"You said to mamma that he was so very ordinary.  I heard you through
the _chiks_," persisted Marian, holding her with accusing eyes.

"I didn't mean you to hear.  How could I tell you were there?  And I
learned to know him better afterwards--how good and kind he was."
Honour defended herself desperately.

"It was not my hearing you, but your saying it, that mattered.  I could
laugh at it at the time, knowing what he really was, but now--I can't
bear to have you in the room with me, to-night, at any rate, when you
misjudged him so."

"Oh, Marian, how can you be so unkind?  If I was in trouble, I would
not keep you away."

"You would not be in this kind of trouble.  You couldn't be.  It isn't
in you."  Marian hurled her shafts deliberately.  "You don't understand
what it is to care for any one as I care for Charley, and I believe you
never will.  You can let two men go on making love to you at once for
more than a year, because you can't make up your mind which of them you
like best."

"Is that my fault?  I don't like either of them in that way."

"No, but you like knowing that they think of you, and care for you, and
watch for the least crumb of kindness you are willing to throw them.
When you thought poor Charteris was dead, you luxuriated in misery with
that very foolish young Gerrard, who ought to have given you the choice
of taking him or leaving him there and then, and when Charteris came
back, you snubbed him.  And if Gerrard should be killed now, in trying
to save my dear Charley, I suppose you and Charteris would mingle your
tears over him.  No, Charteris has more sense.  He won't let himself be
treated----"

Honour's eyes were bright.  "Oh, do you mean that Mr Gerrard is helping
Mr Charteris?  Sir Edmund did not mention him."

"They are co-operating, Lady Antony told me--making forced marches in
the hot weather, to avenge Charley if they can't save him.  But you
don't care--or if you do, it's only because you like to think you can
be an inspiration to them without giving anything in return.  You don't
want to marry either of them, but you won't break with them so long as
they are willing to dangle about you."

"I don't want to marry either of them, it is true, but if they are
willing to be my friends still, why should I break with them, as you
call it?"

"Because each of them thinks that you will be willing to marry him one
day, and you know it.  You are rather proud of their constancy, and
your own firmness in not yielding to either of them.  But it is not a
thing to be proud of; it is a thing to be ashamed of and sorry for.
You could make far more of either of those men by coming down from your
pedestal and marrying him in an ordinary everyday way than by standing
up above him and giving him good advice.  I know you have some delusion
that it is better and higher to be as you are, but I tell you that I
had rather have married my Charley and known him as he really was
and--yes, and even lost him--than stood on high and given good advice
to a whole army.  Oh, Charley, my dear kind Charley--and I behaved so
badly to you when you went away!  I never kissed you!"

A fresh paroxysm of tears succeeded the angry words, and Honour yielded
to the ayah's whispered entreaties, and left the room.  Grief and
resentment combined to give her a very disturbed night, and when Lady
Cinnamond arrived, tired and travel-stained, about mid-day, after an
unbroken journey from Ranjitgarh, she was shocked at her daughter's
appearance.  But there was no time to think of Honour, for Marian,
hearing her mother's voice, had tottered to her door.

"Oh, dear mamma, I have wanted you so much!  You understand, you know
all about it."

Not until the evening did Honour see her mother again, and then Lady
Cinnamond crept out on tiptoe into the verandah.

"Honour, love, I have been so longing to speak to you, but I could not
leave poor Marian until she fell asleep.  I am very anxious about papa.
He has never been alone in the hot weather before, and he is so
terribly imprudent."

"You would like me to go down and take care of him?  I shall be
delighted, mamma.  I find I must be thankful if any one will let me
even stay near them."

"Dear little one, you must not think----"

"I do not think, mamma; I know.  I know that Marian has begged you to
send me away, and said she shall go mad if she sees me about.  She said
almost as much as that to me last night.  I suppose I deserve it
somehow, but I really don't see how."

"Onora, dear child, you must not misjudge poor Marian.  She has had a
fearful blow, and is hardly responsible for what she says.  You know
that I would never send you away from me.  But I see that I must stay
here with her for the present, and it makes me so unhappy to leave dear
papa----"

"And you do know how I long to be of use to any one, don't you, mamma?
I wanted to comfort Marian, but she would not let me.  Oh, mamma, she
said such cruel, unjust things.  And is it my fault if I can't--if I
can't----?"

"No, my love, certainly not.  And if you have been--well, not very
wise, in what you have done and said, no one who knew you could
possibly credit you with any but the best motives.  And you will take
care of papa, and see that he does not go out in the sun unnecessarily?
I feel that it is very cruel to send you down to Ranjitgarh again in
the heat, my precious one."

"What does it signify, mamma?  I am sure Marian would be rather pleased
if I died.  No, I ought not to have said that.  I am really glad to
have some idea what the hot weather is--even though I shall be in a
cool house, with every comfort.  They have nothing of that sort, have
they--marching in the heat to punish Charley's murderers?"

"Who--those two young men?  Oh, my dear child, is it always to be they,
and not he?"

"I don't know; how can I tell?  Oh, mamma, they are both so good, and
they do everything together, and I think it is so splendid of them both
to have risked everything like this.  If only they were both my
brothers!"

"I suppose I should have been too proud with two such sons added to
those I have.  One of them as a son-in-law would quite satisfy me, if
it satisfied you, dearest.  But that seems too much to hope for," said
Lady Cinnamond despairingly.

But when Honour reached Ranjitgarh, under the escort of Sir Edmund
Antony--who fell ill again the day after his arrival, and was promptly
ordered back to the hills by his doctors--she found that the general
opinion of Charteris's and Gerrard's conduct reflected his verdict
rather than hers.  Charteris was the head and front of the offending,
for Gerrard's self-suppression in placing himself under his orders had
had the unlooked-for effect of concentrating attention, and blame, on
the man nominally responsible.  Charteris had precipitated matters by
his hasty action, he was driving Sher Singh to revolt, he would set all
Granthistan in a blaze, and incidentally be wiped out himself--in which
case he would richly deserve his fate.  The confused rumours which came
through of the skirmishes preceding the battle near Kardi created an
atmosphere highly unfavourable to a cool consideration of his reports
when they arrived.  The rumours spoke of defeat, retreat, heavy
loss--the reports of positions maintained and a steady pressure on the
foe, and as such a measure of success, attained by unauthorised and
unprecedented means, was in itself most improbable, the rumours
received far greater credit.  The action of Lieutenant Charteris became
a public scandal, focussing Anglo-Indian attention on Granthistan to a
highly undesirable extent.  The newly arrived Governor-General, Lord
Blairgowrie, who possessed two supreme qualifications for his high
office in a total ignorance of things Indian and a splendid
self-confidence, wrote several of his well-known incisive letters to
the Antony brothers, reflecting upon the discipline of their
subordinates.  Unkindest cut of all, old Sir Henry Lennox grasped
joyfully at the chance of avenging a few of the wrongs he and his
Khemistan administration had suffered at the hands of Granthistan,
and--with the readiness to submit official matters to public
arbitrament which so curiously distinguished the men of his
day--addressed to the press a series of communications reflecting with
equal severity on Charteris's moral character and his military capacity.

A copy of the Bombay paper in which these letters appeared was sent to
Sir Arthur Cinnamond by a friend who thought he ought to know what was
being said, and it fell into Honour's hands.  Sir Arthur, dozing over a
cheroot in the hottest part of the day, was rudely awakened by the
apparition of the tragic figure of his daughter, holding out the
offending journal.

"Papa, have you read this?  Do you see what they say?"

"Eh, what, my dear?"  Sir Arthur groped for his glasses, and settled
them on his nose.  "Oh, that nonsense of Lennox's, I see--most improper
interference; like his--er--er--usual impudence to meddle in our
affairs."

"But the things he says about Mr Charteris, papa--that he ought to be
court-martialled!"

"Well, my dear, you need not be frightened.  Old Harry Lennox ain't
commanding in Granthistan."

"But it's just as bad if he only deserved to be court-martialled, and
we know he doesn't.  As if Mr Gerrard would ever have joined him if he
had been merely trying to bring himself into notoriety at the expense
of disobeying orders!"

"There's no doubt that he moved without orders, my dear girl.  And if
you ask me, I have a shrewd idea that he was in no hurry to open his
orders when they reached him, lest they should direct him to retire.
Ought to be broke, the young scamp!  But hang me if I wouldn't have
done the same in his place!"

"Oh, papa, I am so glad you feel like that!  You are writing to him?
Do you know, I was going to ask you to let me put in a note, that he
might see there was one person on his side."

"Oho, you sly little puss!" cried Sir Arthur, highly amused.  Honour
looked offended, and her father shifted his ground rapidly.  "No, no,
Honour, I couldn't think of it--without consulting your mother, at any
rate.  But I tell you what I will do--add a postscript that my family
send their kind regards to him and Gerrard.  Mustn't leave poor Gerrard
quite out in the cold, but I think they'll understand that--eh?"

"There is nothing to understand," said Honour, departing with dignity.

"So it's Charteris!" said Sir Arthur to himself.  "Somehow I had an
idea it was the other.  I'm almost sorry.  He will take it hard, poor
chap!"




CHAPTER XX.

A DAY OF VICTORY.

Sitting in Charteris's tent, in their shirt-sleeves, the two
inconvenient young men whose inconsiderate action was casting British
India into turmoil talked over their prospects.  The remainder of the
Habshiabad force had beaten off the detachment opposed to it, and
rejoined Gerrard and the guns, and Chand Singh and the Agpur army had
continued their precipitate flight.  On the evening of the battle, the
long-delayed despatches from Ranjitgarh caught up Charteris at last,
ordering him to retire forthwith into Darwan, since it would be
impossible during the hot weather to move reinforcements sufficient to
ensure the capture of Agpur.  Before they slept that night, he and
Gerrard had deliberately made up their minds to put the telescope to
the blind eye.  Retreat now would mean not only perfect liberty for
Sher Singh to move in any direction he chose, but also that that
direction would inevitably be Darwan, where the disaffected artillery
and Bishen Ram's Granthis would joyfully flock to his standard.  All
the work done in pacifying the country would then be wasted, and what
was worse, Sher Singh would be provided with a second base of
operations against Ranjitgarh, and a means of communication with his
desired ally, Abd-ur-Rashid Khan of Ethiopia.  Since to retire would be
to incur fresh danger, as well as to sacrifice the advantages already
won, they determined to advance, and boldly, though with all possible
respect, notified their decision to James Antony.  His reception of the
news astonished them, for their cool estimate of the chances against
them, and readiness to take the risk, seemed to have touched a
sympathetic chord in his iron nature.  In the letter which lay now on
the camp-table between them, the acting-Resident generously associated
himself with their resolution, approved of the measures by which they
had forced his hand, and promised to use his influence in trying to
induce the military authorities to send the desired reinforcements.

"Old boy," said Charteris with emphasis, after reading the letter once
more, "we are made men."

"If we succeed," Gerrard reminded him.  "If not, we drag down James
Antony as well as ourselves."

"The Colonel won't be in a forgiving mood," agreed Charteris.  "Strikes
me, Hal, that but for this latest illness of his we should find
ourselves in the wrong box even now."

"If he will only let us catch Sher Singh, he can try him as much as he
likes when we've got him," said Gerrard.  "We give no guarantees, but
we take him alive if we can.  That ought to meet Sir Edmund's wishes."

"Talking of taking Sher Singh alive is just a little bit like selling
the bear's skin before you've killed him, ain't it?  Any one viewing
our present situation impartially would say we were more likely to be
taken alive ourselves--and in that case I fear we shouldn't long remain
so."

"We can't very well stay as we are," said Gerrard drily.

"True, O most sapient Hal, and we can hardly expect Chand Singh to
attack us unprovoked.  He knows too well that his game is to stay quiet
in the plain there and wait for us to come down, like Colonel Carter's
'possum.  Therefore we must make the plain uncomfortable--not too hot
to hold him, for that we can't do, but simply rather warm.  I suggest
that you take two of your guns to-night round by that nullah on the
left, and tickle him up a bit in the morning.  It won't be a
particularly quiet corner for you, but you can post two other guns in
support, and we'll back you up.  If Chand Singh retreats again we'll
follow him, if he attacks we've got him."

"Quite so.  If he don't see how ill-mannered it is to block the road in
this way to two gentlemen in a hurry, he must be politely removed.  But
listen, Bob!  It sounds almost as if----  And yet they can't possibly
be attacking."

"Charteris, do you know that Chand Singh is advancing?" cried Warner,
coming in hastily.

"Advancing?  He must be mad."

"Advancing in line, with flags and music.  They say Sher Singh is there
too, on an elephant."

"Then he is delivered into our hands," said Charteris, and Gerrard and
he hurried out of the tent and looked over the plain, where the distant
dust-cloud, through the rifts in which came glimpses of colour and
flashing steel, and bursts of barbaric music, showed the approach of
the Agpuri host.  Rukn-ud-din came towards them as they gazed.

"Her Highness sends her salaams, sahib, and she will lead her troops
to-day."

"Ah, this is the day of vengeance, then?"

"So it would appear, sahib, since the brother-slayer yonder has
consulted a famous soothsayer of the unbelievers, who declares that
this day his arms shall be invincible."

"So that's why they are coming on!" said Charteris.  "Who's this?"  The
newcomer was a Habshiabadi in gorgeous raiment, who announced to
Gerrard that his Excellency Dilir Jang Bahadar sent his salaams, and
with Jirad Sahib's permission, would lead his master's forces into
battle.

"With all my heart," said Gerrard, and as the man moved off he observed
to Charteris, "This will leave me free to fight the guns for you, Bob,
if you wish it.  Funny to think of that old sinner Desdichado as fired
with martial ardour, ain't it?   Suppose he thinks it looks as if it
ought to be a soft job, but I only hope he'll be as good as his word,
for I hear that in the last fight before I joined you, when I came on
with the guns and left him in command, he spent the time under a tree
with a case-bottle of arrack, and the troops looked after themselves."

"You must supersede him promptly if he shows any signs of hanging back
to-day.  But I'm uncommon glad to have the guns in your hands, old boy,
even if it's only at the outset.  Hal, if we break up Sher Singh's army
to-day, they must send us our siege artillery and let us finish this
job--they must."

"I only wish they had sent it already--or even given the order.  The
news of that would have been enough.  Do you like the look of your
Granthis, Bob?"

"About as little as you do.  One could wish that our Mr James had shown
his affection in any other way than by sending us another Granthi
regiment, but it was impossible to refuse it.  It's one comfort that
with your fellows we are more than a match for them now if they turn
rusty, and by posting them on the right we can get them in flank with
our whole line.  You think we can't do better with the guns than keep
them where they are until we advance?  All right, then.  Warner will
lead the Darwanis, and the doctor will gallop for us."

The surgeon, who had been sent on by James Antony with the
reinforcements, was young and active, and having at present no
patients, since the native troops scouted him in favour of their own
hakims, was ready to take any part in the fighting, from heading a
cavalry charge to bringing up ammunition, but found himself relegated
to the post of galloper.  He took up his position behind Charteris in
the centre, Warner and General Desdichado commanding the nearer troops
on either hand, while Gerrard with the guns, and Bishen Ram with the
two Granthi regiments, occupied the extreme left and right
respectively, the whole position being roughly crescent-shaped.
Nothing but utter madness, it seemed, could lead an army into the
hollow it commanded, and Charteris sent out scouts to see whether Sher
Singh's advance was not a blind, intended to mask a flank attack.  But
the scouts returned periodically to say that there was no sign of any
other movement than the one in front, and as the enemy came closer, it
was clear that their whole force was in the field.  Gerrard allowed
them to approach until they were well within the horns of the crescent,
then, when with a final crash of music they quickened their step to
charge up the low hill in the centre, his guns opened with tremendous
effect.  But even the cannonade seemed to produce little diminution in
Sher Singh's crowded ranks, and they rolled on up the hill as though
they would overwhelm the defenders by sheer weight of numbers.
Gerrard, rushing from gun to gun to point each in turn, lest the
gunners in their excitement should fire upon Charteris's position,
urged his men on to load and fire with something like desperation.  The
enemy were not suffering as they should, beneath the fire of his guns
on the one hand and the musketry of the two Granthi regiments on the
other.  A sudden suspicion seized him, and he looked across through the
smoke at the opposite horn of the crescent.  But no; it was dotted with
white puffs.  Bishen Ram's men were firing with admirable precision and
coolness, but somehow their shots did not seem to take effect.  The
reason occurred to Gerrard suddenly; they were firing with powder only.
Dearly would he have liked to plant a shell or two among the
treacherous scoundrels, but just now he could not spare the time.  He
redoubled his efforts, and at last his half-incredulous eyes discerned
between the smoke-clouds that the tide was rolling back from the
centre.  Charteris was visible for a moment, standing in his stirrups
and waving his cap vigorously, and Gerrard fired once or twice into the
sullenly retreating Agpuris, to dissuade them gently from rallying and
facing the hill again.  But presently the doctor arrived in hot haste,
with orders to him to hold his fire for the present, since Charteris
meant to assail the enemy with successive charges of cavalry.  Almost
before the smoke had cleared away there was the rush of a torrent of
men and horses down the hill, and the confused mob of Agpuris was
cloven as though by a wedge.  The point of the wedge was a slender
figure on a black horse, an oddly shaped cloth, half brown and half
white, streaming behind it like a veil.  The Rani was heading the
avengers of her son.

There was no time to watch the prowess of the Rajputs and Rukn-ud-din's
Moslems, for Warner came galloping up.

"I am to fight your guns, Gerrard; you are wanted to lead the
Habshiabadis.  Their precious general took care to bring something with
him to keep his courage up, and when we nearly lost the hill just now,
I suppose he took too much of it.  At any rate, he's quite incapable,
and his men are demanding to go on alone."

Gerrard mounted his horse and galloped back to where Charteris, sword
in hand, was riding slowly up and down in front of the ranks of the
eager Habshiabadis, pressing back with the flat any man who pushed
forward.  He turned sharply to Gerrard.

"Look here, Hal; the Rani is going for vengeance, not victory--thinking
of nothing but cutting through to Sher Singh's elephant.  Her men will
be swallowed up, unless you can make a diversion.  Break the enemy up a
bit, and I'll bring the Darwanis down and finish 'em."

"Better ride round the hill and come at them from a different
direction," suggested Gerrard.

"All right.  I'll support you," and as Gerrard led the disgusted and
protesting Habshiabad cavalry away from the fight, Charteris sent off
the doctor to Bishen Ram, whose soldiers had remained inactive since
they had been ordered to cease firing for fear of hitting the Rani's
horsemen.  Now they were to advance and attack the portion of Sher
Singh's troops immediately below them, thus creating a diversion and
distracting attention from the direction in which Gerrard would make
his charge.  Charteris was watching the mêlée in the plain rather than
the doctor's progress, but presently an exclamation from his Darwanis
made him look round.  The Granthis had risen to their feet, and before
the doctor could give his message, saluted him with a volley.  He
turned his horse and rode back, pursued by a dropping fire, some of the
bullets falling among the Darwanis, to their intense excitement.

"They fired at me!" he gasped indignantly.  "A bullet went through my
hat, and another grazed my leg.  My horse is hit, too."

"Well, don't be so precious injured about it," said Charteris.  "Most
men would think they were uncommon lucky to escape from the fire of two
regiments with nothing worse.  When you have finished counting your
bruises, just ride to Warner, and tell him to lay every gun he has dead
on the Granthis.  If they attempt to fire or to move down towards Sher
Singh, he is to fire upon them.  If they persist, let him mow them down
without mercy--plug into them with grape and canister and everything
he's got."

The doctor rode away, and Charteris turned his attention again to the
field, where the Rani, supported by a lessening phalanx of her men, was
steadily cutting her way towards Sher Singh.  Watching through his
glass, the Englishman saw a movement in the gilded howdah of the
Rajah's elephant, saw that a man in gleaming crimson and a golden
turban was taking careful aim with a long matchlock.  Charteris had
barely time to remember the tale of Sher Singh's skill in shooting
which he had heard at Adamkot before the Rani flung up her arms and
fell from her horse into the turmoil seething round her.  The man in
the howdah received a second gun from an attendant, and turned in
another direction, that in which Gerrard was just appearing at the head
of the Habshiabadis.  Charteris shouted a useless warning, realising as
the words left his lips that his voice could never carry across the din
of battle, but even while he shouted, Gerrard's sword flew from his
hand and he pitched forward on his horse's neck.  More Charteris could
not see, for the Granthis under Bishen Ram uttered a yell of triumph
and sprang forward to hurl themselves into the strife, but Warner was
ready for them, and a shell bursting in front of their line gave them
pause.  Another advance, another shell, and then a shower of grape,
adroitly directed at a stream of men trying to edge their way down into
the plain by a side-path, and after a half-hearted volley directed at
the guns over the heads of the fighters below, the Granthis gave up
their attempt to move.  It was now or never, for the Habshiabadis were
wavering, evidently uncertain whether to stay and succour Gerrard or to
continue their charge.  Charteris saw that if success was to be
attained he must risk every man he had, and pausing only to send the
doctor to tell Warner again to keep the Granthis back at all costs, he
hurled himself and his eager Darwanis into the fray.  The unsupported
guns and the disaffected regiments on the hill were the only portions
of his force left outside the _mêlée_.  Before this desperate expedient
Sher Singh's spirit quailed.  He left his elephant, and mounting a
horse, spurred out of the battle towards Agpur.  Disgusted by his
disappearance, his men held out for a while, but Charteris and his wild
horsemen were riding them down on one side, and the rallied
Habshiabadis on the other, and they were without a leader.  They broke
at last, and made for Agpur in headlong flight, pursued so closely by
the Darwanis that Warner durst not fire upon them.  Charteris was
chasing his own men now, turning them back with praise and promises,
threats and curses, seizing one man by the arm and another by the
bridle, in deadly fear that they would carry the pursuit too far, and
be caught when Sher Singh's men turned at bay.  With the assistance of
their own chiefs, he succeeded at last in shepherding back all but a
few who had gone too far to be reached, and was met as he returned by a
deputation of Granthis, very stiff and austere in wounded dignity,
demanding why they had not been allowed to take part in the fight, and
why Warner Sahib had turned his guns on them.

Never was there so innocent and so deeply injured a body of men.  Asked
why they had fired at the doctor, they replied promptly that they
thought he was ordering them to retire from the position they held,
when they were anxious only to throw themselves upon Sher Singh's flank
and cut off his retreat, as the advance prevented by Warner could
witness.  Charteris declined to take their grievances too seriously.
Their behaviour had been most suspicious, and he was fairly certain
that if Sher Singh had shown signs of winning they would have joined
him at once, but it was possible that Gerrard held a different opinion,
and he wished to consult him before taking any definite step.
Promising to consider their protest and give them an answer on the
morrow, he rode on to look for his friend, but before he could reach
the spot where he had fallen, he was stopped by a little procession of
sorely wounded Rajputs, carrying on a litter of crossed spears a body
covered with a cloak.  Rukn-ud-din and several of his men, not one
unwounded, followed, and Charteris saluted as he met them.

"You carry her Highness's body to the burning?" he asked.

"Aye, sahib," answered the leader of the Rajputs, the Rani's cousin.
"Daughter and wife and mother of kings, she has died as a king should
die, and the burning of a king shall be made for her.  But I beseech
your honour to be witness to a certain thing."  He unwrapped from his
arm the discoloured cloth, dipped in her son's blood, which the Rani
had worn when she left Agpur to demand vengeance, and divided it
lengthwise with his sword.  "Half of this I will take, and the other
shall be borne by Komadan Rukn-ud-din, who has been faithful to his
lord and his lord's mother, and to the salt he has eaten.  As the dead
bore it, so will we bear it, until the blood of Kharrak Singh can be
blotted out in the blood of him who slew him."

Rukn-ud-din limped forward and received the ghastly trophy, and
Charteris saluted again and passed on.  The fight had raged hotly where
Gerrard had fallen, and it was some time before they found him.  The
doctor did what he could for him on the spot, and then advised his
being taken at once to the camp, where Sher Singh's bullet might be
extracted, and his other injuries properly treated.  His friend's
insensibility alarmed Charteris almost more than the actual wounds, and
he gave his horse to the groom, and walked beside the bearers, trying
to induce them to keep step, and not jar the patient unnecessarily.  It
was therefore an unfortunate moment for a large and frowsy--he would
almost have said snuffy--figure to lurch forward and clasp him in an
expansive embrace.

"Eh, man, that was a gran' fight, yon!" it hiccoughed, then relapsed
into dignity and Hindustani.  "What a battle we have had, sahib!  What
a victory we have won!"

"We, indeed!" said Charteris, releasing himself with strong disgust.
"General Desdichado, I suppose?"

But the General, apparently unconscious of his momentary lapse of
memory, was not responsive to English.  "The Sahib was pleased to
say----?" he inquired politely.

"I say this, you old villain, that you nearly lost us the battle, and
if Lieutenant Gerrard should die, I give you my word I'll have you shot
for neglect of duty in the face of the enemy!" cried Charteris
furiously.

"The Sahib is pleased to forget that I am accountable only to my own
master," said the General, and retired in good order, though with as
much haste as was compatible with a very unsteady walk.

The unpleasant business of extracting the bullet brought Gerrard to his
senses, and Charteris found his hand wrung almost to numbness as he
knelt by his side.  Those were the days before anaesthetics, and a
bullet in the shoulder required a good deal of torture before it could
be got rid of.

"I thought it was all up with me, Bob," whispered Gerrard when the
operation was over.

"Not just yet, old boy.  If it had been an inch or two more to one
side, now----"

"When I went down among the horses' feet, I meant.  It was you got me
out, old fellow, I know."

"Had to do a good many things first, I'm afraid, and it wasn't very
easy to find you.  Case of 'None could see Valerius, And none wist
where he lay.'  By the bye, Hal, should you say that those
_dangawalas_[1] of Granthis were playing fair to-day, or not?  Did they
fire as Sher Singh advanced?"

"Oh yes, they fired," said Gerrard dreamily.

"You don't mean that they fired at us?"

"No, they fired--all right--but----" his voice became weaker, and he
seemed satisfied not to finish.  The doctor made Charteris a sign not
to disturb him further, and he was obliged to give the Granthis the
benefit of the doubt.



An attack of fever, complicated by his wounds, kept Gerrard from all
rational conversation for some time, but when he recovered his senses,
he thought that it was still the night of the battle.  On the roof of
the tent brooded the gigantic shadow of Charteris in his shirt-sleeves,
writing busily by the usual light of a candle-end stuck into the neck
of a bottle.

"Bob!" said Gerrard weakly.  Charteris was at his side in a moment.

"Want anything, old boy?  By Jove, I'm uncommon glad to hear your voice
again--talking sensibly, that is.

"But it's only a few hours since you brought me in here."

"A few fiddlesticks!  My dear fellow, it's three weeks."

"Bob, have they sent us the siege artillery?"

"No, and they won't.  Guns are too precious to move without escort, and
British troops are too expensive to cart about in the rains.  So here
we are, twiddling our thumbs till better times come."

"But what about the country--and Sher Singh?"

"Sher Singh is safe in Agpur.  We've got him shut up there, at any
rate.  But Granthistan is in a blaze, Hal.  The Commander-in-Chief is
on his way up-country.  It's another Granthi War--thanks to their
delay."

"And our Granthis?"

"Oh, they marched off bag and baggage to join Sher Singh the other
night, when the news came that we were not to be reinforced till the
cold weather.  I didn't hear of their going till they had nearly
reached Agpur, and I wasn't particularly anxious to stop them when I
did."

"Better rid of them.  You know they fired blank all day--the day of the
battle, I mean?"

"That was the trick, was it?  I couldn't get it out of you.  Not that
it would have made much difference if I had known, I suppose.  I tell
you, Hal, there was a moment when, if only the heavy artillery had come
up, we held Sher Singh in the hollow of our hands.  He was in such a
panic when he got back to Agpur that he actually fired on his own
troops when they crowded across the bridge after him.  They would have
handed him over to us like lambs if we could have threatened the city
then.  But it's no use crying over spilt milk.  I'm going to make use
of this interval in hostilities to send you to Ranjitgarh for a bit,
old boy.  If they won't use the river to send us our big guns, we may
use it to recruit our invalids a bit.  It can't be as hot at Ranjitgarh
as it is here.  But I put you on your honour to come back.  No one must
lead the Habshiabadis into Agpur but you.  You will find me relegated
to my original obscurity by that time, with a duly appointed
Brigadier--a _nya jawan_[2]--riding roughshod over my tenderest
feelings, but you can still swagger as the officer accompanying the
forces of a friendly state."

Gerrard had not been listening.  "Bob," he whispered, "I--I can't go to
Ranjitgarh."

"Why not, old boy'?"

"She may be there.  They will have fetched the ladies down from the
hills if there is trouble."

"I think not.  Old Cinnamond has taken the field, but there are plenty
of troops in Ranjitgarh.  But if she is there, Hal?"

"I might speak--I ain't master of myself, Bob."

"Well, my dear fellow, and why not?  Have you forgot what I said--that
you were to have the next turn?  Speak, by all means, and take her with
my blessing, if she'll take you."

"Bob, I won't have it.  I have been making a fool of myself when I
didn't know what I was saying, and you are behaving like a brick
because you are sorry for me."

"Ton my word, it's nothing of the sort.  I can say now what I wouldn't
say once, that I had rather see her happy with you than unhappy with
me.  I'm not going to let you outdo me there, you see, though I may be
a little bit late."

"Good old Bob!" said Gerrard weakly.

"Not a bit of it.  Ain't we chums, old boy?  Now remember, _pop_ goes
the weasel!"



[1] Mutineers.

[2] New hand.




CHAPTER XXI.

FAINT HEART AND FAIR LADY.

"My dear, I fear you will think I have been indiscreet."

Mrs James Antony looked up, and caught her husband's humourously
deprecating expression.  "Oh, James, I know that means you have done
something dreadful, and want me to get you out of the difficulty!" she
sighed.  "Well, love, what is it?"

"I have sent a _kasid_ to meet poor Gerrard, to tell him he is to come to
us, and we will take no refusal.  As soon as the man was gone, I
remembered that you would probably object to his being thrown into Miss
Cinnamond's company."

"But surely you must see for yourself, love, that it would be most
awkward for both of them?  I almost think I had better ask Mrs Jardine to
take in dear Honour for the time.  She would be delighted, I am sure."

"You know best, my dear.  If Lady Cinnamond would not mind finding
herself under such an obligation to Mrs Jardine, it is not for me to make
objections."

"She would dislike it extremely, love, as you well know.  But what else
is there to be done?"

"I don't myself see why there should be any awkwardness at all," said
James Antony sturdily.  "If Miss Cinnamond is going to marry Gerrard,
they had better come to an understanding and get it over, and if
not--why, they will have to meet in the future, and they may as well
begin now.  If the girl chooses to be silly about it, she had better go
back to her mother."

"But, James, love, you don't consider.  How could I let her go back,
knowing that poor dear Mrs Cowper has taken such a dislike to her sister?
Now that she has lost her babe, it would be terrible if they met before
time had softened her grief a little.  And it is not as if dear Honour
were in the least to blame.  I am sure she was keeping house for her
father most beautifully when he was compelled to take the field.  We are
indebted to the Cinnamonds for so many civilities that it would be hard
indeed if we could not help them out of a difficulty by entertaining the
poor girl for a while."

"Quite so, my dear, but it would also be hard if the poor girl could not
help us by assisting to entertain a fellow-guest for a while.  In fact, I
consider that by bringing them to a mutual understanding we should be
doing a kindness not only to the young people themselves but to the
General and Lady Cinnamond."

"Certainly they have no objection to Lieutenant Gerrard," said Mrs Antony
meditatively.

"None whatever, my dear, so that we shall positively be furthering their
wishes.  Come, Jane; ain't I only wise in bringing my indiscretions to
you to set right, since you are such a dab at getting me out of a mess?"

"Fie, James, what slang!  Indeed I don't wonder you affect to consult me,
since it seems to me you will get your own way undisturbed."

James Antony might go on his way with his great laugh, and his wife shake
her head at him in purely simulated reproof, but the results of their
involuntary diplomacy were hardly as satisfactory to the objects thereof
as to themselves.  Gerrard's heart gave an ecstatic bound when his host
mentioned casually on meeting him that Miss Cinnamond was staying at the
Residency during the absence of her father at the front and her mother in
the hills.  All the way from the camp within sight of Agpur, during the
hot voyage diversified with interludes of sniping from the river-banks,
he had assured himself persistently that nothing should induce him to
take advantage of Bob's generosity.  But these good resolutions were
forgotten as he lay in the palanquin which conveyed him from the
landing-place to the Residency, listening, without comprehending what was
said, to James Antony's gruff voice firing off items of latest
intelligence like minute-guns.  In a few moments he would see Honour,
look into her frank eyes, hold her cool hand, begin the siege of her
heart in which his faithful love--freed from the disturbing influence of
Charteris's presence--must surely succeed in breaking down the rampart of
maiden coldness within which she had entrenched herself.  Yes, he was
glad of Charteris's absence; thankful for it.  Bob had bidden him of his
own free will to go ahead, and was he to waste the opportunity for which
he had so long yearned in vain?

But disappointment was waiting for him at the Residency.  Honour remained
so persistently in the background behind Mrs Antony that it seemed almost
as if she was hiding.  Her hand barely touched Gerrard's, her eyes
shunned his, and her manner was constrained--almost awkward.  Before
Gerrard had crossed the verandah he had divined a reason for this change:
she had read her own heart at last, and it was Bob Charteris that she
loved.  And here was he, lagging miserably superfluous on the stage for
three or four weeks, while Charteris was held fast by his duties before
Agpur, and was as unaware of his good fortune as he was unable to profit
by it.

Second thoughts brought, if not a degree of hope, at least a less
complete yielding to despair.  Perhaps it was not Charteris whose image
blinded Honour to the presence of her other lover.  It might only be that
people had been talking, that Mrs Jardine had presumed to offer Honour
some advice inconsistent with the delicate nature of the situation,
perhaps urged her to terminate it in Gerrard's favour, since she had,
unasked, taken his candidature under her wing.  That would be quite
sufficient to account for the girl's coolness and constraint.  The battle
was not, then, absolutely lost, and it might even yet be possible to turn
it into a victory.  Gerrard would be very cautious, very diplomatic, and
would keep their intercourse on the safe ground of their common
preferences in prose and poetry, until he had enabled her to dissociate
him in her mind from his too zealous champions.

Save in one respect, Honour responded to this treatment with a readiness
that was almost embarrassing.  Her novel shyness fell from her when it
became clear that Gerrard was not intending immediately to speak to her
of love, and in discussing the new Dickens and the latest Tennyson she
revealed herself to him almost as freely as of old.  James Antony
agonized his wife by portentous nods and winks behind their backs,
indicative of the complete and final understanding now in course of
accomplishment, but Mrs Antony was not so well satisfied, though she was
unaware of the exact nature of the rift in Gerrard's lute.  One day
Honour broke into a deep discussion of the social and educational topics
touched on in the _Princess_ with a question which had no relation to
them whatever.  It was clear that her thoughts were far from Gerrard's
exposition of his views, or why should she suddenly have asked how long
it took him to reach Charteris at Kardi with the guns after receiving his
note entreating him to hasten?  Gerrard set his teeth.  It was Charteris,
then.  He answered the question fully, and also the others by which it
was followed.  Honour's curiosity on the subject of the unauthorised
operations in Agpur seemed insatiable, and bit by bit she drew from him
the whole history of the campaign.  Following her lead, he made a loyal
endeavour to keep Charteris in the forefront of his narrative, smiling
bitterly to himself when once or twice she questioned him directly about
his own doings.  This was mere politeness, of course, it was Charteris in
whom she was really interested.

The irony of his own anticipations struck Gerrard forcibly after a
fortnight or so principally spent in talking about Charteris.  Outside
the air was filled with wars and rumours of wars, with reports that the
Granthi army was moving on Ranjitgarh, or that this or the other Sirdar
was about to cut the communications with Agpur, and in the society of
James Antony and his intimates these were the topics that everybody
discussed.  But spending the mid-day hours in the damp heat of the
drawing-room, where paper grew mouldy and the covers peeled off books,
under the influence of the rains, with Mrs Antony occupied at a discreet
distance with reading or letter-writing, Gerrard endured what would have
been martyrdom but for the bitter-sweet sense of Honour's
presence--possessing which he could not be wholly miserable.  Continually
there forced itself on him the change in her since the days when they had
lamented together the supposed death of Charteris.  She was restless,
prone to a curious impatience, and the literary interests which had first
drawn them together satisfied her no more.  Only one explanation could
fit the facts.  Bob Charteris was not literary in his tastes, and Honour,
with her heart awakened, had learnt to know that life was more than books.

As the time approached for Gerrard's return to active service, it struck
him that she had perceived her unconscious cruelty, and was endeavouring
to atone for it.  He loved her the better for the thought, though it made
him all the more miserable, since the tenderness in her voice, the tears
he sometimes surprised in her eyes, must spring from a pity that was not
at all akin to love.  No doubt, too, she was thinking of Charteris,
keeping the field in the rains, and extensively abused on all sides as
the cause of the war, and Gerrard would have liked to assure her that he
understood, and to prophesy a general revulsion of feeling when the Agpur
business had been brought to a successful conclusion.  But apparently
sympathy was at a discount with Honour, for the slightest attempt to
approach the subject--even an honest effort to assure her that Bob's
safety should be his first care in the future, for her sake--brought back
at once the sense of constraint, and made her manner hard and impatient,
not to say snappish.  Their final parting took place in public, but this
was Gerrard's own fault, for he could not trust himself alone with her.
He might have been a weak fool to hang about her for so long, but to
offer himself as a bearer of tender messages for Charteris was beyond
him.  She was very pale, and seemed to find difficulty in speaking, and
he guessed at once that she was envying him his good fortune in seeing
her lover so soon.  But his selfishness in refusing to volunteer as a
messenger was rightly punished, for Mrs Jardine, who had seen fit to
appear at the Residency to borrow a fancy-work pattern from Mrs Antony,
just as he was about to start, was not minded to leave things longer in
the uncertainty which had tried her so deeply.

"What! no message for poor Mr Charteris?" she inquired archly, as
Honour's hand touched Gerrard's to the accompaniment of a single murmured
word of farewell.

"Miss Cinnamond knows that I should feel honoured in carrying any message
of hers," he said stiffly.

Honour blushed red, though she looked annoyed.  "Oh, give him my best
wishes, please!" she said lightly.

"Very distant and suitable, I'm sure!" muttered Mrs Jardine, much
disappointed, but Honour did not hear her.

"_You_ have not asked for any message--for yourself," she murmured,
looking at Gerrard's sword-belt as if she had never seen one quite like
it before.

"I did not venture--it is only your kindness that makes you think of it,"
he stammered.

"Perhaps you would rather not have it?"  She raised her eyes for an
instant and looked at him bravely.  "My very best wishes--to you."

"_Bus, bus!_" shouted James Antony from the foot of the steps.  "Don't be
all day binding ladies' favours on your helm, Gerrard, my boy.  Get it
over; it ain't as bad as it looks."

He ran up the steps again, and his great hand descended heavily on
Gerrard's shoulder, and Gerrard, thrilled through by the glance Honour
had turned upon him, and with all his preconceived ideas shattered and
clashing under the impact of a wholly new thought, must perforce allow
himself to be hurried away, vaguely aware that Mrs Jardine, baulked of
her expected sensation, was apostrophizing the acting-Resident as a
"naughty man!"  At the foot of the steps he turned suddenly.  One word
with Honour, even in Mrs Jardine's hearing, and his doubts would be
resolved for ever.  But James Antony fairly dragged him on.

"No looking back now, my dear fellow.  You must make me your messenger if
you have anything to say.  Do you forget that they are waiting for you at
the _ghat_?"

Gerrard mounted his pony reluctantly, then looked eagerly round.
Honour's face might end his doubts as easily as her voice.  But she was
not to be seen; Mrs Jardine was nodding and smiling alone in the
verandah, rather to the disgust of Mrs Antony, who was dimly visible in
the doorway of the drawing-room.  Gerrard could not detect the form
crouched behind her spreading skirts, the face peering under her falling
sleeve, and once again doubt attained mastery over his mind.  If Honour
had meant really to rebuke him for his backwardness, then was he indeed
the most blessed of men, but perhaps she was only mildly chaffing
Charteris's friend.  It was not like her, but could one moment at parting
give the lie to the experience, the settled certainty, of weeks of close
intercourse?  And she had not cared to wait to see him ride away!

During the river voyage, despite the ample opportunity he enjoyed for
forming definite conclusions, Gerrard remained balanced between two
contradictory opinions, and he was still much tumbled up and down in his
mind when he landed and fell into the eminently bracing company of
Charteris.  British troops and siege-guns--not now to be spared from
Granthistan--had come and were still coming up from Bombay, and the lines
which had been fortified by the Darwanis and Habshiabad force were now
only part of an extensive position.  Charteris pointed out the various
spots, much changed now since the battle in which Gerrard had received
his wound, as they rode up to the camp.

"Then you are under the yoke again, Bob?" said Gerrard.

"Rayther, just a very few!  The Brigadier has determined in his own mind
that I am dead set upon presuming, so, to make it impossible, he snaps my
head off every time he sees me, and at once."

"Hard luck, old boy!"

"Oh, I share it with my betters.  By the bye, is it true that the
Governor-General has been powdering Sir Edmund's wig?"

"In a way.  Antony wanted to promise Sher Singh his life if he would
surrender, and the G.-G. came down upon him like a hundred of bricks.
Told him that if he had put forth any such proclamation he would have to
recall it, I believe, but happily things had not gone so far."

"I'm sorry for Sir Edmund, but I back Blairgowrie--which is jolly
handsome behaviour, since he has written some uncommon nasty things about
me.  'Pon my word, Hal, I'm right glad that they refused us our
siege-guns, and left us here tied by the leg for the hot weather."

Gerrard looked at him in astonishment.  "But if we had been able to stamp
out Sher Singh's rebellion--as we could have done if they had supported
us properly--it would have saved this second Granthi War, Bob."

"That's just it.  We should have gone on trying to govern through the
Durbar, and declaring that we were merely taking care of the country
until Lena Singh comes of age, knowing that if he ever reigned alone it
would mean the destruction of all we had done.  But now the farce is at
an end, and they must annex Granthistan.  Our _ikbal_[1] stands fairly
high, but it can't take the risk of a war bad enough to drag the C.-in-C.
from his Olympian retirement every two or three years.  I'm sorry for Sir
Edmund, who has done his very best to bolster up the Durbar, but facts
are too strong for him."

"He will take it hard," said Gerrard.  "Here is my camp, I see--my
_campoo_,[2] I should say," as they were met by a cluster of salaaming
Habshiabadis, who testified loudly their joy at his return.  "But why
shouldn't I report myself to the Brigadier at once, Bob, and then come
back and settle in?"

"Because you ain't wanted, my boy.  You don't go dropping in on your
General in that promiscuous style.  You wait till it's convenient to him
to send for you, and then you apologize for your existence in the most
abject terms at your command.  I happen to know--friend at court, you
see--that you'll be summoned about sunset, and if you behave very nicely,
and answer prettily when you're spoken to, you may even be honoured by an
invitation to dinner."

"Learning one's place!" said Gerrard, with a wry look.

"Exactly--as I have been doing.  Our days of independent action are over,
old boy.  If we had been allowed to capture Agpur it might have been
different, but I don't know.  Who wouldn't go from governing kingdoms to
take up regimental work again?"

Gerrard did not possess the art of banishing unpleasantness with a jest,
and his brow was clouded as they rode up to his tent between the lines of
the Habshiabadis.  For them, however, he had nothing but praise,
rejoicing their hearts by admiration of their discipline, and learning,
as he expected, that Charteris had continued their military education
during his absence.  General Desdichado was still maintaining a judicious
seclusion, owing to a fresh attack of illness, it seemed, and Charteris
remarked on the curious character of the ailment, which invariably became
acute when there was a question of the General's coming in contact with
any British officer.

"Scandal says that nothing but Sadiq Ali's direct command keeps him in
the field at all," he added.  "Otherwise he would sneak back to
Habshiabad, and drink himself to death there in peace."

They were inside the tent now, and Charteris turned suddenly on his
friend.  "Well, Hal, what news?  Is that blessing of mine wanted, or not?"

"It's no good pretending I don't know what you mean, but on my life, Bob,
I can't tell you."

"Can't tell--in a matter of this kind?  Nonsense!"

"It's this way.  Almost the whole of the time I was there I could have
sworn she cared for you.  We talked of nothing but you and your doings."

"Precious little in that.  You did just the same when you thought I was
dead, and it meant absolutely nothing."

"But it makes every possible difference when we both know you are alive.
At any rate, I was too jolly downhearted to court another refusal.  But
just as I came away, she looked at me in a way that made me think--and
something that she said----"

"And you didn't make sure?  My young friend, it strikes me that you fear
your fate a good deal."

"Our Mr James hurried me away.  But I am afraid--and I don't mind saying
so--of risking my last chance."

"Why your last?  I wish I were coxcomb enough to be sure it was your
last, and that you would lose it."

"But even if she refused us both again, you can't go on persecuting a
girl who has said no to you three times."

"Why not?  I shall go on asking her, if she says no a hundred times.
It's for her own good.  No girl can really wish to be an old maid."

"Rather than marry you or me, perhaps."

"That shows how little she knows about it.  But I give you my word she
ain't going to lose a good husband through any slackness of mine.  You
won't find me wasting my opportunities as you have been doing."

"You pitch it pretty strong, Bob, but I believe I deserve it.  Still, it
was not my fault that I could not settle things that last moment.  Will
you do this for me, old boy?  When we get back to Ranjitgarh, leave me
free to speak to her if I meet her first.  If I find that it is you after
all, I promise you to make no attempt to persuade her, and if you meet
her first, of course you will find out for yourself."

"I believe you, my boy!  And I only hope we may find out definitely.
This uncertainty plays the very mischief with a man when he has time to
think of it."

"My dear Bob, you don't mean to say you would rather know that all was up
with you than be able to go on hoping?"

"That I would!  One can set one's teeth then, and grin and bear it, but
it's horrid disturbing, when you're trying to give your mind to regular
hard grinding work, for the thought of all that kind of thing to be
always intruding."

"If I didn't know you better than you know yourself, old boy, I should
say not only that you didn't care a pin for her, but that you couldn't.
Why, how could one carry on work at all without those very thoughts to
help one?"

"You're getting libellous, Hal.  It's the uncertainty, not the thoughts,
that I find disturbing.  If she would take me--bless her!--I'll lay you
anything you like she would be the Commander-in-Chief's lady in the
shortest time on record."

"Bob, it's precious hard on both of us.  Whichever gets her, one of us
must be miserable."

"Let us make quite sure that she's happy, then.  But it's a little late
to be talking like this, ain't it?  What I find most cause to blame in
you, Hal, is a tendency to the sentimental.  Turn your mind strictly to
business--namely, to receiving the orderly who is about to summon you to
the presence of the high and mighty Speathley."

After the warning he had received, Gerrard was not likely to be late for
his appointment, but when he arrived at Major-General Speathley's
headquarters, it was evident that the Brigadier thought it salutary for
junior officers to cool their heels a little in his anteroom.  A number
of other men were hanging about, and a low buzz of conversation filled
the tent.  Gerrard was known by name to most of those present, and he was
soon in possession of the chief item of interest which was agitating the
camp.  That morning's reconnaissance had been pushed as far as Ratan
Singh's tomb, which had been occupied without opposition, and a careful
search had revealed the shallow grave in which the dishonoured remains of
Nisbet and Cowper had been hastily hidden after the tragedy in the spring.

"The old man swears he will turn out Ratan Singh--whoever he may have
been--and give the poor chaps a _pucca_ funeral in the shrine itself,"
said one youth.

"I was not aware that we fought with the dead," said Gerrard, rather
disgusted.

"Seems rayther a spicy idea to me," drawled another.  "They do our
fellows out of a grave, so we prig one of theirs for 'em."

"Surely we can do better for them than a second-hand tomb," said Gerrard,
more emphatically than he realised.  "Wouldn't it be more to the purpose
to leave Ratan Singh in peace, since he has done us no injury, and punish
the living who deserve it?"

"Eh--what?" demanded an explosive voice behind the group.  "And who may
you be, young sir, who think your opinion so well worth hearing?"

Gerrard turned to confront a short choleric man in uniform, whom he had
no difficulty in recognising to be the Brigadier.  "My name is Gerrard,
sir, and I am attached to the Habshiabad force."

"Oho!"  General Speathley drew out with some difficulty an eyeglass, and
fixing it in his eye, looked up at Gerrard as though he had been too
small to see without it.  "So this is another of the sucking Caesars who
command armies in Granthistan!  And what, pray, may be the nature of your
very valuable suggestion, sir?"

"I have acted as Resident at Agpur, sir, and know something about the
people, and I was about to say that they would be far more impressed with
the retribution if we buried our glorious dead in the very midst of the
city from which they were driven rather than in an old tomb outside it."

The astonishment on the General's face was reflected on those around him.
Clearly it was not often that Brigadier Speathley heard an opinion
different from his own.  "Proceed, sir, proceed!" he snapped ferociously.
"I'll be bound we haven't been favoured with the full extent of your
views yet."

The tone was intolerable, and Gerrard grew white with suppressed wrath.
"I have no more to say, sir, if the petty and unchristian course of
turning a dead man out of his grave has already been decided upon."

"I thought so!" cried the General in triumph.  "Antony's cursed
sentimental notions, of course--might have known it.  You are one of
those who prefer the blackfellows to your own people, sir, who think the
lives of the Company's servants are nothing compared with the fear of
displeasing the natives."

"At least, sir, I placed myself at Mr Charteris's disposal to rescue or
avenge Captain Cowper and Mr Nisbet, or your army might not have been
here to-day.  And you will permit me to add that I still consider my plan
likely to be more impressive, if less disgusting, to the natives than
yours."

"And you'll permit me to say, sir," roared the General, whose eyes were
protruding from his head, "that my plan will be carried out if every
pestilent political in Granthistan is opposed to it.  It's high time you
came back to duty, sir.  You seconded subalterns think no small beer of
yourselves, I know, but you'll learn better here, I can tell you, and
you'll find----  Eh, what's that?"

An unobtrusive aide-de-camp was presenting a paper at his elbow, and as
he read it his face changed, but by no means cleared.  "Hum--ha!" he
muttered, "it seems you have some fancy status here--political trick, I
suppose--some quibble about Habshiabad lying outside Granthistan.  But
it's all one.  If you ain't under my command, you don't get mentioned in
my despatches--see?  Eh, how does that suit you, sir?"

"I am honoured by the omission, sir," said Gerrard.



[1] Prestige.

[2] Native force under European leadership.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE TRIUMPH OF THE DEAD.

The siege of Agpur was in full swing, the big guns battering at the
walls from a distance, while the trenches crept nearer and nearer to
the outlying suburbs.  Nisbet and Cowper still slept in their
desecrated grave in the precincts of Ratan Singh's tomb, not because
the mind of General Speathley had yielded in the least to Gerrard's
arguments, but on account of the opportune arrival of the ammunition
for which the army had been waiting, and which enabled active work to
begin at once.  A chilly neutrality reigned between the Brigadier and
the officer accompanying the Habshiabad troops, who saw as little as
possible of one another, finding it advisable to communicate through a
third person.  This was usually Charteris, who stood aghast when he
found what a gulf had been established between them.

"If it had been me to go into a passion and use insubordinate language,
no one would have wondered," he lamented.  "But you, Hal--who have
barely lost your temper three times in your life!  And on a mere matter
of sentiment, too!"

"Didn't you yourself accuse me of a tendency to the sentimental?"

"That was in an affair in which it was more or less natural.  But when
it comes to being cut out of despatches for the sake of a dead
blackfellow----!  Seriously, old boy, it may be bad for you in the
future."

"You know as well as I do whether mention in despatches would have the
slightest weight with a certain lady if she cared for a man.  And if
she didn't, what in the world does it signify losing it?"

"Poor beggar, he's got 'em badly!" mused Charteris, as he left his
friend's tent.  His own sphere of influence being situated within the
confines of Granthistan, he was indubitably subordinate to General
Speathley, but a certain power of accommodating himself to his
surroundings had saved him from incurring the Brigadier's active
enmity.  He could never be wholly forgiven for taking on his own
account those preliminary steps which must always prevent the conquest
of Agpur from being ascribed to the Bombay Army, but he had sufficient
tact, or worldly wisdom, to refrain from such allusions to the fact as
Gerrard had let fall.



The beleaguered garrison of Agpur were not minded to take their
punishment lying down.  At first Sher Singh had sent various
ambassadors professing his readiness to surrender if his life was
guaranteed, and when the authorities on the spot proved adamant,
indited heart-rending letters to Sir Edmund Antony, entreating his
intervention.  But the Governor-General had spoken too plainly to admit
any possibility of mistake, or even a loophole for mediation, and Sir
Edmund, wounded and resentful as he felt over the treatment meted out
to him, could only repeat the promise already given of a fair trial for
the Rajah if he surrendered, and protection for his women.  Thereupon
Sher Singh's attempts at negotiation ceased, and his followers applied
themselves with ardour to making the besiegers' position as
uncomfortable as possible, by means of sorties and surprise attacks.
There was always the chance of an outbreak of disease in the British
camp, or even a successful diversion on the part of the revolted
Granthistan army, such as might compel the raising of the siege.

For some nights there had been no attempt at a surprise, and the
trenches had been advanced to a point at which it was intended to erect
a new battery to assail the portion of the city walls best adapted for
breaching.  The construction of this battery was being busily pushed
forward in the dark, by the help of shaded lights, when the
working-party were fiercely assailed by a horde of the enemy, mounted
and on foot, who had poured silently through the gate nearest to the
threatened point, and almost reached the works before their presence
was detected.  The whole of the British force stood to its arms, but
salutary experience had taught the leaders that sorties seldom came
singly, and only the troops nearest the point of attack were moved to
repulse it.  On the further side of the city Gerrard had a hard task to
restrain the eagerness of his men, who could not see why they should be
kept out of the fight, and avenged themselves by detecting endless
imaginary sorties against their own position.  It was a night of
peculiar blackness, and General Desdichado, who had been drawn from his
seclusion by the alarm, evidently found it trying to his nerves.  His
agitation culminated at last in a wild charge into the darkness,
followed by as many of the Habshiabadis as could find their horses,
yelling and discharging their muskets into the night.  Gerrard, hoarse
with his vain exertions, half amused and half disgusted, was left with
Rukn-ud-din and the Rajput Amrodh Chand and their men to defend the
camp.  He turned to make an ironical remark to the former, but found
him standing like a statue, listening intently.

"Sahib, there come men from the city.  As they crossed the bridge, I
heard their horses' feet on the planks."

"Let us go forward a short distance," said Gerrard, and they went out
into the gloom, the tumult of the Habshiabadis' charge on the left
growing faint in their ears.  They could hear nothing of the advance
Rukn-ud-din thought he had detected, and Gerrard, concluding that the
man's ears had deceived him, was about to suggest returning to the
camp, when a distant flash of lightning, such as had been playing on
the horizon during the earlier part of the evening, lit up the
landscape, and showed a company of horsemen riding cautiously away from
the city.  Their aim was evidently to pass between the camp of the
Habshiabadis and that of the next besieging unit, and they had almost
accomplished their purpose when they were seen.

"The brother-slayer seeks to steal away by night!" cried Rukn-ud-din
fiercely, and without another word he and Gerrard turned and raced for
the camp.  One moment to despatch an orderly with a request to
Charteris to detail some of his Darwanis to guard the tents until
General Desdichado saw fit to return, and another to acquaint the
Brigadier with the importance of the crisis, and all the troop were in
their saddles and thundering out in pursuit.  There was no need for
secrecy, for the fugitives had now laid aside their caution, and could
be heard riding for all they were worth, and the result of the chase
would depend on speed, not cunning.  So thick was the darkness that
more than once Gerrard was obliged to draw rein, and in the silence
palpitating with the breath of excited men and horses, listen for the
pursued, but it was soon clear that they were maintaining a fairly
straight line for the north.  There they must sooner or later be
stopped by the river--unless, indeed, the plot included the bribing of
some of the native contractors supplying the British to have their
boats available, and Gerrard redoubled his efforts to catch them up
before they reached it.  Accidents arising from irrigation-canals or
unsuspected nullahs delayed him once or twice, but when the dawn broke
a shout of triumph burst from his weary men.  The fugitives were full
in view, and there were women among them.  Their horses were obviously
flagging, and the dark line which denoted the brink of the now flooded
river was still some distance in front.  Barely, however, had the
troopers given vent to their irrepressible joy at the prospect of so
important a capture, with the loot which would almost certainly
accompany it, when one of them, happening to look behind, uttered a cry
of surprise and disgust.  The pursuers were themselves pursued, a body
of Bombay cavalry following hard upon their heels.  Gerrard set his
teeth angrily as he looked round and verified the man's information.
General Speathley was determined not to allow even this minor exploit
to fall to the share of his allies.

The Rani's contingent needed no words to induce them to get the utmost
out of their horses in order if possible to reach the fugitives first,
but the pursuers gained upon them steadily, and when the two parties
were actually riding level, and an orderly appeared at his elbow,
Gerrard was reluctantly forced to turn and accept a written order
desiring him to give up the pursuit into the hands of the officer
commanding the troops.  To share the honour would have been bad enough,
to lose it altogether was monstrous, and his men eyed the Bombay
troopers with such disfavour as made it evident that little was wanting
to bring about a fratricidal fight.  Gerrard was obliged to fling
himself into the breach, and argue and persuade his sullen sowars into
allowing themselves to be drawn off.  The incident had caused a slight
loss of time, and it was some consolation to the disappointed ones that
the fugitives had contrived to increase their distance before the
Bombay troop were in motion again.  Pride forbade Gerrard and his
followers to wait and see the result of the chase, and they turned
their horses' heads towards Agpur, disdaining to seek more definite
information than could be obtained by furtive glances backwards on the
part of the rear-rank men, whose observations percolated from one to
another until they reached their commander.  In this way Gerrard
learned that the fugitives had been caught up on, or at any rate near,
the very brink of the river, and that a brisk fight was proceeding.  He
had a resentful impulse to take his troop on at full speed, that they
might not behold the triumph of the interlopers, but the horses were
tired, and there was no sense in riding them hard now.  Without the
excitement of the chase to stimulate them, the men flagged after their
long night's work, and it was a dispirited and sulky-looking band that
watched the victorious Bombay troop ride proudly by, escorting their
captives.  The conquerors expressed their feelings by gestures of
derision, which Gerrard's men were too much crushed to return, and
vanished ahead in a cloud of dust.  But when the vanquished tailed
dolefully into camp some hours later, they were met by their
Habshiabadi comrades, eager to inform them that the triumph had not
been so complete after all.  The majority of the fugitives had been
captured, including Sher Singh's favourite wife and her attendants, but
the Rajah himself had spurred his horse into the river and been carried
quickly by the swollen current beyond reach of pursuit.  It would have
been too much to expect the Rani's men to feel any sorrow at this news,
but politeness demanded that they should express it, and fatigue was
forgotten in the delight of donning fresh clothes and paying visits of
condolence to the camp of the Bombay cavalry.  The keenest joy came
from the fact which was on every man's lips, that but for the delay
caused by the change of pursuers, Sher Singh's whole party might have
been surrounded and captured before it reached the brink of the river.

But if the disappointment of Sher Singh's escape was outweighed in the
men's minds by the fact that it was through their rivals' fingers he
had slipped, Gerrard was not able to console himself so easily.
Charteris, who had heard with burning indignation of the treatment he
had received, hurried to his tent to sympathize with him, and it seemed
as though the two men had exchanged characters, as Gerrard strode up
and down, breathing out furious threats against the Brigadier, while
his friend, seated precariously astride a camp-chair, sought to
interject counsels of prudence.

"It's not so much the insult to me personally that I resent, as the
loss of the opportunity of ending the campaign at a blow!" cried
Gerrard.

"Quite so.  You wouldn't," said Charteris soothingly.

"Though it's perfectly clear that he was merely pursuing his grudge
against me.  He even stoops to vilify my poor fellows in order to
justify himself.  I hear that he said it was impossible to entrust such
an important capture to an officer not under his authority, and to
troops which had probably been bribed already to let Sher Singh slip
past."

"You had visitors before I came, then?"

"A whole lot of 'em.  Uncommon sympathetic they were, too."

"Uncommon pleased to get up a row between you and old Speathley, I
should say.  Don't you listen to 'em, Hal."

"My dear Bob, there are some things one can't pass over.  We have
submitted to Speathley's caprices too long, and it's time to speak out.
Personal injustice may be forgiven----"

"Precious little forgiveness about you just now," muttered Charteris.

"But when it is a case of injury to the public service, it is necessary
to make a stand," concluded Gerrard impressively.

"Oh, all right; and what's your idea of making a stand?  Challenging
Speathley, or denouncing him to his face?"

"I shall write to the papers."

"Sort of thing Lennox and Keeling are always doing," said Charteris
carelessly.  "Not quite our style, eh?  But if your conscience impels
you to ruin your own career and justify the Brigadier's dislike of you,
I suppose I can't prevent it."

"But think what he has sacrificed!  Sher Singh will raise the country,
bring down the Granthi army upon us, perhaps----"

"It's quite possible.  But what I don't see is how your writing to the
papers is going to prevent it."

"It might lead to----  Hang it, Bob! is the fellow to go unpunished?"

"Won't he be punished enough when the story of Sher Singh's escape gets
about--not to speak of the additional trouble we may expect here?  Hal,
old boy, let him alone.  If you don't, you'll be sorry when you're
yourself again."

"For you to urge patience upon me is a novelty," said Gerrard, rather
bitterly, but his step was less resolute as he tramped about the tent.
Suddenly he sat down opposite Charteris.  "Bob, I begin to think you
are not so very far wrong.  At any rate I'll wait before doing it.
Who's that out there?" he cried sharply, as a shadow moved outside.

"Heaven-born!"  Rukn-ud-din rose from his crouching position and
saluted in the doorway.  "It was told in the ears of this slave that
your honour was very wrathful concerning the escape of the
brother-slayer, and he presumed to approach unbidden with news."

"And what is the news?" demanded Gerrard, still ruffled.

"That the man who escaped was not Rajah Sher Singh at all, sahib."

"What! you mean that he is among the prisoners?"

"Not so, sahib.  He has never left the city."

"But what--what reason have you for thinking so?"

"Does your honour think that the men who have been led by Sher Singh
into their present evil case would permit him to forsake them?  Surely
they would hold him fast."

"No doubt they would if they could, but I imagine he has given them the
slip.  Would he send his wife away without him?"

"Sahib, the woman says she is the Rani, but I think she is merely a
slave-girl playing a part.  If the Rajah wished the troops of the
Company to believe he had escaped, would he not have devised just such
a plot as this, sending forth a party intended for capture, that they
might bear the news?"

"It struck me as so characteristic of Sher Singh to sneak away and
leave his women to be captured that I should never have thought of
doubting it," said Gerrard in perplexity to Charteris, who took up the
questioning.

"But what good could it do to Sher Singh that we should think he had
escaped, Komadan-ji?"

"That your honours would not look for him in the city when it falls,"
replied Rukn-ud-din promptly.  "If there is some hiding-place in which
he may seek safety"--Gerrard's eyes met those of Charteris with sudden
enlightment--"he might remain there in peace, and creep out when all is
quiet again.  But do not take my word for it, sahib.  Only, if there is
no news of Sher Singh's seeking support in the north, and bringing an
army against us, remember what I have said."

"It is well.  We will remember," said Gerrard.  "Say nothing of this to
any one, unless it be to Amrodh Chand."

"It is an order, sahib."  Rukn-ud-din received leave to depart, and
melted silently away.  Gerrard looked at Charteris again.

"The treasury!" he cried breathlessly.

"'Pon my word, that's it.  Unless--I told you how they broke into the
passage, you know, and after the treasure was got out, Sher Singh
ordered the place to be destroyed."

"D'ye think he did it, Bob?"

"I don't, if you ask me.  I think it was a do."

"Exactly, and he has secured himself a comfortable underground retreat,
with two exits, both of which are known to us.  We shall catch him like
a rat in a trap, if we keep our own counsel."

"I believe you, my boy!  And now, what's your mature opinion of your
plan for showing up Speathley?  Ain't it ray-ther better to cover
yourself with glory by producing the missing Sher Singh than by
indulging a revengeful temper to put it out of your power to capture
him?  Old boy, he can't keep you out of despatches then!  And the best
of it is that you and I must do the thing all on our own hook, for the
very good reason that we are both sworn not to reveal the secret of the
treasury to a soul.  We shall have to take Rukn-ud-din and Amrodh Chand
into our confidence as far as the preliminaries go, and they'll be
delighted to help, but they must understand that the thing itself is a
Sahibs' job."

"Don't forget that the whole thing depends on Rukn-ud-din's being right
in saying that Sher Singh never left the city."

"Oh, don't _buck_.[1]  Of course he's right," said Charteris rudely.
And as time went on, it became clearer to the two young men that
Rukn-ud-din was right.  True, the garrison of Agpur made great capital
of the escape across the flooded river, and were continually condoling
with the besiegers on the slowness of their horses, or prophesying
great results from Sher Singh's personal influence in raising up
sympathisers in the north.  It was quite evident that they meant it to
be believed that Sher Singh was not in the city, but the actual news
from the north did not support them.  Lieutenant Ronaldson sent word
that an emissary from Sher Singh, sent to stir up his tribesmen against
the English, had unfortunately just slipped through his fingers, but
though intrigues were heard of in abundance from various quarters,
there were no tidings of the Rajah himself.  Meanwhile, the slow
progress of the siege continued, until it received a sudden
acceleration by means of a lucky shot from a howitzer, which dropped
into the enemy's chief magazine, and blew it up.  After this, events
came in quick succession.  The Agpuris were driven first from their
various positions outside the city walls, then from the suburbs, and a
rough road was levelled through the ruins, that the guns might be
brought to bear upon the palace fortress itself.  For the whole of one
day they pounded at the walls which Partab Singh had constructed as the
aid to his ambitious designs, and at night it was pronounced that the
breach was practicable for the next day.  But in the morning a flag of
truce came out, borne by old Sada Sukhi, a persona grata on account of
his loyalty to Nisbet and Cowper, and it was announced that the
garrison, commanded in the absence of the Rajah by the Diwan Dwarika
Nath, desired to surrender.  Before any terms could be granted, it was
required that Sarfaraz Khan and a number of others known to have been
concerned in the murder of the two Englishmen should be handed over,
and this was done, though merely the dead body of the treacherous
captain of the guard, who had poisoned himself with a drug concealed in
the hilt of his sword, could be carried out to the conquerors.  A
parley between Sada Sukhi and the political officer with the force
settled the terms of surrender for the fighting men and the civil
inhabitants, the cases of any who might hereafter prove to have taken
an active part in the murders being specially reserved, and the remains
of the Agpur army marched out, and were duly disarmed.

Much curiosity was evinced by the British troops forming part of the
besieging army as to the fortress which had held them at bay so long,
and Gerrard, wandering through the place when the transfer of authority
was complete, felt a sense of desecration when he discovered several
privates, looking, in their tight scarlet tunics, stiff stocks and
heavy shakos, most incongruously uncomfortable, taking their ease on
the divan in the tower where he had sat with Partab Singh.  Others were
trying to paddle the deaf and dumb man's boat about the lotus-covered
tank, their adventures affording high delight to their comrades on the
shore, and others again were teasing the wild beasts in the menagerie.
The first troops marching in had found the palace strewn with valuable
stuffs and other treasures, but these had now all been collected and
placed under guard, as were the women's apartments, and there was
nothing left to tempt the cupidity of the soldiers, though they found a
good deal that was capable of injury, and promptly injured it.  The
Residency, in which Gerrard had passed so many lonely days, was badly
knocked about, and strewn with the dishonoured remnants of Nisbet and
Cowper's belongings.  Evidently Sher Singh and his adherents had
wreaked their vengeance even upon the house where the murdered men had
lived, for the place was little more than a ruin.  In the enclosed
garden, where he had dreamt of seeing Honour walking, Gerrard came upon
the political officer, whom he knew well as one of Sir Edmund Antony's
most trusted lieutenants.

"Glad to see you, Gerrard.  Curious you should have come upon me just
here.  Wasn't it you who got into trouble with Speathley by saying that
poor Nisbet and Cowper ought to be buried in the city instead of in
Ratan Singh's tomb?"

"Yes, but I don't know how you heard of it."

"Other people have heard of it as well.  You have impressed the
sensitive imagination of no less a person than the Governor-General, my
dear fellow.  Your suggestion got through to him somehow--some one who
was there writing to some one else, I suppose--and he has sent
peremptory orders for it to be carried out.  Ever since the news
arrived, the pet aide-de-camp has been labouring to convince Speathley
that he originated the idea himself, and was only angry with you
because you took the words out of his mouth, and he is just coming to
believe it."

"Very wise, in the circumstances."

"Uncommonly so.  Well, what do you think of this place for the grave?
It is inside the palace enclosure, and yet quite separated from the
palace itself.  Even if we set up a new Rajah, I suppose we shall keep
a garrison in the town, and a sentry can always be mounted here.  No
future Resident would care to live so close to the palace after what
has happened, I should say."

"I suppose you can't do better," agreed Gerrard reluctantly, looking at
the overgrown wilderness which represented his carefully kept garden.
"Yes, make a cemetery of the place by all means, Rawson.  It looks as
if it had a curse on it."

"What an uncommon romantic fellow you are!" said Rawson
good-humouredly.  "This was my chief reason for choosing the spot.
Look here!"

He took Gerrard by the elbow and turned him round.  From where they
stood they looked straight through the breach made by the guns, and
along the rough track formed by levelling the houses from the chasm in
the outer to that in the inner wall.

"See that?  Almost a straight line, ain't it?  Well, if we bring 'em in
through the double breach, along that road, and bury them here in the
heart of the palace, will it, or will it not, produce a fine moral
effect?"

"Magnificent!" murmured Gerrard, the dramatic force of the idea
gripping him.  "Regular time's revenge."

Two or three days later time's revenge was completed.  The bodies of
Nisbet and Cowper, removed reverently from their desecrated grave and
wrapped in the costliest Kashmir shawls to be discovered among Sher
Singh's treasures, were borne through the breach in the city wall,
attended by representatives of every unit of the besieging force,
across the devastated town and through the ruined defences of the
palace, to be laid to rest in the secluded garden with every possible
military honour.  As the last echoes of the firing over the grave died
away, Gerrard turned to Charteris with quickened breath.

"Bob," he murmured, "they have made a way for a corpse through the
great wall of Agpur."



[1] In modern parlance, "gas."




CHAPTER XXIII.

RUN TO EARTH.

On the evening of the day when the bodies of the two murdered
Englishmen had been laid in the grave with all imaginable honour, four
figures crept stealthily through the shadows at the base of the
ramparts of the palace.  After the funeral, in the course of a stroll
round the walls, Gerrard and Charteris had refreshed their memory of
the various localities.  Long ago they had satisfied themselves as to
the identity of the tree which masked the exit of the secret passage,
and on looking from the parapet they discovered that it had survived
the siege uninjured.  But the hole it concealed was by no means easy to
reach, since it was about half-way up the great face of wall, which was
much higher on the outside than the inside.  True, the stones on the
surface were rough-hewn and much weathered, and vegetation of all sorts
had struck its roots between them during the recent rains, but they
were not too firmly fixed in their places, as a gap here and there
showed.  The adventurers agreed that it would be impossible to make
their attempt from the inside of the fortress, owing to the strict
watch maintained there, and since this decision implied a climb up the
sheer crumbling wall-face from below, the help of a rope was very
necessary.  Since to lower one from above would have attracted
attention, it was clear that it must in some way be raised from below,
and the two friends had set their wits to work, with the result that
when they paused--to all appearance quite casually--on the parapet and
looked over at the tree, each of them drew furtively from his pocket a
ball of twine.  Charteris laughed.

"At any rate I'm glad you haven't beat me, Hal.  I could think of
nothing better than unwinding the string and dropping one end on each
side of the tree, in the hope that it might remain untouched till
to-night.  No, by Jove!  I have thought of a better way.  Give us your
ball."

He knotted the two ends of twine, and dropped the balls dexterously one
on either side of the tree, the string thus remaining steadied against
possible winds by the weight at the bottom.  Then, talking carelessly,
he led his friend on, both hoping that no acquisitive small boy might
chance to poke about along the base of the wall during the afternoon.
Rukn-ud-din and Amrodh Chand had already been informed that their
services were desired that night, and at the appointed time they
slipped away from their quarters into the darkness and joined the two
Englishmen.  Caution was necessary in passing through the narrow lanes
of the city, not only lest implacable partisans of Sher Singh should
seize the opportunity of avenging their master's fall, but lest a
British patrol should be encountered.  Charteris and Gerrard knew the
password, but the composition of their party was certain to rouse
curiosity, and lead to the suspicion that something strange was on
foot.  By dint of effacing themselves deftly round corners, and hiding
in doorways, they managed to avoid notice, and reached the appointed
spot at the desired time, when the moon, rising behind the palace
itself, threw this portion of the wall, and the ground at its foot,
into the deepest shadow.  Sentries were posted both within and without
the walls, and it was necessary to wait until the one on this beat had
turned his back, and then run singly from one patch of shade to
another.  All once safely assembled at the foot of the wall, Charteris
produced a dark lantern, and while the rest stood so as to shield him
from observation, hunted for the two little balls of twine.  They had
fallen not far from one another, and by pulling at the strings it
became evident that they were still knotted over the projecting
tree-trunk.  To one of them the end of a stout rope was attached, and
then the other was pulled, so that the rope might be, as the twine now
was, passed over the tree.  When the two ends of the rope hung level,
forming as it were a double handrail, Charteris seized them, and began
to climb, supporting himself by the ropes at each step as he felt for a
higher rest for his foot.  The slight sound he made, gradually growing
more distant, was the only guide those below had as to his position,
but at last there came a tug upon each rope, which was to be the sign
that he had reached the tree and found the entrance of the passage
practicable.  Before following him, Gerrard turned to the two natives.

"Brothers, you know that we hope to seize this night him who has been
guilty of so many crimes, that he may be brought to a fair trial.  You
know also that a vow of secrecy forbids us to share our knowledge of
this place with you.  Swear to me, then, that after to-night it shall
be to you as though it did not exist, whatever may happen to us."

"We swear it, sahib," said both men, but Rukn-ud-din added, "Provided
that if your honour should call to us for help, we are at liberty to
follow you."

"In that case you may certainly come up," said Gerrard gravely, and he
followed Charteris up the wall.  Amrodh Chand's eyes sought
Rukn-ud-din's in the darkness.

"His vow is safe, brother; but what of our vow of vengeance?"

"Aye; we know what is meant by these trials.  Antni Sahib loves Sher
Singh and will not have him slain, and the judges will know it.  They
will appoint a pleader to gain him his life by false words."

"And we, brother--we who have sworn to wash out the stain from the
severed cloth in the blood of the brother-slayer?  We shall be baulked,
and the women will laugh at us in the streets."

"Aye; men will mock at our beards," said Rukn-ud-din bitterly.  "Has
Jirad Sahib forgotten all that has passed?"

Amrodh Chand's head approached his comrade's closely.  "I think Jirad
Sahib has remembered our vow.  Did he not make us swear that _after
this night_ the place should be to us as though it was not?  What,
then, of to-night?"

Rukn-ud-din pondered sagely this most undeserved aspersion on Gerrard's
sincerity.  "It is well thought of," he said.  "Moreover, it seemed to
me but now that I heard a cry or gasp.  What if it were Jirad Sahib's
voice calling to us, and we have failed him?"

"We will succour him at once," said Amrodh Chand.  "See, brother, I
will knot the ends of the rope under this projecting stone, and follow
thee up."

All unconscious of the insubordinate reasoning of his followers,
Gerrard had made his way up the wall, and reaching the tree, peered
into the blackness in search of Charteris.  There was no sign of the
lantern, but not far off he could hear curious muffled sounds, as
though a struggle was taking place in resolute silence.  Feeling along
the tree-trunk with his hands, he discovered the opening in the wall,
and squeezed himself past the roots into it--rather nervous work in
pitch darkness and with the rope left behind.  He found himself in a
narrow passage, the roof and sides of which he could easily touch, and
close in front of him was going on the struggle he had heard.  Two or
more men must be rolling over one another on the floor, wrestling
desperately, but in silence.  Gerrard durst not interfere, lest he
should seize the wrong man, and he ventured only to say, "Here, Bob!"
in a low voice during a pause in the fighting, for fear of betraying
their presence to others.  Suddenly a horrible thud, followed by a
gasping "Ah-h-h!" from Charteris, proclaimed that the contest was over,
and Gerrard was nearly knocked down by some one who cannoned into him
backwards.  A hand was on his throat in a moment, but when the fingers
came in contact with his collar they released their grip, and Charteris
whispered with a hoarse laugh--

"Why, Hal, I nearly strangled you.  Thought you were a comrade of the
fellow here.  Step over him and shield the light.  We must make sure."

Gerrard obeyed--not without an uneasy feeling of exposing himself to
unseen foes--and jumped violently when his foot came in contact with
some portion of the body of Charteris's late foe.  But no attempt was
made to seize him, and he stood upright, filling the passage as far as
possible, while Charteris opened the lantern the merest slit, and
turned it on the man's face.

"He's safe.  I thought that knock I gave him on the floor must have
damaged him considerably.  It was him or me.  He sprang at me as soon
as I got inside, and if I hadn't got my hand over his mouth he would
have given the alarm.  That handicapped me, too--having to hold him, I
mean--and he wriggled like an eel.  Well, come on.  Now look here, Hal;
you ain't going to walk behind me down this passage with your sword
drawn.  You'd have me spitted like a lark if we were attacked either in
front or behind.  I'll go first with my sword, you'll come after with
the lantern--shut, if you please.  If I want light, I'll tell you fast
enough.  Got your Colt ready--not out?"

Gerrard's revolver was ready to his hand, but he realised that it was
out of the question to hold it as he felt his way in the dark, and
after making sure that his sword was loose in its sheath, he followed
Charteris, carrying only the lantern.  When they had explored the
passage before, with plenty of light, it had seemed to them that the
walls and floor were astonishingly smooth, but now, feeling and groping
their way along in pitch darkness, the number of obstacles over which
they stumbled, and projections with which they came into violent
contact, was extraordinary.  The air of the place was close, too, and
between their exertions and their anxiety, they were soon dripping with
perspiration.  Charteris called a halt at last.

"By Jove, it's just struck me what a do it would be if they had laid a
trap for us!" he muttered.  "Quite a shallow hole would bring us down
on top of on another, and we should be at their mercy."

"Oh, go on, and don't _buck_!" said Gerrard irritably.

"Why, your voice is shaking, Hal!  'Pon my word, if I didn't know you,
I should think----"  He stopped abruptly, for Gerrard had gripped his
shoulder.

"Bob, did you hear something?"

"Not I.  You heard your heart beating, perhaps."

"Oh, drop it!  It sounded like the ring of metal on stone--as if a
sword had knocked against the wall."

"Kuku-ud-din or Amrodh Chand may have followed us."

"They swore they wouldn't.  Besides, Bob, it was quite near at hand,
and they could not have caught us up in the dark.  There was no sign of
them at the entrance."

"Quite so.  Well, shall we wait and trip him up?"

"No, he will hear--guess we are there.  We can't stay all night looking
for him in the dark."  Gerrard spoke roughly, fighting down the horror
of such a watch as he suggested, and Charteris yielded, recognising
that his friend's nerves were dangerously strained.

"I should have preferred to make our rear safe, but he will hardly
venture to attack us single-handed.  Give me the lantern, old boy, and
you lead for a bit."

Shamefacedly Gerrard obeyed, realising that the dread of a stealthy
step behind had not for Charteris the paralyzing terror it had for him,
and they groped their way on, trying to assure one another that the
sounds which reached them when they paused were merely the echoes of
their own movements.  At length a very faint glimmer became visible far
in front, and they crept towards it.  It seemed to come from a doorway
on the left-hand side of the passage, and co-ordinating their former
knowledge of the place with the distance they had now come, they saw
that it must proceed from the open door of the secret treasury.
Creeping up to this with the utmost precaution, they paused for a
moment in the shadow to reconnoitre.  The light came from a dim lamp in
the middle of the room, round which they could discern the sleeping
forms of several men--five or six, perhaps, but their mufflings made it
difficult to distinguish them clearly.  One rather removed from the
rest, and lying on a charpoy instead of the floor, was evidently Sher
Singh himself.  Charteris put the lantern deliberately into his pocket,
and drawing swords and revolvers, he and Gerrard stepped into the
doorway.

"Your Highness is tracked!  Surrender!" were the words that pealed into
the room and roused the sleepers.

"Maharaj, fear not!  There are but two Feringhees here!" cried another
voice from behind, and instantly the man nearest to the lamp threw a
quilt over it.  There was a clash of arms as the men roused from sleep
seized the weapons they had laid beside them, but through it Gerrard's
ear detected another sound, a grinding noise on the floor, coming from
behind.  He recognised it at once; it was the grating of the
turning-stone as it closed.  The man who had tracked them and given the
alarm was cutting off their retreat.  Gerrard turned mechanically, and
putting out his hand, felt the stone beginning to fill the doorway
behind him.  Stooping, he groped for the stone doorpost, and snatching
off his cap, thrust it across the corner where the outer edge of the
doorpost met the floor.  The cap was iron-framed, and padded to turn a
sword-cut, and he heard the stone grate more harshly, then stick, so
that at least he and Charteris were not imprisoned without hope of
release.  As he rose, he was aware of a muttered exclamation of disgust
from the other side of the door, and guessed that the man who had set
the stone turning had found that it would not shut.

"Shoulder to shoulder, Hal!" said Charteris sharply.  The moment so
full of thought and action for Gerrard had for him been filled only
with intensest listening for every movement of the enemies in front,
and he had no idea of the foe behind.  Something struck the edge of the
doorpost as it passed through the slit left open, and Gerrard fired at
the sound.  Charteris jumped forward a little as the point of a long
dagger grazed his shoulder, and the noise of the shot was followed by a
choking cry in the passage.

"Thanks, old boy.  Ready, watch!"  Charteris took the lantern from his
pocket, and flashed it slowly round.  Gerrard had a momentary
impression of shining weapons and gleaming eyeballs, all apparently
petrified into immobility by the sudden illumination.  Before the enemy
could take advantage of the light to spring, he had snatched the
lantern from Charteris's hand, and set it on a little stone bracket,
evidently left for some such purpose, above the doorway, so that the
two Englishmen were in shadow, while their opponents were clearly
visible.

"Now, Bob, back to back!" he cried.

Three of the armed men in front made at them at once, while Sher Singh
and the others conferred in the background.  Neither Gerrard nor
Charteris had time to do more than notice this ominous confabulation,
for their adversaries gave them plenty of work.  They were as agile as
cats, and the chance was small indeed of getting in a telling blow.
One man went down with a bullet from Gerrard's revolver in his brain,
but his place was instantly taken by one of those at the back, and the
next few minutes saw several shots wasted.  Suddenly another sound than
the clash of arms struck on Gerrard's ear--the grinding noise made by
the turning-stone.  He had barely time to shout a warning to Charteris
before a shot, sounding like the report of a cannon in the confined
space, smashed and extinguished the lantern, and at the same moment two
hands grasped his ankles and threw him into the middle of the floor,
with Charteris--as he guessed by the clatter of a revolver on the
ground--upon him.

"Sahib, it is I--Rukn-ud-din," yelled a lamentable voice from the door.
"Speak, that I may know where you are."

Gerrard had just breath enough left to shout "Here!" and sufficient
presence of mind to wriggle as far as he could when he had done it.
The instant swish of a sword, delivered with such good will that it
smashed on the stone floor where he had lain but a moment before,
showed his wisdom, and he tried to roll out of the fray, but Charteris,
who must have struck his head in falling, lay a dead weight across his
legs.  While he tried first to lift his friend, and then to drag
himself from under him, a fierce battle was raging above and across
their prostrate forms, and feet, bare or booted, trod upon or tripped
over them.  At length Charteris stirred and groaned, and Gerrard shook
him desperately.

"Bob, get up!  Get off me, anyhow!"

A hand seized his shoulder as he shouted, and he imagined a sword
descending on his head, and thought his last hour had come.  But the
hand came down to meet his, and a voice cried, "Well done, sahib.  Up!"
and helped by Rukn-ud-din, he was on his feet again, and set with his
back to the wall.  Stooping, he found Charteris struggling into a
sitting position, and dragged him back also, then realised that the
fight had suddenly slackened, and that the sound of panting breaths had
replaced the clash of swords.  Before he could ask himself what this
meant, Rukn-ud-din's voice broke the stillness.

"Brother, is it done?"

"It is done, brother," replied the voice of Amrodh Chand from the other
side of the place.  "Partab Singh Rajah and his son and the mother of
his son are avenged."

A wild howl rent the air, as the servants of Sher Singh flung
themselves furiously in the direction of the voice, but the Rajput had
slipped round close to the wall, and Gerrard found him at his side,
half-delirious with joy.

"Slay! slay! slay!" he chanted.  "Wipe out the whole brood from the
earth.  Let all those who served the brother-slayer bear him company in
death."

"Stay!  Let them surrender if they will," cried Gerrard.  "Let the
servants of Sher Singh lay down their arms, and taste the mercy of the
Government."

"That for the mercy of the Sarkar!" was the answer, as a vicious cut
was made in Gerrard's direction from the floor, but Rukn-ud-din warded
it off, and seizing the tulwar as it fell from the severed hand of the
man who had wielded it, gave it to his commander.  Then, advancing in
line across the room, they drove the surviving servants of Sher Singh
before them until, brought up by the opposite wall, they threw down
their arms and cried for quarter.  Then Rukn-ud-din went back along the
passage for the piece of burning match in a metal holder by means of
which he and Amrodh Chandh had made their way to the fight, the sounds
of which had stirred their blood, and the extinguished lamp was found
and relighted.  Sher Singh's body was crouched on the charpoy, in a
listening attitude, the matchlock with which he had shot at the lantern
slipping from his hands.  Four of his men were killed outright, besides
the one outside who had tried to close the door, and whom Gerrard had
shot through the opening, and the other two were badly wounded, while
the victors bore abundant traces of the struggle.  But there was no
time for binding up their hurts just yet, for hurried footsteps and
excited voices could be heard faintly overhead, though no words were
distinguishable.

"The sentries are disturbed in their minds, and have turned out the
guard," said Charteris.  "And no wonder; that shot of Sher Singh's must
have sounded uncommonly like a distant mine exploding.  Well, we had
better appear amongst them by way of the lions' cage and explain
matters, I suppose.  What d'ye think of taking the prisoners with us,
and leaving everything else as it is, Hal?"

"I don't see that it matters.  Wouldn't it be better to make them carry
out Sher Singh's body?" said Gerrard.

"My dear fellow, it does matter, very much.  I should say leave things
exactly as they are.  Otherwise we may get into trouble.  Don't touch
the Rajah, Rukn-ud-din!" he cried sharply.  "Oh, I see; it's a case of
'Is not the gown washed white?'"

The two natives had unwound the discoloured fragments of the Rani's
cloth which they wore wrapped round their waists, and were dipping them
in Sher Singh's blood.

"Our vow, sahib!" said Amrodh Chand proudly.  "Now our faces are white
once more, for all has fallen out as it was spoken, and the innocent
blood is avenged."

"All very well, but our faces are likely to be particularly black,"
muttered Charteris morosely.  "Take the prisoners on.  Look here, Hal,"
as they obeyed; "don't you perceive that we may find ourselves in a
very nasty fix?  If we had been able to produce Sher Singh alive to
stand his trial, nothing would have been too good for us, but as it is,
we have deprived the ruling powers of the opportunity for a tremendous
object-lesson in justice and clemency.  Our only chance is to make it
perfectly clear what a fight we have had.  They may say we ought to
have taken a larger force, but they can't very well blame us for acting
in self-defence.  And if the bodies have obviously not been touched----"

"You mean that otherwise Speathley is quite capable of accusing us of
looting?  Bob, if he attempts anything of the kind, I have done with
the Company for good and all.  I have had about enough.  I daresay the
old Habshi will take me into his service."

"Vice General Desdichado dead of drink?  I think I see you playing the
part, old boy.  No, stick to your colour--and your colours.  We two are
in the same box, and whatever happens we'll keep together.  I was
merely recommending caution.  But here we are at the massy portal.
What'll you take that the lions were killed for food in the siege?  No,
there they are.  Sold again!"

Pride forbade Rukn-ud-din and Amrodh Chand to testify any alarm at the
place where they found themselves, but they hustled their willing
captives to the front of the cage with great celerity, hastened by the
growls which proclaimed that the lions had been awakened by the light.
The beasts seemed sluggish and disinclined to move, and Gerrard called
Charteris back with the lamp, that he might see better to perform the
complicated movements which closed the door.  Almost as he did so, he
felt himself seized and flung violently sideways, Charteris following
and almost falling against him, while a heavy body descended violently
upon the very spot where they had been standing.

"What's up?" demanded Gerrard, between surprise and indignation.

"Oh, only the lion.  Clear out of this, or we shall have the lioness on
us next.  You don't seem to twig, my boy.  Sher Singh has had the
chains lengthened!"




CHAPTER XXIV.

HONOUR AND HONOURS.

The course of events proved Charteris to be a good prophet.
Condemnation of the method adopted by Gerrard in attempting the arrest
of Sher Singh was universal.  It was not the Brigadier alone who
pointed out, with much wealth of language, that the proper course would
have been to report his suspicions as to the Rajah's hiding-place, and
leave it to his superiors to detail a sufficient force--of which he
himself might or might not have formed a part--to effect the capture,
for the whole army were on the same side.  The charitable said that
Gerrard was vilely selfish in trying to secure all the honour and glory
for himself alone, the malicious that even if there was no question of
loot--which was hardly to be imagined--it was pretty clear that he had
been on the look-out to avenge the slights put upon him by Sher Singh
when he was acting-Resident at Agpur, and that he had achieved his
object by murdering the unfortunate Rajah in a hole.  It was in vain
that Charteris pointed out to every one he could induce to listen to
him that the idea of surprising the Rajah in his concealment had been
his originally, and that he had taken a prominent part in the affair;
the comment, as soon as his back was turned, was that the two natives
concerned in it both belonged to Gerrard's force, which looked bad, and
that the friendship which linked Charteris himself with Gerrard was of
a character to rise superior to mere accuracy.  This uncharitable view
of the exploit penetrated to Ranjitgarh, and drew from Sir Edmund
Antony a grieved and reproachful letter such as even Gerrard's
veneration for his chief could not brook with meekness.  He replied
with so warm a remonstrance as made Charteris shrug his shoulders in
despair, though he acknowledged, on the receipt of a hearty and ample
apology, that his friend knew Sir Edmund better than he did.

Since Sher Singh was dead, and not to be restored to life, the
Government was in reality freed from a very serious embarrassment.  One
of his numerous youthful sons was chosen as the representative of the
family, but not seated on the _gaddi_, since all Granthi institutions
were in a state of flux for the present, and it was highly probable
that the titular Rajah of Agpur would in future lead a secluded and
uneventful existence as a pensioner on the Company's bounty.  The new
bearer of the title, with Sher Singh's wives and remaining children,
was removed a safe distance into British territory, and the work of
pacifying the state, by hunting down the remains of the insurgent army
and of the revolted Granthi regiments, proceeded apace.  In fact, it
was so quickly done that new force was given to a body of opinion that
was gradually gathering strength.  Now that the Agpur campaign could be
viewed as a successful whole, men began to contrast it with that other
warfare which was engaging the energies of the Commander-in-Chief and
the entire Bengal Army.  Sher Singh's revolt had really been nipped in
the bud, since he and his army had been strictly confined within the
limits, first of his state and then of his capital, from the moment of
the outbreak.  Had he been allowed to sweep unchecked across his
borders, and uniting with Abd-ur-Rashid Khan of Ethiopia, stir up the
western half of Granthistan against the Durbar and the British, as the
discontented Granthi Sirdars and soldiers of fortune had raised the
eastern portion, how would it have been possible to cope with the
situation?  That it had not arisen was due to the insight and
initiative of one man, Lieutenant Robert Charteris of the Bengal
Fusiliers, who had had the skill to plan, and the courage to execute,
the necessary measures, in independence, even in disregard, of the
orders sent him.

Lieutenant Robert Charteris became a hero, for public opinion, once
reversed in his favour, was not minded to do things by halves.
Moreover, the growing tide was swollen by the arrival of advices from
England, showing that the lords of the East at the India House, and
military circles generally, had conceived, on the strength of the
reports of Charteris's doings up to the time he was superseded by
Brigadier Speathley, the view of his exploits to which India itself was
just coming round.  The home authorities backed their opinion by
tangible marks of favour.  The greatest living soldier, mention from
whose lips was in itself an honour, recommended Lieutenant Charteris to
her Majesty for promotion, and her Majesty was pleased also to confer
upon him a Commandership of the Bath, while the India Board decided to
present him with a gold medal suitably inscribed.  These distinctions
were enumerated with due solemnity in a General Order of the Government
of India, which contained also a passing reference to "the praiseworthy
co-operation afforded by the troops of H.H. the Nuwaub of Hubsheeabad,
accompanied by Lieutenant Henry Gerrard, Engineers."  That was all.

The General Order and the news it enshrined were received with much
more equanimity by Gerrard than by his fortunate friend.  Charteris
could not contain himself, and Gerrard's calmness only increased his
indignation.

"It's a sell, it's a do, it's an unmitigated chouse!" he proclaimed.
"And why don't you put it down to me, Hal?  Any other fellow would have
done that long ago."

"Because I saw your reports, old boy, and I know that ain't the reason.
It's only what I had to expect."

"But the disgusting unfairness of it--in our circumstances especially!"
lamented Charteris.  "I can't get over that."

"My dear fellow, you know that the person of whom we are both thinking
would no more be influenced by a gold medal or a C.B. than by a diamond
necklace.  No, hang it! the plan was yours, and the execution was
yours.  I backed you up, you say?  Well, then, put on my tombstone, 'He
was a good second,' and I ask no more."

But Charteris could not bring himself to take this philosophic view of
the case, and went about abusing the authorities and cursing the
injustice of fate, until he drew down upon himself a rebuke from James
Antony.

"Since you can neither refuse your honours nor share them, my good
fellow, you may as well wear them gracefully," he said.  "As it is, you
are doing Gerrard no good.  He was unlucky in his first post, which has
told against him, but he is a capable man, and bound to come to the
front eventually, provided his friends don't spoil his chances."

The shrewd common-sense of the advice silenced Charteris's murmurs, and
he faced with less outward rebelliousness the prospect of a week or two
at Ranjitgarh.  This was a mere interlude before plunging again into
the main current of battle.  The Governor-General was coming to the
Granthi capital to take counsel with the Commander-in-Chief as to the
further course of the war, which had not hitherto been conducted with
conspicuous success, and the honours for the Agpur campaign were to be
conferred.  The cantonments and the Residency were full, and
Brevet-Major Charteris, C.B., was glad to share his former restricted
quarters with Gerrard.  The Edmund Antonys were in occupation of the
house again, James Antony and his wife retiring into two rooms of the
main block, while Lady Cinnamond was once more at Government House.
With her had come down from the hills Marian Cowper, a sorrowful figure
in the heavy weeds then worn by even the youngest widows, but taking up
the burden of life again bravely.  If she still shrank from Honour, it
was only they and their mother who could perceive it.  Sir Arthur
Cinnamond arrived from the front with the Commander-in-Chief for a week
about Christmas time, and it so happened that Gerrard came suddenly
upon Honour riding with her father the day after his arrival.  She wore
a habit made like the uniform of Sir Arthur's famous Peninsular
regiment--a fashion which probably owed its vogue to the semi-military
costume adopted by the young Queen Victoria for reviews.  Civilian
ladies--whose husbands had no uniform to be copied--called it fast, or
at least 'spirited,' (Gerrard had heard Mrs James Antony animadverting
upon it only that morning,) but the severe lines of the coat suited
Honour well in combination with the long trailing skirt and the broad
hat with its drooping feather.  As he rode up to the pair, and noted
the serious face and the firm lines of the mouth, it struck Gerrard as
curiously ironical that to a girl of this type should have fallen such
a prolonged period of indecision as Honour had undergone between the
claims of Charteris and himself.  The thought was still in his mind
when she glanced round and saw him, and the change in her face was like
the waking into life of a statue.  The lines softened, the eyes
dropped, and a wave of crimson flooded forehead and cheeks.  Sir Arthur
shouted a hearty welcome to Gerrard, commanded him to dinner that
evening, to meet his eldest son, who was on the Headquarters Staff, and
turned judiciously to speak to some one else.  Honour's eyes were on
her horse's mane, Gerrard's were devouring her face, but for the moment
both of them were tongue-tied.  Honour recovered herself first, and
spoke with a desperate effort.

"And--and how is Major Charteris?" she asked, and Gerrard's revived
hope died on the spot.  He could not understand afterwards why he did
not fall from his horse.  What he answered he never knew, but it seemed
that he had laughed aloud, for Sir Arthur turned quickly and looked at
him.  A certain severity, disappointment, puzzled inquiry, were in the
glance, but Gerrard had wrenched his horse round and was riding away,
leaving the General still looking after him.  He rode headlong back to
the Residency, and with the impulse of a wounded creature seeking
concealment, made straight for his own quarters in the inner courtyard.
On the verandah he paused abruptly, for Charteris was sitting there
reading a tattered number of _Bell's Life_.  He tried to speak, but no
words would come, and Charteris looked up and saw him.

"Why, Hal!" he cried.  Gerrard brushed past him hastily.

"I've seen her.  It's you, Bob," he jerked out, and threw himself on
his cot.  Charteris had sprung from his chair, but turned back on the
verandah step.

"Hal, old boy, I'm uncommon sorry.  You do believe it, don't you?"

"I do.  And you know you are the only man----"

Charteris's hand was on his shoulder a moment as the words failed him,
and then his ringing footsteps went down into the courtyard, and
Gerrard heard him shouting for his horse.  The man who had all went out
into the sunshine, the man who had nothing was left.  To keep himself
from tracing the sound of the horse's feet growing faint in the
distance as the happy lover rode away, Gerrard forced himself to plan
for the future.  He must leave Ranjitgarh, and at once; he could not
stay and watch the happiness of the pair, lest he should grow to hate
them both.  Bob would understand, Bob would not expect it.  Some day he
might be able to stand it, but now----  He had not realised how firmly
he was building on Honour's parting words; he had not doubted that the
blush just now was for him.  But it was for Bob, and Bob was worthy of
any woman's love, even of that of the woman of women.  "Heaven bless
them both!" groaned Gerrard, and rolled over with his face to the wall
to make his plans.  He must wait to wring Bob's hand when he returned
triumphant, but after that he would go.  Bob would take his place at
the Cinnamonds' dinner-table, would sit next to Honour, would----  No,
it did not bear thinking of; that way madness lay.  To his own plans!
He would go back to his Habshiabadis, and move heaven and earth to get
the help of the contingent accepted by the Commander-in-Chief.  If not,
and when the war was over--no, he could not face the solitude of his
position at Habshiabad again.  Had he not General Desdichado as a
warning of the depths to which an isolated European, without hope and
without ambition, could sink?  There was a place for him elsewhere.
Coming events were casting their shadows before them, and there could
be little doubt that the close of the war would see the annexation of
Granthistan.  Sir Edmund Antony, who had striven so zealously and with
such a single eye against annexation, would not stay to see it; his
brother James would be the man of the hour when the step was taken.
The Governor-General would be just, even delicate, in his treatment of
the vanquished; Sir Edmund would not be shelved, but transferred to
some other post where his tenderness for native susceptibilities would
be an advantage instead of a drawback.  Thither Gerrard would accompany
him.  Had not Sir Edmund said to him that morning, almost wistfully, "I
should like to have you with me, Gerrard, when I am kicked out of
Granthistan"? and he had answered eagerly that he could desire nothing
better--then paused suddenly, remembering that there might be some one
else to consult as to the ordering of his life.

There were steps in the courtyard, a foot on the verandah.  Gerrard lay
still and pretended to be asleep.  He could not face Bob at this
moment, when the realisation of all he had lost had returned upon him
with such overwhelming force.  But Charteris strode across to him and
shook him savagely.

"You everlasting fool, it's you!"

He pulled him off the cot, and Gerrard sat on the edge and stared at
him stupidly.  Charteris was standing with his back to him, very busy
about a buckle.

"Well?" he barked out.  "You ain't going to do anything--eh?  Think it
was a pleasant thing for a girl to have to tell the wrong man?  Going
to leave her to think about it?"

"Of course not.  I am going to her," said Gerrard wonderingly.
Something astonishing had happened, but he could not for the moment
realise what it was.  He had got as far as the verandah step when he
felt Charteris's hands on his shoulders, and was forcibly dragged back.

"Of all the fools!" said an exasperated voice.  "Off you go, with no
cap, and a head like a haystack.  Do you remember that they have a
_burra khana_[1] on?  Do you want to be turned back for a lunatic?
Dress first and get there early, and then speak to her.  Call your boy,
can't you?  Why I should have to dry-nurse you----!"

Gerrard obeyed meekly, grateful to Charteris for giving the bearer his
orders and presiding over his execution of them.  The bearer, on the
contrary, was much insulted.  His master was like a lay-figure in his
hands, but Chatar Sahib must needs take it upon himself to direct and
correct operations in an unpleasant parade voice, causing many
unnecessary starts and much perturbation of mind to a highly efficient
servant who had most definite ideas on the subject of what his Sahib
should wear to a burra khana.  Gerrard's horse and groom came round,
and Charteris's self-imposed task was not over until he had seen him
safely mounted.  Before starting, Gerrard turned and held out his hand.

"Bob, old boy?"

"Hang it, Hal! go in and win."

Some sense of reality began to return to Gerrard's mind as he rode
forth under the archway, but it made little impression upon his brain
when Mrs James Antony ran out upon the verandah he was passing.

"James, how late you are, love!  Oh, Mr Gerrard, if you meet my
husband, pray beg him to make haste.  We are dining at the General's,
and he has not returned from his ride."

Gerrard promised mechanically, and forgot all about the promise as soon
as it was uttered.  He arrived at Government House somehow, and
immediately became the cause of much disturbance of mind to the
servants, who were scandalized at his early arrival, and still more so
at his demand to see the Miss Sahib.  Honour's own ayah was fetched to
assure him that "Missy Sahib done dress," which meant exactly the
opposite of what it sounded like, and the highly responsible
head-bearer ventured to advise the Sahib to take a little ride, and
return in half an hour or so.  But Gerrard was not to be so easily
dismissed.

"Tell the Miss Sahib that I will wait as long as she chooses, but that
I must speak to her before dinner," he said.

"_Shabash_,[2] Gerrard!  Nothing like putting your foot down in good
time," cried James Antony, charging out of the house and mounting his
waiting pony.  "If only the General and I had done it, we should not
both be in fear of our lives at this moment.  You owe me a good turn
for making him late."

If Sir Arthur was late in dressing, his daughter must have been very
early, for Gerrard had not been sitting long in the smaller
drawing-room, sadly incommoding the servants who were lighting the
candles in their glass shades, when Honour came into the room,
fastening her short gloves, with a defiant swish of white silk flounces.

"You sent me a very peremptory message just now, Mr Gerrard."

Any one less preoccupied than Gerrard would have detected a suspicion
of trembling in the clear tones, but he was too much taken aback by the
accusation hurled at him.

"I am very sorry.  Nothing could have been further----"

"So I just came to tell you that I am not accustomed to messages of
that kind, and to beg you not to do it again."  Holding her head very
high, she turned to sweep out of the room, but Gerrard was at the door
before her.

"No, not without letting me speak!" he entreated incoherently.  "If you
knew what it means to me, how long I have looked forward----!  That
noble fellow Charteris gave me your message----"

"I think you must be dreaming, Mr Gerrard!"  The chilly indignation of
her tone brought him to himself.  "I send you a message by Major
Charteris?  Never!"

"Forgive me; I hardly know what I am saying.  He told me you had
refused him, and I thought that it might be because--that there might
be some one else."

"But even then?"  She still faced him bravely, though the affectation
of polite interest in her tones was very difficult to keep up.

"You can't pretend not to understand--after everything----"

"But it might not be----"

"Oh no, no!" the pain in his voice brought the tears to her eyes.
"Don't say it's some one else!  I could have given you up to him, but
not----  You know something of what he is; there is no braver or better
fellow in India, and now that his name is known, there's no saying how
far he will go.  You could not have refused him--unless----"

Honour was opening and closing recklessly the cameo clasp that fastened
her black velvet bracelet.  "Did you come here to plead Major
Charteris's cause?" she asked in a very small voice.  "What if I--if I
told you your--your pleading had convinced me?"

"I should say you had chosen the better man," said Gerrard steadily.

A hand touched his for a moment, and was snatched away immediately.  "I
have chosen the better man," murmured Honour.  "But it is not Major
Charteris," and the hand allowed itself to be captured.

"I was certain of it!" cried Gerrard triumphantly.  Honour withdrew her
hand hastily.  "Certain? certain of what?" she demanded.  Gerrard was
horrified.

"Miss Cinnamond--Honour--my dearest one--what have I done?  I am an
unlucky fellow!  Have I offended you?"

"You said you were certain," explained Honour, with impatient
deliberateness.  "What were you certain of?"

"Why, that you could not have refused Charteris--splendid fellow that
he is, and with all his honours and successes--unless there was a
little sneaking kindness in your heart for some one else, and I hoped
it might be for a poor wretched failure who has nothing to lay at your
feet beyond his love and fidelity."

Honour surrendered her hand again.  "You are so absurd!" she said, with
a catch in her voice.  "Of course, if pity is all you want----"

"Pity is not to be despised.  It made a good beginning----"

"It did not!" cried Honour sharply.  "How blind you are!  And I thought
you understood!  When you came to the Residency in the rains, were you
to be pitied then?"

"I thought so.  You would hardly look at me."

"Oh, stupid! how could I?"

"You had begun to care then?  But, dearest, how could I guess?  You
talked about nothing but Charteris."

"It was the only way I could get you to talk about yourself.  You had
to tell me little bits about your own doings when you were describing
all he had done."

"If I had only known, it would have saved a lot of misery, both to poor
old Bob and me," mused Gerrard ruefully.  "But how could I possibly
tell!  When you asked so much about Charteris, of course I thought you
cared for him."

"As if I could ever have talked about him to you if I had cared for
him!" said Honour in disdain.  Gerrard mused upon this revelation for a
moment.

"Well, I don't see how I could have known," he said at last.

"Why, I told you!" cried Honour--"when you went away."

"I thought you must have meant that--just for a moment.  But then you
ran away, and would not even say good-bye to me."

"How could I, when I had just told you--shouted it out before
everybody?  But I hid behind Mrs Antony and watched you go.  I--I
kissed my hand to you," shamefacedly.

"And I was bustled off, and never knew!  Dear one, you have only
yourself and my stupidity to thank if you marry a failure.  What might
I not have done if I had known you cared!"

"Perhaps you might not have known it then as well as you do now,"
whispered Honour shyly.  "It--it must be you, you know, not your
success, or----"

"So it is!  But you won't insist on my remaining a failure always, for
I'm hanged if I do.  With you to inspire--to help----"

Could it be the silent, reserved Honour whose transfigured face was
raised to his.  "Oh, you will let me, you think I can?" she breathed.
"I wanted, so dreadfully, to help people when I first came out, but no
one seemed to want it--or else they just asked me to marry them----"

"But so have I.  At least, that was my intention."

"Oh, you!  But you are different.  And I may try to help?"

A deprecating ayah, who had been making signs in vain from the
verandah, advanced in desperation.  "Lady Memsahib done say wish done
see Missy Sahib," she murmured, with downcast eyes.



"Well, is it all serene?" inquired Charteris, as Gerrard returned to
their quarters that night.

"All right--thanks to you, Bob."

"Oh, shut up!  Seventh heaven?"

"Seventy times seventh."

"I believe you, my boy!  Papa and mamma agreeable?"

"They were most kind.  Sir Arthur would have preferred you, Bob--I
can't help seeing that--but he was quite decent.  I even saw poor
little Mrs Cowper for a moment.  She cried, and said how glad she was."

"Uncommon affecting!  And she, herself?"

"She's--she's--I can't express what she is, even to you, Bob.  Hang it!
I believe I could talk of her all night, and get no nearer.  She is an
angel from heaven."

"Question is, has she made up her mind at last--no more
shilly-shallying?  Hope I don't intrude in asking it."

"Made up her mind----  Are you trying to throw doubts----?  Oh, I see.
But it's a thousand years since then, Bob.  You yourself could have no
doubt, if you saw her."

"All right; I'm quite satisfied.  If a doleful beggar like yourself can
feel free from doubt----"

"I could no more doubt her than the sun at noon.  Bob, I'll tell you.
She will go with me to Central India when Sir Edmund goes."

Charteris sat up in his chair.  "Nonsense!" he said sharply.  "What
folly is this?  You are talking of leaving Granthistan?"

"I had made up my mind to it before you came to me this afternoon, and
she agrees with me that it is the right thing."

"My dear fellow, you don't know.  I was talking to the G.-G.'s military
secretary to-night, and he let slip that there would be a local
majority for you at the next distribution of honours.  If you leave
Granthistan, of course that falls through."

"Then I must wait till it comes in the natural course of things."

"You don't seem to realise that Sir Arthur's influence won't help you
outside Granthistan, and will be very little use in any line but the
military.  What's taken you?"

"It's simply that I mean to stick to Sir Edmund.  My views as to the
treatment of the natives were learnt from him, and I can work better
with him than with our Mr James, much as I respect him."

"James Antony is the coming man, and the man for me.  But if you will
choose the losing side--why, I suppose you must.  It's like her, too."

"It is, indeed--since she chose me and not you.  Bob, I'm still lost in
wonder over that."

Charteris moved impatiently.  "Shows her wisdom.  I don't mind telling
you, Hal--it may make you more comfortable to hear it--that I had
misgivings.  Not about my own happiness--Heaven knows that I could ask
nothing better--but whether I could make her happy.  I can't spout
Tennyson to her, or appreciate her pretty little German tales about
knights and water-nymphs--the _New Sporting Magazine_ and _Lays of
Ancient Rome_ are more my number.  Evidently I am cut out for pacifying
Darwan rather than for domestic joys.  And after all, two years ago I
would have given my ears to be where I am now.  You have Honour, and I
have honours, you see"--with a fairly creditable laugh--"and so
everything is for the best in the best of all possible worlds."



[1] Big dinner.

[2] Bravo.