[Illustration: THE BIG POWERFUL BLACK ACTED AS THOUGH HE HAD GONE WILD.]






The Saddle Boys of the Rockies

Or

Lost on Thunder Mountain


BY

CAPTAIN JAMES CARSON



AUTHOR OF

  "THE SADDLE BOYS IN THE GRAND CANYON,"
  "THE SADDLE BOYS ON THE PLAINS,"
  "THE SADDLE BOYS AT CIRCLE RANCH," ETC.



ILLUSTRATED



NEW YORK

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

PUBLISHERS




Copyrighted 1913, by

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY


THE SADDLE BOYS OF THE ROCKIES




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I. ACCEPTING A CHALLENGE
    II. THE STRANGE ACTIONS OF DOMINO
   III. OLD HANK COOMBS BEARS A MESSAGE
    IV. A NOTE OF WARNING AT THE SPRING HOLE
     V. THE VOICE OF THE MOUNTAIN
    VI. A SECOND ALARM
   VII. THE "RUSTLERS"
  VIII. A STARTLING DISCOVERY
    IX. WHAT HAPPENED TO PEG
     X. THREATS OF TROUBLE
    XI. THE BLACK NIGHT
   XII. LOSING THEIR BEARINGS
  XIII. THE SMOKE TRAIL
   XIV. A CALL FOR HELP
    XV. SPANISH JOE DROPS A HINT
   XVI. THE VENT HOLE IN THE WALL
  XVII. FRANK HOLDS THE HOT STICK
 XVIII. A GUESS THAT HITS THE BULLSEYE
   XIX. THE WORKING OF THE GOLD LODE
    XX. TRAPPED IN THE CANYON
   XXI. A CLOSE CALL
  XXII. ONCE MORE AT CIRCLE RANCH--CONCLUSION




THE SADDLE BOYS OF THE ROCKIES


CHAPTER I

ACCEPTING A CHALLENGE

"Hello! what brought you here, Frank Haywood, I'd like to know?"

"Well, I reckon my horse, Buckskin, did, Peg."

"And who's this with you--your new chum; the boy from Kentucky?"

"That's who it is, Peg--Bob Archer; and he's come out West to see how
life on the plains suits him."

"Oh! a greenhorn, eh?"

"Perhaps some people might call him that, though he knows a heap about
horses.  But seems to me, Peg, 'twasn't so very long ago that you
yourself dropped in on us here.  Since when did you climb up out of the
tenderfoot class, tell me?"

The boy who answered to the name of Frank Haywood was a rather chunky,
well set-up lad of about sixteen.  He had blue eyes, that were usually
sparkling with mirth; and a mop of yellow hair; while his skin was
darkened by long exposure to sun and wind.

Frank was the son of a rancher, who not only owned a large tract of
land with many herds, but had interests in paying mines located among
the mountains of the Southwest.  Of course he knew more or less
concerning such things as cowboys practice; though never a day passed
on which Frank could not pick up new ideas connected with life in the
open.

His companion, Bob Archer, was considerably taller than Frank, straight
as an Indian, though rather inclined to be slender; but with a
suppleness that indicated such strength and agility as the panther
displays.

Coming from Kentucky, Bob could at least boast of long familiarity with
horses; and his cleverness in this line promised to make him a crack
horseman when he had picked up a few more of the tricks known to range
riders.

Both of the boys were especially fond of roaming the country, mounted
on their favorite steeds; and indeed, they were becoming known far and
near as the "Saddle Boys" because of their being seen so frequently,
dashing over the prairies at top-notch speed.

Peg was the nick-name which had followed Percy Egbert Grant all the way
from the Chicago suburb, where, for some years, he had played the part
of both dude and bully.  His father was very wealthy, and Peg always
had more money than was good for him.

When he came to the great X-bar-X ranch, not so very far distant from
the Haywood home place, Peg had adopted the same tactics that had
carried the day for him in the past.  The cowboys belonging to his
father's estate seemed to knuckle under to him from the first.  However
much they might ridicule Peg behind his back, they cringed when he gave
orders; because he was a liberal paymaster, and no one wished to incur
his enmity.

So it came to pass that Peg actually began to believe himself of great
importance in the community.  He assumed airs that ill became one who
was really ignorant of many things connected with ranch life.

He and Frank had never become friends.  There was something about the
fellow that the saddle boy could not tolerate.  More than once they had
almost come to blows; and, only for the peace-loving nature of Frank,
this must have occurred long ago.

The two chums had taken the long gallop to the town on the railroad on
this particular day to do a little important business for Mr. Haywood,
who was associated with Bob's uncle in certain large mining
enterprises.  And it was while entering the town that they met Peg,
who, with his customary assurance, had halted them with the question
that begins this chapter.

When Frank give him this little cut, the face of Peg Grant showed signs
of anger.  He knew very well that he was making wretched progress along
the line of becoming an accomplished rider and cowboy.  And the easy
manner in which the other boys sat their saddles irritated him greatly.

"What does it matter to you, Frank Haywood, when I left the greenhorn
class and moved up a pace?  All the boys of the X-bar-X outfit say I'm
full-fledged now, and able to hold my own with nearly any fellow.
It'll be some time, I reckon, before your new friend can say the same.
But I will own that he's got a horse that takes my eye, for a fact."

"That's where you show good judgment, Peg," said Frank, laughing.  "He
brought that black horse with him from Kentucky.  And he can ride some,
you'd better believe me.  When he gets on to the ways we have out here,
Bob will hold his own against heaps of boys that were born and brought
up on the plains."

"Say, I don't suppose, now, you'd care to sell that animal, Archer?"
asked Peg, as he eyed the handsome mount of the Kentucky boy enviously.
"Because I fancy I'd like to own him more than I ever did that frisky
buckskin Frank rides.  If you'd put a fairly decent price on him now--"

"I raised Domino from a colt, I broke him to the saddle, and we have
been together five years now.  Money couldn't buy him from me," replied
the tall boy, curtly.

It was not Bob Archer's habit to speak in this strain to anyone; but
there seemed to be a something connected with Peg Grant that irritated
him.  The manner of the other was so overbearing as to appear almost
rude.  He had had his own way a long time now; and thus far no one
connected with the big ranch owned by his father had arisen to take him
down.

"Oh! well, there are plenty of horses just as good, I guess," Peg went
on; "and some people don't appreciate the value of money, anyway.  But
see here, Frank, you let your eyebrows travel up when I mentioned the
fact that I'd graduated from the tenderfoot class.  I could see that
you doubted my words.  Now, I'm going to tell you something that will
surprise you a heap.  Are you ready for a shock?"

"Oh; I can brace myself for nearly anything, Peg," replied Frank,
easily; "so suppose you tell us your great news.  Have you entered for
the endurance race at the annual cowboy meet next month; or do you
expect to take the medal for riding bucking broncos?"

"Any ordinary range rider might do that, even if he lost out," Peg went
on; "but my game is along different lines; see?  I'm on my way right
now to run down the mystery of Thunder Mountain!  I understand that for
years it's puzzled the whole country to know what makes that roaring
sound every now and then.  Many cowboys couldn't be hired to spend a
single night on that mountain.  As for the Indians, they claim it is
the voice of Great Manitou; and steer clear of Thunder Mountain, every
time.  Get that, Frank?"

"Well, Peg, you have given me a jolt, for a fact," answered the saddle
boy, as his face expressed his surprise.  "I allow that you show a lot
of nerve in laying out such a big plan; and if you only find out what
makes that trembling, roaring sound, you'll get the blessing of many a
range rider who believes all the stories told about Thunder Mountain."

Peg stiffened up in his saddle, as though he realized that he was
engineering a tremendously important thing; and had a right to be
looked up to as a hero, even before the accomplishment of the deed.

"Well, that's always the way with you fellows out here, I find," he
remarked, loftily; "you leave all the big things to be done by fellows
with real backbone.  But then, I don't mind; in fact I'm obliged to you
for neglecting your opportunities so long.  Just you wait, and you'll
hear something drop.  Couldn't I induce you to name a price on that
black beauty, Archer?"

"Domino is not for sale at any price," replied the other, quietly.

"Oh! all right then.  So long, Frank.  Go back home, and wait till I
send you word about what I've found out!" and with a careless wave of
his arm Peg whirled his horse around, and galloped off.

"Now, I wonder did he mean that; or was he just bluffing?" said Frank,
as he turned to his chum.

"He looked as if he might be in dead earnest," replied Bob; "but you
know him better than I do, and ought to be able to say whether he'd
have the sand to take up such a job as that."

"Oh! nobody doubts his grit, when it comes to that," Frank went on, as
though trying to figure the matter out.  "And he seems to want to do
something everybody else lets alone.  You know what I told you about
Thunder Mountain, Bob; and how it has been a mystery ever since the
country hereabout was settled by people from the East?"

"Yes," the Kentucky boy replied, "and somehow, what you told me seemed
to shake me up as I don't ever remember being stirred before.  It was
like a direct challenge--just like somebody had dared me to look into
this queer old mountain, and find out what it all meant."

"That's just it," said Frank, watching the face of his chum with a show
of eagerness.  "It struck me the same way long ago, and I can remember
often thinking what a great time a few of the right kind of fellows
might have if they took a notion to go nosing around that old pile of
rock, to see what does make all that row every little while."

"And you tell me nobody knows what it is?" demanded Bob.

"Why, don't you understand, the cowboys all keep away from Thunder
Mountain as much as they can.  They're worse than the Injuns about it,
because while the reds say that is the voice of Manitou talking, these
fellows just up and declare the mountain is haunted.  Lots of 'em
couldn't be hired to spend a night on the side of that big uplift."

"But Frank, we don't believe in any such thing, do we?" pursued Bob, as
if he had begun to suspect what all this talk was leading up to, and
wished to draw his chum on.

"We sure don't, and that's a fact," declared Frank.  "Twice, now, one
of our boys has made out that he saw a ghost, but both times I managed
to turn the laugh on him.  All the same, if you offered a lump sum for
any fellow to go and camp out half-way up the side of Thunder Mountain
for a week, I don't believe he could be found, not at Circle Ranch,
anyhow."

"I've seen the same kind of men myself; and the coons around our old
Kentucky home always carried a foot of a graveyard rabbit, shot in the
full of the moon, as a sure talisman against ghosts.  I've seen many a
rabbit's foot.  No use talking to any of them; it's in the blood and
can't be cured.  But about that offering a sum for any fellow to go and
camp on the side of that old fraud of a haunted mountain, if you happen
to hear about such a snap you might just think of me, Frank."

The other saddle boy smiled broadly.  He believed he knew Bob pretty
well by this time, and could no longer doubt what the Kentucky lad was
hinting at.

"Say, look here, would you take me up if I proposed something right
now?" asked Frank, his face filled with sudden animation.

"If you mean that we try and beat Peg Grant at his own game, and learn
what the secret of Thunder Mountain is, I say yes!" answered Bob,
steadily.

"Shake on that!" he exclaimed.  "I'm just primed for something that's
out of the common run; and what could be finer than such a game?  I saw
Billy Dixon in town; and we can send back word to father that we've
gone off for a big gallop; so he won't worry if we don't turn up for a
few days.  Is it a go, Bob?"

"Count on me," replied the other.  "I don't know how it is, Frank; but
it strikes me that I'd like to cut in on that boaster in this thing.
If we managed to find out what makes that fearful booming in the
mountain, and told about it before he got a chance to blow his horn,
he'd feel cheap, wouldn't he?"

"He sure would, now," Frank said.  "And when you look at it, he just
the same as gave us the challenge direct, because he hinted that we
didn't have the nerve to attempt such a big thing as this.  Bob, we'll
call it a go!  Wonder what Peg will say when he runs across us out
there in that lonely place?  Wow!  I reckon he'll be some mad."

"Let him," remarked Bob, carelessly.  "He has no claim on Thunder
Mountain; has he?  And we want to call his bluff, if it was one.  So
just make up your mind we're in for a new experience.  It may pan out a
heap of fun for us.  And it will be worth while if we can settle the
question that has been giving these superstitious cowmen the creeps all
these years."

"Then let's get through with our business, send word by Billy, though
not telling what we've got in the wind, and then pick up a few things
we might need on a trip like this.  After that we can drop out of town,
and take our time heading for the mountain; because I think I'd like
Peg to get there first, so that he couldn't say we'd stolen his
thunder."

Half an hour later the saddle boys, having finished their business, and
sent the Circle ranch cowboy galloping homeward bearing the message to
Mr. Haywood, were moving slowly through the main street of the town,
heading toward a store where they could pick up a couple of blankets, a
simple cooking outfit, and some of the substantials in the way of
bacon, coffee and the like, when they came upon a scene that instantly
attracted their attention.

It was a terrified cry that reached their ears at first, and caused
both boys to pull in their horses.  Glancing in the direction whence
the sound of distress seemed to spring, they saw a small Mexican girl
struggling with an over-grown fellow, garbed in the customary range
habit, even to the "chaps" of leather covering his trousers.

Both Frank and Bob jumped from their saddles, for the little affair was
taking place in the courtyard of an inn that fronted on the street.
Whether the brute was simply playing the bully, and trying to kiss the
girl; or meant to strike her for getting in his way, Bob Archer did not
stop to inquire.

His warm Kentucky blood on fire, he made a swoop for the fellow, and
managed to give him a tremendous blow that toppled him over in a heap.

"Lie there, you coward!" he exclaimed.

And then, as the fellow whom he had knocked down struggled to his
knees, to stare up at him, Bob discovered, not a little to his
surprise, and satisfaction as well, that he was looking into a familiar
face.

It was Peg Grant!




CHAPTER II

THE STRANGE ACTIONS OF DOMINO

"Well, I declare!" exclaimed Frank; which remark showed how much
surprised he was to recognize the youth whom his chum had sent to the
ground.

"What do you mean by hitting me like that?" snarled the rich man's son,
as he managed to scramble to his feet again, though he seemed a bit
"groggy," and one of his eyes was already turning dark, as if it had
come in violent contact with a stone when he struck the ground.

"What do _you_ mean, hurting that poor little Mexican girl?" demanded
Bob, who stood on his guard, as though he might not be averse to trying
conclusions with the bully, if so be the other felt like seeking
satisfaction for his upset.

"She sassed me when I ordered her to get out of my way, that's what she
did;" declared Peg, wrathfully, "and I'd look nice now, wouldn't I,
letting a little greaser kid talk back to me?  So I was just giving her
a good shaking when you broke in.  Guess you didn't know who you were
hitting when you did that, Bob Archer!"

"Perhaps I didn't," replied the Kentucky lad, calmly; "though that
wouldn't have made any particular difference.  Any cur who would lay
his hands on a child like that ought to get knocked down every time.
I'd do it again if you gave me the chance!"

Peg stared at him.  Perhaps he had never been treated in this manner
before.  All his life his acquaintances had truckled to him on account
of the great wealth of his father, and the liberal way he himself, as a
boy, rewarded those who were allowed the privilege of being his cronies
or mates.

"You--would, eh?" he gasped, as if hardly daring to believe his ears.
"Even if you knew it was Peg Grant you'd treat me that way; would you?
I'll remember that!  I'm not the one to forget in a hurry.  Some day,
perhaps, you'll wish you'd never tried to play the hero part, and hit
me when my back was turned.  I've got a good notion to teach you a
lesson right now; that's what!"

"All right," remarked Bob, coolly.  "Suppose you begin.  I was never in
a better humor for trouble.  Somehow I seemed to just know we'd hit it
up sooner or later if our trails crossed.  I give you my word, my
friend here won't put a finger on you, if so be you get the better of
the row; will you Frank?"

"I should say not," declared the lad, instantly, adding: "and unless I
miss my guess there won't be any need of it, either."

"Are you coming on, Peg?" asked the Kentucky lad, temptingly.

From under his drooping eyebrows Peg observed how easily the other had
assumed a position of self-defense.  Somehow Peg did not fancy the
athletic build of his antagonist; for, while Bob was rather slender, he
had the marks of one accustomed to exercise; possessing at least
ordinary ability to take care of himself.

"It'll keep, and be all the better for the delay," Peg grumbled, as he
clenched one fist furiously, and used the other hand to feel of his
injured optic.  "Besides, I don't feel fit to fight right now, with
this bunged-up eye.  But just wait till the right time comes, and see
what you get then for doing this."

"Oh! well, suit yourself," returned Bob, with a laugh.  "If the little
brown-faced girl hadn't vamoosed I declare if I wouldn't feel like
making you get down on your knees, and asking her to excuse you.  Bah!
you're not worth bothering about, Peg.  Get out!"

The other moved away.  He did not like the manner in which Bob said
this; and he seemed to be afraid that perhaps the other might yet
decide to press some further indignity on him.

When, however, he had reached the door of the inn, so that he could
have a way of escape open to him in case of need, he stopped and shook
his fist threateningly toward the saddle boys.

"You're both going to pay dear for this little fun, hear that?" he
called, his voice trembling with passion.  "I'll find a way to get
even, see if I don't!  And when Peg Grant says that he means it, too!
Just you wait till I----"

And then, as Bob started to advance toward the hostelery Peg retreated
in a panic, slamming the door after him.

"Well, what d'ye think of that?" asked Frank, who had been an amused
observer of this curious scene.

"He's turned out just what I thought he would," remarked Bob, as he
once more gained the side of his comrade, a grim smile on his face.
"Whenever you run across a fellow who likes to boast of the way he does
things, make up your mind he's a rank coward, every time.  No matter
what he claims he will do, there's a yellow streak in him _somewhere_,
and sooner or later it's bound to show."

"I believe you're just about right, Bob," said Frank; "and it agrees
with my own opinion exactly.  Still, that fellow can be dangerous if he
wants."

"So can a rattlesnake; but at any rate the reptile is honest, for he
gives plenty of warning before he tries to strike; and that's more'n
Peg would do, if I read him straight."

"You must keep an eye out for him after this, Bob.  He'll never forgive
you that crack.  My! but didn't it drop him, though!  Just like a steer
would go down when the loop of a lariat closes on his foreleg.  That
fellow will lie awake nights trying to get even with you."

"Let him," remarked Bob, carelessly; "next time perhaps I'll put a
little more steam back of my fist, if he pushes me too hard.  That's
the way they treat cowards back where I was brought up; and they call
anybody by that name who will put his hand in anger on girl or woman.
But see here, Frank, is this little affair going to force us to change
our plans?"

"Whew!  I forgot all about that," said the other, with a whistle, and
an uplifting of his eyebrows.  "If we go poking around Thunder
Mountain, and Peg is there, with a couple of the tough cowboys he has
trailing after him most of the time, Spanish Joe and Nick Jennings,
perhaps we'll run up against a peck of trouble."

"Well, how about it?" asked Bob, with a shade of annoyance on his face.

"What do you say?" asked Frank, in turn.

"Go, by all means," came the quick response.  "You don't think so mean
of me as to believe I'd be frightened off by the bare chance of running
across that fellow's trail out there; do you, Frank?"

"All right, call it a bargain, then.  I'm with you through thick and
thin, Bob.  Let Peg have a care how he meddles with us.  We're going to
pay attention to our own business, and he'd better do the same.  But
what became of the little Mex?  I thought I'd seen her face before,
somewhere, but she skipped out before I could take a second look.  Some
cowboy, or cattle rustler's child from beyond the Rio Grande, I reckon.
Well, come along, let's get in the saddle again, and finish our
shopping.  Then we'll go out to the country along the river, and put in
a day waiting for Peg to have his chance at finding out what makes
Thunder Mountain groan and shake just so often, and scare the Injuns
out of their seven senses."

As the two chums swung themselves into their saddles, and cantered
away, a head was thrust cautiously out from behind a pile of boxes near
by; and then, finding the coast clear, the small girl who had been the
cause of all the trouble darted across the courtyard, vanishing beyond
the gate.

Frank and Bob went about making their purchases, first fastening their
horses to a rail in front of the general store, where everything they
needed could be bought.

More than one cattleman in passing would cast an envious eye toward
those two splendid mounts, for they could not fail to catch the
attention of anyone accustomed to judging horseflesh, as these Western
men were.  Still, it would be a bold man indeed, white or Indian, who
would dare attempt to steal a horse in broad daylight, in a country
where such a thief was treated to a rope when caught.

Frank had had considerable experience in roughing it, while his comrade
was, in a measure, new to such a life.  Consequently it was Frank whose
judgment was called into play when making a selection of the things
that would be essential to their comfort when on this new campaign.

Many articles they could do without; but a blanket apiece was
absolutely necessary, as was a frying pan and coffee pot, two cups, as
many platters, as well as common knives, forks and spoons such as
prospectors and cattlemen use.

For food they took some bacon, coffee, dried meat, hard-tack in place
of bread, a can of condensed milk, and several other things which would
carry well.

"We must make them up in two packs," Frank went on; "so that each of us
can fasten one to his horse, back of the saddle.  And, as I'm an old
hand at this business, just watch me get a hustle on.  Next time you'll
know how to go about it for yourself, Bob."

The Kentucky boy always studied everything his comrade showed him, for
it was his ambition to excel in the many little tricks connected with
the free life of the plains.  Things were done so differently here from
what he had been accustomed to in his old Kentucky home, before his
father died, that they often puzzled him; but Bob was a persistent boy,
and would never rest content until Frank could teach him no more.

Neither of them suspected what was going on outside, while they busied
themselves in purchasing the supplies needed for the little campaign in
the neighborhood of the mysterious mountain.  And yet all was not as
quiet as it might be.

The saddle boys had hardly been inside the general store ten minutes
before a slinking figure might have been observed drawing nearer and
nearer to the horses ranged along the bar.  There were several besides
the animals of our two young friends; but, somehow, the handsome black
seemed to attract the entire attention of this shadowy form.

Twice he stopped, and assumed an attitude that would indicate his utter
indifference to such commonplace things as horses.  Then, finding that
it must have been a false alarm, he would edge closer.

Finally he was beside the black horse, uttering low words such as
cowboys make use of to soothe a restive steed when they mean to throw a
saddle across his back, and cinch the girth.

Two men came out from the store, and drew near.  The slim figure,
finding it out of the question to flit hurriedly away, without
attracting attention, which was just the thing he wished to avoid,
commenced stroking the sleek side of the big black Kentucky
thoroughbred, as though he might be a cowboy connected with the far
famed Circle ranch of Frank's father.

Casting just one casual glance toward him, the men threw themselves
into their saddles with the rapidity and grace of true plainsmen, and
went galloping off.

Two minutes later the shadowy figure of the man flitted away from the
line of horses that remained.  If his purpose had been to steal the
black he must have changed his mind, for there was no break in the
chain of horses that stood there, impatiently scraping the ground with
their forefeet.

A little later out came Frank and Bob, each bearing a compact bundle
which they quickly fastened back of their saddles.

Bob was the first to mount, and this action was hurried because he
hardly knew what to make of the restless actions of Domino.  The animal
seemed to be dancing up and down as though he had stirred up a hornet's
nest, and the little insects were charging his exposed legs.

No sooner was Bob in the saddle than the horse gave a shrill neigh, and
dashed off like a crazy creature.  Indeed, a less experienced rider
than Bob would have been instantly thrown by the sudden and unexpected
move, something that Domino had never been known to attempt before.

Frank looked up in astonishment.  His practiced eye told him in an
instant that the sudden violent dash had not been engineered in the
least by his chum; but was altogether the result of fright on the part
of Domino.  Why, the big and powerful black acted as though he had gone
wild, jumping madly about, now fairly flying off to one side, only to
whirl and dance and leap high in the air, until every one within seeing
distance was staring at the strange spectacle.  And this, too, in a
town where bucking broncos were a common sight.

Frank had gained his saddle, and was chasing after his friend, but just
then the black had taken a notion to run, and apparently nothing in
that country could overtake him while his present savage mood held out.

"What ails the beast?" Frank asked himself, as he drew rein and watched
the other passing beyond range of his vision among the stunted
mesquites outside of the edge of the town.  "He acts like a locoed
horse; but there isn't a bit of the poison weed growing within twenty
miles of here.  And why was Peg Grant standing on the stoop of the
tavern grinning as I rode past?  Can he have had a hand in this sudden
crazy spell of the black?  Spanish Joe knows all the tricks of putting
a thorn under a saddle, that will stab the horse when the rider mounts.
Is that the trouble now?  If it is then it's lucky my chum knows as
much as he does about managing a horse, or he would never come back
alive from that mad ride.  And all I can do is to sit here, wait for
his return, and watch Peg Grant and his cronies!"




CHAPTER III

OLD HANK COOMBS BEARS A MESSAGE

If there was one thing Bob could do well, it was to ride.  Born in
Kentucky, where horses take a leading part in the education of most
boys, Bob had always spent a good part of his time in the saddle.

Hence, when he came out here to the plains, the cowboys of the ranch
found that, in his own way, he was well versed in managing the fine
black horse he brought along with him.

Of course there were dozens of tricks which these daring riders of the
plains could show the tenderfoot from the South; but when it came down
to hard riding Bob was able to hold his own.

When his powerful horse bolted in such a strange fashion Bob simply
kept his seat, and tried to soothe Domino by soft words.  For once the
remedy failed to produce any immediate effect.  The animal seemed
fairly wild, and tore along over the open country like mad.

"He never acted like this before in all his life," thought Bob, as he
found considerable difficulty in keeping his saddle, such were the
sudden whirls the black made in his erratic course.

But although he had by no means learned all the things known to old
cowmen, Bob had picked up quite a few points since arriving at the
ranch.  He had even heard of a mean trick practiced by revengeful
Mexicans, and others, when they wished to place a rival's life in
danger.

"Something has happened to him since we went into that store," Bob said
again and again, as he puzzled his wits to hit upon an explanation for
the animal's remarkable antics.  "Now, what could it have been?  Would
any fellow be so mean as to fasten some of those prickly sand burrs
under his tail?  Or perhaps it's a poison thorn under the saddle!"

This last idea seemed to strike him as pretty near the truth.  He began
to investigate as well as he was able during the rushing of the runaway
horse.  When, in pursuing his investigations, he ran his hand under the
flap of the saddle, he could feel the horse start afresh, and his queer
actions seemed worse than ever.

"That's just what it is, as sure as anything!" Bob declared, his whole
frame quivering with indignation at the thought of anyone being so
cruel and treacherous; "but how in the wide world am I going to get at
the thing?"

His first impulse was to ease the strain all he could by removing his
weight from the point where he believed the thorn to have been hidden.
This he did by leaning forward after the manner of a clever jockey in a
race, throwing pretty much all his body upon the shoulders and neck of
the horse.

Then he again began to speak soothingly in the ear of Domino.  By
degrees the horse seemed to slacken his wild pace.

Encouraged by this fact, Bob continued the treatment.  It appeared as
though the intelligent animal must comprehend what was wanted, for,
although evidently still in more or less pain, he gradually ceased his
runaway gait, until, finally, at the command of "whoa!" Domino came to
a complete stop.

Bob was on the ground immediately.  His horse was trembling with
excitement and other causes.  Bob continued to pat him gently, and
speak soothing words.  All the time he was working toward the buckle of
the band by means of which the saddle was held firmly on the beast's
back.

Once he had a grip on this he made a sudden pull.  Domino squirmed, and
for the moment Bob feared the animal would break away.

"Easy now, old fellow; take it quiet!  I'll have that saddle off in a
jiffy; and see what is wrong.  Softly, Domino!  Good old Domino!"

While he was talking in this manner Bob was releasing the band; and,
with a sudden jerk, he threw the saddle to the ground.

His quick eye detected signs of blood on the glossy back of the
Kentucky horse.

"That's what it was!" he exclaimed, angrily.  "A thorn of some kind,
put there so that when I jumped into my seat my weight would drive it
in.  And I reckon, too, it would be just like the cowardly sneak to
pick out one that had a poison tip!  Oh! what a skunk! and how I'd like
to see some of the boys at the ranch round him up!  But I wonder, now
could I find it?  I'd like to get Frank's opinion on it."

The horse had by now ceased his mad prancing.  This proved that the
cause for his strange actions had been removed when Bob cast the saddle
off.  And it did not require a hunt of more than two minutes to
discover some little object clinging to the cloth under the saddle.  It
was, just as Bob had suspected, a thorn with several points that were
as sharp as needles, and very tough.

Bob put it away in one of his pockets.  Then he once more replaced the
saddle, carefully adjusting the girth so as to avoid any more pressure
on the painful back of Domino than was absolutely necessary.

The horse seemed to understand his master's actions, and, although
still restive, allowed Bob to mount.

Cantering along over the back trail, in half an hour Bob came in sight
of his chum heading toward him.

"Well," said Frank, as they finally met, "I was beginning to get
worried about you, even though I knew you could manage a horse all
right.  It was a lively run, I should say," as he glanced at the
foam-streaked flanks of the gloss black.

"As fierce a dash as I ever want to take," answered Bob, patting his
horse gently.

"Did you find out what ailed him?" asked the other.

"After I'd spent some time trying to keep from being thrown, I did."

As he said this Bob drew the thorn from his pocket, and held it before
Frank, who took the vicious little thing in his hand.

"I thought so," he muttered.  "That's Peg's idea of getting even with
us; the coward!"

"But you don't mean to say Peg did that?" exclaimed Bob, astonished.

"Well, not with his own hand.  He wouldn't know how, you see; but he
had a Mexican cowboy along with him who is up to all these
tricks--Spanish Joe.  When we were busy in that store, he crept up and
fixed this thorn under your saddle.  Of course, as soon as you sprang
into your seat, your weight just drove one of these tough little points
in deeper.  And, as the horse jumped, every movement was so much more
torture.  Get onto it, Bob?"

"Sure I do; and I guessed all that while riding back.  But tell me, why
did he pick out _my_ horse, instead of your Buckskin?" asked the
Kentucky boy.

"Look back a little.  Who was it gave Peg his little tumble when he was
striking that child?  Why, of course it was nobody but Bob Archer.  I
saw Peg standing on the porch of the tavern as I galloped after you;
and give you my word, Bob, he had a grin on his face that looked as if
it would never come off.  Peg was happy--why?  Because he had just seen
you being carried like the wind out of town on a bolting nag.  And I
guess he wouldn't care very much if you got thrown, with some of your
ribs broken in the bargain."

Bob proceeded to tell how he had figured on what caused the queer
antics of his horse, and then what his method for relieving the
pressure had been.

"Just what you should have done!" exclaimed Frank, enthusiastically.
"Say, you're getting on to all the little wrinkles pretty fast.  And it
worked too, did it?"

"Thanks to the smartness of Domino, it did," replied Bob, proudly.
"Some other horses might have broken away as soon as their rider
dismounted; but he's mighty near human, Frank, I tell you.  He just
stood there, quivering with excitement, and pain, till I got the thing
off.  But do you know what kind of thorn this is?"

"I know it as well as you would a persimmon growing on a tree in Old
Kentucky; or a pawpaw in the thicket.  It's rank poison, too, and will
breed trouble if the wound isn't taken care of in time.

"That's bad news, old fellow.  I'd sure hate to lose my horse,"
remarked Bob, dejectedly, as he threw an arm lovingly over the neck of
the black.

"Oh!  I don't think it'll be as bad as that; especially since I happen
to have along with me in my pack some ointment old Hank Coombs gave me
at a time I fell down on one of the same kind of stickers, and got it
in my arm," and Frank opened the smaller of the two packs he had
fastened behind his saddle.

When the ointment was being thoroughly rubbed into the spot where the
barb of the thorn had pierced the flesh of the animal, Domino seemed to
understand what their object was.  He gave several little whinnies,
even as he moved uneasily when his master's hand touched the painful
spot.

"Now what's the programme?" asked Bob, after he had replaced the saddle.

"Just what we decided on before," replied his chum; "a little rest
before we make a start.  Twenty-four hours will do Domino considerable
good, too.  How did you come out about the duffle you were carrying;
any of it get lost?"

"None that I've noticed.  I'll make a round-up and see, before we go
any further," Bob remarked, examining the packages secured behind his
saddle.

"How?" queried Frank, in the terse, Indian style, as he saw that the
other had gone carefully over the entire outfit.

"Everything here, right side up with care.  And now I'll have to mount
again, a thing that may not appeal very much to Domino.  But it's lucky
I long ago learned the jockey way of riding, with most of the weight
upon the withers of the horse.  In that manner you see, Frank, I can
relieve the poor beast more than a little."

Together they rode off slowly.  Really, for one day it seemed that the
big black must have had all the running his fancy could wish.  Besides,
neither of the boys knew of any reason for haste.  As Frank had
suggested, it would perhaps be just as well to allow a certain amount
of time to elapse, before pushing their intended investigation of the
mysteries supposed to hover around Thunder Mountain.

The afternoon had almost half passed when Frank's sharp eyes discovered
a single horseman riding on a course that would likely bring him across
their trail soon.

"Seems to me there's something familiar about that fellow's way of
sitting in the saddle," he observed; and then, reaching for the field
glasses which he carried swung in a case over his shoulder, he quickly
adjusted them to his eyes.  "Thought so," he muttered, and Bob could
see him smile as he said it.

"Recognize the rider, then?  Don't tell me now that it's Peg, or one of
those slippery cowboy friends he has trailing after him," remarked Bob.

"Here, take the glasses, and see what you think," replied the other,
laughingly.

No sooner had the Kentucky lad taken a single good look than he called
out:

"Who but old Hank Coombs, the veteran cow puncher of the Southwest!  I
suppose your father has sent him on an errand, Frank."

"Just as likely as not, because he trusts old Hank more than any man on
the entire ranch.  You can see he's headed in a line that will fetch up
at the Circle Ranch by midnight, if he keeps galloping on.  Look there,
he sees us, and is waving his arm.  Yes, he's changed his course so as
to meet us, Bob."

"But if we needed the glass to find out who he was, how does it come
that an old man like Hank could tell that we were friends, at such a
distance?" asked the young tenderfoot, always eager to learn.

"Because his eyes are as good as ever they were.  Some of these fellows
who have lived in the open all their lives have eyes like an eagle's,
and can tell objects that would look like moving dots to you.  Let's
swing around a bit, so as to keep old Hank from doing all the going."

As he spoke Frank veered more to the left, and in this fashion they
speedily drew near the advancing horseman.  He proved to be a cowman in
greasy chaps, and with many wrinkles on his weather-beaten face.  But
Hank Coombs was as spry as most men of half his age.  He could still
hold his place in a round-up; swing the rope in a dexterous manner;
bring down his steer as cleverly as the next man; ride the most
dangerous of bucking broncos; and fulfill his duties with exactness.
Few men grow old on the plains.  Most of them die in the harness; and a
cowboy who has outlived his usefulness is difficult to find.

The veteran eyed the additional packs back of the saddles of the two
boys with suspicion in his eyes.  He knew the venturesome nature of his
employer's son; and doubtless immediately suspected that Frank might
have some new, daring scheme in view, looking to showing his friend
from the East the wonders of this grand country, where the distances
were so great, the deserts so furiously hot, the mountains so lofty,
and the prairies so picturesque.

"Ain't headin' toward home, are ye, Frank?" was the first question Hank
asked, as they all merged together, and rode slowly onward in company.

"Oh! not thinking of such a thing, Hank," replied the boy.  "Why, we
only left the ranch yesterday, you know, and meant to be away several
days, perhaps a week.  But I'm glad we ran across your trail right now,
Hank, because you can take a message to dad for me."

"Glad to do that same, Frank," the veteran cowman replied, and then
added: "but jest why are ye headin' this way, might I ask?  It's a wild
kentry ahead of ye, and thar be some people as don't think it's jest
the safest place goin', what with the pesky cattle-rustler crowd as
comes up over the Mexican border to give the ranchers trouble; and
sometimes the Injuns off their reservation, with the young bucks primed
for a scrap."

"Is that all, Hank?" asked Frank, turning a smiling face upon the old
rider.  Hank moved uneasily, seeming to squirm in his saddle.

"No, it ain't," he finally admitted, with a half grin; "that's Thunder
Mounting about twenty mile ahead o' ye.  None o' us fellers keers a
heap 'bout headin' that-a-way.  Twice I've been 'bliged to explore the
canyons thar, arter lost cattle; but I never did hanker 'bout the job.
It's a good place to keep away from, Frank."

"You don't say, Hank!" chuckled the boy.  "Too bad; but you see that's
just the very place we expect to head for to-morrow--Thunder Mountain!"

The old man looked closely at him, and shook his head.

"I don't like to hear ye say that, Frank," he muttered, uneasily; "an'
I kinder reckons as how yer father'll feel oneasy when I tell him what
yer up to.  'Cause, I opine, ye wants me to carry thet same news back
home; don't ye?"

"Sure," answered the other, laughing.  "That's what I meant when I said
I was glad we'd met up with you, Hank."

"But ye didn't expect to take a turn thar when ye left home, did ye?"
the veteran cowman went on.

"Never entered my head, Hank.  Fact is, we weren't thinking of Thunder
Mountain up to an hour or two ago, when we ran across Peg Grant, who
was in town with his two followers, Spanish Joe and Nick Jennings."

"The wust as ever throwed a leg over leather," muttered Hank, between
his teeth.  "We been talkin' it over, some o' us boys, an' 'bout kim to
the conclusion as how them fellers must be in touch with the Mendoza
crowd o' rustlers as draps over the Rio Grande every leetle while, to
grab a bunch o' long horns."

"My opinion exactly, Hank," went on Frank.  "But listen till I tell you
what they are thinking of doing about finding out the secret of Thunder
Mountain."

Quickly he related the incident of their meeting Peg, and of his boast.

"They'll never do it, mark me," declared Hank, after he had been put in
possession of the main facts.  "Thet noise ain't human!  I been
a-hearin' it for the last forty years, an' I give ye my word it's
gittin' wuss right along.  The reds believe as how it's the voice of
the Great Spirit talkin' to 'em.  An' honest now, Frank, thems my
sentiments to a dot."

"In other words, Hank, you believe the mountain is haunted, and that
anyone bold enough to wander into the unknown country that lies back
there is going to get into a peck of trouble?" Frank asked, seriously.

"Reckon as how that kivers the ground purty well," replied the cowman,
grimly.

"Well," Frank went on, "we happen to believe something different, and
we mean to look into the thing a bit.  It wouldn't surprise me to find
that some sharp crowd has been taking advantage of the bad name Thunder
Mountain has always had, to hide among those canyons.  And, Hank, I'm
going to look for the trail of some cattle while I'm there!"

"Which I take it to mean," Hank continued thoughtfully, "that you
kinder think them rustlers might be usin' the ha'nted mounting for a
hiding place to keep the cows which they run away with?  Um! wa'al now,
I never thort o' that afore.  But stands to reason no Mexicans'd ever
have the nerve to go whar white cowmen kept away from."

"Not unless they had solved the strange mystery of the mountain, and no
longer saw any reason to be afraid of the thunder.  But listen while I
tell you something else that happened to my friend here."

Frank then described the sudden bolt of Domino.  At his first words the
experienced western man looked wise.  He had immediately guessed what
caused the unexpected action of the usually tractable black horse.

"As low down a trick as was ever carried out," he remarked, finally, as
he looked at the thorn.  "And jest sech as thet sneakin' coyote,
Spanish Joe, would be guilty of tryin'.  I've seen it done more'n a few
times; and twict the critter was rounded up, and treated like he'd been
a hoss thief; 'case ye see, in each case 'twar a woman as rid the
animile as got the thorn.  But ye must let me rub somethin' on thet
wound right away, Bob."

"Don't bother," sang out Frank, cheerfully; "because we happened to
have with us that ointment you gave me, and I used it a while ago.
I'll put on more to-night when we get the saddles off, and once again
in the morning."

"Then ye mean to go into camp soon?" inquired Hank.

"See that timber over yonder, where a stream runs?  We'll settle down
for the night there.  Better hold over with us, Hank, unless you're in
a terrible hurry to get back home," Frank observed.

"I'd like to fust rate, Frank; and p'raps thar aint no sech great need
o' gittin' back to the ranch to-night.  Yes, I'll hang over.  P'raps I
kin coax ye to give up that crazy ijee 'bout Thunder Mounting."

And when they had settled down under the trees, with the westering sun
sinking toward the horizon where, in the far distance, Frank pointed
out to his chum the towering peak toward which they were bound, old
Hank did try to influence his employer's son into giving up his
intended trip.

It was useless, however.  Frank had made up his mind, and obstacles
only served to cause him to shut his teeth more firmly together and
stick to his resolution.  And so they spent the night very comfortably,
under the twinkling stars.

"Tell dad not to worry about us at all, Hank," Frank said to the
veteran, on the following morning, as they were bidding him good-bye.
"We'll turn up all right in the course of a few days.  And perhaps, who
knows, we might be able to tell you all about the queer noise that
shakes the earth every little while around the big uplift.  So-long,
Hank!"

The old cowman sat in his saddle, and looked after the two boys as
their horses went prancing away, each of the riders turning once or
twice to wave a jolly farewell, with uplifted hats.

"As fine a pair o' happy-go-lucky boys as ever drawed breath," Hank
muttered, as his eyes followed their vanishing forms beyond the
mesquite thicket.  "But I sure feel bad 'bout them goin' into that 'ere
Thunder Mounting territory.  I hopes Mr. Haywood'll start out with a
bunch o' cowmen to round 'em up.  But he thinks that Frank kin hold his
own, no matter what comes along.  If he don't show signs o' bein'
worried, I'm goin' to see if the overseer, Bart Heminway, won't take
the chances of sendin' several of us out to hunt for strays; an' it'll
be funny now, how them mavericks all run toward Thunder Mounting."

Chuckling, as if the new idea that had appealed to him gave him
considerable satisfaction, the old cow-puncher stirred his little
bronco into action, and was soon galloping away.  But, more than a few
times, he might have been observed to turn in his saddle and cast a
look of curiosity, bordering on apprehension, toward the dimly-seen
mountain that arose far away on the Southwestern horizon.

For to Hank Coombs that peak stood for everything in the line of
mystery and unexplained doings.




CHAPTER IV

A NOTE OF WARNING AT THE SPRING HOLE

"Pull up, Bob; I sure glimpsed something moving, out there in the sage
brush!"

Both horses came to an immediate stop as the bridles were drawn taut.

"Which way, Frank?" asked the Kentucky lad, eagerly, as he threw back
his shock of black hair, and waited to see where the finger of his
companion would point.

"Whatever it was disappeared behind that spur of the low foot hills
yonder.  I just caught a peep of the last of it.  Here, Bob, take the
glasses, and wait to see if it shows up again on the other side of the
rise," and Frank thrust the binoculars into the hand of his chum.

"Think it could have been a prowling coyote; or perhaps a bunch of
antelope feeding on the sweet grass around some spring hole, as you
were telling me they do?" asked Bob, holding himself in readiness.

"Well," returned Frank, quickly, "the sun was in my eyes some, you see,
and so I wouldn't like to be too sure; but somehow, Bob, I just have a
notion that it was a horse."

"With a rider on it, of course!" exclaimed the other lad, as he raised
the glasses to his eyes, training them on the further end of the squat
elevation that stood up in the midst of the sage level like a great
hump on a camel.

"There, looks like I was right, Bob!" ejaculated Frank, a minute or so
later, as something came out from behind the low hill, moving steadily
onward.

"Indians! as sure as anything!" fell from the lips of the one who held
the field glasses to his eyes.

"One--two--three--a heap of the reds in that bunch, I reckon," muttered
Frank, watching with his naked eye; although the distance, separating
them from the spot where the figures were passing steadily into view,
was considerable.

"Say, these glasses are jim-dandy ones, all right!" remarked Bob,
presently, as he turned to offer them to his chum, who immediately
clapped them to his own eyes.

"Huh!" grunted Frank a moment later, "squaws along; each cayuse
dragging poles on which they heap their lodges, blankets and such;
reckon there's no war party about that, Bob."

"I should think not, if what you've told me about the Indians is a
fact, Frank.  But look here, what d'ye suppose they're doing so far
away from their reservation?" and Bob gripped his quirt, which hung, as
usual, from his wrist, in cowboy fashion; and with a nervous slash cut
off the tops of the rattlesnake weed within reach.

"That's where you've got me, Bob," replied the one who had been brought
up on a ranch, and who was supposed to know considerable about the life
of the plains; "unless they've just got desperate for a good old hunt,
and broke loose.  Pretty soon the pony soldiers will come galloping
along, round 'em up, and chase the lot back to their quarters.  Uncle
Sam is kind, and winks at a heap; but he won't stand for the Injuns
skipping out just when the notion takes 'em."

They sat there in their saddles a while longer, watching the long
procession pass out beyond the low hill, and track along the plain
through the scented purple sage.

"Navajos, ain't they?" asked Bob, who, of course, depended on his
comrade for all such information, since one Indian was as much like
another as two peas to him.

"Sure thing," replied the other, carelessly.  "Tell 'em as far as I can
glimpse the beggars.  And I just reckon now that's old Wolf Killer
himself, ridin' at the head of the line, with his gay blanket wrapped
around him.  Wonder what he'd say if he knew Frank Haywood was here, so
far away from the home ranch?" and Frank chuckled as though amused.

"Do you know the old chief, then?" asked Bob.

"Say, do I?" replied Frank, with a laugh.  "Remember me telling you how
the boys on our place caught a Navajo trying to run away with one of
our saddle herds about three years ago, when I was hardly more'n a kid?
Well, I chased him with the rest of the outfit, and saw old Hank throw
his rope over his shoulders.  He snaked the fellow over the ground and
through the short buffalo grass like a coyote, 'till he was punished
enough; and then my dad made 'em let him go.  But you just ought to
have seen the way he folded his arms, stared at each of us, and, never
saying a single word, walked away.  I've often wondered if he didn't
mean to come back some day, and try to get his revenge."

"And that was the chief himself?" asked Bob.

"Just who it was," Frank went on.  "He'd left the reservation, and got
too much fire-water aboard, they said; so he thought the good old days
had come back, when a Navajo always tried to get away with any horses
he ran across.  They say Wolf Killer used to rustle cattle long ago,
till Uncle Sam put his hand down heavy on his tribe, and shut the lot
up."

"Then, if he has reason to remember everybody connected with Circle
Ranch in that way, I reckon it's just as well we don't try to let him
know we're here," remarked Bob, uneasily.  "We didn't come out on this
little picnic for trouble with the reds.  There they go, pushing
through the sage brush, Frank.  So-long, Navajo, and good luck to you
on your hunt," waving a hand after the departing string of distant
figures.

"Our way lies yonder, along the foot of the mountains," said Frank, as
he turned his head to look toward the grim range that stood out boldly
against the skyline.

"Yes," observed his companion, as he allowed his black horse his head,
once more advancing in a Southerly direction, "and, unless all signs
fail, that's Thunder Mountain towering above the rest of the peaks."

"You're right, Bob, that's what it is; and we're going to camp at its
foot unless something goes wrong," and as he spoke Frank urged Buckskin
on again.

The yellow bronco was a true range pony.  He had been taught many of
the clever tricks for which his kind are noted.  A stranger would have
had a hard time keeping his seat on the back of the animal, such was
his dislike for unknown parties.  He could dance almost as well as a
circus horse; and when Frank had tended the saddle herd at night, as
horse-wrangler, he was accustomed to depend on Buckskin to give ample
warning of trouble, whether in the shape of a storm, a threatened
stampede, or the presence of cattle-rustlers.

Both boys were, of course, dressed pretty much as cowboys are when on
the ranch; leather "chaps" covering their corduroy trousers; with boots
that mounted spurs; flannel shirts; red handkerchiefs knotted around
their necks; and with their heads topped by felt hats, such as the men
of the range delight in.

Slung to their saddles were a couple of up-to-date guns of the
repeating type, which both lads knew how to use at least fairly well.
Of course both carried lariats slung from the pommels of their high
Mexican saddles.  Frank was accustomed to throwing a rope; while Bob,
naturally, had much to learn in this particular.

"Say," remarked the latter, who had fallen a trifle behind his comrade,
"to see the way we're just loaded down with stuff makes me think of
moving day in the old Kentucky mountains.  But no use talking, if a
fellow wants to be half way comfortable, he's just got to lug all sorts
of traps along."

"That's right, Bob," assented the other, laughing.  "And that applies
in an extra way when he means to be out in the Rockies for perhaps a
week."

"No telling what he may run up against there, eh?" queried Bob.

"Well, if it isn't a grizzly, it may be an avalanche, or a
cloud-burst," remarked the boy who had spent his whole life in the open.

"Not to speak of Indians, or Mexican rustlers looking for a chance to
drop down on some peaceful ranch, and carry off a bunch of long horns;
eh, Frank?"

"Sure; and a lot more besides, Bob," was the reply.  "But the sun's
getting kind of low, you notice."

"In other words, we'd better be looking around for a place to camp,
Frank?"

"You've hit the nail on the head," the other replied.  "Suppose we hold
up here for a bit, and let me take another squint up yonder through the
glass."

"Meaning at old Thunder Mountain?" observed Bob, as his eye traveled
upward toward the bare crown of the great uplift, that had so long
remained a source of mystery to the entire community.

"Yes.  Just look at the pinons growing up the sides like tufts, along
with the funny looking clumps of stunted cedars.  Then you can see the
aspens and silver spruce next.  And over the whole outfit is a silence
that beats the desert itself.  Whew! the closer you examine the place
the more it impresses you."

Bob accepted the glasses after Frank had used them and focussed them on
the slope.

"So that's old Thunder Mountain, is it?" he remarked.  "Well, I must
say it shows up right well.  I've tried to picture the place from all
we've heard."

"But you don't feel disappointed, do you?" asked Frank.

"Not a bit, Frank," his companion continued.  "I've seen some
mountains, even before I came out here to your Rockies; but there's
something about this thing that just staggers a fellow.  Wow! but we'll
sure have our troubles climbing that wild slope."

"Never could make it if it wasn't for the canyons," Frank added.  "They
all tell me that.  Here, let me put the field-glasses away.  Half an
hour's gallop, and we'll jump off.  That ought to bring us to the foot
of the slope.  Here you go, Buckskin; show us you're not tired after
your day's run.  Whoop-la!"

Frank brought his hat down on the flank of the horse, accompanying the
action with a real cowboy yell.  Instantly the spirited steed bounded
off, with Bob's Domino close behind, snorting, and giving signs of
astonishing animation.

So they sped along, with clanking sounds from the various packages
fastened behind the saddles; but after a few minutes both boys
gradually drew upon the lines, knowing full well that their mounts had
done a fair day's work already; and, besides, there was no possible
need of haste.

"How's this for a camping place?" asked Frank, as he suddenly brought
Buckskin upon his haunches in a quick stop.

"Suits me first rate," replied his chum, after giving a glance around.
"Let's see if I remember all you told me about what a fellow has to
look for when he expects to go into camp.  Water handy, grass for the
horses, wood for a fire, and shelter from a hidden mountain storm.
What better could we ask, I'd like to know?  Is it a go, Frank?"

For answer the shorter lad jumped from his seat.  His first act was to
remove the saddle, and then, with a handful of dead grass, rub the
sweaty back of the mettlesome animal, as every true son of the plains
always does before he thinks of his own comfort.

Next he hobbled the animal, and drove the stake pin, to which the
lariat was attached, deeply into the ground.  After that the bridle
came off; and Buckskin's first natural act was to drop to the ground,
and roll over several times.

Bob was following this procedure with Domino.  The intelligent animals
seemed to understand just what the programme was to be; for after
rolling, they walked down to the little watercourse to slake their
thirst; and then set about eagerly nibbling the sweet grass that grew
all around.

The two chums went about preparing to spend a night under the bright
stars, with a readiness that told of long practice.  Bob, of course,
knew less than his companion about such things, but Frank had often
accompanied the cowboys on his father's ranch on their expeditions, and
had even spent nights in the company of old Hank, when off on a hunt
for fresh meat; so that he knew pretty well what ought to be done to
add to their comfort.

It pleased him to show Bob some of the things he had learned.  There
might be no real reason why he should start a cooking fire in a hole he
dug, rather than make a roaring blaze that could be seen a mile away;
but Bob was tremendously interested, and would never forget all that he
learned.

"Besides," Frank explained, after he had the small fire started, "it is
easier for cooking, once you get a bed of red ashes; because in this
warm country a fellow doesn't much like to get all heated up, standing
over a big blaze."

Bob had, meanwhile, opened some of the bundles.  One of these contained
a small coffee pot, as well as the frying pan without which camping
would be a failure in the minds of most Western boys.

"Look out for rattlers," advised Frank, as his chum went to the spring
hole to fill the coffee pot.  "They often come to such places in dry
season We haven't had rain for so long now, that, when it does come, I
expect a regular cloud-burst.  That's often the way in this queer
country, along the foothills of the Rockies."

Hardly had he spoken than there sounded a sudden and angry whirr,
similar to the noise made by a locust, and which Frank knew only too
well meant a rattlesnake!




CHAPTER V

THE VOICE OF THE MOUNTAIN

"Hey! take care there, Bob!" shouted Frank, starting up from beside his
little cooking fire in something of a panic; for that alarm signal is
apt to send the blood bounding through the veins like mad, whenever
heard.

"Don't bother!" came the reassuring reply of the unseen Bob, from a
point near by; "I think I've got the beggar located, all right.  Say,
don't he sing though, to beat all creation?  He's mad clean through,
all right.  I'm looking for a stick, so as to knock him on the head."

"Go slow, and keep your eye out for a second one," advised Frank,
uneasily; "because they generally hunt in couples.  That isn't a measly
little prairie rattler either; but a fellow that's come down from
Thunder Mountain."

"Nice warm reception for visitors, I should remark," laughed Bob,
immediately adding: "there, I've found just the stick I want.  Now, old
chap, look out for yourself!  I'm going to have that rattle of yours to
take home, unless you give me the slip."

"No danger of that," remarked Frank; "because a rattler seldom runs
away, once he shakes his old box, and gives warning.  Hit him just back
of the head, and let it be a good smart blow too, so that you break his
neck."

Then came a swishing sound, twice repeated.  The thrilling rattle
immediately subsided.

"Get him?" demanded Frank, ready to take up his task once more, upon
receiving a favorable reply from his friend.

"He's squirming some, but helpless," returned Bob, composedly.  "I'll
cut his head off, so that he can't turn around and jab me while I'm
getting that rattle box of his."

Two minutes later he came back into camp, carrying the coffee pot,
which he proceeded to place upon the fire Frank had started.  The
latter noticed that his chum was trembling a little, and could give a
shrewd guess that Bob had been more startled than he had thus far
admitted.

"Perhaps I'll get used to it in time," Bob remarked, presently; "but it
sure does give a fellow a nasty shock to hear that sound burst out
close by your feet, knowing as you do what a bite from those fangs
means."

"Then it was a narrow squeak, was it?" asked Frank.

"I guess I never want to be closer to a diamond-back than that," Bob
admitted, with a shake of his head.

Soon a delightful aroma began to steal through the air in the immediate
vicinity of the little camp near the foot of the towering, mysterious
mountain; as some bacon sizzled in the pan, and the crushed berry from
Java boiled and bubbled most cheerily.

Besides, upon some splinters of wood Frank had thrust small pieces of
venison, the last fresh meat they had brought from the ranch.  As the
heat from the red coals began to turn these to a crisp brown, Bob
sniffed the added fragrance in the air after the manner of a hungry
range-rider, or a boy with a healthy appetite.

"Seems to be plenty of game around here," he remarked.  "I jumped two
rabbits near the spring, and they went up the rise, as usual."

"Yes," remarked the cook, "the place looks good for game, and you'd
wonder why those Injuns passed it by, only I happen to know.  Ten to
one there's a deer in that thicket of wild plum over there.  And you
can just believe an old grizzly wouldn't want a better hang-out than up
yonder among the cliffs and crags of the mountain side."

"But to return to our mutton, which after all is antelope meat, when do
we start operations?  I'm nearly wild, with all these smells, and never
a bite.  The water just drips from my tongue, I give you my word,
Frank."

For answer the other picked up the coffee pot, and set it aside for a
minute, to let the contents settle.

"Grub's ready, Bob," he said, laughingly; "and I reckon we'll not
bother banging on the frying pan with a big spoon to-night, range
fashion.  Sit down, and get your pannikin ready for some of this bacon
and meat.  How does that coffee look?"

"Say, it's got the color, all right, and if it only tastes half as fine
as it looks you'll hear no kick coming from me," replied Bob, as he
poured his tin cup full of the liquid.

As the boys ate they chatted on various topics, most of which talk had
of course some connection with the big cattle ranch they had so
recently left.

"I'd give a heap to know if Peg Grant meant business when he said we
were riding to a fall if we thought we were the only pebbles on the
beach," Bob remarked.

"Oh!" replied Frank, "I reckon he's going to make a try to solve that
Thunder Mountain puzzle.  But just think of a tenderfoot like Peg let
loose on that fierce slope up yonder; will you?"

"Perhaps he's here already," suggested Bob.

"Wouldn't be one bit surprised," Frank continued, readily enough, as
though he considered that a foregone conclusion anyway.  "He and his
cronies had time enough, unless Peg changed his mind.  He might be
wondering what happened to you, and thinking how the X-bar-X ranch
would be safer, in case some of our boys chased after him to give him
the tar and feathers he deserves for playing such a mean trick."

"But supposing they did come," said Bob; "Peg and Spanish Joe, and that
other treacherous cowboy you told me about; we're pretty apt to meet up
with them if we go prowling around here for the next few days."

"Just so, and we'll try to mind our business all the time," remarked
Frank; and then his eyes flashed a little as he continued: "but if they
try any of their ugly little tricks on us, Bob, they're likely to get
hurt."

"I'm with you there, Frank," the other added, shutting his teeth in a
determined way.  "I can stand a certain amount of fun, and, I hope,
take it the right way.  Your cow punchers said that when they hazed me,
you know.  But I certainly do object to any such rough-house business
as fastening a poisoned thorn under a fellow's saddle."

"That game has cost more than a few people their lives," Frank declared
vehemently.  "Cowmen draw the line at it.  You noticed how angry old
Hank became when he heard about that same thing.  But your horse seems
to be getting on all right, Bob."

"Sure he does.  That ointment made by old Hank's like magic.  Domino
won't suffer much from that jab.  But that was a bully good supper all
right, and I don't care how soon we repeat it," he concluded with a
laugh.

Finally both lads lay down to secure such rest as they needed after a
long and tiresome day.

The drowsy chirp of crickets, and shrill voices of katydids in the lush
grass near by, told of the summer night.  Many times had Frank listened
to this same chorus as he lay in his blanket on the open prairie,
playing the part of night-wrangler to the herd of saddle horses
belonging to the round-up party of cow-punchers.

He could hear some lurking rabbit slinking through the hazel bushes
over at one side.  Somewhere off on the level, where the sage grew so
heavily, there must have been a prairie dog village; for the sound of
the peculiar barking of these queer little animals frequently floated
to his ears as the breeze changed.

The two horses were still feeding at the time Frank dropped off into a
sound and refreshing sleep, but doubtless they would soon lie down.
Bob was already breathing heavily, which would indicate that he had
passed beyond the open door to slumber-land.

The minutes passed, and several hours must have gone.

Frank was dreaming of the excitement attending some of the many dashing
gallops he had lately enjoyed in company with his chum, looking up
stray cattle, helping to brand mavericks, watching the cowmen mill
stampeding herds, or chasing fleet-footed antelopes just to give the
horses a run.

He was suddenly aroused by a strange sound that seemed to cause the
very earth under him to tremble.  The trample of a thousand hoofs would
make such a noise; if one of those old-time mighty herds of bison could
have come back to earth again; or a stampede of an immense herd of
long-horns might cause a similar vibration.

But Frank Haywood knew that neither of these explanations could be the
true one, even as he thus sat upright on his blanket to listen.  The
ominous, growling, grumbling noise was more in the nature of
approaching thunder, just as though one of those furious summer storms,
tropical in their nature, and often encountered in this country where
plains and mountains sharply meet, had crept upon them as they calmly
slept.

And yet, strange to say, neither of the two boys jumped quickly to
their feet in wild dismay, seeking to prepare for the rain that might
soon burst upon them.  On the contrary they continued to sit there,
straining their ears to catch the rumbling reverberations that kept
coming, with little respites between.

"Say, now, what d'ye think of that, Bob?" asked Frank, when silence
again held sway for a brief period.  "Nary a cloud as big as your hand
in the sky; and yet all that grumbling oozing out of old Thunder
Mountain!  Looks like we might have the biggest job of our lives
finding out the secret of that pile of rocks.  There she starts in
again, harder than ever.  Listen, Bob, for all you're worth!"




CHAPTER VI

A SECOND ALARM

"It's stopped again!" remarked Bob, after possibly five minutes had
passed, during which time the ominous rumbling, accompanied by earth
tremors, had kept up, now rising to a furious stage, and then almost
dying away.

Frank gave a big sigh.

"It sure has," he admitted; "and I don't wonder now, after I've heard
the racket with my own ears, that the reds for a hundred years back
have always declared the Great Manitou lived in Thunder Mountain, and
every little while let them hear his awful voice."

"Then this thing has been going on forever, has it?" asked Bob.

"The Navajos say so; though even they admit that, of late, it's got a
brand new kink to the growl," Frank answered.  "They believe it's sure
unlucky for any brave to be caught near the mountain after dark, and
especially when Manitou scolds.  You see, that accounts for the hurry
of that hunting party to climb out before sunset."

"Yes," Bob went on.  "And now I understand what you said about the
Indians never hunting near Thunder Mountain.  Perhaps they believe all
the game that hides along the slopes, and in the deep gullies, belongs
to the Great Spirit, and that he'll punish any warrior bold enough to
try and get a line on it.  But see here, Frank, do white men--cowboys,
prospectors, and the like--believe this mountain is haunted?"

"Heaps of 'em do, and that's a fact," replied the other, chuckling.
"I've heard some of our cowpunchers talking about it more'n a few
times; and you remember how old Hank took it when we told him what we
had in mind?"

"They're a superstitious lot, as a whole, I take it," Bob ventured.
"Now, as for me, I never could believe in ghosts and all that sort of
thing.  If there ever came a time when something faced me that I
couldn't understand, I just set my teeth together and vowed I'd never
rest easy till I had found out what it meant."

"Same here, Bob; and that's why I just jumped at the chance to beat Peg
out in his game.  The funny part about it is why I never thought of
this racket before.  But perhaps that was because I didn't have a chum
to stand back of me."

"None of the boys on the ranch would go with you, then?" asked Bob.

"I should say not!  Even old Hank would balk at that, and he's never
been afraid of thing that flies, runs or crawls.  It was old Hank who
taught me all I know about range life.  He showed me how to shoot,
throw a rope, and do heaps of other things a prairie boy ought to know.
Hank thinks lots of me, and honest now, Bob, that gruff old fellow
would willingly lay down his life for me."

"I reckon he would," assented the other, readily enough.

"But Hank's a rank believer In the Injun story of the mountain, and
would never come here of his own accord; but to keep an eye on me, and,
stand between me and danger, he'd just crawl down the crater of a live
volcano."

"Seems like the show might be over for tonight," Bob suggested.

"The row has stopped, sure enough," Frank remarked, looking up at the
dimly-seen outlines of the far-away crest of the rocky elevation, where
it stood out against the starry heavens.

"You don't believe, then, that there could have been some kind of storm
up there; do you?" questioned Bob.

"Well, it's sure a great puzzle," replied his chum, with a long breath.
"My eyes are reckoned prime, but I can't glimpse any sign of a cloud
that would bring out all that noise.  A mystery it's been these many
years; and if so be we can learn the cause for all that queer roaring
that shakes the earth, we'll be doing more'n anyone else has ever done
in the past."

"That's what we're here for, if Peg gives us half a chance," remarked
Bob, with the healthy assurance of youth.  "And as neither of us takes
any stock in the fairy story about the Manitou's anger, we ought to
stand some chance of locating the thing; or 'bust the b'iler trying' as
old Hank would say."

Frank had crawled out of his blanket, and stood erect.

"What's on?" asked his camp-mate, presently, noticing that he was
holding up his hand, after wetting his finger, a method much in vogue
when one wished to learn the direction of the passing air currents.

"Southeast; and blowing strong a bit ago up there on the mountain, I
reckon," Frank remarked.  "You notice we happen to be sheltered more or
less down here, when she comes out of that same quarter?"

"Meaning the wind," Bob remarked.  "Yes, you're right, Frank.  But what
has that got to do with the measly old grumble of the mountain, tell
me?"

"Huh!  I don't know that it's going to have anything to do with it,"
came the answer; "but we want to know every little point as we go on.
And Bob, just remember that the wind was coming out of the Southeast;
and a clear sky overhead!"

"But look here, Frank, you've heard your dad talk about this Thunder
Mountain business, I take it?"

"Well, now, I reckon I have, heaps of times; but then you know, he
isn't much on bothering about things that don't concern him.  Thinks
he's got his hands full, looking after the stock, keeping tabs on the
doings of those rascally Mexican rustlers, that have been running off
batches of cattle every little while; and fighting that big syndicate
of Eastern capitalists, headed by the millionaire, Mr. Grant, Peg's
father, that wants to throw all the Southwestern ranches into a close
trust."

"But what I wanted to remark is this: you must have heard him give an
opinion about this thunder sound?" Bob persisted in saying.

"Oh! he thinks the same as several gentlemen did who came out here a
few years ago on some business.  They declared that once, hundreds of
years ago, perhaps, old Thunder Mountain must have been a volcano; and
that it still grumbles now and then, as the fires away down in the
earth begin to kick up some of their old monkeyshines."

"Yes, I heard one man say that," laughed Bob.  "He declared that
there's going to be the biggest rumpus some fine day, when the fires
inside get to going out of bounds.  Then the whole cap of the mountain
will go flying into a million pieces; and good-bye to any unlucky
cow-puncher caught napping near this place."

"Well," remarked Frank, as he prepared to settle down again into his
snug blanket, "I reckon we're not going to be scared away by a little
thing like that growl.  Unless we hit a snag, or Peg Grant and his
guides break up our game, a few days ought to see us heading back to
Circle Ranch with a story calculated to make the boys sit up and take
notice; or else----"

"Just pull up right there, Frank," interrupted his chum, with a laugh.
"There's nothing going to happen to knock us out.  If that same Peg
comes around, making a nuisance of himself, why, he's due for a nice
little surprise, mark me.  Besides that; what could there be to make
trouble?"

"Oh, I'm not bothering my head over it, Bob," declared the other, as he
dropped into the nest he had made in his blanket.  "But say, did you
take notice of the way our horses acted while that thing was going on?"

"Just what I did," the other replied.  "They must have been trembling
all over.  I could hear your Buckskin snorting to beat the band, and
pawing just like he does when he's worried.  Reckon they didn't know
what to make of it, either, seeing that there's nary a sign of a storm
cloud around.  But both horses have quieted down again.  They think all
danger of a howler has passed away."

Frank made no reply.  He was already getting ready to resume his
interrupted nap; and Bob lost no time in following his example, both
confident that in the alert Buckskin they had a sentry capable of
giving ample warning should peril threaten.

Once more Frank composed himself for sleep.  The many noises of the
night, which had seemed to cease while that mysterious rumbling was
going on in the heart of the lofty mountain, had again resumed sway.
The hum of insects; the melancholy hooting of the lonely owl, in some
willow or cottonwood tree near the base of the mountain; the far-off
howl of the prairie wolf; or the more discordant voice of the skulking
coyote--all these things were as familiar music in the ears of the boy
whose cradle had been the rich black earth of the grazing country ever
since he was old enough to remember anything.

They all did their share in lulling him to sleep.  And, no doubt in
dreams, he was once more galloping across the wide prairie on the back
of his mount, his nostrils filled with the life-giving Sir of the
sage-covered level.

Frank slept, he never knew just how long.

This time it was not the rumbling sound and the fearful vibration of
the ground that aroused the two saddle boys; but a far different cause.

When Bob sat up he found his comrade already erect, and apparently
listening as though keenly alive to some approaching peril.

"Buckskin's uneasy, you see," remarked Frank in a whisper; "he's pawing
the ground and snorting as he always does when he scents danger."

As he said this, Frank dropped back again, and seemed to place his ear
to the ground, a trick known and practiced among the Indians from the
days of the early pioneers along the Ohio down to the present time;
since sound travels much better along the earth than through the
air--at least, in so far as the human ear, unaided by wireless
telegraph apparatus, is concerned.

"A bunch of horses coming out of the Northwest!" announced the prairie
boy, almost immediately; "and we can't get our nags muzzled any too
soon, Bob."

Apparently the other lad had been coached as to what this meant.  He
sprang to his feet, snatching up his blanket as he did so.  Together
they were off on the jump toward the spot where their animals had been
staked out at the end of the lariats.

Arriving at the pins which had been driven into the ground each boy
sought to clutch the rope that held his restlessly moving horse; and
hand over hand, they moved up on the animals, the blankets thrown over
their shoulders meanwhile.

A few low-spoken words served to partly soothe Buckskin and his black
mate; then the blankets were arranged about their heads, and secured in
such fashion that no unlucky snort or whinny might betray their
presence to those who passed by.




CHAPTER VII

THE RUSTLERS

At a word from his master the well trained Buckskin doubled up, and lay
down on the ground.  Most cowboy ponies are taught to do this trick by
their masters, and it is in common use; so that the punchers believe it
is a poor animal that has not learned to roll over and play dead on
occasion.

Bob, too, managed to induce his mount to do the same thing; but to make
it absolutely certain that no unwise flounder on the part of Domino
might betray them, he sat upon the horse's head, soothing him by little
pats on his glossy hide.

"I hear 'em coming," announced Frank, presently.

The sounds reached him against the wind, so that it was quite natural
to believe the approaching horses must by now be very close.  There was
a confused pounding that could only spring from a large body of
animals.  The trained ear of Frank caught a significance in the clash
of hoofs that told him much more than Bob was able to make out.

"All horses, Bob," he whispered across the little gap that separated
him from his chum; "and two thirds of 'em running free, without saddles
or riders.  Lie low, now, and see if you can glimpse 'em as they go
past."

"Won't they be apt to run over us?" asked Bob, a bit nervously.

"Nixy.  I looked out to pick a place they'd be apt to avoid.  They'll
brush past a little further to the south," and Frank ended his words
with a hiss of warning.

The pounding of many hoofs continued.  Frank, straining his eyes,
believed he was now able to make out a confused moving mass at some
little distance away, heading directly toward the foot of Thunder
Mountain.

As the starlight was so vague he could not make out more than that here
and there a figure was mounted on a galloping horse, with several
unridden animals trailing along behind, as though led by ropes.

The little caravan passed quickly.  Already they were vanishing in the
deeper shadows lying closer to the base of the mountain that towered
aloft several thousand feet.

Still the two boys continued to sit there, guarding their horses;
although all danger of discovery seemed absolutely past.

"Whew!" exclaimed Bob, presently, as the sound of retreating hoofs
began to die away; "what d'ye think of that, eh, Frank?"

"Indians?" queried the Kentucky boy, eagerly.

"Well," replied his chum, "not so's you could notice.  Say, now, you
didn't see any feathers on their heads, did you?  And I sure heard the
fellow nearest us say something that only a white man would remark,
when his horse stepped into a hole, and almost threw him over its head."

"Cow punchers; or perhaps rustlers?" continued Bob, anxious to know.

"What would cowmen be doing away off here, tell me that, Bob?  And
lugging along a bunch of extra mounts, too, in the bargain?  No, I
rather think, Bob, that those fellows must have some of Mendoza's
cattle rustlers.  And they've been making a dandy raid on some ranch's
saddle herd; or I miss my guess."

"Perhaps the Circle outfit had gotten careless," suggested Bob.

"I sure hope not, for the boys have had plenty of warning; and I reckon
Bart Heminway is some too good an overseer to permit such a raid.  I'd
rather believe it was the X-bar-X outfit that has gone and got nipped
this time.  But stop and think Bob; what d'ye expect takes these
cattle-rustlers over this way right now, headed straight for the
canyons of Thunder Mountain?"

"Oh, I see what you mean!" exclaimed the taller lad, immediately.
"Perhaps the secret hiding place of Mendoza and his crowd of cattle
thieves may be somewhere around this same old rock pile.  It'd be just
like the tricky rustler to have a hide-out where nobody else ever came!"

"Now, why didn't somebody ever think of that before?" ejaculated Frank,
in a tone of mingled surprise and disgust.

"Looks easy, doesn't it, after we've run across a clue?" admitted Bob,
laughing softly.  "You remember what they said about discovering
America, after Columbus did it.  But supposing this thing _does_ turn
out to be true; how's it going to affect our little business, Frank?
Oh! say, I wonder if that crowd can have anything to do with the
rumbling of the mountain?"

Frank laughed heartily at the suggestion.

"Well," he remarked, "they're a pretty tough lot, all right; but even
such a bad bunch could hardly get enough hot air together to make a
mountain shake and groan like that.  Besides, don't you see, Bob, they
must have been out yonder, riding this way with their stolen horses,
when that little circus came off."

"But one thing is sure," the other went on, sturdily; "they don't seem
to take any stock in that notion about a volcano, because, as we saw,
they headed straight for Thunder Mountain.  That gives it away; they're
so used to the row that they don't pay any attention to it any longer."

"Correct!" echoed Frank, as though his mind was made up.

"Do we need to hold the horses down any longer?" asked Bob, who could
feel that Domino was becoming very restless under his enforced silence.

"I reckon not," replied the other, at the same time taking the blanket
from Buckskin's head; whereupon the animal, recognizing this as a sign
to rise, quickly gained his feet and shook himself.

"It's back to the blankets again for another nap," remarked Bob, when
he, too, had seen his animal regain an upright position.  "Wonder
what's next on the programme for us.  Twice, now, we've been waked up;
and I don't know whether it's really worth while trying to get any more
sleep to-night.  It isn't a great ways from dawn, is it, Frank?"

The other cast a quick look up at the stars.  Accustomed to reading
these heavenly sign posts of the night, he was able, from their
positions, to give a pretty fair guess as to the hour; just as the sun
served him in place of a watch during the day.

"Three hours yet to dawn, Bob; no use staying up all that time," he
said, presently.  "We expect to be on the move again at peep of day;
because, after what's happened, it'll be wise for us to get off the
level here before broad daylight comes along.  There might be curious
eyes on the watch up yonder, on Thunder Mountain; and that, you see,
would just spell trouble for our crowd."

"Whew! things are thickening, for a fact!" exclaimed Bob.

"I was only thinking," Frank continued, "whether we ought to try and
get word back to the ranch about our discovery.  If they knew Mendoza
and his rustlers were hiding somewhere about this place they'd comb the
whole mountain range so they could run him to earth.  He's been the
pest of the border too long now, and something's just got to be done to
chase him back where he belongs, south of the Rio Grande."

"But you don't want to go back just yet, do you, Frank?" asked Bob,
uneasily.

"I'm ready to do what you say, though I'd like to stay," came the
prompt answer.

"Then I say, let's stick it out," declared Bob, with animation.  "It
might turn out to be a false alarm, after all; and we'd feel pretty
cheap to bring all the boys along, and then not be able to show 'em any
game.  No, I say it'll be time enough to go after 'em, when we make
dead sure!"

"That settles it, then," remarked Frank, with a little laugh, as though
pleased to learn that his saddle chum looked at the matter in such a
sensible light.

This time, after they had lain down in their blankets, there was no
further alarm.  Frank, from long habits of early rising on the range,
awakened just as the first faint streaks of dawn began to show in the
eastern horizon.

It required but a touch to arouse Bob; and saddling up, with packs in
place, the boys soon left the scene of their night bivouac, heading
toward the heavy growth of timber directly at the foot of the mountain.

The early morning mists concealed their movements until they had
entered among the timber; when they left they were safe from any
suspicious eye, should the bold Mexican rustler have posted any watcher
upon the side of the mountain.

Again did the saddle boys build a small fire in a hole, over which they
proceeded to cook their breakfast; while the horses cropped the grass
near by, secured by the ever useful lariats, or riatas.

"There's where this leads into a big gully," remarked Bob, later on,
pointing as he spoke to where the ground became broken.

"Yes," Frank went on, thoughtfully, "and the chances are ten to one
that it changes into a regular canyon, where the water rushes down
whenever they have one of those gushers, or cloud bursts, that come
along once in a while around here.  Now, I wonder if those riders hit
it up this way?"

He jumped to his feet as he said this.  Passing back and forth, Frank
seemed to be examining the ground, marking the stepping stones of the
mountain.

"Signs aplenty around here," he remarked.  "Wish old Hank was along to
read 'em.  I reckon I can tell what they stand for, though."

"Then they went on up that canyon, you believe?" asked Bob.

"Reckon there isn't any doubt about that part of it," chuckled Frank;
"though just where that same canyon leads I can't say.  P'raps it may
be a short-cut across the big range here, leading to the prairie on the
other side.  P'raps it doesn't go anywhere, but just leads to a blind
hole that I've heard prospectors call a _cul de sac_.  Anyhow, we ought
to find out, Bob."

"_They_ knew all right," remarked the other, positively.  "Wouldn't get
any riders going up there in the dark, unless they were mighty familiar
with every foot of the way.  That's my idea, Frank."

"And I reckon it's the true one," asserted the other.  "They know this
place as well as I do all around old Circle Ranch."

"There's the sun coming up; and perhaps we'd better be getting a move
on about now?" suggested Bob.

"Wait!"

Something in the tone which his saddle chum used caused Bob to turn his
head, and look out toward the plain.

"Huh! what does that mean?" he ejaculated.  "A single rider heading
this way; and he seems to be leading a burro loaded with supplies.
Must be a bold prospector, bound to look into the secrets of Thunder
Mountain as we're bent on doing; only he hunts for gold, while we're
just bent on finding things out."

"But look now," Frank said a little later, as the other came closer.
"Don't you see that it's only a little Mexican boy on that bag of bones
of a horse?  Tell you what, Bob, he must have been sent to town for
fresh supplies by some party of gold hunters located right now over the
range."

"Yes, and how do we know but what this Mexican boy is hooked up with
that Mendoza crowd?" asked the other, seriously.  "They might send him
off for grub, and such things as they happen to need.  And he pays for
it with money they get from selling stolen cattle and horses!  Nobody
would suspect him, Frank, and try to follow.  I hope our horses don't
give us away now.  I'd like to see what that little fellow does."

The boy indeed looked weary as he drew closer, leading his tired burro,
upon which a fair-sized load was strapped and roped.

"Get down, Bob," said Frank.  "He hasn't glimpsed us, and, luckily
enough, our horses are feeding out of sight just now.  Doesn't he look
sleepy and tuckered out though?  See him nodding in his saddle, poor
little runt!  Oh! what's that moving there among those rocks just
ahead?"

"Perhaps it may be one of the rustlers coming down to interview him,"
said Bob.

"Hist!" Frank uttered almost in his chum's ear as he craned his own
neck in order to see better.

The small boy on the tired broncho, and leading the patient burro, kept
on steadily advancing, apparently allowing his animal to follow its
nose, as though it knew the way fairly well from having passed along it
before.

"Look! look!" ejaculated Frank suddenly, jumping to his feet.  "Great
guns!  Bob, would you see what is coming out from among those loose
rocks there?  A great big grizzly bear; and making straight for the
pack mule, sniffing the air as if he smelled grub!  There, the horse
has scented him.  See him rear up, will you?  Oh! he's gone and done
it, as sure as you live--thrown the boy over his head!  And the poor
burro is caught fast, with his leading rope held in a crotch of the
rocks.  The boy will be killed if ever he meets up with that monster!
Quick!  We must do something to save him, Bob, but whatever shall it
be?" and Frank leaped to his feet.




CHAPTER VIII

A STARTLING DISCOVERY

The Mexican boy had apparently escaped serious injury at the time the
frightened cayuse made a sudden bolt upon sighting the bear, and threw
him over his head onto the rocks.

The lad was already sitting up, and rubbing his knee in a dazed way, as
if not fully understanding what had happened.  The pony rushed wildly
away, heading up the wide gully, as though with a full knowledge of
where it was going.  And the poor little burro would doubtless have
been only too glad of a chance to follow, if only it could break loose
from the detaining rope.

Meantime the ugly monster, that had been the cause of all this
commotion, was shuffling closer with each passing second, eager to
strike down the burro with one savage blow from his mighty paw with its
long claws, after which he could proceed to help himself to what those
various packages contained.

All this Frank Haywood saw in that one glance he shot toward the scene
of action.  The boy was apparently directly in the path of the hungry
bear.  And when his pony had fled in such a panic he must have also
carried off the rifle, if the boy possessed so valuable a weapon.

Thus the little fellow was at the mercy of the most feared wild beast
to be found in all the territory between the Atlantic and the Pacific.

A wild inclination to hurl himself between that brute and his
prospective victim surged over Frank.  With but a knife, or even a
revolver to back him up, such a rash act would have been little short
of madness.  Fortunately it was not needed.

"Let me try for him, Frank!" said a trembling voice at his side.

And then, all at once, Frank Haywood discovered his chum was crouching
close by, and that he was clutching a rifle in his shaking hands.  How
he had managed to get hold of the weapon Frank could not even guess,
because his own was a dozen feet away just then.

Now Bob Archer had certainly never before set eyes on a ferocious bear
outside of the circus or museum.  And doubtless that brownish-colored
beast looked as big as a house to him, for he was very much excited.
But he had true Kentucky pluck, and even that circumstance did not make
him quail.  If the monster had seemed to equal two houses, still would
Bob have tried to do his duty.  And just then it was to save that poor
little Mexican boy.

The grizzly had advanced so rapidly that he was already almost upon the
crouching boy, who stared at him as if in dire dismay, as well he
might.  It was not too late, even then, for the boy to have escaped,
could he have understood the real situation, and that it was the food
in the packs the bear craved, rather than his life; but he did not seem
to realize the fact.

They had seen him fumbling about his sash, and now he drew something
forth that glistened in the early morning sun.  Why, the little chap
had actually drawn his knife, as though that trifling bit of steel
could avail anything more than the prick of a pin against that shaggy
monster.

The boy was shivering as with terror, but all the same he showed
himself game.  Frank was amazed by the sight, and not apt to forget it
in a hurry.

But by now Bob had stepped forward, uttering a sharp "hello" as he did
so.  His object, of course, was to attract the attention of the bear
toward himself.  This might cause the grizzly to change his course, and
allow of a few more seconds' delay.  It would also divert the attack
from the helpless boy to one who was at least better armed, even though
not professing to be a bear-hunter.

Frank aroused himself.  He remembered that he, too, had a repeating
rifle, leaning against the trunk of a tree not far off.  He sprang to
secure the firearm, in the belief that possibly his assistance would be
needed in order to finish the dreaded animal.

However good Bob's intentions were, when he sought to draw the
attention of the grizzly toward himself, they did not succeed as he had
hoped.  Bruin seemed to know that a feast awaited him as soon as he
could clear a way to that frantic little burro with the big load.  And
he declined to be turned aside on any account.

Seeing this, the Kentucky boy dropped on one knee.  He felt that he
must find some sort of rest for his gun, since his shaking hands could
hardly be expected to hold the weapon steady when it came time to pull
the trigger.

Even as Frank swept up his gun he heard the weapon of his chum speak
sharply.  The report was instantly drowned in a tremendous roar.
Looking, even as he drew back the hammer of his rifle, Frank saw that
the bear had finally turned away from temptation in the way of meat and
supplies.  He had started to rush Bob, whom he evidently recognized as
the cause of that sudden pain which had shot through his bulky body.

Bob was pumping another cartridge into the firing chamber of his
repeater.  He seemed cool, although perhaps only he himself knew how
his heart was pounding away like mad against his ribs.

Both guns spoke together, it seemed.  The grizzly gave another roar,
even more furious than before.  At the same time, however, he stumbled,
and fell over sideways.  Then he tried desperately to scramble back to
his four feet, still full of fight.

Both the boys again put their guns in a firing condition.  Even if
tremendously excited at the moment, they seemed to remember what was
necessary to do in order to accomplish this result.

But the bear was apparently unable to get up again.  One of the bullets
must have most luckily reached a vital point in the region of his
heart.  He was floundering about unevenly, while the little Mexican boy
sat and stared, still gripping that ridiculously small blade in his
hand.

"We got him that time, Frank!" exclaimed Bob just then, though he could
hardly believe his eyes at seeing the monster growing weaker.  "He's a
goner, as sure as shooting!  Look at him wobble!  Wow! there he goes
over, to make his last kick!  Frank, just think of me having a hand in
the killing of such royal game!  A real grizzly!  Oh!  I can hardly
believe it!"

They now approached the spot where the little Mexican boy was getting
on his feet again.  He was no longer white.  The threatening monster
had been placed where he could do no more harm; but the little chap
stared uneasily at the two saddle boys.  Evidently he was possessed of
a new cause for alarm in the mere fact of their unexpected presence.

The burro, meanwhile, had somehow managed to effect his release from
the rope that had become fast in the crevice of the rock.  Still in a
panic because of the wild animal odor so close at hand, the laden
animal hurried off after the cayuse that had fled along the gully,
heading for where Frank had declared the canyon must undoubtedly lie.

And the boy really looked very much as though he, too, would like to
depart with equally scant ceremony.

"Hi! there goes the burro!" called out Bob.  "Head him off, Frank; or
shall I jump on my horse and try to rope him?"

To the astonishment of both the saddle chums the Mexican boy threw out
a detaining hand, crying earnestly:

"Senors, all, there is no need to chase them.  They know where to go,
believe me, and surely I must soon overtake them.  You have saved my
life, Senors.  Lopez, he thanks you both.  Before now have I seen such
a bear; but this time I was caught dreaming.  He would surely have
killed me if it had not been for the brave Americanos."

Frank was struck with the soft tones of the small chap, who did not
look as if he could be much more than twelve years of age.  His
features were regular, if thin, and the big black eyes seemed to be
filled with a courage beyond the ordinary.  Indeed, they could not
doubt this, having seen how he had drawn that small knife on finding
himself confronted by the Rocky Mountain terror.

"Well, we were only too glad to have been of help to you, Lopez," Frank
remarked, as he advanced with outstretched hand.

The boy looked embarrassed, as though hardly knowing what to do.  It
seemed to Frank that he had been staring very hard at Bob, and he
wondered why.  Then again he imagined that the boy must be keeping
something back.  This would account for the worried look on his small,
pinched, but good-looking face.

But undoubtedly Lopez realized that it ill became him to decline to
take the hand that had helped save his life.

"You understand that we are your friends, Lopez, don't you?" asked
Frank, as he held the small palm of the Mexican in his own strong one
for a moment, and looked with a puzzled expression into the big black
eyes that quickly fell under his gaze.

"Oh, yes, Senor, surely you have proved it more than enough," the
little fellow hastened to say; and Frank was astonished to hear what
good language he used.

"You go across mountains, eh?" asked Bob, indifferently; truth to tell
he was just then more interested in the size of the great grizzly that
had fallen before the guns of himself and his saddle chum, than the
mere fact of this stripling being entrusted with such a task as
bringing supplies to prospectors, or rustlers, as the case might prove.

A flash crossed the face of the boy, just as though he saw a sudden
opening whereby his presence here might be explained without entering
into details.

"Oh! yes, across the range.  I get supplies for prospectors in camp,"
he replied, with an intake of his breath, while he watched Bob
narrowly, as if, somehow, he believed he had more to fear from that
source than from the tawny-haired prairie lad.

"That's kind of queer, seems to me," remarked Bob, slowly, turning to
again survey the boy; "for them to send so small a chap on so long a
trail.  I should think it was more of a man's work, toting supplies
across these mountains, through the canyons.  And with the chances of
running foul of such dangers as bears, not to speak of rustlers."

At that Lopez drew his diminutive figure up, and tried to assume a bold
look.  The Spanish blood was proud, Bob could see.

"This have I done a long while, Senors, believe me," he said, calmly;
"and until to-day never have I met with trouble.  Had I not been so
tired and sleepy, perhaps even I might have shot the bear, who knows?
It would not be the first I have seen, no, nor yet the second; but the
horse ran away with my gun.  But Senors, I must go on after my animals;
they will be waiting for me farther along."

"Then you won't wait for us?" asked Frank.  "My friend, he would like
to get the claws of this fellow, to remember him by.  It will not take
very long, Lopez."

"Thank you, Senors, but I must not delay.  Perhaps you may overtake me
farther along the trail.  There is no more danger; and my pack burro
might scrape off his load if I am not there to watch.  Again I thank
you, Senors."

The boy bowed to each of them in turn, just as though he might have
been an actor in some old-time play.  Frank believed he had never seen
such remarkable grace in any half-grown lad.  Generally, at that age,
boys are apt to be about as clumsy as bear cubs at play.  He looked
after Lopez with a frown on his face.

"What's the matter, Frank?" demanded Bob, as he noticed this
expression.  "Are you huffed just because the independent little rascal
wouldn't let us mother him?  Say, look at his strut, will you?  If he
was heir to the throne of Alfonso he couldn't walk finer.  Give me a
whack between the shoulders, won't you, Frank?  Perhaps I've been
asleep, and dreamed all this."

"Oh, rats!  Take a look at the bear, and that'll show you what's what.
There, he's disappeared behind that clump of mesquite yonder," and
Frank turned to look at his saddle mate with an expression of
bewilderment on his face, as though he might be trying to clutch some
idea that kept eluding him.

"Suppose you help me cut these awful claws off, Frank.  You see I don't
know the first thing about how it's done; and I think your idea about
keeping 'em for trophies is just immense."

"Well, for that matter," replied Frank, "I don't know as I ever did a
job like that, myself; but I've watched old Hank do it, so I reckon
we'll get along."

For a few minutes they worked away in silence.  Then Bob looked up to
remark:

"He said it was prospectors he was taking those supplies to, didn't he;
and that he'd been doing the same a long while?"

"That was about the size of it, Bob," returned his chum, thoughtfully.

"Well," Bob went on, "between you and me, Frank, I'd rather believe
little Lopez was in touch with the rustlers.  I mentioned that word
just on purpose to see if he would turn red, or give himself away."

"And did he?" asked the other, quickly.

"Well," replied Bob, "not so you could notice; but then he seemed such
a smart chap, like as not he knew how to hide his feelings.  He looked
frightened when we talked of wanting him to stay with us.  Mark me,
there's a heap of mystery bound up in that little fellow."

"He sure puzzles me, all right," remarked Frank.  "Did you notice how
he had a silk handkerchief bound around his head, regular Mex fashion?"

"Sure I did," laughed Bob, without glancing up, as he used his knife
industriously after the fashion set by his chum.  "And I also took
notice that he had a fine, glossy bunch of hair under that same colored
silk bandana."

"Great governor!" ejaculated Frank, suddenly.

"What's the matter--you didn't cut yourself, I hope?" demanded his
comrade, uneasily, starting up.

"Shucks! no.  Something just struck me, that's all," replied Frank,
with an air of disgust, and a quick look up the gully where the little
Mexican had last been seen.

"Oh!  Is that so?" mocked Bob.  "Must have hurt right bad then, to make
you peep like that.  Now, I reckon it might have been something about
Lopez?" for he had noted that hasty glance, and the disappointed frown.

"That's just what it was, Bob," Frank continued, in an even tone.
"Fact is, I just remembered who Lopez put me in mind of.  Only perhaps
you'll laugh when I tell you.  Remember that poor little girl Peg Grant
was cuffing when you knocked him down?  Well, if you took that colored
handkerchief off Lopez, and let his black hair fall down, I give you my
word he'd be a ringer for that Mexican child!"

Bob stared as if dazed, and then the light of a great discovery dawned
upon him.

"Say, Frank!" he exclaimed presently.  "Honest Indian, now, I believe
you've sure struck pay dirt, and that's what!"




CHAPTER IX

WHAT HAPPENED TO PEG

"Then you think the same as I do, eh, Bob?" asked the saddle boy, as if
pleased.

"Well, now a heap of things seem to point that way, Frank," replied the
other, slowly.  "Only for the life of me I can't get it through my poor
old head just why a girl like that would want to carry on in such a
queer way."

"Nor me, either," laughed his chum.  "That's something else for us to
lie awake nights puzzling our wits over.  Everything around this
Thunder Mountain just seems to be plastered with mystery--who little
Lopez is; what he, or she may be doing away off here in the canyons of
the Rockies; and more particularly the mystery of the mountain that the
reds look on as sacred; where Mendoza and his band of rustlers have
gone with those stolen horses; and also who the prospectors can be that
this pile of grub was meant for--it's all a blank, that's what!"

"Say, I guess that's pretty near the way it sizes up," grumbled Bob.
"I don't like to run against a stone wall like this.  If I was alone
now, d'ye know what I'd likely be doing, Frank?"

"Well, say, perhaps I might hit close to the bull's-eye, since I've
come to know you pretty well these days, Bob," replied the other.  "I
wouldn't be surprised one bit but what you'd go rushing after Lopez,
and demand to know all about it.  But Bob, I look at it in another
light.  That's his own private business."

"I suppose so; and I was brought up to mind my own affairs, too," said
Bob.

"Wouldn't you put up a great howl now," continued Frank, "if somebody
grabbed hold of you, and insisted on your giving him the whole story of
your life, where you were born, what your dad did for a living, when
you cut your first tooth, how much it cost your father to let you
gallop around the country in the saddle with me, and all that?  Say,
honest now, would you knuckle down like a meek kid; or give the
questioner to understand that he was poking his nose into affairs that
didn't concern him one whit?"

Thereupon Bob laughed heartily.

"I give up, Frank," he admitted.  "You go at a fellow, and put him in a
hole as a lawyer might.  We'll just let little Lopez alone, no matter
whether he's girl or boy; the grub-getter of prospectors; or agent for
that sly Mendoza, the cattle-rustler.  And, on the whole, I reckon
we've got about all the business we can attend to right now on our
hands."

"That sure sounds good to me, Bob," said Frank, turning once more to
get his horse, the task of securing the grizzly's claws having been
completed.

Naturally enough, while the excitement was on, both horses had
exhibited the greatest alarm, even though they were out of sight behind
some trees.  The near presence of that terrible monster had caused them
to strain at their ropes, prance wildly, and try in every way possible
to break loose; but those lariats had been selected with a view to
wonderful strength.  After the death of the grizzly the animals had
gradually quieted down.

Ten minutes later, and the two saddle boys were slowly picking their
way along the gully, heading upward.  Frank, as one born to the
country, and familiar with many of its peculiarities, amused himself by
pointing out to his comrade the various positive signs that as a rule
marked these strange water-courses.

"You see, Bob," he remarked, "this is really what might be called a
_barranca_."

"Yes, I've heard you tell about them before," observed the other.

"Most of the year it's only a dry ravine, with high walls; but once in
a while there happens to be a tremendous downpour of rain in the
mountains, when a heavy cloud breaks against the wall above.  When that
comes about, this gully is going to be bank-full of roaring, rushing
water; and anything caught by the flood is apt to be battered and
bruised and drowned before it's swept out below."

"Whew!" observed Bob, with a shrug of the shoulders.  "Let's hope then,
that the next cloud-burst will have the kindness to hold off till we
get out of this hole.  If it caught us here, Frank, I reckon we'd just
have to let our nags shift for themselves, and take to climbing the
sides.  And wouldn't I hate to lose Domino the worst way; even if he
does give me a raft of trouble at times?"

Frank patted the satiny flank of Buckskin affectionately, as he said:

"And it would just about break me up if anything happened to this
fellow, Bob.  I've tried heaps of mounts, seeing that we always have
hundreds on the ranch; but I never threw a leg over one I fancied like
my Buckskin.  Why, there are times, Bob, when the game little fellow
seems next door to human to me.  We understand each other right well.
He knows what I'm saying now; listen to him whinny, soft-like, at me."

Possibly Bob, knowing considerable about horses himself, may have had a
strong suspicion that the animal understood the touch of his young
master's hand much more readily than he did spoken words; but this was
a subject which he never debated with Frank.  The latter had a habit of
talking confidentially with his horse, and seemed satisfied to believe
the animal understood.

Slowly they made their way along.  Now and then Frank would dismount to
examine the rocks and scanty earth that formed the trail over which
they were passing.

"Always plenty of signs to tell that horses have been going along here
off'n on, both ways--stacks of 'em," he announced, when perhaps an hour
had elapsed since they left the scene of the encounter with the grizzly.

The ravine, or gully, which he called a _barranca_, had gradually
changed its character.  It was now more in the nature of a canyon;
though there were still places where the walls, instead of towering
high above their heads, sloped gradually upwards.

"Smart horses could easy climb out of here up that rise," remarked
Frank, thoughtfully eyeing one of these places.

"Are you thinking that perhaps we'd better get out with our nags, while
we have the chance, and leave them, while we keep up the game on foot?"
asked Bob, suspecting that his chum might be considering such a move.

"Well," remarked the other, "it stands to reason that our horses aren't
going to be of much use in the mountains.  If we shook 'em now, we'd be
able to climb almost anywhere, and peek into places we'd never be able
to find as long as we stuck to our mounts.  So, if you're of the same
mind, Bob, we'll try and find a place where we might rope 'em out, an'
take the chances of finding 'em again when we're done poking around."

"I hope then, none of the rustlers will run across them while we're
away," said Bob, as he looked across a deep little pool that lay just
at the foot of a very high slope; and then fastened his gaze on a
peculiarly twisted cedar that seemed to cling to the bank, half way up.

"Leave that to me, my boy," returned his chum, confidently.  "I'll make
sure they leave no trail behind to catch the eye of a horseman riding
past.  Besides, we're not dead sure, you know, that the rustlers have
really got a camp around these diggings.  P'raps now, they just push
through the canyon to get to some other point across the divide.  Or it
may be a favorite trail for them to carry off the cattle they rustle.
In some hidden valley, you see, they can change the brands; and then
openly drive the steers to a shipping station on the railroad."

"All right, then," agreed his companion, who was ready to put the
utmost faith in any plan proposed by his saddle chum.  "We'll keep our
eyes peeled for a chance to get the horses out of this place.  Here's a
slope they might climb, as you say; but it looks as if they'd have to
swim that pool first."

"No use trying it," remarked Frank, casting a rapid glance upward to
where, at a distance of possibly a hundred feet, he could see little
bushes growing on the edge of the top of the rise, which slope formed
an angle of something like forty-five degrees; "sure to be better
places further on, where the holding is firmer."

"And yet," remarked Bob, suddenly, "horses have made this climb only a
short time ago, Frank!"

"What makes you say that?" asked the other, interested at once.

"Why, there are tracks going up slantingly, you see; and even if I am
next door to a greenhorn I can tell that the marks look fresh," Bob
declared, pointing.

"Say, I take a back seat, Bob," Frank remarked, laughingly.  "That's
the time you saw my lead, and went me one better.  Sure there have been
horses climbing that slope--one, two, three of 'em.  And Lopez, he had
only two; so it can hardly be him.  I wonder now if that measly
tenderfoot, Peg----"

"Look up yonder!" interrupted Bob, suddenly pointing again.  "I saw the
bushes moving along the edge of the top there.  Somebody's got an eye
on us right now, Frank.  D'ye reckon it could be one of those rustlers;
and would they try to hold us up so as to get our mounts?"

Bob instinctively snatched his rifle, and began to make a
demonstration, as though half tempted to shoot.  His action looked so
decidedly hostile that it naturally created something of a panic in the
breast of the unknown who was lying concealed behind the fringe of
bushes.

They saw a sudden hasty movement, as though, in alarm, the hidden one
had started to change his position.  Then something not down on the
bills occurred.

The loose earth at the edge of the top of the long slope seemed to give
way in a treacherous manner.  Immediately a human figure came into
view, struggling, clawing desperately, and trying in every way possible
to clutch at something firm in order to halt his downward progress.

But it was all of no avail.  A second figure attempted to grasp the
imperiled one in time, but evidently failed to secure a firm hold.  And
so the fellow started to roll down the slope.  He came much after the
manner in which a bag of corn might turn over and over.  Sometimes he
was head-first; and then again resuming the side motion, he whirled
around in a way that was enough to make anyone dizzy.

All the while he kept letting out shrill squeals of real alarm; as
though the prospect of a final plunge into that deep dark pool at the
base filled him with dread.

By some rare chance the rolling man struck the twisted little cedar
that tried to keep its dying hold on the scanty soil half way up the
rise.  Caught by the seat of his stout trousers on one of the scrubby
tree's broken branches, the unfortunate one was suspended in midair,
kicking, floundering and yelling at a tremendous rate.

"Say!" exclaimed Frank, when he was able to catch his breath again,
"What d'ye think of that, now?  Our friend Peg is so glad to see us he
couldn't wait to walk down, but tried to skate.  And see what's
happened to him!  Next thing he wants is a bath; and I sure reckon he's
due for one when that cedar pulls out its last root.  Wow!"




CHAPTER X

THREATS OF TROUBLE

"Splash!"

Hardly had Frank ventured upon his prediction before it came true.  The
stout cloth of which Peg's garments were composed might have sustained
his weight indefinitely, and had it depended on his trousers giving
way, his friends above must have been compelled to use their ropes in
order to release him from so unfortunate a predicament.

But the roots of the little stunted cedar were soon torn from their
hold.  And when this came about, of course the unfortunate Peg
continued his roll down the balance of that steep slope, clawing at
every object which he thought might stay his progress.

He certainly did drop into the pool with a tremendous splash that sent
the water flying in every direction.

At first he vanished entirely from view.  Then his head emerged, and it
could be seen that he was swimming furiously to keep afloat.  Somehow
his awkward movements made Bob Archer think of a hippopotamus he had
once seen in a tank.

Peg must have had his mouth open when he struck.  Perhaps he was trying
to shout for somebody to stop him, and in this manner he swallowed a
quantity of water.  At any rate he spouted forth quite a little fluid
as he floundered about, kicking and beating with feet and hands, as
though he were being run by an engine that had gone wild.

Both of the saddle boys grinned.  They could not help it, the thing
looked so laughable.  Had it been a dear friend, instead of an enemy,
they must have enjoyed the sight just the same.

Twice Peg bobbed under, to come up again, paddling for all the world
like a puppy that was having its first swim.  His face had taken on a
look of terror.

"Help!  Can't keep up much longer!  Something pulling me down!" he
spluttered.

Frank and Bob exchanged a quick glance.  Of course this put quite
another face on the matter.  If Peg was really in danger they had no
business to stand there, laughing.  It might seem funny to them, but to
Peg the matter was not at all comical.

"I don't believe the critter knows how to swim, Bob!" exclaimed Frank.

"That's what," answered the other, seriously.  "He's just keeping up
because he's crazy with fright.  We've got to get him out of there,
Frank."

"We sure have; come along," echoed the western boy.

Fortunately Frank was possessed of a quick mind.  He never wasted any
time in wondering what methods he should use in order to accomplish
things.

The pool was of considerable width, and even though he bent over its
border he would not be able to come within five feet of the struggling
Peg.

Without hesitation he stepped into the water, holding his gun.  Two
feet from the bank and it was to his knees.  But he believed he had now
reached a point where he could hold out his rifle and touch Peg.

"Take hold, and I'll pull you out!" he called, as he extended the gun.

It was laughable to see how eagerly the other seized upon the chance.
And, when Peg had fastened himself to the other end of the rifle Frank
easily drew him shoreward.

The bully came out, dripping wet, and in anything but an angelic
temper.  It was bad enough, in his eyes, to have fallen into the pool;
but to be rescued by a fellow he hated, as he did Frank Haywood, added
to the aggravation.

After spluttering for a minute or two, so that he could get rid of the
balance of the water he had swallowed, Peg faced the two chums.

Strange to say he did not seem to consider that Frank had placed him
under any obligations in the least when he dragged him out of the water.

"See what you did," Peg exclaimed, now spluttering with burning anger.
"What d'ye mean pointing your old gun up at me, and making as if you
meant to shoot?"

"Oh!" remarked Bob, elevating his eyebrows; "was that what forced you
to take that header down the slope?  Well, now, we had an idea you were
so glad to see us that you just couldn't wait to walk down, but wanted
to fly!  But, if I was to blame at all for your trouble, I'm sure I'm
sorry.  But you see, we didn't know whether we were going to be held up
by rustlers or Indians.  That's what comes from hiding, Peg."

"Bah! guess I'll do just whatever I want," spluttered the other, wiping
his dripping face on his sleeve without doing either much good,
however.  "And do you know what I think?"

"Well, no, I must say I don't happen to be a mind reader, Peg.  Suppose
you tell me," replied the unruffled Bob, who had taken the measure of
the other, and knew he might be set down as a great boaster, but one
not particularly dangerous when it came to a show-down.

"I believe you just did that on purpose, that's what," Peg went on,
hotly.  "You've got it in for me ever since that time we had our little
affair, when I laid a hand on the Mexican girl who sassed me.  You just
knew I'd jump up in a hurry if you made out you was going to shoot; and
I bet you even remembered this lake at the bottom of the slope.  Oh! it
worked all right; but don't you forget; my time will come.  I'm going
to pay you back in full!  I've got friends who'll stick by me, all
right.  Bah! what're you two fellers doing here on Thunder Mountain,
anyhow?"

A new suspicion had apparently seized upon Peg.  He viewed their
presence as a personal insult; just as though they might have plotted
to forestall him in the glorious adventure he had planned to carry out.

"Well, if the old mountain belongs to you," spoke up Frank, thinking it
time he took a hand in the talk, "we'll ask you to excuse us, and back
out.  But I don't think you have any claim on it; so we'll hang around
as long as we see fit.  And remember this, Peg, we're going to mind our
own business; but we don't stand for any bother from you, or those with
you.  Understand that?"

Peg looked at him long and steadily.  The eyes of Frank never wavered
in the slightest degree.

"All right," said Peg, finally, as his own eyes dropped.  "You wait and
see; that's what!  This thing's been hanging fire a long time now; and
some day we're bound to have it out, Frank Haywood.  My dad's after
yours with a sharp stick; and perhaps the trouble is going to come down
to the next generation.  You'll get yours good and plenty when the
right time comes!"

He turned away, and, limping to where the slope could be reached by
skirting the edge of the pool, laboriously commenced to climb,
following the tracks of the three horses.

"There's one of his guides up yonder, Frank," remarked Bob; "sitting on
the top of the bank.  Looks to me like he was grinning to beat the
band."

"Yes, that's Nick Jennings," replied Frank.  "Used to work on the
Circle Ranch, but he got his walking papers because he was caught
stealing from the other men.  He's got a grudge against me because I'm
a Haywood.  But Nick likes a joke as well as any cowboy; and who could
keep a straight face after seeing what happened here?  Look a little
farther on, and you'll just glimpse the colored handkerchief Spanish
Joe wears on his head."

"I see him peeping at us from behind the bushes," returned Bob.  "And
say, he's handling that gun of his just like he'd be glad to use it if
anybody gave him the dare.  I reckon Spanish Joe is some ugly customer,
Frank."

"That's just what he is; but let's be moving on.  If Peg takes another
flop and splashes in this puddle again, he'll have to swim for it, or
else depend on his own guides to yank him out.  No more for me.  I'm
wet to the knees; and did you hear him thank me for it?  He's sure the
limit."

So the two boys went on.

They were not interfered with, which pleased Frank not a little.
Knowing the nature of Spanish Joe, and the revengeful character of Nick
Jennings, he would not have been much surprised had they attacked him
and Bob, and carried things with a high hand.

Presently a turn in the canyon shut out the scene of their late
adventure.  The last glimpse they had of Peg Grant, he had nearly
arrived at the top of the slope, and it seemed possible that he would
not make a slip that might cause him to repeat his recent circus act.

"Why do you think they left the trail, and made their horses climb up?"
asked Bob, presently.

"Well, they might have talked it over just as we did, and chosen to
leave the horses so they could look around on foot," Frank replied.

"But you suspect they might have another reason, too?" Bob insisted.

"That's a fact," replied his chum, seriously.  "For all we know they
may have run across some sign of the rustlers, and thought it best to
get out of the beaten rut here before they got caught."

"Then you don't believe that little Lopez had anything to do with it,
Frank?"

"What, that Mex boy?  Oh! he's out of the business long ago," replied
the other.

"In what way?  Didn't he come along this trail ahead of us?" asked Bob.

"Sure thing," Frank went on.  "But you see I've missed the marks of
that burro's little hoofs for nearly twenty minutes.  I made up my mind
Lopez had some slick way of climbing out of the _barranca_ a ways back,
without leaving much of any trail.  I told you he was a sly one, and I
say the same now, no matter whether he's a brother to the girl you
defended against Peg, or the girl herself."

"All right, Frank.  Get us out of this as soon as you can," Bob
remarked, looking ahead, as though he did not much fancy the appearance
of things there.

Ten minutes later Frank drew rein sharply.

"What's doing?" asked Bob, nervously, as he half raised his rifle,
which he had insisted on holding in his hand all the time since that
meeting with Peg.  "Think you see signs of trouble from Peg and his
bunch; or is it something else?"

"Something else this time," remarked Frank.  "Fact is, our chance has
come to get up out of here with the nags!"




CHAPTER XI

THE BLACK NIGHT

"How does this suit you, Bob?"

Frank asked this question as he and his comrade sat there in their
saddles, and glanced around at the peaceful scene.  They had climbed
the bank of the _barranca_, and reached a spot where the grass was
growing under a cluster of mesquite trees.

"It looks good enough for me," replied the young Kentuckian.

"Plenty of forage for the horses," Frank went on, nodding his head as
he looked; "and do you see that little trickling stream of water that
crawls along?  All we have to do is to hide the horses here.  When we
want 'em, the chances are we'll find 'em safe."

"I hope so," remarked Bob, as he alighted.

In a short time they had removed saddles and bridles, hiding these
among the neighboring rocks, together with their supplies, and had
picketed the horses by means of the lariats.

"Now what?" asked Bob.

"You sit down here, and wait till I come back," Frank remarked.

"What are you going to do?" the Kentucky lad inquired; "something that
I might lend a hand at?"

"No, I reckon you're a little shy on knowing how to hide a trail, Bob.
Old Hank showed me, and I've practiced it often.  This promises to be a
chance to see whether I learned my lesson half-way decent."

"Oh! all right, Frank.  But some day I expect you to show me all about
that sort of thing.  You know I want to be in the swim, and learn how
to do everything there is.  I'll wait here by the water," and Bob
dropped down to rest.

"I won't be gone long," Frank observed.  "Pretty much all the slope was
made up of stone; and what a great time the horses did have, trying to
hang on.  Once I thought your nag was going to take a nasty plunge,
because he isn't as used to the work as a Western pony would be.  But
he recovered, thanks to the help you gave him, and made the top all
right.  So-long, Bob."

"I notice you're taking your gun along," remarked the one who was to
stay.

"Well, when you're in the mountains it's just as well to be prepared
all the time.  You never can tell when you'll run slap into something.
It might be a big grizzly like the one we met; then perhaps a hungry
panther might take a notion to tackle you.  I knew a cowman who had
that happen to him.  Yes, and perhaps you heard him tell the story."

"You must mean Ike Lasker," Bob replied, quickly.  "Yes, I remember how
he said he was lying down, waiting for some feeding deer off to
windward to work closer, when, all of a sudden, something struck him on
the back, and nearly knocked the wind out of him for keeps.  He managed
to get his knife out, and they had it there, good and hard."

"Ike said he nearly cashed in his checks that time," Frank added.
"Some of his mates found him, after they discovered his horse feeding
near by.  The panther was dead as a stone, and Ike was clawed and bit
till he looked like a map of the delta of the Mississippi--anyhow,
that's the way he told it.  Keep your shooter handy, too, Bob."

"I will that," returned the Kentucky boy, impressed by his chum's
earnestness.

After a little while Frank came back again.  His manner told that he
was quite satisfied with what he had done.

"A sharp-eyed trailer might find where we left the canyon," he
admitted; "but I don't believe any ordinary fellow would notice the
marks.  So I think our horses stand a first class chance of being here
when we come back for 'em."

Bob got on his feet.

"I've fixed up some grub, just as you told me," he remarked.  "It isn't
much, but ought to serve in a pinch."

"And as it's nearly noon now," observed Frank.  "Why not take a snack
before we leave our base of supplies?  Let's get the stuff out of the
cache again, and have a round of bites."

"I don't see the use of hurrying away from here right now, anyhow," Bob
remarked, while they were eating.

"You mean," said Frank, "that we only came here to see what we could
find out about the secret of old Thunder Mountain, and why it kicks up
such a rumpus every little while?"

"Yes, and seems to me that since we're right on the ground now, we
might just as well start business, here," Bob asserted.

"That is, hang around until night, and wait to see if the grinding
begins again, as it did when we were in camp below?"

"We'd be in a position to guess what it was, better than before," Bob
went on.

"That's a fact," laughed Frank.  "And if, as lots of people think, this
old mountain is a played-out volcano, perhaps we might even smell the
sulphur cooking, by sticking our noses down into some of these crevices
in the rocks."

"Now you're joshing me, Frank!" declared the Kentucky lad, reprovingly.

"I am not," replied the other, immediately.  "Suppose there was any
truth in that fairy story about the fires away down in the earth here;
don't you think a fellow might get a whiff of the brimstone if he was
Johnny on the spot?  Why, honest now, Bob, it was on my mind to find
some sort of cave up here, and go in just as far as we could.  Don't
you see the point?"

"Oh!  I reckon I do, Frank.  You take little stock in that yarn; but,
all the same, you think we ought to look into it, now we're on the
ground?"

"That's it, Bob.  Why, even my dad kind of favors that idea, and I want
to either prove it a fake, or learn that there's something to it."

So they lay there, lazily enough, instead of climbing farther up the
side of the mountain.  It was very pleasant to keep in the cool shade
of the trees, with that trickling little stream so near, for, as the
afternoon advanced, it seemed as though the air became very oppressive.

Frank was looking up at the sky many times, and finally his companion
asked him what was on his mind.

"I don't pretend to be a weather sharp," Frank replied; "but, all the
same, there are signs up there that've got me guessing."

"Well, it _is_ clouding up some," replied Bob, as he swept a look
around at what they could see of the arch overhead.  "Perhaps the long
drought is going to be broken at last, Frank.  Your father will be
tickled, if it turns out that way.  He's been complaining of late about
the stock having to hunt twice as far away from the ranch for forage.
A rain would make things green again."

"Sure it would," replied Frank; "but, as I said to you before, a rain
storm up in the Rockies is sometimes no joke.  We may have to do some
tall climbing if it gets a whack at us when we're in the canyon."

The day was passing.  They had seen nothing more of Peg Grant and his
two guides, but could easily believe the others were not a great way
off.  Perhaps they, too, were only waiting for night to come in order
to start their investigation.

"I don't think either Spanish Joe, or Nick, could be depended on, if
the thing began to look too spooky," Frank had said more than once,
showing that his thoughts must be running in the direction of the rival
party.

"Oh! this is easy," chuckled Bob.  "If all we've got to do is to squat
here and take notes when the menagerie begins to wake up, it's going to
be a snap."

Frank did not want to make his chum nervous by confessing that he had
another reason for agreeing to remain there idle the balance of the
day, besides the fact of there being no hurry, and that they could take
notes just as easy there as farther up the mountain.

The fact was, he had concluded, it would be safer for them to remain in
hiding while daylight lasted, and do what searching they expected to
accomplish in the darkness of night.

It was too easy, for anyone who had no scruples, and wished to do them
injury, to drop a rock down from the wall of the canyon.  Against this
sort of attack their rifles would be useless; and terrible damage might
result.

As to who would be guilty of such an outrage, Frank only remembered
that Peg was in a white heat of indignation, and fully capable of doing
some madcap prank in order to frighten off the two saddle boys.  He was
also not a little worried about the rustlers, supposed to be lurking
somewhere not far distant.

Last, but not least, there were the prospectors to whom little Lopez
had admitted he was carrying the supplies that were secured on the pack
burro.  Frank had not heard of any treasure-hunters having invaded the
slopes and valleys around Thunder Mountain; but this did not mean it
could not be true.

If these men were secretly taking out possibly large quantities of
precious ore, and did not wish to be discovered, or disturbed in their
operations, even they might try to alarm the invaders by hostile
demonstrations.

"It's as pretty a mixup as ever I heard tell of," Frank had said
several times that afternoon, while they were exchanging confidences in
connection with the remarkable possibilities around them.  "What with
the rustlers, Peg and his crowd of thunder investigators, the little
Mex. boy and his unknown prospector bunch; and last but not least, Bob,
ourselves, it sure has me going some."

"Yes," the other had returned, "but I hope we'll keep clear of the
whole lot, and be able to find out something worth while.  I wish the
next night was over, and we were galloping along over the plains headed
for good old Circle Ranch."

"Me too, Bob, always provided we carried with us an explanation for
those deep grumblings that shake the earth, and seem to come out of the
heart of Thunder Mountain.  I'm a stubborn fellow, as I reckon you
know; and when I throw my hat into the ring I like to stick it through
till they carry me out."

"The same here," Bob had declared, after which the chums had to shake
hands on it again, thus sealing the compact to stick.

And so the day went, and night came on apace.

The air did not seem to cool off to any extent as darkness approached.
Frank took pains to call the attention of his comrade to this fact.

"You can guess what that means, Bob," he remarked.  "It's sure going to
bring on a whopper before a great while.  All the signs point that way
right now.  So we can expect to get ready for a ducking."

"Oh! that doesn't bother me," declared Bob.  "I've been through many a
one.  All I hope is that we don't happen to be in the old canyon when
that cloudburst you mentioned comes along.  I'm not hankering after a
ride on a forty foot wave, and down that crooked old canyon, too.
Excuse me, if you please!"

"Of course if we only stick it out here, there's going to be no
danger," Frank remarked, indifferently.

"I see that you're just itching to be on the move, old fellow,"
ventured Bob, who knew the restless nature of his chum.

"Do you?  Well, Bob, to tell the truth, if I was alone now, I suppose
I'd be making for the top of the old hill, bent on finding out whether
there was any sign of smoke oozing from the cracks and crevices at just
the time the rumblings came on."

"Then what's to hinder both of us going at it?" demanded the proud
Kentucky lad, fearful that Frank might think him timid because he had
suggested their remaining out of the danger zone.

"We may, later on.  Just now it's our business to get some supper; and
hot or not, I'm going to make a cooking fire back of this big boulder,
where nobody could ever glimpse the blaze."

"Did you say coffee?" remarked Bob.  "All right, I'll go you, old
fellow.  I feel a little that way myself, and that's no yarn."

So Frank got things started, and it was not a great while before the
coffee pot was bubbling as merrily as ever, with that appetizing odor
wafting from it.

The darkness kept on increasing while they ate.  An hour later it was
very black all around them, and Bob viewed the possibility of their
venturing into the unknown perils around them with anything but a
comfortable feeling.

It was just when he was wondering whether Frank would not conclude to
remain in the safe position they occupied that he heard his comrade
give a sharp cry.

"What have you discovered, Frank?" asked Bob, starting to get up.

"A light up the side of the mountain yonder," replied the other, "and,
Bob, perhaps if we could only manage to climb up there, we'd learn
something worth while.  The question is, have we the nerve to try it?"




CHAPTER XII

LOSING THEIR BEARINGS

Bob chose to consider this a direct challenge.

"I expect that it would be queer if we didn't make some sort of effort
to find out what the light means.  Where is it, Frank?" he remarked,
with perfect coolness.

"Well, it must have gone out while you were speaking, Bob, as sure as
anything," the other replied.  "But I saw it, I give you my word I did.
Huh! there she comes again, just like it was before.  Step over here;
the spur of the rock is in your way there.  Now look straight up.  Get
it?"

"Easy, Frank.  A fellow might think it was a star, if he didn't know
the mountain was there.  Now it's getting bigger right along."

"That's so, Bob.  And yet it doesn't seem to be a fire, does it?"

"More like a lantern to me," declared the Kentucky boy.  "Say, what
d'ye reckon anybody could want a lantern up there for?  Can you see any
swinging motion to the light Frank?"

"It does seem to move, now and then, for a fact," admitted the other,
after watching the gleam for a short time.

"About like a brakeman might swing his lantern if he was on a freight
train in a black night, eh?" continued Bob.

"Hello!  I see now what you're aiming at, Bob; you've just got a notion
in your head that the lantern is being used for signalling purposes."

"Well, does that strike you as silly?" demanded Bob Archer.

"Silly?  Hum! well, perhaps not, because it may be the right
explanation of the thing.  But whatever would anybody up there be
signalling for, and who to, Bob?"

"There you've got me," laughed the other.  "I'm not so far along as
that yet.  P'raps it might be one of the rustlers, telling something to
another of the same stripe, who is located in camp out yonder on the
plain.  Then, again, how do we know but what it might be that Peg Grant
lot?  And Lopez.  Don't forget little Lopez, Frank.  Prospectors could
have a lantern; in fact, I understand they often do carry such a thing
along with 'em when they go into the mountains to pan for dust in the
creek beds."

"So," said Frank, who evidently was doing considerable thinking.

They stood there for some little time, looking up at the light.  Bob
was merely indulging in various speculations regarding its source.  On
the other hand Frank busied himself in locating the strange glow, so
that he might be able to know when he reached the spot, in case it was
invisible at the time they arrived.

"Do we go?" asked Bob, when he, too, found his impatience getting the
better of him; whereupon Frank, who had evidently been waiting for some
sign, immediately took him up on it.

"If you're ready, we'll start right away," he said, quietly.  "Luckily
I've been studying the face of Thunder Mountain at times during the
afternoon, and I reckon I can pilot the expedition all right."

But when Frank said this so confidently he failed to consider the
intense darkness that might baffle all his plans of campaign.  Still,
Bob had the utmost confidence in his chum's ability to pull out of any
ordinary difficulty.  And, since his Kentucky spirit had been fully
aroused, he was ready to accompany Frank anywhere, at any time.

Before they had been ten minutes on the way each of the boys sincerely
wished that the idea to investigate had never appealed to them, for
they began to have a rough time of it.  But both were too proud to
admit the fact, and so they kept crawling along over the rocks with
their rifles slung on their backs, at times finding it necessary to
clutch hold of bushes or saplings in order to save themselves from some
tumble into holes, the actual depth of which they had no means of even
guessing in the darkness.

The light was gone.  Of course that might not mean it had vanished
entirely; but at least it could no longer be seen by the boys who were
climbing upward.

Bob was hoping his comrade would propose that they call it off, and
proceed to spend the balance of the night in the first comfortable nook
they ran across.  But Frank himself was loath to give the first sign of
a backdown.  Consequently they continued the laborious task which was
likely to bring no reward in its train, only the satisfaction of
knowing they had accomplished the duty which they had in mind at the
time of the start.

An hour must surely have gone since they first left the little green
glade where the horses were staked out, and their supplies cached.

Bob found himself blown, and trembling all over with fatigue, because
of the unusual exertion.  The heat, too, was troublesome.  But not for
worlds would he be the first to complain.  Frank was setting the pace,
and he must be the one to call a halt.

"Phew! this is rough sledding," remarked Frank, finally, as he stopped
to wipe his streaming face.

Of course Bob also came to a halt.

"Well, it is for a fact," he admitted with a little dry chuckle; for he
felt really pleased to think that he had held out so long, and forced
Frank to "show his hand."

"Seems to me we ought to have struck something," suggested Frank.

"Do you really mean you think we've come far enough for that?"
questioned Bob.

"I reckon we have, though it's so dark I can't be dead sure.  You don't
happen to glimpse anything queer around here, do you, Bob?" and while
speaking Frank, perhaps unconsciously, lowered his voice more or less.

"Nary a thing," replied the other, breathing fast, as if to make up for
lost time.

"And I don't get any whiff of smoke, do you?" continued Frank.

"Oh! you're thinking about that volcano business again, eh?" chuckled
Bob.  "Nothing doing, Frank.  Gee! we must be up pretty high here!"

"Feels like it," returned the prairie boy, accustomed to the heavier
air of the lower levels at all times.  "Makes me breathe faster, you
know.  But that was a hot old climb, Bob."

"All black up yonder in the sky, with never a star showing," observed
the boy from Kentucky.

"Oh! we're going to get it, sooner or later," declared Frank,
cheerfully.  "Can't escape a ducking, I take it.  But here we are, half
way up old Thunder Mountain, and not a thing to show for our work.
That's what I call tough!"

"Got enough?" asked his chum, invitingly.

"You mean of course for to-night only, because you'd never think of
such a thing as giving up the game so early, Bob?"

"Well, I was only going to make a little suggestion," returned the
other.

"Hit her up, then; though perhaps I could guess what it's like, Bob."

"All right then.  You know what I mean--and that since we're away up
here, we might as well make up our minds to hunt an overhanging ledge,
and take a nap.  But say, what're you sniffing that way for, Frank?"

"Just imagined that I got a faint whiff of smoke; but of course it was
all in my eye," replied the other.

"Was it?  I tell you I had a scent of it myself right then," declared
the taller lad, showing signs of considerable excitement.

"Seems to come and go, then, for I don't get it any more.  What was it
like, Bob?  Did you ever smell sulphur burning?"

"Lots of times, and helped to use it too, disinfecting," replied Bob,
readily.  "Spent months with my uncle, who is a doctor in Cincinnati,
during an epidemic, and he often had to clean out rookeries just to
stamp out the disease.  But this wasn't any sulphur odor I caught,
Frank."

"Then you could recognize it; eh?" asked his chum.

"It was burning wood, I give you my word for that," replied Bob, firmly.

"Hum.  That sounds more like it.  We'll let the volcano matter sizzle
for a little while, and look around for something smaller.  Burning
wood must mean a fire, Bob!"

"That's what they say, always; where there's smoke there must be fire.
But it seems to me we ought to see such a thing on this black night,
Frank."

"Unless it's hidden, as we make our cooking fire; or else the blaze is
at the last gasp.  Then, after all, we may have been a little off about
that light we saw," Frank continued.

"The one we said was a lantern?  Then you think, now, it might have
been a fire?" questioned the Kentucky lad.

"Well, I just don't know what to think.  But let's look around a bit,
and see if we can locate this fire," Frank suggested.

After moving around for a short time as well as the darkness allowed
the two boys came together again.

"No luck, eh?" questioned Frank.

"Didn't find a thing; but I stumbled over a creek and came near taking
a header down-grade that would have made that plunge of Peg's take a
back seat.  Just in the nick of time I managed to grab a little tree.
Phew! it shook me up, though," and Bob rubbed one of his shins as
though he might have "barked" it at the time of the encounter.

"Same here; only I didn't happen to fall," replied Frank.

"So it seems as if we were no better off than before," remarked Bob,
dejectedly.

"We've learned where the fire isn't, if that's any satisfaction to us,"
chuckled his chum, trying to make the best of a bad bargain.

"And that smoke smells so meaning-like, it's sure a shame we can't just
get a line on where it comes from," Bob went on to say.

Frank seemed to catch a significance in his words, for he turned
sharply on his companion, saying:

"Look here, have you been getting a whiff of it again, Bob?"

"Why, yes, several of 'em in fact, Frank," replied the other, in what
seemed to be a surprised tone.  "But what does that matter, when
neither of us can find any fire around?  I sniffed and sniffed, but
although I just turned my eyes in every direction not even a tiny spark
could I see.  And that happened just three times, Frank."

"What! do you mean you smelled smoke three separate times since you
left me?" demanded the saddle boy.

"I'm sure it must have been three, because it was between the first and
second times that I tripped.  Yes, and always in just the same place
too, which was queer enough."

"That sounds kind of encouraging, Bob," declared Frank.

"Do you think so?" asked the other, puzzled to account for Frank's
newly awakened interest.  "Tell me why, won't you, please, Frank?"

"Sure, after you have answered me a question," Frank promptly remarked.

"All right, let's have it, then," his chum returned.

"Do you think you could find that exact spot again?" asked Frank.

"Meaning where I sniffed that smoke each time?  Why, I guess I can,
because I went back there twice, all right.  Couldn't be quite
satisfied that there wasn't _something_ around there I ought to
discover.  But it turned out a fizzle, Frank."

"Perhaps it wouldn't be so unkind to me, though," the Western boy
declared.  "Take me to that place, Bob, and right away.  It strikes me
I'd just like to get another little whiff of that same wood smell,
myself.  It wouldn't be the first time I'd followed up a smoke trail."

"Gracious! that sounds interesting, and I hope you can do it, Frank!"
breathed Bob, his admiration for his chum awakening once more.

"First of all, get me to that place.  Lead off, and I'll be close at
your heels.  And, Bob, don't forget that spot where you came near
having your tumble.  Keep your level head about you."

"I'll sure try to, Frank.  Come on then."

Bob led the way through the darkness.  Although he had been out West
for so short a time Bob Archer was rapidly learning the ways practiced
by those who live close to Nature.  He began to observe always all that
he saw, and in such a way that he could describe it again, in every
detail.

And so it chanced that, having marked his course when coming back after
his unsuccessful search for the fire, he was able, not only to lead his
comrade thither, but to warn him every time they approached a dangerous
slide, where a trip might hurl one some hundreds of feet down the face
of Thunder Mountain.

"Here is the place, Frank," Bob suddenly said, in a cautious whisper.




CHAPTER XIII

THE SMOKE TRAIL

"Are you sure of it?" asked Frank, in the same low voice.

"Why, try for yourself, and see if you can't get a whiff of smoke right
now," Bob replied.

"You're right, because I caught it just then; but I reckon the wind
must be changing some, for it's gone again," Frank remarked.

"You never spoke truer words, Frank, because I can hear the breeze
beginning to shake the leaves in the trees up yonder, and it wasn't
doing that before."

Bob pointed upwards as he said this cautiously.  And Frank, always
watchful, noticed a certain fact.  The trees were so situated that they
could be said to lie almost in a direct Southeast line from where he
and Bob stood!  This might appear to be a very small matter, and hardly
worthy of notice; but according to Frank's view it was apt to prove of
considerable moment, in view of what was likely to follow.

"Well, as the smoke's gone again, let's see if we can locate it by
moving a little this way," and Frank led off as he spoke, with Bob
following.

Both lads were very cautious now.  Even Bob, greenhorn as he was, so
far as Western ways were concerned, understood the need of care when
approaching a camp that might be occupied by enemies.  And as for
Frank, he had not been in the company of an old ranger like Hank Coombs
many times without learning considerable.

They had not been moving in the new direction more than five minutes
when Bob reached out his hand and clutched the sleeve of his chum's
jacket.

"What is it?" asked the leader, stopping short, and crouching there.

"I got it again, Frank," whispered the Kentucky boy, eagerly.

"Sure," replied his comrade, immediately.  "Why, I've been smelling
smoke for more'n a whole minute now.  And I'm following it up, foot by
foot."

"Oh!" murmured Bob, taken aback by this intelligence.

"Don't say a word above your breath, Bob.  Whoever it is can't be far
away now.  We may run in on 'em any minute, you know," and as if to
emphasize the need of caution Frank drew his chum close while he
whispered these words directly in his ear.

Bob did not make any verbal reply; but he gave the other's sleeve a