Hawala networks closely feed into Islamic banks throughout the world 
and to commodity trading in South Asia. There are more than 200 
Islamic banks in the USA alone and many thousands in Europe, North 
and South Africa, Saudi Arabia, the Gulf states (especially in the 
free zone of Dubai and in Bahrain), Pakistan, Malaysia, Indonesia, 
and other South East Asian countries. By the end of 1998, the overt 
(read: tip of the iceberg) liabilities of these financial 
institutions amounted to 148 billion US dollars. They dabbled in 
equipment leasing, real estate leasing and development, corporate 
equity, and trade/structured trade and commodities financing 
(usually in consortia called "Mudaraba"). 
While previously confined to the Arab peninsula and to south and 
east Asia, this mode of traditional banking became truly 
international in the 1970's, following the unprecedented flow of 
wealth to many Moslem nations due to the oil shocks and the 
emergence of the Asian tigers. Islamic banks joined forces with 
corporations, multinationals, and banks in the West to finance oil 
exploration and drilling, mining, and agribusiness. Many leading law 
firms in the West (such as Norton Rose, Freshfields, Clyde and Co. 
and Clifford Chance) have "Islamic Finance" teams which are familiar 
with Islam-compatible commercial contracts.
II. HAWALA AND TERRORISM
Recent anti-terrorist legislation in the US and the UK allows 
government agencies to regularly supervise and inspect businesses 
that are suspected of being a front for the ''Hawala'' banking 
system, makes it a crime to smuggle more than $10,000 in cash across 
USA borders, and empowers the Treasury secretary (and its Financial 
Crimes Enforcement Network - FinCEN) to tighten record-keeping and 
reporting rules for banks and financial institutions based in the 
USA. A new inter-agency Foreign Terrorist Asset Tracking Center 
(FTAT) was set up. A 1993 moribund proposed law requiring US-based 
Halawadar to register and to report suspicious transactions may be 
revived. These relatively radical measures reflect the belief that 
the al-Qaida network of Osama bin Laden uses the Hawala system to 
raise and move funds across national borders. A Hawaladar in 
Pakistan (Dihab Shill) was identified as the financier in the 
attacks on the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
But the USA is not the only country to face terrorism financed by 
Hawala networks. 
A few months ago, the Delhi police, the Indian government's 
Enforcement Directorate (ED), and the Military Intelligence (MI) 
arrested six Jammu Kashmir Islamic Front (JKIF) terrorists. The 
arrests led to the exposure of an enormous web of Hawala 
institutions in Delhi, aided and abetted, some say, by the ISI 
(Inter Services Intelligence, Pakistan's security services). The 
Hawala network was used to funnel money to terrorist groups in the 
disputed Kashmir Valley. 
Luckily, the common perception that Hawala financing is paperless is 
wrong. The transfer of information regarding the funds often leaves 
digital (though heavily encrypted) trails. Couriers and "contract 
memorizers", gold dealers, commodity merchants, transporters, and 
moneylenders can be apprehended and interrogated. Written, physical, 
letters are still the favourite mode of communication among small 
and medium Hawaladars, who also invariably resort to extremely 
detailed single entry bookkeeping.  And the sudden appearance and 
disappearance of funds in bank accounts still have to be explained. 
Moreover, the sheer scale of the amounts involved entails the 
collaboration of off shore banks and more established financial 
institutions in the West. Such flows of funds affect the local money 
markets in Asia and are instantaneously reflected in interest rates 
charged to frequent borrowers, such as wholesalers. Spending and 
consumption patterns change discernibly after such influxes. Most of 
the money ends up in prime world banks behind flimsy business 
facades. Hackers in Germany claimed (without providing proof) to 
have infiltrated Hawala-related bank accounts.
The problem is that banks and financial institutions - and not only 
in dodgy offshore havens ("black holes" in the lingo) - clam up and 
refuse to divulge information about their clients. Banking is 
largely a matter of fragile trust between bank and customer and 
tight secrecy. Bankers are reluctant to undermine either. Banks use 
mainframe computers which can rarely be hacked through cyberspace 
and can be compromised only physically in close co-operation with 
insiders. The shadier the bank - the more formidable its digital 
defenses. 


The use of numbered accounts (outlawed in Austria, for instance, 
only recently) and pseudonyms (still possible in Lichtenstein) 
complicates matters. Bin Laden's accounts are unlikely to bear his 
name. He has collaborators.
Hawala networks are often used to launder money, or to evade taxes. 
Even when employed for legitimate purposes, to diversify the risk 
involved in the transfer of large sums, Hawaladars apply techniques 
borrowed from money laundering. Deposits are fragmented and wired to 
hundreds of banks the world over ("starburst"). Sometimes, the money 
ends up in the account of origin ("boomerang").
Hence the focus on payment clearing and settlement systems. Most 
countries have only one such system, the repository of  data 
regarding all banking (and most non-banking) transactions in the 
country. Yet, even this is a partial solution. Most national systems 
maintain records for 6-12 months, private settlement and clearing 
systems for even less.
Yet, the crux of the problem is not the Hawala or the Hawaladars. 
The corrupt and inept governments of Asia are to blame for not 
regulating their banking systems, for over-regulating everything 
else, for not fostering competition, for throwing public money at 
bad debts and at worse borrowers, for over-taxing, for robbing 
people of their life savings through capital controls, for tearing 
at the delicate fabric of trust between customer and bank (Pakistan, 
for instance, froze all foreign exchange accounts two years ago). 
Perhaps if Asia had reasonably expedient, reasonably priced, 
reasonably regulated, user-friendly banks - Osama bin Laden would 
have found it impossible to finance his mischief so invisibly. 


Straf - Corruption in Central and Eastern Europe
The three policemen barked "straf", "straf" in unison. It was a 
Russianized version of the German word for "fine" and a euphemism 
for bribe. I and my fiancée were stranded in an empty ally at the 
heart of Moscow, physically encircled by these young bullies, an 
ominous propinquity. They held my passport ransom and began to drag 
me to a police station nearby. We paid. 
To do the fashionable thing and to hold the moral high ground is 
rare. Yet, denouncing corruption and fighting it satisfies both 
conditions. Such hectoring is usually the preserve of well-heeled 
bureaucrats, driving utility vehicles and banging away at wireless 
laptops. The General Manager of the IMF makes 400,000 US dollars a 
year, tax-free, and perks. This is the equivalent of 2,300 (!) 
monthly salaries of a civil servant in Macedonia - or 7,000 monthly 
salaries of a teacher or a doctor in Yugoslavia, Moldova, Belarus, 
or Albania. He flies only first class and each one of his air 
tickets is worth the bi-annual income of a Macedonian factory 
worker. His shareholders - among them poor and developing countries 
- are forced to cough up these exorbitant fees and to finance the 
luxurious lifestyle of the likes of Kohler and Wolfensohn. And then 
they are made to listen to the IMF lecture them on belt tightening 
and how uncompetitive their economies are due to their expensive 
labour force. To me, such a double standard is the epitome of 
corruption. Organizations such as the IMF and World Bank will never 
be possessed of a shred of moral authority in these parts of the 
world unless and until they forgo their conspicuous consumption. 
Yet, corruption is not a monolithic practice. Nor are its outcomes 
universally deplorable or damaging. One would do best to adopt a 
utilitarian and discerning approach to it. The advent of moral 
relativism has taught us that "right" and "wrong" are flexible, 
context dependent and culture-sensitive yardsticks. 
What amounts to venality in one culture (Slovenia) is considered no 
more than gregariousness or hospitality in another (Macedonia). 
Moreover, corruption is often "imported" by multinationals, foreign 
investors, and expats. It is introduced by them to all levels of 
governments, often in order to expedite matters or secure a 
beneficial outcome. To eradicate corruption, one must tackle both 
giver and taker.
Thus, we are better off asking "cui bono" than "is it the right 
thing to do". Phenomenologically, "corruption" is a common - and 
misleading - label for a group of behaviours. One of the following 
criteria must apply: 
(a) The withholding of a service, information, or goods that, by 
law, and by right, should have been provided or divulged. 
To have a phone installed in Russia one must openly bribe the 
installer (according to a rather rigid tariff). In many of the 
former republics of Yugoslavia, it is impossible to obtain 
statistics or other data (the salaries of senior public 
officeholders, for instance) without resorting to kickbacks. 
(b) The provision of a service, information, or goods that, by law, 
and by right, should not have been provided or divulged. 
Tenders in the Czech Republic are often won through bribery. The 
botched privatizations all over the former Eastern Bloc constitute a 
massive transfer of wealth to select members of a nomenklatura. 
Licences and concessions are often granted in Bulgaria and the rest 
of the Balkan as means of securing political allegiance or paying 
off old political "debts". 
(c) That the withholding or the provision of said service, 
information, or goods are in the power of the withholder or the 
provider to withhold or to provide AND That the withholding or the 
provision of said service, information, or goods constitute an 
integral and substantial part of the authority or the function of 
the withholder or the provider. 
The post-communist countries in transition are a dichotomous lot. On 
the one hand, they are intensely and stiflingly bureaucratic. On the 
other hand, none of the institutions functions properly or lawfully. 
While these countries are LEGALISTIC - they are never LAWFUL. This 
fuzziness allows officials in all ranks to usurp authority, to trade 
favours, to forge illegal consensus and to dodge criticism and 
accountability. There is a direct line between lack of transparency 
and venality. Eran Fraenkel of Search for Common Ground in Macedonia 
has coined the phrase "ambient corruption" to capture this complex 
of features. 



(d) That the service, information, or goods that are provided or 
divulged are provided or divulged against a benefit or the promise 
of a benefit from the recipient and as a result of the receipt of 
this specific benefit or the promise to receive such benefit. 
It is wrong to assume that corruption is necessarily, or even 
mostly, monetary or pecuniary. Corruption is built on mutual 
expectations. The reasonable expectation of a future benefit is, in 
itself, a benefit. Access, influence peddling, property rights, 
exclusivity, licences, permits, a job, a recommendation - all 
constitute benefits. 
(e) That the service, information, or goods that are withheld are 
withheld because no benefit was provided or promised by the 
recipient. 
Even then, in CEE, we can distinguish between a few types of corrupt 
and venal behaviours in accordance with their OUTCOMES (utilities): 
(a) Income Supplement 
Corrupt actions whose sole outcome is the supplementing of the 
income of the provider without affecting the "real world" in any 
manner. 



Though the perception of corruption itself is a negative outcome - 
it is so only when corruption does not constitute an acceptable and 
normative part of the playing field. When corruption becomes 
institutionalised - it also becomes predictable and is easily and 
seamlessly incorporated into decision making processes of all 
economic players and moral agents. They develop "by-passes" and 
"techniques" which allow them to restore an efficient market 
equilibrium. In a way, all-pervasive corruption is transparent and, 
thus, a form of taxation. 
This is the most common form of corruption exercised by low and mid-
ranking civil servants, party hacks and municipal politicians 
throughout the CEE. 
More than avarice, the motivating force here is sheer survival. The 
acts of corruption are repetitive, structured and in strict 
accordance with an un-written tariff and code of conduct. 
(b) Acceleration Fees 
Corrupt practices whose sole outcome is to ACCELERATE decision 
making, the provision of goods and services or the divulging of 
information. None of the outcomes or the utility functions are 
altered. Only the speed of the economic dynamics is altered. This 
kind of corruption is actually economically BENEFICIAL. It is a 
limited transfer of wealth (or tax) which increases efficiency. This 
is not to say that bureaucracies and venal officialdoms, over-
regulation and intrusive political involvement in the workings of 
the marketplace are good (efficient) things. 


They are not. But if the choice is between a slow, obstructive and 
passive-aggressive civil service and a more forthcoming and 
accommodating one (the result of bribery) - the latter is 
preferable. 
Acceleration fees are collected mostly by mid-ranking bureaucrats 
and middle rung decision makers in both the political echelons and 
the civil service. 
(c) Decision Altering Fees 
This is where the line is crossed from the point of view of 
aggregate utility. When bribes and promises of bribes actually alter 
outcomes in the real world - a less than optimal allocation of 
resources and distribution of means of production is obtained. The 
result is a fall in the general level of production. The many is 
hurt by the few. The economy is skewed and economic outcomes are 
distorted. This kind of corruption should be uprooted on utilitarian 
grounds as well as on moral ones. 
(d) Subversive Outcomes 
Some corrupt collusions lead to the subversion of the flow of 
information within a society or an economic unit. Wrong information 
often leads to disastrous outcomes. Consider a medical doctor or an 
civil engineer who bribed their way into obtaining a professional 
diploma. 
Human lives are at stake. The wrong information, in this case is the 
professional validity of the diplomas granted and the scholarship 
(knowledge) that such certificates stand for. But the outcomes are 
lost lives. This kind of corruption, of course, is by far the most 
damaging. 
Unfortunately, it is widespread in CEE. It is proof of the collapse 
of the social treaty, of social solidarity and of the fraying of the 
social fabric. 
No Western country accepts CEE diplomas without further 
accreditation, studies and examinations. Many "medical doctors" and 
"engineers" who emigrated to Israel from Russia and the former 
republics of the USSR - were suspiciously deficient professionally. 
Israel was forced to re-educate them prior to granting them a 
licence to practice locally. 
(e) Reallocation Fees 
Benefits paid (mainly to politicians and political decision makers) 
in order to affect the allocation of economic resources and material 
wealth or the rights thereto. Concessions, licences, permits, assets 
privatised, tenders awarded are all subject to reallocation fees. 
Here the damage is materially enormous (and visible) but, because it 
is widespread, it is "diluted" in individual terms. Still, it is 
often irreversible (like when a sold asset is purposefully under-
valued) and pernicious. a factory sold to avaricious and criminally 
minded managers is likely to collapse and leave its workers 
unemployed. 
Corruption pervades daily life even in the prim and often hectoring 
countries of the West. It is a win-win game (as far as Game Theory 
goes) - hence its attraction. We are all corrupt to varying degrees. 
But it is wrong and wasteful - really, counterproductive - to fight 
corruption in CEE in a wide front and indiscriminately.  


It is the kind of corruption whose evil outcomes outweigh its 
benefits that should be fought. This fine (and blurred) distinction 
is too often lost on decision makers and law enforcement agencies in 
both East and West. 
ERADICATING CORRUPTION
An effective program to eradicate corruption must include the 
following elements:
(a) Egregiously corrupt, high-profile, public figures, 
multinationals, and institutions (domestic and foreign) must be 
singled out for harsh (legal) treatment and thus demonstrate that no 
one is above the law and that crime does not pay.
(b) All international aid, credits, and investments must be 
conditioned upon a clear, performance-based, plan to reduce 
corruption levels and intensity. Such a plan should be monitored and 
revised as needed. Corruption retards development and produces 
instability by undermining the credentials of democracy, state 
institutions, and the political class. Reduced corruption is, 
therefore, a major target of economic and institutional 
developmental.
(c) Corruption cannot be reduced only by punitive measures. A system 
of incentives to avoid corruption must be established. Such 
incentives should include a higher pay, the fostering of civic 
pride, educational campaigns, "good behaviour" bonuses, alternative 
income and pension plans, and so on.



(d) Opportunities to be corrupt should be minimized by liberalizing 
and deregulating the economy. Red tape should be minimized, 
licensing abolished, international trade freed, capital controls 
eliminated, competition introduced, monopolies broken, transparent 
public tendering be made mandatory, freedom of information 
enshrined, the media should be directly supported by the 
international community, and so on. Deregulation should be a 
developmental target integral to every program of international aid, 
investment, or credit provision.
(e) Corruption is a symptom of systemic institutional failure. 
Corruption guarantees efficiency and favourable outcomes. The 
strengthening of institutions is of critical importance. The police, 
the customs, the courts, the government, its agencies, the tax 
authorities, the state owned media - all must be subjected to a 
massive overhaul. Such a process may require foreign management and 
supervision for a limited period of time. It most probably would 
entail the replacement of most of the current - irredeemably corrupt 
- personnel. It would need to be open to public scrutiny.
(f) Corruption is a symptom of an all-pervasive sense of 
helplessness. The citizen (or investor, or firm) feels dwarfed by 
the overwhelming and capricious powers of the state. It is through 
corruption and venality that the balance is restored. To minimize 
this imbalance, potential participants in corrupt dealings must be 
made to feel that they are real and effective stakeholders in their 
societies. A process of public debate coupled with transparency and 
the establishment of just distributive mechanisms will go a long way 
towards rendering corruption obsolete.


Russia's Missing Billions
Russia's Audit Chamber - with the help of the Swiss authorities and 
their host of dedicated investigators - may be about to solve a long 
standing mystery. An announcement by the Prosecutor's General Office 
is said to be imminent. The highest echelons of the Yeltsin 
entourage - perhaps even Yeltsin himself - may be implicated - or 
exonerated. A Russian team has been spending the better part of the 
last two months poring over documents and interviewing witnesses in 
Switzerland, France, Italy, and other European countries. 
About $4.8 billion of IMF funds are alleged to have gone amiss 
during the implosion of the Russian financial markets in August 
1998. They were supposed to prop up the banking system (especially 
SBS-Agro) and the ailing and sharply devalued ruble. Instead, they 
ended up in the bank accounts of obscure corporations - and, then, 
incredibly, vanished into thin air. 
The person in charge of the funds in 1998 was none other than 
Mikhail Kasyanov, Russia's current Prime Minister - at the time, 
Deputy Minister of Finance for External Debt. His signature on all 
foreign exchange transactions - even those handled by the central 
bank - was mandatory. In July 2000, he was flatly accused by the 
Italian daily, La Reppublica, of authorizing the diversion of the 
disputed funds.



Following public charges made by US Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin 
as early as March 1999, both Russian and American media delved 
deeply over the years into the affair. Communist Duma Deputy Viktor 
Ilyukhin jumped on the bandwagon citing an obscure "trustworthy 
foreign source" to substantiate his indictment of Kremlin cronies 
and oligarchs contained in an open letter to the Prosecutor General, 
Yuri Skuratov. 
The money trail from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to Swiss 
and German subsidiaries of the Russian central Bank was 
comprehensively reconstructed. Still, the former Chairman of the 
central bank, Sergei Dubinin, called Ilyukhin's allegations and the 
ensuing Swiss investigations - "a black PR campaign ... a lie." 
Others pointed to an outlandish coincidence: the ruble collapsed 
twice in Russia's post-Communist annals. Once, in 1994, when Dubinin 
was Minister of Finance and was forced to resign. The second time 
was in 1998, when Dubinin was governor of the central bank and was, 
again, ousted. 
Dubinin himself seems to be unable to make up his mind. In one 
interview he says that IMF funds were used to prop up the ruble - in 
others, that they went into "the national pot" (i.e., the Ministry 
of Finance, to cover a budgetary shortfall).



The Chairman of the Federation Council at the time, Yegor Stroev, 
appointed an investigative committee in 1999. Its report remains 
classified but Stroev confirmed that IMF funds were embezzled in the 
wake of the 1998 forced devaluation of the ruble. 
This conclusion was weakly disowned by Eleonora Mitrofanova, an 
auditor within the Duma's Audit Chamber who said that they 
discovered nothing "strictly illegal" - though, incongruously, she 
accused the central bank of suppressing the Chamber's damning 
report. The Chairman of the Chamber of Accounts, Khachim Karmokov, 
quoted by PwC, said that "the audits performed by the Chamber 
revealed no serious procedural breaches in the bank's performance."
But Nikolai Gonchar, a Duma Deputy and member of its Budget 
Committee, came close to branding both as liars when he said that he 
read a copy of the Audit Chamber report and that it found that 
central bank funds were siphoned off to commercial accounts in 
foreign banks.
The Moscow Times cited a second Audit Chamber report which revealed 
that the central bank was simultaneously selling dollars for rubles 
and extending ruble loans to a few well-connected commercial banks, 
thus subsidizing their dollar purchases. The central bank went as 
far as printing rubles to fuel this lucrative arbitrage. The dollars 
came from IMF disbursements.



Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, based on its own sources and an 
article in the Russian weekly "Novaya Gazeta", claims that half the 
money was almost instantly diverted to shell companies in Sydney and 
London. The other half was mostly transferred to the Bank of New 
York and to Credit Suisse.
Why were additional IMF funds transferred to a chaotic Russia, 
despite warnings by many and a testimony by a Russian official that 
previous tranches were squandered? Moreover, why was the money sent 
to the Central Bank, then embroiled in a growing scandal over the 
manipulation of treasury bills, known as GKO's and other debt 
instruments, the OFZ's - and not to the Ministry of Finance, the 
beneficiary of all prior transfers? The central bank did act as 
MinFin's agent - but circumstances were unusual, to say the least.
There isn't enough to connect the IMF funds with the money 
laundering affair that engulfed the Bank of New York a year later to 
the day, in August 1999 - though several of the personalities 
straddled the divide between the bank and its clients. Swiss efforts 
to establish a firm linkage failed as did their attempt to implicate 
several banks in the Italian canton of Ticino. The Swiss - in 
collaboration with half a dozen national investigation bureaus, 
including the FBI - were more successful in Italy proper, where they 
were able to apprehend a few dozen suspects in an elaborate 
undercover operation. 



FIMACO's name emerged rather early in the swirl of rumors and 
denials. At the IMF's behest, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) was 
commissioned by Russia's central bank to investigate the 
relationship between the Russian central bank and its Channel 
Islands offshoot, Financial Management Company Limited, immediately 
when the accusations surfaced. 
Skuratov unearthed $50 billion in transfers of the nation's hard 
currency reserves from the central bank to FIMACO, which was 
majority-owned by Eurobank, the central bank's Paris-based daughter 
company. According to PwC, Eurobank was 23 percent owned by "Russian 
companies and private individuals".
Dubinin and his successor, Gerashchenko, admit that FIMACO was used 
to conceal Russia's assets from its unrelenting creditors, notably 
the Geneva-based Mr. Nessim Gaon, whose companies sued Russia for 
$600 million. Gaon succeeded to freeze Russian accounts in 
Switzerland and Luxemburg in 1993. PwC alerted the IMF to this 
pernicious practice, but to no avail.
Moreover, FIMACO paid exorbitant management fees to self-liquidating 
entities, used funds to fuel the speculative GKO market, disbursed 
non-reported profits from its activities, through "trust companies", 
to Russian subjects, such as schools, hospitals, and charities - 
and, in general, transformed itself into a mammoth slush fund and 
source of patronage. Russia admitted to lying to the IMF in 1996. It 
misstated its reserves by $1 billion. 
Some of the money probably financed the fantastic salaries of 
Dubinin and his senior functionaries. He earned $240,000 in 1997 - 
when the average annual salary in Russia was less than $2000 and 
when Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve of the USA, 
earned barely half as much.
Former Minister of Finance, Boris Fedorov, asked the governor of the 
central bank and the prime minister in 1993 to disclose how were the 
country's foreign exchange reserves being invested. He was told to 
mind his own business. To Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty he said, 
six years later, that various central bank schemes were set up to 
"allow friends to earn handsome profits ... They allowed friends to 
make profits because when companies are created without any risk, 
and billions of dollars are transferred, somebody takes a (quite 
big) commission ... a minimum of tens of millions of dollars. The 
question is: Who received these commissions? Was this money 
repatriated to the country in the form of dividends?"
Dubinin's vehement denials of FIMACO's involvement in the GKO market 
are disingenuous. Close to half of all foreign investment in the 
money-spinning market for Russian domestic bonds were placed through 
FIMACO's nominal parent company, Eurobank and, possibly, through its 
subsidiary, co-owned with FIMACO, Eurofinance Bank. 
Nor is Dubinin more credible when he denies that profits and 
commissions were accrued in FIMACO and then drained off. FIMACO's 
investment management agreement with Eurobank, signed in 1993, 
entitled it to 0.06 percent of the managed funds per quarter. 
Even accepting the central banker's ludicrous insistence that the 
balance never exceeded $1.4 billion - FIMACO would have earned $3.5 
million per annum from management fees alone - investment profits 
and brokerage fees notwithstanding. Even Eurobank's president at the 
time, Andrei Movchan, conceded that FIMACO earned $1.7 million in 
management fees.
The IMF insisted that the PwC reports exonerated all the 
participants. It is, therefore, surprising and alarming to find that 
the online copies of these documents, previously made available on 
the IMF's Web site, were "Removed September 30, 1999 at the request 
of PricewaterhouseCoopers".
The cover of the main report carried a disclaimer that it was based 
on procedures dictated by the central bank and "... consequently, we 
(PwC) make no representation regarding the sufficiency of the 
procedures described below ... The report is based solely on 
financial and other information provided by, and discussions with, 
the persons set out in the report. The accuracy and completeness of 
the information on which the report is based is the sole 
responsibility of those persons. ... PricewaterhouseCoopers have not 
carried out any verification work which may be construed to 
represent audit procedures ... We have not been provided access to 
Ost West Handelsbank (the recipient of a large part of the $4.8 IMF 
tranche)"



The scandal may have hastened the untimely departure of the IMF's 
Managing Director at the time, Michel Camdessus, though this was 
never officially acknowledged. The US Congress was reluctant to 
augment the Fund's resources in view of its controversial handling 
of the Asian and Russian crises and contagion. 
This reluctance persisted well into the new millennium. A 
congressional delegation, headed by James Leach (R, Iowa), Chairman 
of the Banking and Financial Services Committee, visited Russia in 
April 2000, accompanied by the FBI, to investigate the persistent 
contentions about the misappropriation of IMF funds.
Camdessus himself went out of his way to defend his record and 
reacted in an unprecedented manner to the allegations. In a letter 
to Le Mond, dated August 18, 1999 - and still posted on the IMF's 
Web site, three years later - he wrote, inadvertently admitting to 
serious mismanagement:
"I wish to express my indignation at the false statements, 
allegations, and insinuations contained in the articles and 
editorial commentary appearing in Le Monde on August 6, 8, and 9 on 
the content of the PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC) audit report 
relating to the operations of the Central Bank of Russia and its 
subsidiary, FIMACO.



 
Your readers will be shocked to learn that the report in question, 
requested and made public at the initiative of the IMF ... 
(concludes that) no misuse of funds has been proven, and the report 
does not criticize the IMF's behavior ... I would also point out 
that your representation of the IMF's knowledge and actions is 
misleading. We did know that part of the reserves of the Central 
Bank of Russia was held in foreign subsidiaries, which is not an 
illegal practice; however, we did not learn of FIMACO's activities 
until this year--because the audit reports for 1993 and 1994 were 
not provided to us by the Central Bank of Russia. 
The IMF, when apprised of the possible range of FIMACO activities, 
informed the Russian authorities that it would not resume lending to 
Russia until a report on these activities was available for review 
by the IMF and corrective actions had been agreed as needed ... I 
would add that what the IMF objected to in FIMACO's operations 
extends well beyond the misrepresentation of Russia's international 
reserves in mid-1996 and includes several other instances where 
transactions through it had resulted in a misleading representation 
of the reserves and of monetary and exchange policies. These include 
loans to Russian commercial banks and investments in the GKO 
market." 

No one accepted - or accepts - the IMF's convoluted post-facto 
"clarifications" at face value. Nor was Dubinin's tortured sophistry 
- IMF funds cease to be IMF funds when they are transferred from the 
Ministry of Finance to the central bank - countenanced. 
Even the compromised office of the Russian Prosecutor-General urged 
Russian officials, as late as July 2000, to re-open the 
investigation regarding the diversion of the funds. The IMF 
dismissed this sudden burst of rectitude as the rehashing of old 
stories. But Western officials - interviews by Radio Free 
Europe/Radio Liberty - begged to differ. 
Yuri Skuratov, the former Prosecutor-General, ousted for undue 
diligence, wrote in a book he published two years ago, that only c. 
$500 million of the $4.8 were ever used to stabilize the ruble. Even 
George Bush Jr., when still a presidential candidate accused 
Russia's former Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin of complicity in 
embezzling IMF funds. Chernomyrdin threatened to sue.
The rot may run even deeper. The Geneva daily "Le Temps", which has 
been following the affair relentlessly, accused, two years ago, 
Roman Abramovich, a Yeltsin-era oligarch and a member of the board 
of directors of Sibneft, of colluding with Runicom, Sibneft's 
trading arm, to misappropriate IMF funds. Swiss prosecutors raided 
Runicom's offices just one day after Russian Tax Police raided 
Sibneft's Moscow headquarters.
Absconding with IMF funds seemed to have been a pattern of behavior 
during Yeltsin's venal regime. The columnist Bradley Cook recounts 
how Aldrich Ames, the mole within the CIA, "was told by his Russian 
control officer during their last meeting, in November 1993, that 
the $130,000 in fresh $100 bills that he was being bribed with had 
come directly from IMF loans." Venyamin Sokolov, who headed the 
Audit Chamber prior to Sergei Stepashin, informed the US Senate of 
$2 billion that evaporated from the coffers of the central bank in 
1995. 
Even the IMF reluctantly admits:
"Capital transferred abroad from Russia may represent such legal 
activities as exports, or illegal sources. But it is impossible to 
determine whether specific capital flows from Russia-legal or 
illegal-come from a particular inflow, such as IMF loans or export 
earnings. To put the scale of IMF lending to Russia into 
perspective, Russia's exports of goods and services averaged about 
$80 billion a year in recent years, which is over 25 times the 
average annual disbursement from the IMF since 1992."


The Enrons of the East
Hermitage Capital Management, an international investment firm owned 
by HSBC London, is suing PwC (PricewaterhouseCoopers), the biggest 
among the big four accounting firms (Andersen, the fifth, is being 
cannibalized by its competitors). 

Hermitage also demands to have PwC's license suspended in Russia. 
All this fuss over allegedly shoddy audits of Gazprom, the Russian 
energy behemoth with over $20 billion in annual sales and the 
world's largest reserves of natural gas. Hermitage runs a $600 
million Russia fund which is invested in the shares of the allegedly 
misaudited giant.

The accusations are serious. According to infuriated Hermitage, PwC 
falsified and distorted the 2000-1 audits by misrepresenting the 
sale of Gazprom's subsidiary, Purgaz, to Itera, a conveniently 
obscure entity. Other loss spinning transactions were also 
creatively tackled. Stoitransgaz - partly owned by former Gazprom 
managers and their relatives - landed more than $1 billion in 
lucrative Gazprom contracts.

These shenanigans resulted in billions of dollars of losses and a 
depressed share price. AFP quotes William Browder, Hermitage's 
disgruntled CEO, as saying: "This is Russia's Enron". PwC threatened 
to counter-sue Hermitage over its "completely unfounded" 
allegations.




But Browder's charges are supported by Boris Fyodorov, a former 
Russian minister of finance and a current Gazprom independent 
director. Fyodorov manages his own investment boutique, United 
Financial Group. Browder is a former Solomon Brothers investment 
banker. Other investment banks and brokerage firms - foreign and 
Russian - are supportive of his allegations. They won't and can't be 
fobbed. 

Fyodorov speculates that PwC turned a blind eye to many of Gazprom's 
shadier deals in order to keep the account. Gazprom shareholders 
will decide in June whether to retain it as an auditor or not. 
Browder is initiating a class action lawsuit in New York of Gazprom 
ADR holders against PwC. 

Even Russia's president concurs. A year ago, he muttered ominously 
about "enormous amounts of misspent money (in Gazprom)". He replaced 
Rem Vyakhirev, the oligarch that ran Gazprom, with his own protégé. 
Russia owns 38 percent of the company.

Gazprom is just the latest in an inordinately long stream of 
companies with dubious methods. Avto VAZ bled itself white - under 
PwC's nose - shipping cars to dealers, without guarantees or advance 
payments. The penumbral dealers then vanished without a trace. Avto 
VAZ wrote off more than $1 billion in "uncollected bills" by late 
1995. PwC did make a mild comment in the 1997 audit. But the first 
real warning appeared only three years later in the audit for the 
year 2000.

Andrei Sharonov, deputy minister in the federal Ministry of 
Economics said, in an interview he granted "Business Week" last 
February: "Auditors have been working on behalf of management rather 
than shareholders." In a series of outlandish ads, published in 
Russian business dailies in late February, senior partners in the 
PwC Moscow office made this incredible statement: "(Audit) does not 
represent a review of each transaction, or a qualitative assessment 
of a company's performance."

The New York Times quotes a former employee of Ernst&Young in Moscow 
as saying: "A big client is god. You do what they want and tell you 
to do. You can play straight-laced and try to be upright and protect 
your reputation with minor clients, but you can't do it with the big 
guys. If you lose that account, no matter how justified you are, 
that's the end of a career."

PwC should know. When it mentioned suspicious heavily discounted 
sales of oil to Rosneft in a 1998 audit report, its client, 
Purneftegaz, replaced it with Arthur Andersen. The dubious deals 
dutifully vanished from the audit reports, though they continue 
apace. Andersen claims such transactions do not require disclosure 
under Russian law.

How times change! Throughout the 1990's, Russia and its nascent 
private sector were subjected to self-righteous harangues from 
visiting Big Five accountants. The hectoring targeted the lack of 
good governance among Russia's corporations and public 
administration alike. Hordes of pampered speakers and consultants 
espoused transparent accounting, minority shareholders' rights, 
management accessibility and accountability and other noble goals. 

That was before Enron. The tables have turned. The Big Five - from 
disintegrating Andersen to KPMG - are being chastised and fined for 
negligent practices, flagrant conflicts of interests, 
misrepresentation, questionable ethics and worse. Their worldwide 
clout, moral authority, and professional standing have been 
considerably dented. 

America's GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Practices) - once 
considered the undisputable benchmark of rectitude and disclosure - 
are now thought in need of urgent revision. The American issuer of 
accounting standards - FASB (Financial Accounting Standards Board) - 
is widely perceived to be an incestuous arrangement between the 
clubby members of a rapacious and unscrupulous profession. Many 
American scholars even suggest to adopt the hitherto much-derided 
alternative - the International Accounting Standards (IAS) recently 
implemented through much of central and eastern Europe. 

Russia's Federal Commission for the Securities Market (FCSM) 
convened a conclave of Western and domestic auditing firms. The 
theme was how to spot and neutralize bad auditors. With barely 
concealed and gleeful schadenfreude, the Russians said that the 
Enron scandal undermined their confidence in Western accountants and 
the GAAP. 




The Institute of Corporate Law and Corporate Governance (ICLG), 
having studied the statements of a few major Russian firms, 
concluded that there are indications of financial problems, "not 
mentioned by (mostly Western) auditors". They may have a point. Most 
of the banks that collapsed ignominiously in 1998 received glowing 
audits signed by Western auditors, often one of the Big Five.

The Russian Investor Protection Association (IPA) and Institute of 
Professional Auditors (IPAR) embarked on a survey of Russian 
investors, enterprises, auditors, and state officials - and what 
they think about the quality of the audit services they are getting.

Many Russian managers - as avaricious and venal as ever - now can 
justify hiring malleable and puny local auditors instead of big 
international or domestic ones. Surgutneftegaz - with $2 billion net 
profit last year and on-going dispute with its shareholders about 
dividends - wants to sack "Rosexperitza", a respectable Russian 
accountancy, and hire "Aval", a little known accounting outfit. Aval 
does not even make it to the list of 200 largest accounting firms in 
Russia, according to Renaissance Capital, an investment bank.

Other Russian managers are genuinely alarmed by the vertiginous 
decline in the reputation of the global accounting firms and by the 
inherent conflict of interest between consulting and audit jobs 
performed by the same entity. Sviazinvest, a holding and telecom 
company, hired Accenture on top of - some say instead of - Andersen 
Consulting. 

A decade of achievements in fostering transparency, better corporate 
governance, and more realistic accounting in central and eastern 
Europe - may well evaporate in the wake of Enron and other scandals. 
The forces of reaction and corruption in these nether lands - greedy 
managers, venal bureaucrats, and anti-reformists - all seized the 
opportunity to reverse what was hitherto considered an irreversible 
trend towards Western standards. This, in turn, is likely to deter 
investors and retard the progress towards a more efficient market 
economy.

The Big Six accounting firms were among the first to establish a 
presence in Russia. Together with major league consultancies, such 
as Baker-McKinsey, they coached Russian entrepreneurs and managers 
in the ways of the West. They introduced investors to Russia when it 
was still considered a frontier land. They promoted Russian 
enterprises abroad and nursed the first, precarious, joint ventures 
between paranoid Russians and disdainful Westerners. 

Companies like Ernst&Young are at the forefront of the fight to 
include independent directors in the boards of Russian firms, 
invariably stuffed with relatives and cronies. Together with IPA, 
Ernst&Young recently established the National Association of 
Independent Directors (NAID). It is intended to "assist Russian 
companies to increase their efficiency through introduction of best 
independent directors' practices."



 
But even these - often missionary - pioneers were blinded by the 
spoils of a "free for all", "winner takes all", and "might is right" 
environment. They geared the accounts of their clients - by 
minimizing their profits - towards tax avoidance and the abolition 
of dividends. Quoting unnamed former employees of the audit firms, 
"The New York Times" described how "... the auditors often chose to 
play by Russian rules, and in doing so sacrificed the transparency 
that investors were counting on them to ensure."


The Typology of Financial Scandals

I. Overview
Also published by United Press International (UPI)
The recent implosion of the global equity markets - from Hong Kong 
to New York - engendered yet another round of the semipternal 
debate: should central banks contemplate abrupt adjustments in the 
prices of assets - such as stocks or real estate - as they do 
changes in the consumer price indices? Are asset bubbles indeed 
inflationary and their bursting deflationary?
Central bankers counter that it is hard to tell a bubble until it 
bursts and that market intervention bring about that which it is 
intended to prevent. There is insufficient historical data, they 
reprimand errant scholars who insist otherwise. This is 
disingenuous. Ponzi and pyramid schemes have been a fixture of 
Western civilization at least since the middle Renaissance.
Assets tend to accumulate in "asset stocks". Residences built in the 
19th century still serve their purpose today. The quantity of new 
assets created at any given period is, inevitably, negligible 
compared to the stock of the same class of assets accumulated over 
decades and, sometimes, centuries. This is why the prices of assets 
are not anchored - they are only loosely connected to their 
production costs or even to their replacement value. 
Asset bubbles are not the exclusive domain of stock exchanges and 
shares. "Real" assets include land and the property built on it, 
machinery, and other tangibles. "Financial" assets include anything 
that stores value and can serve as means of exchange - from cash to 
securities. Even tulip bulbs will do.
In 1634, in what later came o be known as "tulipmania", tulip bulbs 
were traded in a special marketplace in Amsterdam, the scene of a 
rabid speculative frenzy. Some rare black tulip bulbs changed hands 
for the price of a big mansion house. For four feverish years it 
seemed like the craze would last forever. But the bubble burst in 
1637. In a matter of a few days, the price of tulip bulbs was 
slashed by 96%! 
Uniquely, tulipmania was not an organized scam with an identifiable 
group of movers and shakers, which controlled and directed it. Nor 
has anyone made explicit promises to investors regarding guaranteed 
future profits. The hysteria was evenly distributed and fed on 
itself. Subsequent investment fiddles were different, though.
Modern dodges entangle a large number of victims. Their size and 
all-pervasiveness sometimes threaten the national economy and the 
very fabric of society and incur grave political and social costs. 
There are two types of bubbles. 
Asset bubbles of the first type are run or fanned by financial 
intermediaries such as banks or brokerage houses. They consist of 
"pumping" the price of an asset or an asset class. 


The assets concerned can be shares, currencies, other securities and 
financial instruments - or even savings accounts. To promise 
unearthly yields on one's savings is to artificially inflate the 
"price", or the "value" of one's savings account.
More than one fifth of the population of 1983 Israel were involved 
in a banking scandal of Albanian proportions. It was a classic 
pyramid scheme. All the banks, bar one, promised to gullible 
investors ever increasing returns on the banks' own publicly-traded 
shares. 
These explicit and incredible promises were included in prospectuses 
of the banks' public offerings and won the implicit acquiescence and 
collaboration of successive Israeli governments. The banks used 
deposits, their capital, retained earnings and funds illegally 
borrowed through shady offshore subsidiaries to try to keep their 
impossible and unhealthy promises. Everyone knew what was going on 
and everyone was involved. It lasted 7 years. The prices of some 
shares increased by 1-2 percent daily. 
On October 6, 1983, the entire banking sector of Israel crumbled. 
Faced with ominously mounting civil unrest, the government was 
forced to compensate shareholders. It offered them an elaborate 
share buyback plan over 9 years. The cost of this plan was pegged 
at  $6 billion - almost 15 percent of Israel's annual GDP. The 
indirect damage remains unknown.
Avaricious and susceptible investors are lured into investment 
swindles by the promise of impossibly high profits or interest 
payments. 


The organizers use the money entrusted to them by new investors to 
pay off the old ones and thus establish a credible reputation. 
Charles Ponzi perpetrated many such schemes in 1919-1925 in Boston 
and later the Florida real estate market in the USA. Hence a "Ponzi 
scheme". 
In Macedonia, a savings bank named TAT collapsed in 1997, erasing 
the economy of an entire major city, Bitola. After much wrangling 
and recriminations - many politicians seem to have benefited from 
the scam - the government, faced with elections in September, has 
recently decided, in defiance of IMF diktats, to offer meager 
compensation to the afflicted savers. TAT was only one of a few 
similar cases. Similar scandals took place in Russia and Bulgaria in 
the 1990's .
One third of the impoverished population of Albania was cast into 
destitution by the collapse of a series of nation-wide leveraged 
investment plans in 1997. Inept political and financial crisis 
management led Albania to the verge of disintegration and a civil 
war. Rioters invaded police stations and army barracks and 
expropriated hundreds of thousands of weapons.
Islam forbids its adherents to charge interest on money lent - as 
does Judaism. To circumvent this onerous decree, entrepreneurs and 
religious figures in Egypt and in Pakistan established "Islamic 
banks". These institutions pay no interest on deposits, nor do they 
demand interest from borrowers.  Instead, depositors are made 
partners in the banks' - largely fictitious - profits. Clients are 
charged for - no less fictitious - losses. A few Islamic banks were 
in the habit of offering vertiginously high "profits". They went the 
way of other, less pious, pyramid schemes. 


They melted down and dragged economies and political establishments 
with them. 
By definition, pyramid schemes are doomed to failure. The number of 
new "investors" - and the new money they make available to the 
pyramid's organizers - is limited. When the funds run out and the 
old investors can no longer be paid, panic ensues. In a classic "run 
on the bank", everyone attempts to draw his money simultaneously. 
Even healthy banks - a distant relative of pyramid schemes - cannot 
cope with such stampedes. Some of the money is invested long-term, 
or lent. Few financial institutions keep more than 10 percent of 
their deposits in liquid on-call reserves.
Studies repeatedly demonstrated that investors in pyramid schemes 
realize their dubious nature and stand forewarned by the collapse of 
other contemporaneous scams. But they are swayed by recurrent 
promises that they could draw their money at will ("liquidity") and, 
in the meantime, receive alluring returns on it ("capital gains", 
"interest payments", "profits").
People know that they are likelier to lose all or part of their 
money as time passes. But they convince themselves that they can 
outwit the organizers of the pyramid, that their withdrawals of 
profits or interest payments prior to the inevitable collapse will 
more than amply compensate them for the loss of their money. Many 
believe that they will succeed to accurately time the extraction of 
their original investment based on - mostly useless and 
superstitious - "warning signs".  



While the speculative rash lasts, a host of pundits, analysts, and 
scholars aim to justify it. The "new economy" is exempt from "old 
rules and archaic modes of thinking". Productivity has surged and 
established a steeper, but sustainable, trend line. Information 
technology is as revolutionary as electricity. No, more than 
electricity. Stock valuations are reasonable. The Dow is on its way 
to 33,000. People want to believe these "objective, disinterested 
analyses" from "experts". 
Investments by households are only one of the engines of this first 
kind of asset bubbles. A lot of the money that pours into pyramid 
schemes and stock exchange booms is laundered, the fruits of illicit 
pursuits. The laundering of tax-evaded money or the proceeds of 
criminal activities, mainly drugs, is effected through regular 
banking channels. The money changes ownership a few times to obscure 
its trail and the identities of the true owners. 
Many offshore banks manage shady investment ploys. They maintain two 
sets of books. The "public" or "cooked" set is made available to the 
authorities - the tax administration, bank supervision, deposit 
insurance, law enforcement agencies, and securities and exchange 
commission. The true record is kept in the second, inaccessible, set 
of files. 
This second set of accounts reflects reality: who deposited how 
much, when and subject to which conditions - and who borrowed what, 
when and subject to what terms. These arrangements are so stealthy 
and convoluted that sometimes even the shareholders of the bank lose 
track of its activities and misapprehend its real situation. 
Unscrupulous management and staff sometimes take advantage of the 
situation. Embezzlement, abuse of authority, mysterious trades, 
misuse of funds are more widespread than acknowledged. 
The thunderous disintegration of the Bank for Credit and Commerce 
International (BCCI) in London in 1991 revealed that, for the better 
part of a decade, the executives and employees of this penumbral 
institution were busy stealing and misappropriating $10 billion. The 
Bank of England's supervision department failed to spot the rot on 
time. Depositors were - partially - compensated by the main 
shareholder of the bank, an Arab sheikh. The story repeated itself 
with Nick Leeson and his unauthorized disastrous trades which 
brought down the venerable and veteran Barings Bank in 1995.
The combination of black money, shoddy financial controls, shady 
bank accounts and shredded documents renders a true account of the 
cash flows and damages in such cases all but impossible. There is no 
telling what were the contributions of drug barons, American off-
shore corporations, or European and Japanese tax-evaders - channeled 
precisely through such institutions - to the stratospheric rise in 
Wall-Street in the last few years.
But there is another - potentially the most pernicious - type of 
asset bubble. When financial institutions lend to the unworthy but 
the politically well-connected, to cronies, and family members of 
influential politicians - they often end up fostering a bubble. 
South Korean chaebols, Japanese keiretsu, as well as American 
conglomerates frequently used these cheap funds to prop up their 
stock or to invest in real estate, driving prices up in both markets 
artificially.
Moreover, despite decades of bitter experiences - from Mexico in 
1982 to Asia in 1997 and Russia in 1998 - financial institutions 
still bow to fads and fashions. They act herd-like in conformity 
with "lending trends". They shift assets to garner the highest 
yields in the shortest possible period of time. In this respect, 
they are not very different from investors in pyramid investment 
schemes. 
II. Case Study - The Savings and Loans Associations Bailout
Also published by United Press International (UPI)
Asset bubbles - in the stock exchange, in the real estate or the 
commodity markets - invariably burst and often lead to banking 
crises. One such calamity struck the USA in 1986-1989. It is 
instructive to study the decisive reaction of the administration and 
Congress alike. They tackled both the ensuing liquidity crunch and 
the structural flaws exposed by the crisis with tenacity and skill. 
Compare this to the lackluster and hesitant tentativeness of the 
current lot. True, the crisis - the result of a speculative bubble - 
concerned the banking and real estate markets rather than the 
capital markets. But the similarities are there.
The savings and loans association, or the thrift, was a strange 
banking hybrid, very much akin to the building society in Britain. 
It was allowed to take in deposits but was really merely a mortgage 
bank. The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control 
Act of 1980 forced S&L's to achieve interest parity with commercial 
banks, thus eliminating the interest ceiling on deposits which they 
enjoyed hitherto.
But it still allowed them only very limited entry into commercial 
and consumer lending and trust services. Thus, these institutions 
were heavily exposed to the vicissitudes of the residential real 
estate markets in their respective regions. Every normal cyclical 
slump in property values or regional economic shock - e.g., a plunge 
in commodity prices - affected them disproportionately. 
Interest rate volatility created a mismatch between the assets of 
these associations and their liabilities. The negative spread 
between their cost of funds and the yield of their assets - eroded 
their operating margins. The 1982 Garn-St. Germain Depository 
Institutions Act encouraged thrifts to convert from mutual - i.e., 
depositor-owned - associations to stock companies, allowing them to 
tap the capital markets in order to enhance their faltering net 
worth. 
But this was too little and too late. The S&L's were rendered unable 
to further support the price of real estate by rolling over old 
credits, refinancing residential equity, and underwriting 
development projects. Endemic corruption and mismanagement 
exacerbated the ruin. The bubble burst.
Hundreds of thousands of depositors scrambled to withdraw their 
funds and hundreds of savings and loans association (out of a total 
of more than 3,000) became insolvent instantly, unable to pay their 
depositors. They were besieged by angry - at times, violent - 
clients who lost their life savings. 



The illiquidity spread like fire. As institutions closed their 
gates, one by one, they left in their wake major financial 
upheavals, wrecked businesses and homeowners, and devastated 
communities. At one point, the contagion threatened the stability of 
the entire banking system. 
The Federal Savings and Loans Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) - which 
insured the deposits in the savings and loans associations - was no 
longer able to meet the claims and, effectively, went bankrupt. 
Though the obligations of the FSLIC were never guaranteed by the 
Treasury, it was widely perceived to be an arm of the federal 
government. The public was shocked. The crisis acquired a political 
dimension. 
A hasty $300 billion bailout package was arranged to inject 
liquidity into the shriveling system through a special agency, the 
FHFB. The supervision of the banks was subtracted from the Federal 
Reserve. The role of the the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC) was greatly expanded.
Prior to 1989, savings and loans were insured by the now-defunct 
FSLIC. The FDIC insured only banks. Congress had to eliminate FSLIC 
and place the insurance of thrifts under FDIC. The FDIC kept the 
Bank Insurance Fund (BIF) separate from the Savings Associations 
Insurance Fund (SAIF), to confine the ripple effect of the meltdown. 
The FDIC is designed to be independent. Its money comes from 
premiums and earnings of the two insurance funds, not from 
Congressional appropriations. Its board of directors has full 
authority to run the agency. 


The board obeys the law, not political masters. The FDIC has a 
preemptive role. It regulates banks and savings and loans with the 
aim of avoiding insurance claims by depositors. 
When an institution becomes unsound, the FDIC can either shore it up 
with loans or take it over. If it does the latter, it can run it and 
then sell it as a going concern, or close it, pay off the depositors 
and try to collect the loans. At times, the FDIC ends up owning 
collateral and trying to sell it. 
Another outcome of the scandal was the Resolution Trust Corporation 
(RTC). Many savings and loans were treated as "special risk" and 
placed under the jurisdiction of the RTC until August 1992. The RTC 
operated and sold these institutions - or paid off the depositors 
and closed them. A new government corporation (Resolution Fund 
Corporation, RefCorp) issued federally guaranteed bailout bonds 
whose proceeds were used to finance the RTC until 1996. 
The Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) was also established in 1989 
to replace the dismantled Federal Home Loan Board (FHLB) in 
supervising savings and loans. OTS is a unit within the Treasury 
Department, but law and custom make it practically an independent 
agency. 



The Federal Housing Finance Board (FHFB) regulates the savings 
establishments for liquidity. It provides lines of credit from 
twelve regional Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB). Those banks and the 
thrifts make up the Federal Home Loan Bank System (FHLBS). FHFB gets 
its funds from the System and is independent of supervision by the 
executive branch. 
Thus a clear, streamlined, and powerful regulatory mechanism was put 
in place. Banks and savings and loans abused the confusing overlaps 
in authority and regulation among numerous government agencies. Not 
one regulator possessed a full and truthful picture. Following the 
reforms, it all became clearer: insurance was the FDIC's job, the 
OTS provided supervision, and liquidity was monitored and imparted 
by the FHLB. 
Healthy thrifts were coaxed and cajoled to purchase less sturdy 
ones. This weakened their balance sheets considerably and the 
government reneged on its promises to allow them to amortize the 
goodwill element of the purchase over 40 years. Still, there were 
2,898 thrifts in 1989. Six years later, their number shrank to 1,612 
and it stands now at less than 1,000. The consolidated institutions 
are bigger, stronger, and better capitalized. 
Later on, Congress demanded that thrifts obtain a bank charter by 
1998. This was not too onerous for most of them. At the height of 
the crisis the ratio of their combined equity to their combined 
assets was less than 1%. But in 1994 it reached almost 10% and 
remained there ever since. 
This remarkable turnaround was the result of serendipity as much as 
careful planning. Interest rate spreads became highly positive. In a 
classic arbitrage, savings and loans paid low interest on deposits 
and invested the money in high yielding government and corporate 
bonds. The prolonged equity bull market allowed thrifts to float new 
stock at exorbitant prices. 
As the juridical relics of the Great Depression - chiefly amongst 
them, the Glass-Steagall Act - were repealed, banks were liberated 
to enter new markets, offer new financial instruments, and spread 
throughout the USA. Product and geographical diversification led to 
enhanced financial health. 
But the very fact that S&L's were poised to exploit these 
opportunities is a tribute to politicians and regulators alike - 
though except for setting the general tone of urgency and 
resolution, the relative absence of political intervention in the 
handling of the crisis is notable. It was managed by the autonomous, 
able, utterly professional, largely a-political Federal Reserve. The 
political class provided the professionals with the tools they 
needed to do the job. This mode of collaboration may well be the 
most important lesson of this crisis. 
III. Case Study - Wall Street, October 1929
Also published by United Press International (UPI)
Claud Cockburn, writing for the "Times of London" from New-York, 
described the irrational exuberance that gripped the nation just 
prior to the Great Depression. 


As Europe wallowed in post-war malaise, America seemed to have 
discovered a new economy, the secret of uninterrupted growth and 
prosperity, the fount of transforming technology:
"The atmosphere of the great boom was savagely exciting, but there 
were times when a person with my European background felt alarmingly 
lonely. He would have liked to believe, as these people believed, in 
the eternal upswing of the big bull market or else to meet just one 
person with whom he might discuss some general doubts without being 
regarded as an imbecile or a person of deliberately evil intent—some 
kind of anarchist, perhaps."
The greatest analysts with the most impeccable credentials and track 
records failed to predict the forthcoming crash and the 
unprecedented economic depression that followed it. Irving Fisher, a 
preeminent economist, who, according to his biographer-son, Irving 
Norton Fisher, lost the equivalent of $140 million in today's money 
in the crash, made a series of soothing predictions. On October 22 
he uttered these avuncular statements: "Quotations have not caught 
up with real values as yet ... (There is) no cause for a slump ... 
The market has not been inflated but merely readjusted..."
Even as the market convulsed on Black Thursday, October 24, 1929 and 
on Black Tuesday, October 29 - the New York Times wrote: "Rally at 
close cheers brokers, bankers optimistic". 



In an editorial on October 26, it blasted rabid speculators and 
compliant analysts: ``We shall hear considerably less in the future 
of those newly invented conceptions of finance which revised the 
principles of political economy with a view solely to fitting the 
stock market's vagaries.'' But it ended thus: "(The Federal Reserve 
has) insured the soundness of the business situation when the 
speculative markets went on the rocks.''
Compare this to Alan Greenspan Congressional testimony this summer: 
"While bubbles that burst are scarcely benign, the consequences need 
not be catastrophic for the economy ... (The Depression was brought 
on by) ensuing failures of policy".
Investors, their equity leveraged with bank and broker loans, 
crowded into stocks of exciting "new technologies", such as the 
radio and mass electrification. The bull market - especially in 
issues of public utilities - was fueled by "mergers, new groupings, 
combinations and good earnings" and by corporate purchasing for 
"employee stock funds".
Cautionary voices - such as Paul Warburg, the influential banker, 
Roger Babson, the "Prophet of Loss" and Alexander Noyes, the eternal 
Cassandra from the New York Times - were derided. The number of 
brokerage accounts doubled between March 1927 and March 1929. 
When the market corrected by 8 percent between March 18-27 - 
following a Fed induced credit crunch and a series of mysterious 
closed-door sessions of the Fed's board - bankers rushed in. The New 
York Times reported: ``Responsible bankers agree that stocks should 
now be supported, having reached a level that makes them 
attractive.'' By August, the market was up 35 percent on its March 
lows. But it reached a peak on September 3 and it was downhill since 
then.
On October 19, five days before "Black Thursday", Business Week 
published this sanguine prognosis:
"Now, of course, the crucial weaknesses of such periods -- price 
inflation, heavy inventories, over-extension of commercial credit -- 
are totally absent. The security market seems to be suffering only 
an attack of stock indigestion... There is additional reassurance in 
the fact that, should business show any further signs of fatigue, 
the banking system is in a good position now to administer any 
needed credit tonic from its excellent Reserve supply."
The crash unfolded gradually. Black Thursday actually ended with an 
inspiring rally. Friday and Saturday  - trading ceased only on 
Sundays - witnessed an upswing followed by mild profit taking. The 
market dropped 12.8 percent on Monday, with Winston Churchill 
watching from the visitors' gallery - incurring a loss of $10-14 
billion. 
The Wall Street Journal warned naive investors:
"Many are looking for technical corrective reactions from time to 
time, but do not expect these to disturb the upward trend for any 
prolonged period."



The market plummeted another 11.7 percent the next day - though 
trading ended with an impressive rally from the lows. October 31 was 
a good day with a "vigorous, buoyant rally from bell to bell". Even 
Rockefeller joined the myriad buyers. Shares soared. It seemed that 
the worst was over.
The New York Times was optimistic:
"It is thought that stocks will become stabilized at their actual 
worth levels, some higher and some lower than the present ones, and 
that the selling prices will be guided in the immediate future by 
the worth of each particular security, based on its dividend record, 
earnings ability and prospects. Little is heard in Wall Street these 
days about 'putting stocks up.'"
But it was not long before irate customers began blaming their 
stupendous losses on advice they received from their brokers. Alec 
Wilder, a songwriter in New York in 1929, interviewed by Stud Terkel 
in "Hard Times" four decades later, described this typical exchange 
with his money manager:
"I knew something was terribly wrong because I heard bellboys, 
everybody, talking about the stock market. About six weeks before 
the Wall Street Crash, I persuaded my mother in Rochester to let me 
talk to our family adviser. I wanted to sell stock which had been 
left me by my father. He got very sentimental: 'Oh your father 
wouldn't have liked you to do that.' He was so persuasive, I said 
O.K. I could have sold it for $160,000. Four years later, I sold it 
for $4,000."
Exhausted and numb from days of hectic trading and back office 
operations, the brokerage houses pressured the stock exchange to 
declare a two day trading holiday. Exchanges around North America 
followed suit.
At first, the Fed refused to reduce the discount rate. "(There) was 
no change in financial conditions which the board thought called for 
its action." - though it did inject liquidity into the money market 
by purchasing government bonds. Then, it partially succumbed and 
reduced the New York discount rate, which, curiously, was 1 percent 
above the other Fed districts - by 1 percent. This was too little 
and too late. The market never recovered after November 1. Despite 
further reductions in the discount rate to 4 percent, it shed a 
whopping 89 percent in nominal terms when it hit bottom three years 
later.
Everyone was duped. The rich were impoverished overnight. Small time 
margin traders - the forerunners of today's day traders - lost their 
shirts and much else besides. The New York Times:
"Yesterday's market crash was one which largely affected rich men, 
institutions, investment trusts and others who participate in the 
market on a broad and intelligent scale. It was not the margin 
traders who were caught in the rush to sell, but the rich men of the 
country who are able to swing blocks of 5,000, 10,000, up to 100,000 
shares of high-priced stocks. They went overboard with no more 
consideration than the little trader who was swept out on the first 
day of the market's upheaval, whose prices, even at their lowest of 
last Thursday, now look high by comparison ... 


To most of those who have been in the market it is all the more awe-
inspiring because their financial history is limited to bull 
markets." 
Overseas - mainly European - selling was an important factor. Some 
conspiracy theorists, such as Webster Tarpley in his "British 
Financial Warfare", supported by contemporary reporting by the likes 
of "The Economist", went as far as writing:
"When this Wall Street Bubble had reached gargantuan proportions in 
the autumn of 1929, (Lord) Montagu Norman (governor of the Bank of 
England 1920-1944) sharply (upped) the British bank rate, 
repatriating British hot money, and pulling the rug out from under 
the Wall Street speculators, thus deliberately and consciously 
imploding the US markets. This caused a violent depression in the 
United States and some other countries, with the collapse of 
financial markets and the contraction of production and employment. 
In 1929, Norman engineered a collapse by puncturing the bubble."
The crash was, in large part, a reaction to a sharp reversal, 
starting in 1928, of the reflationary, "cheap money", policies of 
the Fed intended, as Adolph Miller of the Fed's Board of Governors 
told a Senate committee, "to bring down money rates, the call rate 
among them, because of the international importance the call rate 
had come to acquire. The purpose was to start an outflow of gold - 
to reverse the previous inflow of gold into this country (back to 
Britain)." But the Fed had already lost control of the speculative 
rush.