or written over a dozen books. I figured you had some reason for converting me, 
but not wanting me to let John know about it. What's on your mind, milady?"
    Pausing -- probably for effect, Cade thought -- Mandi said, "I'm putting 
together a special response team. I was kind of hoping you'd volunteer to help 
train people."
    Taking another bite of burger and creating a pause of his own, Cade said 
thoughtfully, "Uh, huh. 'Volunteer', indeed. You were going to wait until after 
I'd finished converting and had changed so much that my old life wouldn't be 
enough, but your doubts about me made us reach this point a little earlier than 
you had in mind. Who's coming at us and what's the setup?"
    "What made you ask that? 'Who's coming at us'?"
    With a shrug, Cade said, "Just figures, as I see it. You may only be 
assembling a team to help with natural disasters and work with cops and firemen, 
but I'd have to doubt that. If you were, you'd be shopping for cops and firemen; 
people with that kind of training, who'd know the limitations of the equipment 
and people involved. Instead, you drafted me."
    "Drafted you? Volunteerism isn't mandatory, you know."
    "How long would my conversion be a secret if I turn you down, ma'am? When 
would all the government agencies and anybody else who figured to hire a 
super-bodyguard or whatever stop knocking on my door?"
    "You think I'd tell anyone you'd been converted?"
    "John, maybe. Or maybe I'd slip up and do something super in public. Doesn't 
matter how the info gets out; it will. The combined might of an army might not 
be enough to take you down, but I'm not going to be quite that powerful, am I?"
    "Well, no, but..."
    "But I'm going to be powerful enough to make the authorities nervous as hell 
about having me around, right?"
    Meeting his gaze, Mandi nodded slightly. "Yes."
    "So unless I'm under someone's supervision -- someone stronger than me and 
whom they believe they can control, even if only because she wants their 
cooperation -- I may never have another damned day of peace or privacy. That's 
the way their little minds work."
    After a moment, Mandi asked, "You're pretty angry with me, aren't you, Ed?"
    He shook his head. "No. No point. In this case, done is done, right or 
wrong. How soon will you need me?"
    Mandi's gaze narrowed questioningly. "Don't you want to know a little more 
about what..."
    Cade began bagging their trash and said, "Sure. Let's check out the next 
restaurant. You can tell me all about it while we eat. Got a schedule to meet?"
    "Uh, well, sort of. The President offered me the use of an obsolete missile 
base and some money to fix it up."
    "Hm. Remote, mostly underground facilities. You're going to convert some 
women, too, aren't you?"
    Somewhat guardedly, Mandi asked, "Why do you ask?"
    Grinning at her, Cade said, "You're talking about converting a bunch of 
people, ma'am. It seems to me that I'll probably be too dangerous for 
unconverted women by Wednesday or so, and I'm thinking it would be nice if I had 
some variety, too."
    Standing up and pitching the fast food bag at a trashcan about thirty feet 
away, he added, "Besides, it just wouldn't be fair otherwise, would it? And 
you'll be spending federal money, so somebody'd sue you for discrimination in a 
heartbeat."
    Getting to her feet, Mandi said, "You can be pretty irritating at times, 
Cade. You know that, don't you?"
    He shrugged. "Yeah, I've been told that."
    With a wicked grin, she said, "Well good. Then maybe you can figure out why 
I suddenly have a craving for Mexican food."
    Cade shrugged again. "Hey, you're a big girl with your own money, ma'am. If 
you want Mexican food, then by God, it's your right to eat the nasty stuff. I'll 
be at the fish 'n chips place across the way. Just gimme a holler when you're 
ready to move on and be sure to brush your teeth real well later, okay?"
    "What?! You aren't coming with me?"
    Doing his best to look puzzled, Cade said, "Well, I thought that's what I 
said. Yeah. I'm pretty sure that's what I said."
    Raising her voice slightly to a strident tone, Mandi asked, "How would you 
like to walk back to the hotel, Ed?"
    "The oldest routine in the book. 'If you don't cooperate, honey, you'll have 
to walk home'. Tacky. Very tacky. I'd never pull something like that on a date. 
Besides, it's only about twelve miles. I can call a cab or take a MARTA train if 
I don't feel like walking."
    "The what? What the hell's a MARTA train?"
    "It's a buck-fifty to go all over Atlanta unless it's gone up since last 
year. There's a station a quarter-mile west of here, so no sweat. Still want 
Mexican food?"
    Standing straight, Mandi gloweringly said, "Yes. I do."
    Cade said, "Then by all means go for it. We can meet up later," and started 
walking toward the fish place.
    There was a breeze and Mandi suddenly appeared in front of him, her hands on 
her hips and an angry glint in her eyes.
    "Yes?" asked Cade.
    In an ominous tone, she stated, "I'm not accustomed to being abandoned 
during a date."
    "You aren't being abandoned. We can meet up in a little while and..."
    "That's not acceptable."
    "Then pick another restaurant tonight and eat Mexican food when you're out 
with someone else."
    "Is that what this is about? Me converting other men?"
    "Hell, no. It's about Mexican food. I told you how I felt about it, and now 
you seem to want to get some just to give me a hard time. That's what isn't 
acceptable, lady."
    "Don't you realize how it would look if we split up?"
    Sighing, Cade asked, "Like we had an argument? Like one of us flatly won't 
eat Mexican food? Like somebody isn't getting her way in things? Like one of us 
is trying to establish the beginnings of control over the other? And I'm not 
talking about me, by the way."
    He gestured around and said, "I don't give a rat's ass what anyone way the 
hell out here thinks about a couple of tourists and you aren't some poor, 
defenseless prom queen. If you really want Mexican food, go get some. If it 
doesn't really matter, let's go to the fish 'n chips place."

Chapter Nineteen

    Mandi cocked her head and looked at Cade for a moment, then asked in a way 
that sounded more like a discovery, "You really aren't trying to manipulate me, 
are you?"
    "Nope. You're Mandi Steele, the woman who can juggle cars and shrug off 
big-assed explosions. You don't need me or any man to escort you to a taco 
factory. Or anywhere else."
    "What if I simply asked you politely to come with me?"
    "Then you'd be trying to manipulate me at this point in things. Same answer. 
Same reasons."
    "You're only leaving me with the choice of going to the Mexican restaurant 
or going with you. Isn't that manipulation?"
    "No, that's just self defense. There's a third option. You can just do what 
you want and not worry about whether anybody's getting the upper hand or how 
things look to the natives."
    After another moment of regarding him, Mandi chuckled and said, "The funny 
thing is; talking about Mexican food made me think about it. Now I really do 
want some."
    With a short sigh and a nod, she said, "Ohhkaay. I'll find you in a little 
while," and headed for the Mexican place.
    Cade watched her go for a moment, then began walking toward the street. As 
he reached the other side of the highway, a blue, late-model car full of people 
cruised past, abruptly made a U-turn, and headed back.
    It screeched to a stop a few feet from Cade and all the doors opened at once 
as six young men of various colors got out and spread out to surround him.
    The guy who'd lost his knife to Cade earlier was among them. His forearm was 
bound tightly with a sports wrap bandage and he tried not to move it much.
    "That's not good enough," said Cade, pointing at the elastic bandaging. 
"You'll need a cast."
    The injured guy said, "Watch out. He's got a gun."
    "Fuck his gun," said the apparent leader of the mob, ambling up to Cade. "He 
won't try nothin' 'cuz he know they ain't no way he can take us all."
    The guy's left hand remained behind him as he approached. Whatever he held 
was heavy enough to make the muscles of his forearm stand out. Likely a gun.
    Cade said, "Five guys and a scared cripple. Could be you need a little more 
help."
    One guy laughed and another one simply glared at Cade as the others hung 
back a bit and waited for their leader's commands.
    "Oooo, he be a bad-ass!" cackled the laugher.
    The leader showed his left hand, which he'd been keeping behind his back. In 
it was a black Taurus 92F autopistol.
    He pointed his pistol at Cade and said, "Okay, badass. Check this out. Muh 
man Lolo, there, he only had a pissy little knife a while ago. Whatchoo gonna do 
about this?"
    Cade said nothing and let the guy blather on with his ghetto bravado as he 
aimed the gun at Cade's head and pulled the hammer back for emphasis. The guys 
behind Cade moved well to either side, apparently on general principles.
    Letting his eyes follow the muzzle of the gun, Cade simply stood still and 
waited. Sure enough, when he didn't get a response, the guy assumed that Cade 
had changed his mind about being brave and stepped up to put the muzzle of the 
weapon to Cade's right temple.
    "Well?!" he screamingly demanded as he reached for Cade's Glock, "I axed you 
a question, mufucka! Whatchoo gonna do?! Huh?! Huh?!"
    Feinting toward the Glock with his left hand to distract the guy's 
attention, Cade ducked slightly and swatted the Taurus upward with his right 
hand as he turned his feinting left into a jab at the guy's eyes. Grabbing the 
guy's gun hand, he twisted it downward and back so the Taurus pointed at the 
guy's chest.
    "Bye-bye," said Cade, putting his index finger over the guy's trigger finger 
and forcing it to move.
    The gun barked and the guy jerked, then sagged backwards in openmouthed 
shock, clutching his chest. He landed hard on his left hip and when his elbow 
hit the pavement, the gun fired once into the air above the parking lot.
    Cade had drawn his Glock from its holster. He stepped back and indicated 
that the men to his right and left should move back toward the car, then he and 
they watched as the guy on the ground gasped and let go of the gun to use both 
hands to clutch his chest. His eyes closed and his breathing was ragged.
    One of the others suddenly jumped into the car's driver's seat, but Cade 
pointed his Glock at the guy's face and said, "No, not yet. Get back out here."
    Once the guy was again standing by the car, Cade indicated the guy on the 
ground and suggested that they take their trash with them. After another stunned 
moment, two of them moved toward the man on the ground.
    Cade stepped over to put a foot on the guy's gun and said, "This stays. He 
doesn't need it anymore."
    Without argument, they stuffed their leader into the back seat of the car 
and sped away. Cade put his gun away as Mandi seemingly flashed into existence 
in front of him.
    Looking at her, he asked, "Change your mind about fish?"
    "I heard a shot as I entered the restaurant. I saw what happened, Ed."
    "If you heard a shot before you looked, you didn't see why it happened. The 
guy put a gun to my head. That gun."
    Cade moved his foot and took out one of his paper towel hankies to pick up 
the gun.
    "Who were they?"
    "Friends of the guy we disarmed. Look, I'm still kind of hungry and the cops 
will probably show up soon. Unless you want to spend the next few hours talking 
to them, you'll get us out of here."
    "Us? You're the one who was involved in the fight."
    "It was never a fight, and if I have to deal with the cops over that 
asshole, you've wasted my conversion. I'll just keep doing what I've been doing 
with the same people."
    Giving him a flat gaze, Mandi said, "Well, maybe that's for the best, if 
your opinion of civil authority is that low."
    Nodding, Cade said, "Yeah, okay. Later, Mandi," and started walking toward a 
phone kiosk at a nearby gas station.
    "Where the hell do you think you're going?"
    Pausing, Cade said, "If you want to know that, you can take me there or come 
with me."
    "What are you going to do with that gun?"
    Shoving the gun into his belt, he said, "Same answer," then started walking 
again.
    He heard her mutter something just before her arms slid under his from 
behind and she lifted him into the night sky.
    "Now tell me where the hell you were going," she said.
    "Okay," said Cade, shifting in her grip for some comfort under his arms. 
"Back to the hotel."
    "What about the gun?"
    "Turn it in. Dump it somewhere. Doesn't matter."
    Mandi landed them behind a nearby building and stepped in front of him to 
hold out her hand.
    "Give me the gun, Ed."
    Cade dropped the clip and cleared the chamber, caught the ejected round, and 
handed the gun to her, which she tossed on the concrete pavement.
    Twin beams lanced from her eyes and the gun glowed a dull red almost 
instantly. Flames and acrid smoke billowed out of it as the lubricants and 
plastics burned away, and suddenly the gun's outline glowed yellow, then almost 
white before it collapsed and became a bright puddle.
    The puddle spread itself like water on the concrete, then solidified quickly 
after she turned off her heat vision.
    "Mandi," said Cade, staring at the smoking puddle, "That was truly 
impressive. Will I be able to do that?"
    Ignoring his question, Mandi said, "Now the bullets," again holding out her 
hand.
    Thumbing the loose round into the top of the magazine, Cade dropped the mag 
in his jacket pocket as he said, "No point in wasting ammo. Carter uses a nine 
millimeter. So do some of the others."
    They heard sirens approaching and saw red and blue lights flashingly reflect 
off the sides of buildings at the end of the alleyway as two cop cars sped past 
the entrance.
    Before Cade could ask, "So, do I walk home or not?" Mandi had slung an arm 
around him, pulled him snugly to her, and launched upward.
    She remained only barely subsonic during their flight to their hotel's roof. 
At lesser speeds, Cade might have enjoyed being hugged to her like that, but 
he'd had to struggle to pull his jacket up enough to cover his head against the 
shrieking, blasting wind of their passage through the air.
    When they landed, it became obvious that the jacket had borne the brunt of 
that flight, having become considerably frayed -- almost shredded -- at edges 
that had been exposed to the wind.
    Quickly retrieving her purse from some hidden location near the roof door, 
Mandi yanked the door open and leaped down the flight of stairs to the hotel's 
top floor.
    Cade quickly put a foot in front of the closing roof door and followed her 
as she let herself out of the stairwell below. She was standing by the elevator 
doors as he exited the stairwell.
    As he approached her, Mandi said, "We'll talk later."
    Stopping beside her, Cade asked, "Why? You planning to feel differently 
about things later?"
    Glancing sharply at him, she said flatly, "No, but I want to give us both 
time to cool down a bit."
    "Ah," Cade said with an understanding nod. "Right."
    They waited in silence for the elevator and rode it to the fourth floor. 
When the doors opened, Mandi instantly strode out and headed for their room.
    Cade ambled out and headed the same direction, but he angled toward the ops 
room as Mandi used her keycard. She watched him take off his jacket, drape it 
over his arm, and knock on the ops room door, then saw the door open for him 
before she let herself into their room.
    As soon as she'd closed the door, Mandi adjusted her vision and hearing and 
watched Cade head for the coffee pot in the ops room.
    He asked, "Anybody here using nine millimeter ammo?" and a brunette woman 
with her feet propped on the writing desk raised a hand.
    "I am. Why?"
    Cade reached in his pocket for the magazine and tossed it to her as he said, 
"Happy birthday, Beth."
    She caught it and examined it, then asked, "Where'd you get this, Cade?"
    Shrugging, Cade said, "I haven't used nine millimeter for years. No need to 
hang onto it if you can use it."
    That seemed to be answer enough for Beth. She nodded and said, "Thanks," 
then dropped the magazine in her purse on the desk and asked, "Where's Mandi?"
    Shrugging, Cade said, "Dunno. In the room, I think."
    Peering at him, Beth asked, "Aren't you two getting along?"
    With a small sigh, Cade said, "No, not really. That's why I dropped in here 
for coffee."
    "Want to talk about it?"
    "No. She's tense about some things that don't mean shit to me, that's all. 
Remember when I wouldn't go with Connie when she switched our Perlman tickets 
for that Barbara Streisand thing without telling me?"
    "Yeah. She was max pissed at you, Cade."
    Parking his butt against the desk, Cade sipped his coffee and said, "Well, 
this is the same kind of thing and I didn't cooperate tonight, either. Is the 
lost and found in here?"
    "You lose something?"
    Turning up the bottom seam of his jacket, Cade said, "Nope. Just want to 
swap jackets. This one's gotten kind of ratty at the edges."
    "Try the closet, left side. Have you had dinner yet?"
    Shrugging, Cade said, "I could probably eat something."
    "Then pick a clean one. Something fairly nice, so you can take me to dinner 
tonight."
    Grinning slightly, Cade said, "You're a pushy woman, Beth."
    Returning his grin, Beth asked, "You gonna do it or not?"
    Laughing, Cade asked, "Are you kidding? You're half my age and you're 
beautiful. Hell, yes, I'm gonna do it. I just wanted you to know you're a pushy 
woman, that's all."
    As Cade headed for the closet, Beth lowered her feet to the floor and said, 
"Crap, Cade. I'm thirty-six and I'm never the woman men notice first in any 
room."
    Checking out a green windbreaker, Cade said, "That's just your own, 
personal, heavily biased opinion, ma'am. How many times have you caught me 
eyeballing your legs?"
    That made the only other person in the room -- Tony -- blurt a laugh and 
say, "He's got you there, Beth."
    "Oh, bull, Tony. He eyeballs every woman's legs."
    "So? We all do. Can't help it." He let his eyes roam her figure for a 
moment, then added, "But only if they're worth it, Beth, and yours are 
definitely worth it."
    "Hey!" Cade snapped in mock anger, "Watch it, dude. You guys work in the 
same office. You can put the make on her anytime, but tonight she's my date." 
Putting on the jacket and adjusting the fit, he said, "See, Beth? An unbiased 
second opinion, offered without the slightest hint of duress."
    Beth snorted and said, "Unbiased. Sure. He's a man. Like he said, 'Can't 
help it'."
    "Finish the quote," said Cade, "'Only if they're worth it'. Need to make any 
stops before we go?"
    She shook her head as she slung her purse on her shoulder and said, "No. I'm 
starving. I haven't eaten since breakfast."
    Opening the door for her, Cade asked, "So I'm just some poor, susceptible 
schmuck you're tapping for a meal, huh?"
    With a sigh and a roll of her eyes, Beth said, "Oh, Jesus. If you've got any 
objections, now's the time, Cade."
    He paused to look thoughtful for a moment, then said, "Yeah, one. No Mexican 
food," and pulled the door shut.
    Across the corridor, Mandi had watched and listened as Cade had led Beth 
into tacitly accepting -- or at least acknowledging -- a personal compliment.
    She realized that Beth was a woman who felt a need to try to be 'one of the 
guys' when on duty, and she understood well the kinds of barriers such women 
maintained against anything that might somehow dent that image.
    Mandi also realized that Cade hadn't been in any particular need of a dinner 
date. He could have simply swapped jackets and headed downstairs alone to 
contend with his hunger.
    As Beth and Cade waited for an elevator, Mandi studied Beth; her posture, 
her figure, her vitals. Heartbeat and respiration were up slightly. Beth was 
somewhat nervous, switching her weight from leg to leg, but that may have been 
because she'd been on them all day.
    She surreptitiously checked the lay of her clothing, tapped her earrings, 
and touched her hair to make sure it was in place, then glanced at Cade, who 
said, "Relax. You look fine, Beth."
    Leaning on the doorframe, Mandi continued to watch them. Yes, Beth 
definitely had things other than dinner in mind. Out of all the other men on the 
teams, she'd decided to consider Cade, but when? Before or after he'd called her 
beautiful?
    He was only in his first day of conversion, so if he was very careful... It 
seemed unlikely that he'd be careless with Beth, especially with two other 
inadvertent injuries fresh in his mind.
    Cade's vital signs were normal, as usual. Did he realize at all that he'd 
been selected for more than dinner? Mandi snorted and wryly wondered if the 
likely prospect of getting laid later would cause him any more excitement than 
shooting people.
    Probably not, she decided. He seemed to deal with things as they happened. 
One of them would steer the conversation and a suggestion would surface. Would 
it be Beth or Cade? Or would it be Beth, specifically because Cade had built up 
her confidence enough to ask him up to her room?
    Mandi stopped with a sense of startlement and examined that last bit of 
speculation for a moment. Where the hell had that come from? Was she just 
projecting her own thoughts about how he should proceed or did she really think 
that's what Cade would do?
    Shaking her head at herself, Mandi turned from the door and went to the 
fridge for a canned drink, then sat on the edge of the bed and lay back to stare 
at the ceiling.
    Yes, that was very likely what he'd do if Beth didn't seem able to drop her 
guard and let him in on her own. He'd find reasons to compliment her and make 
her realize the truth of them until she decided absolutely about bedding him.
    And then, Mandi realized, he'd likely suggest a coed shower and do to Beth 
what he'd done to her. He'd likely do it to her again in bed, then slide himself 
upward into position and...
    The can of soda in Mandi's hand abruptly crumpled and her drink seemed to 
splatter everywhere. Uttering a nasty word, Mandi went to the bathroom for a 
towel to clean up the mess.
    She wasn't angry at Cade. His conversion wasn't far enough along; he wasn't 
capable of making love to her like that yet. Mandi was just angry with herself 
for allowing her imagination to cause a wet accident on the bed.
    Taking off her damp dress and washing it in the bathroom sink, Mandi gently 
wrung it out and hung it in the tiny closet space, then she dried it with her 
heat vision.
    When the drying was finished, she lay back on the bed again and sighed at 
the evening as a whole. A few minutes later she reached for the TV remote and 
scanned the channels for something interesting, but it was only nine-thirty and 
she wasn't really in the mood to watch TV.
    Clicking off the TV, Mandi set the remote on the night table and headed for 
the shower, realizing as she caught herself marching that she was angry with 
Cade, after all, and even more so because he was very likely to get laid 
tonight.
    She changed course toward the desk, took her uniform out of her purse, and 
put it on, then slipped her NIA-issue cell phone and the keycard into her right 
boot-top and let herself out of the room.
    Flashing down the hall to the stairwell, she flew to the roof and used the 
keycard to block the door lock while she fetched the flattened can from where 
she'd dropped it earlier.
    Swapping the can for the card, she tucked the card back into her boot and 
launched skyward. If anything came up, John could reach her on the cell and she 
wasn't about to sit in that room all night.

Chapter Twenty

    The hotel restaurant was closed when Beth and Cade arrived in the lobby, but 
the bar and lounge area was still open. Their menu at that hour was rather 
unimpressive, and Cade politely said so.
    "Well, sir," said the lone waiter, "There are still a few places open on 
Peachtree Street," and he named three.
    Cade thanked him and he and Beth headed for the doors. As they passed the 
big glass windows by the luggage check-in desk, Cade very deliberately allowed 
Beth to see his reflection eyeing her reflection's rump and legs.
    Pretending to have been caught in the act, he said, "Sorry. I wasn't kidding 
about your legs, you know."
    Beth gave him an aloof, arched-eyebrow look, but she said nothing and worked 
hard to conceal a grin as they continued out the doors to the street.
    At the same bar and grill where he'd shot pool with Mandi, they ordered 
burger baskets and beer. Beth was more than a little surprised when he ordered 
two baskets with extra fries.
    "Wow," she said, "And I thought I was hungry."
    "I was going to order three, but I didn't want you to think I was some kind 
of a pig."
    She thought he was joking, of course. Their conversation ranged over the 
events of the previous two days, then she asked questions about Mandi, none of 
which he could answer.
    With some incredulity, Beth said, "For someone who's bunking with her you 
don't know a helluva lot about her."
    "Nope. Guess not."
    "What do you know about her?"
    "Not much. Haven't needed to. Besides, she's just crashing with me to avoid 
being pestered. I'd rather know about you, Beth. How'd you get into this 
business?"
    Shrugging, Beth said, "I was a Delaware cop who never got out of the office. 
I was bored shitless and going nowhere. The NIA said they could use me, so I 
switched over."
    "Seems to me I first saw you in -- what? -- 1993?"
    She nodded. "Right after we busted that colonel at the Watergate in March."
    "You were impersonating an Air Force captain and I said something about 
being a sucker for a woman in uniform. If I recall correctly, you rolled your 
eyes and sighed at me."
    "I'd heard that line thirty times by then."
    Doing his best to look hurt, Cade said, "Hey, it wasn't a line. Put on a 
uniform sometime and try me. I'll fall all over you, ma'am. Putty in your hands, 
and all that."
    As their food arrived, she snickered and said, "Sure, I'll do that someday. 
Pass the salt and pepper."
    They chatted some more as they ate, and when her food was gone, she began 
filching his french fries as they talked. Cade pushed the burgerless basket 
toward her and reached for the second burger.
    "Mind if I order another one?" he asked.
    In some startlement, Beth asked, "You got a tapeworm or something?"
    "Nope. Just hungry tonight for some reason."
    Shrugging, she said, "Go for it."
    After the third burger and fries, Cade felt as if he'd make it through the 
night without quite starving. Beth had occasionally stared at him as he'd put 
away the third basket of food, but she'd only remarked that he might want to see 
a doctor sometime about his appetite.
    It occurred to Cade that he'd made no eliminations of solid or liquid waste 
since he'd nibbled on Mandi. That pretty much had to mean that anything he ate 
or drank was being used fairly completely by the conversion process.
    He wondered if he could take that to mean that any mass would do in a pinch. 
If so, a phone book would do as well as a steak dinner as a midnight snack. He 
put that thought on the shelf as he realized water would do, too, and nobody'd 
miss any amount of water he could possibly drink.
    "Beth," he said, "How come you were free to make me take you to dinner 
tonight?"
    "Make you? I didn't make you... Oh. You want to know why I don't have a 
boyfriend, huh?"
    "Yup. May I speak freely?"
    "Uh... Okay, I guess so."
    Nodding, Cade said, "Okay, then, I'll run with it. Regardless what you may 
think of yourself, most men see you as a fine looking woman..."
    "You've decided that based on your opinion and what Tony said upstairs?"
    "No, and don't run yourself down around me, okay? He was right and you know 
it. Men glance at every woman, but they only really eyeball the best ones. 
You've got great legs and a fine figure and you don't even come close to 
qualifying as plain or ugly. So, unless you're a closet lesbian, why is there no 
man in your life?"
    Before she could answer, he raised a hand and added, "And if you are a 
lesbian, that's something I don't need to know about while we're both working 
for the government."
    Giving him an amused look, Beth asked, "If I were a lesbian, would that 
bother you?"
    Shaking his head, Cade said, "Not even a little bit. A couple of my friends 
back in Florida are lesbians and we get along just fine. They make stuff for my 
online store and use me as an escort now and then."
    Beth blinked at him and asked, "An escort?"
    "Yeah. One works for a company that throws those damned 'one big happy 
family' employee parties. We go as a group and I pretend to be her boyfriend."
    With a chuckle, Beth said, "That must be interesting."
    Shrugging, Cade said, "We usually make an appearance, circulate a bit so she 
can say she attended, and leave unless there's a reason not to. We also babysit 
each others' cats."
    "You have cats?"
    "Yup. Three."
    "I thought men preferred dogs."
    "Not this one. Don't like sports, either, if that's where you're going 
next."
    She nodded and said, "Yeah. I was. No football, huh?"
    "Nope. No team sports. Boring. Remember how you said I could speak freely?"
    Beth's reply sounded rather cautious as she said, "Yes."
    "How freely?"
    Still sounding cautious, she said, "'Freely' means freely."
    Sipping his beer, Cade regarded her for a moment, then said, "I could 
pretend and play games, but it's getting late. I'd very much like to come back 
to your room with you, Beth. I'd very much like to make love with you."
    After a few moments of meeting his gaze, Beth asked, "What about Mandi?"
    "She moved to my room to avoid dealing with too many people after she went 
public."
    Another few moments passed before Beth nodded and quietly asked, "You aren't 
into anything kinky, are you?"
    With a small grin, Cade asked, "Would kissing my way up your legs be kinky? 
Would inhaling the scent of you while I kiss your shoulders be kinky?"
    Beth pinked a bit and bit her lip, then said, "No."
    "Would pleasuring you with my tongue be kinky?"
    Her pink deepened to a near-red, but she said, "No. Of course not."
    "How about..."
    Putting her beer down firmly, Beth said, "I get your point," then she picked 
up her beer again and nearly drained it.
    "Want another beer?" asked Cade. "Want to give things a little more 
thought?"
    "Are you trying to talk me out of it now?"
    Shaking his head, Cade poured some of his beer in her glass and said, "Oh, 
no, ma'am. Definitely not. I just thought another beer might be in order before 
you pounce on me."
    Her eyes got big in startlement.
    "Me pounce on you?"
    Nodding, Cade said, "Yeah. I was kind of hoping you would, you know. It's 
always nice to feel appreciated."
    Beth snickered and sipped her beer. The bartender had seen Cade share his 
beer and looked inquiringly toward their table. Cade nodded. Two fresh beers 
arrived shortly.
    "Another one of these," said Beth, "And I may do more than pounce on you, 
Cade."
    "Suits me, ma'am. Could you wait until after I've licked you senseless, 
though? I'd really enjoy making you..."
    "Cade!" she hissed, glancing at the bartender.
    Sharing her glance, he nodded knowingly and said, "Ah. Yes, of course, 
ma'am. Mustn't embarrass the natives."
    "Screw the natives! We mustn't embarrass me!"
    Leaning forward, she whispered sharply, "And you won't tell anybody, right? 
By God, if you do, I'll..."
    "No need for threats, ma'am. I don't kiss and tell. Or lick and tell. Or..."
    "Cade, dammit!"
    Raising a hand in polite protest, he said, "Yes'm. I'll shut up now. No need 
to get all fuzzed up and rowdy. Yet. I'll try to make it worth your while later, 
though."
    Beth looked at the ceiling and let out a soft, exasperated, "Ah, hell!" then 
grabbed her new beer and finished it.
    "Enough of this," she said, setting the glass firmly on the table. "Let's go 
now."
    Draining his own beer, Cade said, "Yes'm. As you say. By your command, 
milady."
    He stood up and went to pay the bill, then held the door for Beth and 
followed her to the sidewalk. Yup. She had real nice legs and it was going to be 
a true pleasure to...
    "You're doing it again," said Beth, without turning around.
    "What's that, milady?"
    "Staring at my legs."
    "Oh. Yup. Sure was. Just planning my route north."
    That made her turn to face him. "Your what?"
    "My route north. I intend to memorize you, Beth. I'm gonna taste you from 
your ankles up. Hope you don't mind."
    She came to stand a few inches from him and quietly said, "After all this 
talk, you'd better be worth it, mister."
    "Money back guarantee, ma'am. I'll be doing my best down there. And 
everywhere else, too, of course."
    "And you won't tell a soul? Not anybody? Ever?"
    "Nope. This is strictly between you and me."
    Beth held his gaze for a long moment, then nodded and started them walking 
back to the hotel.
    "Okay, then," she said, "I'll go in first and leave the door open for you. 
You'll follow me a few minutes later."
    "Better synchronize our watches, huh?"
    Her glance was narrow. "Just do what I tell you, okay?"
    "Yes'm. You got it. Going into sneaky mode now."
    She said something nasty and slapped his arm.
    "Ow! Okay! Sneaky mode later, then. No pain stuff, lady."
    Beth started giggling, then had to stop and lean on the wall as her giggles 
turned into laughter. A cop car slowed and looked as if it would stop near them, 
but Beth laughed even harder as she shook her head and waved them on.
    The passenger side cop looked at Cade and asked, "Have you people been 
drinkin'? What's so funny?"
    "She just realized something, I think."
    "What?"
    "Well, I'm not exactly sure. It's business related, I think."
    Nodding, the cop waved the driver on as he said, "Uh, huh. Well, it's late, 
so hold the noise down, okay?"
    "Sure. No problem."
    Beth suffered another spate of laughter as the cops drove away. Cade went to 
stand by her and waited for the laughter to abate, thinking she must have been 
strung pretty tight to be so thoroughly amused by so little.
    She levered herself off the wall and began walking again as she caught her 
breath.
    "You okay?" asked Cade.
    "Fine. You were right. I realized something."
    He waited as she took a breath and seemed to collect herself a bit.
    "Cade, were you trying to make me laugh?"
    "Nope. Not really. I was just trying to make you feel a little more 
comfortable about dragging me back to your cave."
    "I'm not dragging you anywhere. You conned me."
    Hand over his heart, Cade said, "Never. Not me. No way. Nuh-uh."
    "Bullshit."
    "If I don't agree with you, will I still get laid, ma'am?"
    "Of course you will. I want laid and you've got the duty."
    "Ah. Well, then, okay. I conned you. Just a little, though."
    "Just enough."
    "Oh. Yes. Of course. Just enough, then. Yes, ma'am."
    She smacked his arm and said, "Stop that."
    "Yes, ma'am."
    "That, too."
    "Yes, ma... Okay. You caught me. Now what?"
    "Now you'd better be the best lay I've ever had, that's all."
    "No problem. I'm very motivated, ma'am. Are you still worried about getting 
caught having a legal good time?"
    Beth stopped just outside the hotel doors and said, "No. Well, not like I 
was. I see no reason to advertise our business, but I also see no reason that I 
can't have you."
    Giving her a small salute, Cade said, "Roger that, milady. We're both adults 
and we're on separate teams."
    "Exactly right."
    "You betcha." Indicating the doors, he asked, "Ready?"
    Leading the way, Beth said, "Ready. Let's do it."
    Pointing at the bar, Cade asked, "Want a another couple of beers for later?"
    Beth looked toward the bar and said, "You get some beer. See if they have 
any white wine coolers."
    "Okay. Why don't you go on up and take a few minutes for yourself before I 
get there? I'll tap on the door when I come in. Good?"
    Nodding, Beth said, "Yeah. Good. Don't be all night," and turned to go. A 
few steps later, she turned and said, "Thanks," without explaining why before 
getting underway again.
    Thanks for the laughs? Thanks for setting her up to get laid? Thanks for 
allowing her some time to herself, or for letting her go on ahead so they 
wouldn't be seen entering her room together? Mix and match the answers?
    Whatever. Didn't matter. The idea was to make Beth happy while making 
himself happy.
    A sense of being watched caused Cade to rub the goosebumps off his arms. 
Someone from one of the teams? As likely as not; sometimes they were ordered to 
follow each other around just to keep skills sharp. Cade drank a beer at the bar 
and stalled ten minutes, then followed Beth upstairs.
    The fourth floor hallway looked clear, but that didn't mean anything. It was 
highly unlikely that Carter hadn't installed some security cams in their floor's 
hallway.
    Cade felt Mandi's presence in his room as he passed it, ambling along until 
he reached Beth's door, which he shouldered open on his way into the tiny 
hallway beyond.
    Closing the door, he tapped on it as he'd said he would and Beth answered, 
"In here, Ed."
    He found her sitting in the chair by the desk, flipping channels until she 
found an old movie. She turned the sound up a bit and turned to face him.
    "Your white wine, milady," he said as he set the bottles on the desk and 
opened one for her. "I'll get you a glass."
    Putting a hand on his arm, she said, "No. Don't bother," and stood up. After 
kissing him soundly, she turned around and said, "Unzip me, please."
    He did so, then helped her slither out of her dress. As she went to hang it 
up, he opened a beer and leaned on the desk to watch her. Eyeing her tall form 
from the ankles up, his eyes met hers and she smiled. Nice. Very nice, indeed.
    "Cade," said Beth with a short laugh, "You look like a kid on Christmas 
morning."
    "That's because you look like an unwrapped present." Going to her, he took 
Beth in his arms and said, "In fact, you look delicious. Mind if I have a taste 
now?"
    Kissing her, he let his fingers trail down the backs of her arms and 
finished the motion with a reach for her bra strap. Beth giggled when he licked 
her shoulder, then nibbled. As her bra came loose, she bit her lip and waited 
for his reaction.
    Inhaling the scent of her hair, he whispered, "Ohhh, yes. You taste great, 
ma'am. You smell great. You look great and you feel great. I'm really going to 
enjoy nibbling on you."
    Stepping back, Cade used a finger to pull the bra free of her and hung it on 
one of the hangers as he leaned to kiss her shoulder again.
    Leading her back to the desk, Cade handed Beth her open wine and openly 
admired her as she took a long sip of it. She started to snicker again and 
choked a little on the wine. Some few drops of it trickled down her chest.
    "Hm," said Cade, "Guess we'd better wash that off, huh?"
    Smilingly nodding, Beth took another sip as Cade stripped off his clothes 
and set them on the desk chair. The hackles on the back of his neck were up and 
a light coating of goose bumps formed on his arms as a response to a strong 
sense of being watched, and not just by Beth.
    As he draped his pants so that nothing would fall out of the pockets, he 
glanced around the room and wondered whether his instincts were being triggered 
by a hidden camera. If so, screw 'em. He'd order eight by ten glossies unless 
Beth had any objections.
    Should he mention anything to Beth? No point. They were both naked. They'd 
been drinking and smooching. If they were being filmed, it was too late to give 
a damn about it.
    Then he realized that the watcher might be Mandi. After all, she'd watched 
him deal with Nassir. And she was watching? Same answer. Too late to matter. He 
looked toward his room as he sipped his beer.
    On general principles, he nodded slightly as an acknowledgement and tipped 
the bottle to her, then sipped again and rubbed his forearms to quell the 
goosebumps. Setting his beer down, he rubbed his neck, as well, then moved to 
accompany Beth to the shower. A few moments later, his sense of being watched 
winked off abruptly.

    Mandi had returned to the room after an hour or so of unsettled boredom 
aloft. She'd heard the door to Beth's room open and had glanced that way through 
the walls. Seeing Beth alone had puzzled her, and she'd scanned the hotel for 
Cade.
    Finding him standing at the bar drinking a beer puzzled her further. Had 
something gone wrong? Mandi glanced toward Beth's room to see if she appeared 
upset at all and saw Beth hurrying about, tidying up the room. A few moments 
later, Beth swilled some mouthwash and checked her face and hair in the bathroom 
mirror.
    Hmm. Not the actions of a despondent woman.
    Looking back down at Cade, Mandi saw the bartender put some bottles in a bag 
and hand the bag to him, then saw Cade head for the elevators.
    Uh, huh.
    As far as Mandi knew, Cade wasn't that fond of booze. Unless she was 
mistaken and he was bringing the drinks to her, he and Beth were going to party.
    A few minutes later, Mandi heard Cade's almost inaudible footsteps 
approaching in the corridor. He wasn't sneaking; the sounds of his striding 
steps were no different than usual.
    She watched him glide past their door and on to Beth's door, then open it 
and enter, after which he used a knuckle to tap softly on the door. Beth 
answered, "In here, Ed."
    The way Beth kissed Cade after he delivered the wine let Mandi know that 
there were definitely no difficulties between them. She watched a few moments 
longer, mostly just to see how Cade would proceed.
    In a rather gentlemanly manner he soon had Beth down to her panties and was 
removing his own clothes by the desk when something about his demeanor changed 
in some barely perceptible manner.
    Cade straightened up, turned slightly to face Mandi's direction and sipped 
his beer, then he nodded slightly and tipped his bottle toward her. Sipping 
again, he rubbed his forearms before rubbing the back of his neck as he set the 
bottle on the desk and walked with Beth to the shower.
    Mandi sat down in her desk chair in openmouthed amazement. Cade knew! He 
actually knew she was watching him! But how? And did he really know, or was he 
just assuming..? But he'd looked right at her. Not toward the bed area or 
anywhere else. Straight at her. Just a lucky guess?
    Somehow Mandi didn't think so. Switching her vision to normal, she lay back 
on the bed to think and fell asleep sometime before Cade let himself into the 
room.
    Although he moved as quietly as ever, Mandi came awake and watched him 
through the darkness. Almost as if he, too, could see in the dark, he went to 
the desk, stripped, and headed for the bathroom, where he didn't turn on the 
light until he'd closed the door.
    Hm. Considerate of him, anyway.
    After a quick shower and the use of his toothbrush, Cade padded across the 
room to the bed, slipped under the sheets, and went to sleep almost as soon as 
his head hit the pillow.

Chapter Twenty-one

    Cade snapped awake Sunday morning for no good reason that he could imagine. 
The phone wasn't ringing, nobody was knocking on his door, and the TV was off.
    He sat up and glanced around the room and saw no Mandi, but her luggage was 
still by the desk. His travel alarm clock -- set not to go off at all -- read 
almost eight o'clock on the nose. Hm. What the hell had wakened him?
    Feeling ravenously hungry, Cade visited the bathroom and drank several 
glasses of water to fill the void. That took the edge off his hunger as he 
cleaned up and dressed, then headed for the restaurant for breakfast.
    As he left his room, he saw Ray Lewis enter the ops room across the hall and 
headed that way to see about some wake-up coffee and a general situation report. 
Tony answered the ops door and let him in, and as Cade entered the room, he saw 
Beth by the coffee pot.
    Beth looked up from stirring her cup and saw him. She paled slightly and bit 
her lip. Aw, hell. Was she having morning-after recriminations or was she just 
worried that he'd say something about last night?
    With a smile, Cade said, "Leave me some of that stuff, lady," as he 
approached. He snagged a cup and filled it, then tossed in a few small ice cubes 
from the nearby ice bucket.
    To the room as a whole, he asked, "Anybody seen Mandi?"
    Tony said that she'd gone to breakfast with John.
    "Breakfast," said Cade, taking a donut from the tray by the coffee pot, 
"Yeah. My next stop." Turning to Beth, he asked, "You had breakfast yet? If you 
aren't on duty this morning, we can snag a free paper at the luggage check-in 
and read the funnies over pancakes."
    Beth seemed to consider the offer, then said, "Sure. I haven't eaten yet, 
either. Give me a minute to check my messages," and headed for her desk.
    Cade parked his rump on the corner of somebody's desk and sipped his coffee 
as he snarfed another donut and waited for her. Beth's hands were trembling a 
little, he noted. Well, he'd reassure her that he wouldn't tell anyone. That was 
about all he could do, really.
    When she stood up again, Beth made a production of searching her purse and 
the top of her desk, then went to Cade and said, "I need to get something from 
my room on the way," before she led the way to the door.
    Cade topped off his coffee and snagged another couple of donuts before 
following her. Both donuts and the coffee were gone before he caught up with her 
a few doors down the corridor. He used his jeans to dust the sugar off his hand 
and followed her into her room.
    As soon as the door had closed, Beth spun to face him and asked in an angry 
tone, "What the hell did you tell Mandi about last night? About us?"
    Shrugging, Cade said, "Nothing. She was already in bed when I got back to 
the room. She was gone when I woke up this morning. We haven't talked at all 
since just before I gave you that 9mm ammo last night."
    Obviously not convinced, Beth said, "When she came into the ops room a while 
ago, she had to wait for John. She chose to do her waiting by my desk, Ed."
    With a chuckle, he said, "Well gee, ma'am, that does sound pretty ominous. 
You were probably the only other woman in the room, Beth, and..."
    "She just sat there and stared at me," Beth interrupted, "Just sat there and 
stared at me for about five full seconds before she gave me one of those fakey 
smiles and said 'Good morning, Beth. Did you sleep well?'"
    Again shrugging, Cade said, "I didn't tell her a damned thing, Beth. I swear 
it."
    As she again studied his face for signs of perjury, Cade asked, "Um... and 
did you? Sleep well, I mean?"
    Beth's eyes narrowed to gunsight slits. She growlingly snapped, "Yes, as a 
matter of fact, I did."
    Grinning, Cade asked, "Was it because you were dead tired or because you had 
a great time?" As she opened her mouth to respond in what looked like a snappy 
manner, Cade raised a finger and prompted, "Honest answer only, please."
    Smoldering a bit, Beth sighed and answered in a rather grudging tone, "Yes. 
I had a good time, Ed. Is that what you want to hear?"
    "Of course that's what I want to hear. Don't you think I was busting my ass 
to please you last night? You sure seemed to think so at the time, ma'am, 
especially when I..."
    "Never mind when," snapped Beth. "Yes, dammit, I had a good time. A great 
time, in fact. Now, what about Mandi?"
    "What about her? She's got no right or reason to say anything about who I 
play with. Or who you play with. Are you sure you're not just having some 
morning-after regrets, Beth? Is that what this is all about? Or are you worried 
I'll brag around the office?"
    "No! I mean... No. No regrets. And you said you wouldn't say anything, 
right?" She stepped forward until she was almost nose-to-nose with Cade and 
repeated insistently, "Right?"
    Cade took Beth in his arms and said, "Beth, I promise. Not a word to anyone. 
And I haven't said anything to Mandi or anyone else," and then he kissed her.
    Beth stiffened for a moment, then gradually responded to his kiss. Cade used 
a finger to sweep a few wisps of her hair out of her face, then let the finger 
continue down behind her ear and along the line of her throat to her exposed 
shoulder.
    Leaning slightly, he kissed her shoulder and trailed his lips up Beth's 
throat to her jaw, then kissed his way back to her lips as he again held her 
close.
    When the kiss ended, he said softly, "You aren't on duty this morning. Let's 
go back to bed. Breakfast can wait. In fact, you can be my breakfast. Would you 
like that, ma'am?"
    Beth's lips were slightly swollen, her face and shoulders were turning 
pinkish, and her pulse was pounding slightly. She looked almost ready to say 
'yes', but still a bit hesitant.
    "Beth," he said, "This job ends today. It could be a long time before we get 
a chance to play again. I really want another taste of you before you go. Do you 
know that feeling?"
    She nodded slowly before she softly replied, "Yes. I know that feeling."
    Kissing her again, Cade asked, "Well? Are you going to let me please you at 
least once more before you escape? Like last night? Can the pancakes maybe wait 
a little while?"
    Snickering softly, Beth smilingly nodded and said, "Yeah. The pancakes can 
wait," and pulled him into a kiss.

    After the third time Cade had helped Beth climb her personal mountain to its 
summit, she lay limp and winded on the bed for some moments, then she drowsily 
asked Cade to get her a glass of water. He kissed lips, then her breast, and 
then her thigh as he slid past her off the bed and stood up.
    Saluting her, he said, "Yes, ma'am. One water coming up," and headed for the 
bathroom, where he quickly drank several glasses himself before taking hers to 
her.
    Beth seemed barely awake enough to drink half the water, then she handed him 
the glass and let her arm fall to the bed as she sighed deeply.
    "I'm gonna take a nap," she said, almost slurring the words. "You?"
    Cade's stomach rumbled at him, prompting him to say, "Can't. I'm starving. 
How about I come back in an hour or so? Think you'll be up to another round by 
then?"
    Giggling softly, Beth nodded and said, "Sure. Maybe by then. Take my 
keycard. If I'm asleep when you get back, just get into bed and snuggle up."
    Leaning to kiss her, Cade said, "A lady with a plan. I like that. Yes'm. 
I'll climb in and snuggle."
    Beth giggled again, pulled the covers up, and mumbled, "I feel so 
incredibly, absolutely used..."
    "Excellent," said Cade, putting his pants on, "That's exactly what I was 
shooting for, milady."
    Laughing softly, Beth adjusted her pillow and said, "It felt like you were 
shooting me. From the inside. We have these rooms all day, Ed. I have to catch a 
nine o'clock flight, so hurry back. We aren't through yet."
    "I'll bring you something from the restaurant."
    Nodding, she said, "Thanks. Doesn't matter what it is. God, I haven't felt 
like this in ages..."
    He kissed her again and trailed his fingers down her blanketed form to her 
knees, picked up the keycard, and buttoned his shirt on the way to the door.
    Cade stepped out of Beth's room feeling as if he hadn't eaten in days. 
Instead of waiting for an elevator, he took the stairs down two flights and 
entered the con suite to see what was on the buffet.
    The black guy who seemed to be in charge of the con suite every year saw him 
coming and waved from behind a serving table as he picked up a large aluminum 
tray that still held half a dozen sliced sandwiches.
    "Hi, guy!" said Cade. "Still wearing red, huh? Don't you know that's an 
unlucky color in Starfleet?"
    "No sweat. Ever notice how they never send the cooks on away teams? Crucial 
bridge personnel, medics, scientists, security types, and even family members 
and practically any-damned-body else who wants to go, but never the cooks."
    Grinningly shaking his hand, Cade said, "Good point, indeed. Seems to me, 
though, that anybody that valuable oughta be wearing gold and have the keys to 
the ship."
    The guy laughed, "Damned right, but it'll never happen."
    Cade reached for a sandwich, but the guy moved the tray away and said, "Nah, 
these have been out there all morning, man. They're stale as hell. I'm supposed 
to pull them."
    "Got any more behind the bar?"
    "Not yet. In an hour or so it'll be time to set out the lunch snackies, 
though. Can you hold on that long?"
    "No," Cade said firmly, reaching for the tray again and getting a grip on 
it. "Stale is fine; I'm starving. I'll bring you the tray in a few minutes. It 
won't leave this room."
    Sounding a bit like Jim Carey, the guy raised his hands clear and said, 
"Well, all righty, then."
    "Fanks," Cade said around some ham and cheese.
    "No problem. I thought they fed you guys. Or paid you enough to afford food, 
anyway."
    Swallowing the last of the first sandwich, Cade said, "Special 
circumstances," and started on the next sandwich.
    Someone reaching for potato chips nudged his arm and the tray tilted 
sharply. Cade righted it quickly enough to keep the sandwiches aboard, but there 
was a loud 'wunk' sort of noise and the black guy's eyes got big as he looked at 
the tray.
    Cade's gaze followed his and he thought, 'Oh, shit,' as he saw that his 
thumb had heavily dented the edge the heavy aluminum tray, squashing the ridge 
around it flat and warping the metal for several inches.
    "Um. Sorry," said Cade.
    He stacked the remaining sandwiches on a napkin and turned the tray over to 
push the damaged area flat, then handed the tray across the table, gathered up 
the sandwiches, and said, "Sorry. Really," and turned to go.
    "Hey," said the black guy, "Wait."
    Turning to face him, Cade indicated the tray and asked, "Would ten bucks 
cover it?"
    "I buy 'em used. Seven would do it, but that's not..." He waited until 
another table-grazer moved away and continued, "How'd you do that? I ran over 
one of these trays with my truck once and didn't much more than scratch it a 
little."
    Setting the sandwiches down, Cade fished ten bucks out of his money clip, 
laid it on the tray, and said, "I've had a real workout this morning. That's why 
I'm so hungry. Thanks again," and headed for the door with the sandwiches, 
detouring to the drink dispenser for a cup of Dr Pepper.
    One of the sandwiches disappeared on the way back to the stairwell. The rest 
vanished only in a few minutes as Cade sat on the third floor landing and 
considered what he'd just done to the heavy aluminum tray with his thumb.
    Damn. Mandi hadn't been exaggerating at all. He considered his time with 
Beth and shuddered. One wrong move... one unrealizing squeeze while he'd been... 
Oh, hell.
    He'd been wrong when he'd said to Mandi that he expected to be dangerous to 
women in a week or so. But she hadn't corrected his estimate. Because they'd 
been arguing, or because she'd figured about the same amount of time?
    Was he ahead of schedule or something? Reaching for the bent-pipe safety 
railing of the stairs, he squeezed. At first nothing happened, so he squeezed a 
little harder. The tubing crumpled in his hand.
    Staring at the damaged pipework, Cade knew he couldn't continue with Beth. 
He'd been extremely lucky not to have hurt her this morning, no damned doubt 
about that.
    Then it struck him that he hadn't mashed any of the sandwiches and he 
remembered Mandi having mentioned the same phenomenon the night before. She'd 
said, 'You didn't squash your burger, did you?' Or something like that.
    Maybe he could continue with Beth. If he was very gentle, very careful... 
Wait one. He was describing all but a very few moments of their time together 
the night before. And this morning had been one long, easygoing, session. No 
hard riding at all, except when she'd been on top.
    "That's it," he softly said aloud to himself. "Slow and easy unless she's on 
top. That ought to work."
    He'd been so preoccupied that he hadn't noticed Mandi's presence descending 
between the stairwells until his last thought had essentially seemed to solve 
his dilemma.
    As he sipped the last of his Dr Pepper, she floated to a stop directly 
behind him and cleared her throat with a grin, obviously expecting Cade to jump 
out of his skin.
    Cade drained the cup and said, "Hi, Mandi," without so much as a flinch.
    Annoyed as hell that she hadn't startled him and determined not to let him 
see her failure, Mandi concealed her irritation as she flitted upward enough to 
clear the handrail, then settled to the steps just below the landing so they'd 
be more or less eye-to-eye.
    Glancing around, she asked, "Is there some reason you're sitting in the 
stairwell?"
    He pointed to the crumbs on the napkin and said, "I've just been having a 
private snack before I head down to breakfast. Care to join me?"
    "I've already eaten, but I guess I could stand another coffee." Grinning, 
she asked, "What was that 'slow and easy unless she's on top' all about, Ed?"
    Stuffing the napkin into the paper cup, Cade stood up and walked downstairs 
past her as he said, "Just a kind of safety lecture about dealing with 
unconverted women."
    Turning to follow him, she asked, "'Dealing' with them, huh? Sounds to me as 
if you plan to be doing more than 'dealing' with them. Anyone in particular?"
    "Could be. I know some unconverted women. Wouldn't know them very long if I 
let myself get clumsy with them."
    Chuckling, Mandi said, "Likely so, but in a few days it will be better if 
you don't play with them at all."
    Glancing back at her, Cade asked, "Why's that?"
    Raising an eyebrow at him, Mandi grinningly said, "Think about it. A normal 
man can squirt about how far? Three feet? Once you're fully converted, you'd 
kill your unconverted lady."
    Cade stopped on the stairs and looked at her. Mandi's face was -- 'dead' 
serious, you could say -- and she made sense.
    To confirm, Cade asked, "You're saying that a week from now, you'll be my 
only sexual option?"
    Mandi's face turned glowering. "Should I slap the hell out of you now, or 
let you explain what you really meant?"
    Shaking his head, Cade said, "Sorry. Poor choice of words. But you know what 
I mean. No unconverted women, right?"
    Not terribly mollified, Mandi answered, "Right."
    After a moment, Cade asked, "How many converted women are there at present?"
    "Two."
    "And where are they?"
    "Las Vegas. One's a cop. The other runs her own business."
    "And there's another woman like you on Earth?"
    "Yes. In California."
    Some moments passed before Cade said, "Nope. I don't buy it," and continued 
down the stairs to the lobby.
    In a sharp tone, Mandi called after him, "Just what exactly don't you buy, 
Cade?"
    Stopping again, Cade said, "In all this time on Earth, you've only converted 
two women? She's converted no women? That's what I don't buy, Mandi. It may be 
true, but I don't believe it at this very moment. Later."
    With that, he opened the lobby door and left the stairwell. Cade wanted to 
eat and haul his ass back up to Beth's room for what might be his last sexual 
romp for a long time, the way things seemed to be going.
    In fact, he did believe what she'd said about soon being too dangerous for 
unconverted women. But he didn't for a moment believe that a woman who admitted 
converting two other women would have any hesitations about converting more if 
they qualified and were needed.
    Mandi had tapped the President for money and a place to train people and 
she'd felt it necessary and justified to convert him without asking how he felt 
about it, so there was a definite need for convertees. It was as simple as that.
    She'd need them in both genders, too, if she were training enough of them to 
justify requesting a place to train them. The sense of total alienation would be 
too much for many of the convertees, otherwise.
    Nope. Either there already were more or there would be more convertees 
reasonably soon, and about half of them would be female unless Mandi planned to 
spend a great deal of her time servicing all her male convertees herself.
    Choosing a booth, Cade told the waiter to bring him one of the lunch 
specials. As the waiter left, Mandi came to stand by the booth.
    "Mind if I join you?"
    "Have a seat. Want me to call the waiter back?"
    Shaking her head as she sat down, Mandi said, "No. I'll order a coffee or 
something when he comes back."
    For long moments, the two of them simply matched gazes across the table, 
then Mandi said, "There are only two in Vegas. There are a few others elsewhere 
around the country."
    When Cade said nothing, Mandi asked, "Since you didn't ask about male 
convertees, I'll..."
    "I don't give a rat's ass about the men," he interrupted, "I want to know 
about the women. Got any in Florida?"
    "No. Georgia. They work with the Center for Disease Control and other 
agencies. In fact, they've been working with another NIA branch this weekend. As 
backups, you could say, in case more happened than I could handle at once. One 
of them was even in the look-alike contest."
    Sipping his water, Cade said, "Fascinating. Did you convert any of them 
without asking first?"
    With a sigh, Mandi said, "NO, and you said 'done is done', as I recall. I'm 
sorry and that's all I can say. I thought someone your age would be..."
    That rankled Cade a bit. "'Someone my age?' Would be what? That someone any 
other age wouldn't be, that is."
    Gazing hard at him across the table, Mandi said, "I'd very much appreciate 
it if you wouldn't interrupt me when I'm speaking, Ed. I thought you'd be 
considerably happier about being chosen for conversion."
    "That's your word for it. 'Near-total alienation' is what I'm calling it for 
the moment."
    The waiter buzzed up to the table and asked Mandi what she'd like. She 
ordered a coffee and the waiter told Cade that his lunch would arrive shortly, 
then he buzzed away again.
    Mandi sat back and said, "You crushed that steel rail in the stairwell. If 
that's an indication of your progress, you'll be able to stop a tank round with 
your bare hands in a week. You'll be bulletproof and no Earthly disease will be 
able to touch you. You'll be stronger and faster than you can possibly imagine 
and you may develop some of my other powers to a degree."
    Pausing, Mandi sipped the water the waiter had brought her and added, "And 
there's one more little thing. Our cells replicate, but they don't degenerate 
with every copy. Do you understand what that means?"
    "Sure. It means I may have time enough to write another few thousand books."
    "You don't seem very impressed with virtual immortality."
    "Of course I am. I'm just not letting it overshadow the fact that you're 
forming teams, which means that something more than you can handle alone is 
headed this way, and if it's bigger than you, it'll be able to squash a 
convertee in a heartbeat."

Chapter Twenty-two

    Tossing her hands up, Mandi softly exclaimed, "Okay. I give up. What the 
hell can I possibly do to make this terrible thing I've done up to you, Ed?"
    "Nothing, really," said Cade. "If something that big is coming, being as 
much like you as possible will probably increase my chances of survival. I just 
wanted you to know how I felt before you pulled the same 'oh, he won't mind' 
trick on someone else."
    The waiter arrived with food as Mandi sat staring at Cade. When the waiter 
finished placing food on the table, Cade told him to bring another lunch 
special. The waiter thought he meant for Mandi and smilingly nodded at her. Cade 
then told him to also pack one to go.
    "To go, sir?"
    "Yup. It's going upstairs with me."
    "Yes, sir. One more to the table and one to go."
    "You got it. Thanks."
    When the waiter had left, Mandi smilingly asked, "Why didn't Beth come down 
to lunch with you?"
    Digging into his food, Cade said, "She needed a nap. Why were you watching 
us last night?"
    Startling imperceptibly, Mandi thought, 'He DID know!' then she said, "When 
you didn't come back to the room, I thought maybe you'd gotten into more 
trouble."
    Around some steak, Cade said, "Uh, huh. Glad I'm wearing boots, ma'am." He 
cut another piece and said, "Got a question. Am I just processing mass into 
energy?"
    "Partly. You're being restructured, which requires quite a bit of both mass 
and energy."
    "So I could probably just drink a lot of water or eat a phone book and it 
wouldn't matter a damn to the process?"
    Mandi snickered and asked, "A phone book?"
    "Bulk. Mass. Something to convert. It doesn't necessarily have to be food, 
right? Just a steady supply of mass."
    "I suppose so. Will you want gravy on your phone book?"
    "Probably wouldn't be a bad idea. You seemed surprised that I squashed that 
rail in the stairwell. Why? Am I ahead of schedule or something?"
    Nodding, she said, "It would seem so. A little, anyway."
    "Why would that be?"
    Mandi shrugged. "Your system is accepting conversion easily and you're 
having sex with Beth."
    "What does sex have to do with it?"
    Filching his tomato slice, she said, "All human bodily functions are closely 
tied to the reproductive system. Stir things up and the process can speed up 
considerably."
    "Speed up only, or also enhance the process? Could I wind up being a bit 
more... 'super'... at the other end?"
    "Yes, you could. Others have, for the same reason."
    With a nod, Cade met her gaze and asked, "Do you want optimum conversion, or 
would plain old average do?"
    "Optimum would be nice, of course."
    Cade sliced off a chunk of meat and ate it, then said, "I think so, too, 
also of course. There's nothing quite like knowing your support people are as 
good as they can possibly be. Beth is good for another few hours, then she'll 
leave for D.C. or I'll become too much for her. Doesn't matter which; that'll be 
the end of it. If we're going to try to optimize me, I'll need someone to take 
her place."
    "Her name is Andrea. I've already talked to her."
    "Why not you?"
    Mandi sighed and said, "Sorry. You're still several days away from being 
able to make love to me, Ed."
    Another chunk of steak later, Cade asked, "So this Andrea -- who's never 
even met me -- is willing to take over for Beth in my bed, huh?"
    "If she likes you. She's very fond of sex. If she doesn't like you enough, 
she'll simply supervise your normal conversion."
    "I'll need supervised? It won't just happen on its own?"
    Sighing again, Mandi said, "Yes, of course it would, but there are ways -- 
that don't involve sex -- to heighten the effect a bit."
    "What ways?"
    "Hard exercise and energy infusion can help."
    "Energy infusion?"
    "Direct transfer from one of us to you. That couldn't happen for another day 
or two, though. It would kill you."
    Filching his other slice of tomato, she said, "Andrea is taking a week off 
to help you through this. John says you have a three-bedroom house."
    "It would be if I threw out two rooms'-full of ceramic molds and computer 
gear."
    After a pause, Mandi said, "Oh."
    Cade chuckled. "Yeah. Oh. The place is a factory, too. But don't worry about 
it. If we don't get along well enough to sleep together, I'll take the couch for 
a week. Think she'd like to go to Disneyworld and some of the other tourist 
traps?"
    Smiling, Mandi canted her head and said, "I really don't know. I do know she 
shoots pool fairly well."
    Returning her smile, Cade said, "Well, that's a plus."
    He'd just put the last bit of steak in his mouth when Mandi said, "Slide 
your plates over here. John's coming."
    Shoving everything to her side of the table, Cade asked, "Why doesn't he 
know about this, Mandi?"
    Giving him a firm look, Mandi said, "He's not in the loop."
    "I've known him for ages. He'd be cool with it."
    "Okay, he probably would be, but you weren't supposed to happen for a while 
yet. Quiet. Here he comes."
    As John walked up to the table, Cade thought, 'Not supposed to happen for a 
while yet? What the hell?'
    "Hi, all," said John, taking a seat beside Mandi. "Good news. They found 
Kahlil this morning. The company is saying this op is finally over."
    More strangeness. John had referred to 'the company', which the NIA most 
definitely wasn't. Only the CIA was referred to as 'the company' by anyone who 
knew the difference, and John definitely knew the difference.
    Cade said nothing and gave John a slightly puzzled look as Mandi agreed that 
it was good news, indeed. John gave Cade the old-days hand sign that meant 
'later' and talked to Mandi as the waiter brought the other steak dinners Cade 
had ordered and asked John if he'd like anything. John ordered coffee.
    'Great,' thought Cade. 'Settle one problem and up pops a new one. Get 
through one puzzle and another one will fall into your lap pretty much 
instantly.'
    He started in on the second dinner as Mandi and John chatted and talked 
about wrapping things up in the ops room. Cade kind of hurried through his steak 
and John asked him why he was in a rush. Pointing at the 'go' bag, Cade told him 
that was for someone upstairs and that he didn't want it to get cold.
    "Would it maybe be for Beth?" asked John.
    "Can't let her starve. She's NIA property."
    "Thought so. Carter says you've been spending a lot of time in her room."
    "Someone was using my room." Meeting John's gaze, Cade cautioned, "Beth 
doesn't know -- or maybe she just doesn't want to know -- that anyone else 
knows, you know? I don't really know why it matters to her, but it does."
    Mandi grinningly crossed her heart and zipped her lips like a schoolgirl 
taking a pledge of silence. John chuckled and nodded as he spoke.
    "No sweat. Like it or not, she knows we've been monitoring the hallways, so 
this has to be a personal preference. I'll mention to Carter to keep it quiet, 
okay?"
    "Thanks. Word'll probably get out sooner or later, but it doesn't have to 
happen today."
    As he finished up his steak, Mandi said, "I'll see you later, Ed. Give me a 
call around seven or drop by the room."
    "Seven. You got it." Cade stood up and picked up the bag and the bill, then 
said, "Later, all. I'll tip the waiter when he makes my change," and headed for 
the register.
    After paying the bill, Cade took the stairs to save time and reached Beth's 
room in moments. He let himself in, put the card on the desk, and went to the 
bed. Beth seemed to be in deep sleep, but as he turned away, she spoke.
    "Hi, there."
    "Hi, yourself, lady. I brought you some food."
    Smiling drowsily up at him, she said, "Such service. Maybe I should keep 
you, Cade. What do you think about that?"
    "I think you'd be disappointed, ma'am. I turn into a plain ol' 
inconsiderate, garden variety man on weekdays and I get downright mean on 
holidays. Hope you like steak for lunch."
    Sitting up, Beth said, "Steak is fine, Ed. I'll bet you don't change at all, 
really. I'll bet you're like this all the time."
    He shrugged. "Maybe so. Doesn't matter. You have to fly back to D.C. tonight 
and I'll be in Florida by tomorrow. Let's just play some more and make the best 
of our time together."
    Tossing the sheet aside, Beth stood up. Cade eyed her nakedness as she 
walked over to him and embraced him for a moment, then kissed him.
    "You're a nice man," she said quietly. "You're good in bed, too. I could do 
a lot worse, I think, if you were up for it."
    Kissing her, Cade said, "Thanks, milady, but you're still too young and 
beautiful to settle for less than you deserve. Try me again in a few years if 
you can manage to stay single."
    With a sardonic chuckle, she said, "Well, hell, I've managed this long, 
haven't I?" and opened the restaurant bag to begin unpacking it on the desk.
    As she sat down to eat, she eyed Cade and asked, "Am I going to be the only 
naked person in this room?"
    Pretending vast surprise, Cade said, "Oh! Yes'm, I'll get right to that. 
Very sorry, ma'am. I was so wrapped up in eyeballing your gorgeous bod that I 
just completely forgot. You know how it is, don't you?"
    Laughing, Beth said, "Yeah, sure. I know how it is," and dug into her food.
    A few bites later she asked, "Hey, Cade. If I'm so gorgeous, how come all 
the other guys don't act like you?"
    "Simple ignorance, ma'am. They don't know how."
    "So how did you become so knowledgeable?"
    "I had a good teacher early in life."
    "Who was she?"
    "One of my teachers in high school."
    Glancing up incredulously, Beth asked, "Really?"
    "Yup. I was sixteen. She was twenty-six and kind of pushy, just like you. I 
learned a lot at that lady's knees."
    Beth nearly choked with laughter. "At her knees...? Uh, yeah, well, I 
suppose... That's where you'd have been..."
    Patting her back, Cade said, "Yup. Most of the time, too, as I prefer to 
recall. Just try to breathe for now, Beth. Talk later."
    Beth managed to eat most of her steak and Cade finished what she couldn't, 
then they spent the rest of the afternoon like newlyweds on a honeymoon.
    At six-forty-five her ride to the airport pulled up at the front doors and 
-- to Cade's surprise -- Beth hugged him and kissed him long and hard.
    Holding her close, Cade whispered, "Somebody might see."
    Snickering, she said, "Screw 'em. There were cameras in the halls, anyway. 
Everybody who doesn't know now will know by tomorrow. I'll deal with it."
    "Would saying 'thank you' sound trite, ma'am?"
    "Not if I say it first. Thanks, Cade."
    Then she made a show of glancing at her watch, making an apologetic face and 
an excuse about long check-in times these days, and hurried into the waiting 
car.
    They waved good-bye as the car rolled down the ramp, then it turned left at 
the street and she was gone. Cade sighed once, then turned to go back upstairs.
    A tall, thirtyish, brunette woman in a sharp, shades-of-green skirt and 
jacket business ensemble asked, "Your wife?"
    Stopping to meet her gaze, Cade said, "No. A friend." After a short pause, 
he added, "A very nice lady."
    The woman had ice-gray eyes like fine gemstones that were nearly on a level 
with Cade's. Her face at first seemed rather plain, or perhaps she simply wore 
no makeup, but her strong character shone through her features like a beacon. A 
very impressive woman.
    Her full lips parted and Cade realized she was speaking again as she said, 
"Are you all right?"
    Shaking off her spell, Cade said, "Uhm. Yes, ma'am. Sorry. You have... 
unique eyes. They're a color I don't see often enough. Very lovely." With a 
grin, he added, "I guess they kind of shorted out my little brain for a few 
seconds. Excuse me, but I have to be somewhere shortly."
    Taking his cell phone out of his pocket as he left her, he dialed Mandi's 
number, even though he'd felt her watching since Beth and he had left her room 
with her luggage.
    Mandi answered, "Hi, Ed. Andrea's here. I've filled her in. Come on up to 
the room."
    "On my way, milady."
    A toddler on a leash managed to get loose and came running Cade's direction 
as his mother tried to call him back. When the kid neared him, Cade's arm 
flashed out and snagged the kid's collar. He constrained the thrashing little 
beast at arm's length as he continued talking to Mandi.
    "Gimme an extra few minutes, ma'am. I have to return something to someone 
down here."
    Laughing, Mandi said, "So I see. Good collar, Officer Ed."
    The woman arrived to collect her child and Cade got underway again. On the 
fourth floor landing, he thought he heard voices and looked up and down the 
stairwell. Nobody either way.
    He turned a bit and listened a little harder. Some guy was trying to arrange 
a rental car. The other voice he heard was apparently that of a rental agent on 
a phone, and the voices seemed to be coming from the other side of the fourth 
floor hallway door.
    No, not the door; to one side of it. Cade stepped that direction and clearly 
heard the agent tell the guy that the kind of car he wanted would have to be 
brought in from the airport.
    The agent's voice was much fainter than the other one, so he probably wasn't 
on a speaker phone. That seemed to mean that Cade was listening to both sides of 
a conversation over a regular phone or a cell phone.
    "Look, I'm in a hurry," said the guy. "I'll head down to the lobby and get a 
cab. You just tell me who I have to see what all I have to do on the way, okay?"
    Cade instantly opened the landing door and stepped into the hallway. The 
door to the room on his left opened and a guy with a suitcase in one hand and a 
cell phone to his ear hurried out of the room and down the hall.
    'Damn,' thought Cade, suddenly far too aware of a myriad of sounds in the 
hall. 'What other changes could he expect?'
    Mandi's idea that he might need supervision made more sense as he tried 
vainly to filter out some of the useless noise around him. Training was what 
he'd need.
    As he approached his room, he stopped walking as he heard Mandi say, "Ed has 
been a bit difficult, Andrea. More than a bit difficult, in fact. I hate to say 
it, but converting him may have been a mistake."
    A familiar woman's voice responded, "Oh, he didn't strike me as being all 
that terrible. You heard what he said about my eyes, didn't you? And the way he 
said it? And he was so polite when he excused himself and moved on. He called me 
'ma'am'. Jerks don't act like that, Mandi."
    "Uh, huh. He'll call you 'milady', too, but don't let it go to your head. 
You know that horse you call a 'hardmouth'? The one who sometimes decides to go 
where he damned well pleases? You may come to think of Cade as a hardmouth, 
too."
    With a snicker, Andrea said, "Well, if I do, I'll be sure to let you know. 
But if he's no worse than what I've seen so far, he'll max out just fine, 'cause 
I'll bang his brains out all week."
    Laughing, Mandi said, "Yeah, sure. More likely he'll tickle yours loose 
first." She took a breath and intoned solemnly, "Be warned," then burst out 
laughing again.
    Laughing with her, Andrea said, "If he's that good, more power to him. 
What's keeping him?"
    'Uh-oh,' thought Cade, getting underway again just as he felt Mandi's gaze 
locate him.
    A few steps later he tapped on the door as he used his keycard and let 
himself into his room.

Chapter Twenty-three

    From long habit, Cade stood somewhat to one side of the doorway as he pushed 
it open with his left hand, then pretended to take a moment to put his keycard 
back in his jacket pocket rather than walk straight into the room.
    The door swung gently open all the way to the wall before he entered the 
room, blocking the door's return swing with his right boot as he glanced around 
and continued his entry with almost no pause.
    Mandi sat on the bed, Andrea sat in the desk chair. A bottle of champagne 
nestled in an ice bucket on the desk and Mandi's bags had been moved nearer the 
door because two blue suitcases had taken their place by the desk. There were no 
other people in the room and both women were staring at him.
    "Well?" asked Mandi, "Are you coming in or not?"
    Andrea chuckled as Cade replied, "Have you ever seen me just waltz right 
into a room, ma'am?"
    Snickering, Mandi asked, "Not even your own room?"
    Cade walked over to Andrea as he said, "I'm old enough to have old habits 
because I earned them the hard way. Your own room is the first place to expect 
an ambush. Especially on birthdays in military service. 'Surprise!', and all 
that."
    Mandi snickered again, but her glance went to Andrea as if to confirm 
something.
    As Andrea stood up to take his hand, he met her gaze for a long moment, and 
said, "And you are definitely a surprise. Hi. I'm Ed, and I hope to Goddess 
you're Andrea, ma'am."
    Her smile continued, but she asked, "Goddess?"
    "I'm a pagan. We mostly prefer goddesses if we bother with deities at all."
    Andrea glanced at Mandi, who nodded and grinned as she said, "That probably 
wasn't a line, Andrea. He has a pagan website where he sells stoneware and 
pewter jewelry."
    Returning her gaze to Cade, Andrea said, "I'll have to see it sometime. Yes. 
I'm Andrea. Are you at all disappointed?"
    Shaking his head, Cade said, "Not even a little. Are you?"
    Grinning, Andrea said, "Mandi and I have been talking about you. I've 
decided that youth may not be everything. Could I have my hand back now?"
    Pretending to notice that he was still holding her hand, Cade released it 
with a calculated 'Oh, I kinda forgot' shrug.
    Laughing, Mandi said, "I think you've got his attention, Andrea. Let's have 
some champagne. Cade?"
    Reaching to open the champagne, Cade said, "I'm on it."
    The wire on the bottleneck broke when he twisted. Cade reached for his 
beltknife, flicked it open, wedged it under the wire, and twisted. The wire 
broke and he pried it off, then slapped his knife shut and slipped it back into 
its belt pouch.
    In the mirror above the desk he noticed both Mandi and Andrea staring at 
him. Oh, well. Had Mandi somehow missed the fact that he'd been wearing a belt 
knife all this time?
    He decided that was unlikely and finished opening the champagne, then poured 
some into each of the three plastic cups Andrea silently lined up on the desk. 
In truth, he detested champagne, but he'd only ever met one woman who felt the 
same way about it.
    Handing glasses to the ladies, he picked up his own and said, "Mandi, you're 
the honcho here, so you make the toast."
    Andrea snickered and Mandi laughed, "Gee, thanks. Okay. Let's keep it 
simple. Here's to all good things. May there always be many and may they never 
end."
    After clunking their cups together and sipping, Mandi sat back down on the 
bed and said, "I talked to John this afternoon; he now knows you've been 
converted." Noddingly indicating Andrea, she said, "Andrea's your instructor. 
That's all he knows and that's all he needs to know."
    She sipped again and said, "We have time for dinner before I leave for 
Vegas. Any suggestions about where to eat?"
    "Yes," said Andrea. "A buffet steakhouse just opened near my neighborhood. 
Since Ed's got a convertee appetite, we may as well go there."
    "Works for me," said Cade. "Andrea, what do you do?"
    "As in work? I'm a research scientist with the CDC."
    "That sounds a lot more important than selling jewelry on the net and 
writing science fiction. Would you rather I call to make arrangements for my 
cats and stay up here with you this week? It wouldn't be a problem."
    Shaking her head, she said, "No way. I haven't had a whole week away from 
that place in over a year. You're stuck with me, Ed. You have cats?"
    "Three. You like cats?"
    She nodded. "Oh, sure. I'd have one if I were home more."
    Turning to Mandi, she said, "I think I like this guy already. He has cats." 
Returning her gaze to Cade, she asked, "How do you feel about horses?"
    "Had one until I was fifteen. Didn't use a saddle most of the time. He 
especially liked bubblegum and mulberry leaves."
    Andrea's grin widened. "Yeah, we'll get along fine, Mandi."
    A quick knocking at the door made Cade put his drink down and go answer it. 
Cody Barnes from the ops room entered the room to stand by Mandi's luggage.
    "Ma'am," he said, "John sent me for your luggage."
    "It's all right there, Cody. Thanks."
    "Oh, no problem, ma'am. I'll have it UPS'd tomorrow."
    He grabbed the bags and headed for the door. Cade let him out and came back 
to lean against the desk.
    When he didn't ask, Mandi said, "UPS is easier. Safer for the stuff in them, 
too."
    Nodding, Cade said, "Figured that."
    She parted a finger from her cup to indicate Cade's cup and asked, "You 
don't like champagne?"
    "Nah. I'm more of a beer person. Or Dr Pepper. Or gin and bitter lemon."
    Andrea's snort almost startled him.
    When he looked at her, she said, "I just don't believe this, that's all. Gin 
and bitter lemon? Me, too. I didn't think anyone else drank those."
    "Hm," said Cade. "Horses, cats, gin and bitter lemon, and gorgeous eyes. 
That's a damned good score so far. Will you be very surprised if I propose to 
you later, ma'am?"
    "No, probably not. Will you be very surprised if I accept?"
    Cocking his head, Cade said, "Oh, yeah. I'm pretty sure I would be. You 
can't look that delicious and not be married if married is what you want to be."
    "Maybe I'm just waiting for Mr. Right."
    Shaking his head, Cade said, "Nope. Doesn't seem to fit. Can't say exactly 
why, but I don't think that's the answer."
    Mandi laughed and asked, "Did I tell you he seems to be fairly smart, too?"
    "Yes, indeed you did. Notice how he mixed that compliment with undeniable 
logic before he stated an intuition?"
    Standing up, Mandi said, "Sure did. If nobody's going to drink any more 
champagne, I think it's dinnertime."
    Andrea and Cade agreed and they trooped out of the room and down the hall to 
the elevator, which was moving with a bit more alacrity since the convention 
crowd had begun thinning.
    Cade had expected Andrea to produce a car and simply drive them to the 
restaurant she'd mentioned, so it surprised him a bit when Mandi poked the 
button for the top floor.
    During the ride up, he considered a few things. Mandi had likely spent some 
time discussing him with Andrea. Call it a briefing of sorts. She'd known about 
his cats and his preference for gin and bitter lemon was in his records.
    Horses were another matter; he couldn't remember having mentioned his 
childhood horse to Mandi, but John knew about Cloud and knew Cade had owned part 
of a riding stable in Germany back in the seventies; after all, the agency had 
used the place as a meeting point dozens of times.
    Andrea was nearly six feet tall and had striking eyes. John might also have 
mentioned Giselle, who'd had similar features and a place in Cade's heart, and 
how Cade had considered leaving the agency when she'd been killed during an 
arrest that the system had refused to prosecute for diplomatic reasons.
    Or maybe he was just being a bit paranoid. Could be she truly just happened 
to be a tall goddess with ice-gray eyes who liked cats, horses, and the same 
booze as Cade. He wondered what the other convertee in Atlanta looked like and 
whether Andrea had 'volunteered' or been 'chosen' to coach him.
    On the other hand, the conversion was underway, like it or not, and he'd 
been issued a goddess. Cade glanced at Andrea and decided that things could most 
definitely be worse.
    From the top floor they took the stairs to the roof and Mandi retrieved her 
flattened can from its hideaway under the eaves. After she put it in place to 
keep the door from locking, she turned to Andrea and Cade and put her hands on 
her hips.
    In a dead serious tone, Mandi said, "I'm afraid it's time to choose, Ed."
    A trick? A trap? For what reason? No point in trying to escape, in any case.
    "Could you be just a bit more specific?" he asked.
    Noddingly indicating Andrea, Mandi said, "You have to choose which of us 
will carry you."
    Hm. He hadn't known that Andrea could fly. Cool. Maybe that meant that 
flight was one of the powers he'd have later.
    "You mean you aren't going to fight over me?"
    Andrea snorted and groaned softly, "Oh, yeah, right."
    Cade glanced at her and said, "Hey, it was just a thought."
    Shrugging, he told Mandi, "Whoever wants to haul me may do so. I know better 
than to choose between goddesses. Need a coin to toss?"
    "Oh, never mind," said Mandi, and she wrapped her arms around Cade and 
lifted them into the evening sky.
    After two minutes of flying eastward they landed among some trees near a 
very new-looking restaurant. It was a bit crowded, as is normal for new places, 
but Andrea opined that the crowd would act in their favor because nobody'd 
notice the number of times Cade visited the serving lines.
    Almost two hours later Cade felt pretty much full for the first time in two 
days. Andrea had been right, for the most part. Only one of the waitresses had 
noticed that Cade seemed to be packing away inordinate amounts of food, and 
while she watched with a certain amount of amazement, she apparently said 
nothing about it.
    On the way back to the hotel, Andrea suddenly dropped away from them like a 
stone falling toward the ground and Cade almost lost the dinner he'd spent all 
that time consuming when Mandi followed her in the same manner. Looking down, he 
saw where Andrea was going.
    A tanker truck had maneuvered to refill a local gas station's underground 
tanks and a yellow pickup truck in the alley behind the station was heading 
straight for the truck at about fifty miles per hour. As they neared the ground, 
they could see the driver slumped on the steering wheel.
    As Andrea flew to deal with the pickup, Mandi landed to set Cade down and 
flew to join Andrea. Everything seemed well in hand, but an unanticipated wild 
card in the form of a blue Ford sedan entered the parking lot behind the tanker 
truck.
    The driver couldn't take his eyes off the two flying women and didn't have 
sense enough to stop the car. The Ford hit a light pole and one of the wires 
above snapped with a sound like a rifle shot, then swung down and touched the 
concrete, where the current made it dance crazily around the car.
    When Cade saw the woman on the passenger side open her door, he ran toward 
the car yelling for her to stay inside it. She stared at him dazedly for a 
moment, noticed that the man beside her was bleeding, unconscious, and slumped 
between the steering wheel and the driver's door, and freaked out.
    The power line was slapping itself frantically around the car as the woman 
screamed, opened the door wider, and got out of the car, but she couldn't run. 
Her gashed and bloody left leg gave out and she tried to crawl, but chances were 
just too good that the power line would hit her.
    Cade saw a stave from a broken pallet and grabbed it on the way to the car. 
It was one of the spine boards; hard wood with half a dozen slats still stuck to 
it.
    He almost dove over the front of the car and managed to bat the power line 
aside from the woman twice as she continued crawling, unaware that he was there.
    Then the power line slapped the side of the car and rebounded so quickly 
that Cade had no chance to swing at it. He could only brace the stave crossways 
in front of the oncoming power line and hope things would go well.
    The heavy line smashed through the wooden stave and hit Cade's chest like a 
baseball bat, knocking him flat and slapping him twice more across the chest and 
legs.
    With each smashing slap, the line sent massive amounts of electricity 
through Cade to the ground. He was barely conscious enough to see Mandi grab the 
cable and wrestle with it to prevent it from slamming him again, then he passed 
out.
    Someone was patting his face and calling his name. He opened his eyes to see 
Mandi kneeling beside him. Behind her he saw the power line knotted around 
around the broken pole.
    "Hi," he said. "Thanks. It was gonna get me again."
    "Everything's okay now. How do you feel?"
    Cade gave that some thought, then flatly said, "Ow."
    Chuckling, Mandi asked, "Can you move?"
    "Damned if I know. Gimme a minute and I'll find out."
    Although his arms and legs were still jangling from the electricity, they 
shakily lifted and moved a bit on command.
    "Guess so," he said, trying to sit up.
    That didn't work the first time, but he was able to roll over and lever 
himself swayingly upright in front of her.
    "I've been better, but I think I'll survive."
    "Great," said Mandi, "We need to get moving," and without ceremony she 
picked him up and launched into the sky some distance before he heard Andrea 
ask, "How is he?"
    "Just barely alive, ma'am," said Cade. "Nice of you to ask, though."
    Mandi snorted a short laugh as Andrea came into view and peered down at 
Cade.
    "Did anybody get a good look at us?" she asked Mandi.
    "I don't think so," said Mandi. "The pickup driver was dead, the car driver 
was unconscious, and the girl was halfway across the parking lot by the time I 
secured the power lines. Nobody came near the car before I lifted with Cade."
    "Sneaky angels," said Cade. "I don't know why, exactly, but I like that 
concept."
    "You said you were a pagan," said Andrea. "Do pagans believe in angels?"
    "Angels. Goddesses. Same things, different labels."
    When Mandi set him down on the roof, she didn't let go of him immediately, 
which was just as well. The electricity had apparently scrambled his circuits a 
little and Cade had to try twice to get his legs to function properly.
    "Damn," he said. "How much juice do those lines carry?"
    Andrea said, "No idea, but it's enough to power everything for blocks in a 
commercial zone. We were kind of surprised to find you still breathing, Ed."
    As Mandi slapped dust and dirt off his clothes, Cade said, "So was I. Maybe 
the lines grounded out as they hit me. Maybe I didn't get a full dose?"
    "No," said Mandi. "I saw the end of that cable hit you twice. It didn't 
touch the ground either time."
    Shrugging with a bit less grace than usual, Cade said, "Well, then, I guess 
we don't have an answer. Let's head for the room. I could use a coffee."
    Andrea said, "Actually, so could I, I think."
    'I could use a coffee,' Mandi repeated Cade's words in her mind as they 
headed downstairs. That was exactly what he'd said to Carter after dealing with 
Nassir, and he'd said it in exactly the same tone.
    She checked his heartbeat and respiration and found them ranging about 
normal, even as he descended the stairs to the top floor. To Cade, the incident 
was completely over, just as he'd completely closed the Nassir matter with those 
words.
    Were those words his... with a mental shrug, she inserted the word 'mantra'. 
Were they some sort of self-developed ritual or key phrase for closing the door 
on an incident?
    Cade offered to make the ladies some of his instant coffee as they entered 
his room, but Mandi opted for another glass of champagne and Andrea said she'd 
see what was in the fridge.
    "Ed," she added as he took his cup and his jar of instant to the sink, "I'm 
a research scientist, not an M.D., but I'd like to check you over for damage."
    Shrugging, Cade said, "Thanks, but if I have anything more than a few big 
bruises, it'll be there later. Right now I just want to sit down with a coffee 
and try to relax."
    Mandi read his pulse and respiration again and nearly laughed aloud. If he 
became any more relaxed, he'd be asleep. Cade saw her grinning at him in the 
mirror above the sink and she gave him an innocent look, to which he responded 
with a mildly puzzled look as he turned on the hot water.
    She checked her watch, swore softly, and looked at the alarm clock on the 
desk.

Chapter Twenty-four

    "What's the matter, Mandi?" asked Andrea.
    "Oh, I think my watch has been fried," said Mandi. "Its screen is blank."
    "Open it," said Cade. "If the battery isn't swollen, it may just need to be 
taken out and put back in to reboot the watch."
    "Would that really work?" asked Andrea.
    Tapping his own watch, Cade said, "It might. It does when a computer power 
supply's field blanks my watch."
    Mandi fussed with the watch for a few seconds, then said, "There's a notch 
on the back, but I can't get my fingernails under the edge."
    Cade stirred the instant coffee as he walked toward her, then he put the 
coffee on the desk, reached for her watch, and looked at the back. Flicking his 
knife open, he used the tip to pry up the back of the watch and tickle the 
battery out of its holder, then he slid the battery back into place and checked 
the front.
    Showing it to Mandi, he said, "There you go, ma'am. You've got numbers 
again," then he handed her the watch and its back and said, "I'm afraid to 
squeeze it back on. You do it," and slapped his knife shut to return it to its 
belt sheath.
    "Thanks," said Mandi. "I never would have thought of that. I thought the 
battery was dead."
    "May I see that knife?" asked Andrea.
    Cade handed it to her closed. She took it and looked it over, then -- 
holding it rather gingerly, he thought -- unfolded the blade until it locked 
open with a loud 'whack' that seemed to startle her a little.
    She looked up and asked, "Why didn't it sound like that when you opened it?"
    "I was holding it like a tool. You're holding it like a delicate antique. 
Things make more noise in a light grip."
    Mandi snickered as Andrea studied Cade as if wondering if she were being 
teased, then her eyes fell back to the knife. She still held it rather gingerly 
as she studied the brass bolsters, the wood between them, and short serrated 
region on the stainless blade.
    "It looks as if you must have put those serrations on the blade yourself. 
Why?"
    "They're better for cutting rope and thick stuff and I can use the last two 
notches to strip insulation off wires."
    She glanced up again and said, "They make the knife look mean. Nasty."
    Leaning on the desk, Cade sipped coffee and said, "Only if you're viewing it 
strictly as a weapon. Do you feel that way about serrated kitchen knives, too?"
    Andrea shook her head. "No. I guess I don't. How long have you been carrying 
a knife?"
    "Since I worked on a ranch when I was a kid. This knife or one much like it. 
Back then oil came in cans and beer cans didn't have pull-tabs. I had to be able 
to dig things out from under horseshoes, pound wire staples back into fence 
posts, and cut rope and leather. Got a wild dog with it once when he came at me 
by the barn, and I got to where I could throw it and nail rats in the feed bin."
    Making an 'eeewww' face, Andrea handed the open knife back to him as Mandi 
laughed and Andrea asked, "I trust you clean it really well now and then?"
    Nodding with a grin, Cade said, "Yup, sure do," and put the knife away.
    Mandi was poking buttons on the watch, setting the time and date. She looked 
up at the alarm clock, then pushed a button a few more times.
    "Done," she pronounced. "Only time will tell if it'll still tell time. I 
need to get moving, people. Cade, I'll turn you over to Andrea now and drop in 
on you next weekend if I can't find time during the week. Andrea, he's all yours 
if you're sure."
    'Sure?' thought Cade. He'd thought it was a done deal.
    "I wasn't absolutely sure before," said Andrea. "I'm sure enough now, I 
think. Enough so to deal with him for a week, anyway. Besides, if I have to, I 
can always dump him back on you and come back to Atlanta."
    With a short laugh, Mandi said, "Oh, no. He's yours. I have to get an 
antique missile base ready to receive guests."
    She stood up and held out her arms. Andrea got to her feet and Cade did 
likewise as she went to Mandi and hugged her.
    "What?" asked Mandi, looking at Cade. "I don't get a hug from you, too?"
    Going over to her, Cade said, "I just wasn't sure you'd want one from me. 
I've been a bit difficult about things."
    After she hugged him, Mandi held him at arm's length and met his eyes for a 
moment before speaking.
    "Ed, I was worried about having made a mistake by converting you right up 
until you grabbed a stick and tried to save that woman. You kill people a little 
too easily to suit me, but you're just as quick to put yourself in harm's way 
for them. We'll work something out, I think."
    Pulling him close, Mandi kissed him, then released him and turned into a 
blur for a moment. The blur became mostly red and white before she solidified 
wearing her uniform.
    "You two stay put," she said with a grin. "I can find my own way out," then 
she blurred to the door, opened and closed it in a split second, and was gone.
    "It still amazes me how she does that," said Andrea.
    "Yeah, she's quick," said Cade.
    As he picked up his coffee and moved to sit on the bed, bolts of agony 
coursed through his shins and thighs. When he leaned to rub them, more agony 
shot through his chest. He froze for a moment to let the sensations pass.
    Moving to stand in front of him, Andrea said, "I saw that. I'm not asking 
you now, Ed. I'm telling you. I want to see how badly you were hurt."
    Cade looked up into her eyes and got momentarily lost in them, as before. 
She reached for his shirt buttons and he leaned to set his coffee on the night 
table, then stood up and started undressing.
    "I think I'm probably just bruised a bit," he said, opening his shirt.
    Andrea gave him a mildly exasperated look and said, "As if you'd know," then 
sucked in her breath as she saw his chest.
    Her reaction made Cade turn to see himself in the mirror and he saw the 
bruising that covered nearly all of his chest.
    "Well, damn," he muttered. "It got me good, didn't it?"
    "Mandi said it hit your legs, too," said Andrea. "Off with the pants, too. 
Do you know what electricity does to muscle tissue? It forms a cone of damage 
below the skin and..."
    "Yes'm," said Cade. "I know. I was a medic once."
    He toed off his boots and unbuckled his pants, then let them drop and 
stepped out of them. Andrea studied the livid bruisings on his legs, reaching to 
touch his thigh.
    Cade asked, "Um... Will you be getting naked, too, anytime soon, do you 
think?"
    With a small smile, Andrea said, "I want to check you out first. Does that 
hurt?"
    "No, but it probably won't hurt for a while, anyway. I expect to really 
start feeling them later tonight or tomorrow, when I'm on the road back to 
Florida and don't have anything else to think about."
    Andrea's gaze narrowed slightly. "You drove here?"
    "Yup. Thought I might need my car and I don't want to go through the 
anti-terror hoops and barrels at airports."
    She seemed to consider matters -- particularly the matter in the middle of 
Cade that was stiffly pointing at her by that time -- for a few moments, then 
she said, "We could stay here another night or two. I'd rather not take you home 
with me because the neighbors... well, I'd just rather not take a man home with 
me."
    Shrugging, Cade said, "Yeah, here's good. Or I could drive halfway back and 
get a motel room, then finish the drive Tuesday. That will get the car and me 
home and still give us plenty of time to work on enhancing my conversion."
    "Why use euphemisms?" Andrea asked irritatedly.
    Cade stopped in mid sip and looked at her as he said, "I didn't. Isn't 
enhancing my conversion the reason she called you in on this? You don't know me 
from Adam, so..."
    "Yes," snapped Andrea. "Sure. You're right. That's why she called me." 
Striding to the desk chair and sitting down, she continued, "But it isn't the 
only reason I'm here now."
    She leaned to reach in the fridge and took out a soft drink, opened it, and 
eyed Cade as she sipped for a moment before speaking again.
    "You see, Cade, I like having sex. I mean, I really like it. Finding ways to 
get enough of it is a problem, because none of the converted men are near enough 
to just drop by when I'm horny and unconverted men are a waste of time. My women 
friends do more for me than unconverted men."
    "Ah..." said Cade with a nod. "Okay. Gotcha."
    "No, not yet, you don't. When Mandi told me that you'd -- achieved 
conversion -- and all on your own merits, as it were -- I was instantly 
interested; interested enough to take a week off and take over supervising your 
conversion for that reason alone. Then I met you and you gave me reasons to like 
you immediately. That doesn't happen all that often, either."
    "Um. Andrea, I still don't quite understand what happened in that shower. 
How did I get converted? I mean, I realize it had to be from nibbling on Mandi, 
but... then what? How?"
    "She didn't tell you?"
    "I'm asking, aren't I?"
    Grinning, Andrea sipped her drink and simply gazed at Cade for some moments, 
then asked, "You really brought her off all by yourself? No... 'help'... from 
her?"
    Tiring of the delay in receiving a useful answer as well as being the only 
naked person in the room, Cade said, "Yeah. All by myself. It's Standard 
Operating Procedure, ma'am; get 'em all wet and wound up and then lick 'em 'till 
they holler 'stop, please stop, I've had enough'."
    For a moment Andrea's face was somewhat stern, then her small smile became a 
small grin and she snickered. The snicker became a giggle, then an outright 
laugh.
    "I'll bet that last part can take a while sometimes."
    "Yeah," said Cade. He shrugged. "Some women never seem to wind down. Can't 
tell you how many times I've damned near sprained my tongue trying to get to a 
woman's very last one."
    Laughing again, Andrea said, "Tenacity. I like that."
    "Great. If you aren't going to tell me what happened or at least get as 
naked as I am any time soon, I think I'll head for a hot shower."
    "A shower might help those bruises. I'm getting to the answer, Ed."
    "So what happened to me?"
    "You triggered the release of a retrovirus. All women like Mandi have a 
small special gland that produces the stuff."
    "Converted women, too?"
    "Yes. We develop the same gland."
    "So when I nibble you off I'll get another dose. What then?"
    Shaking her head, Andrea said, "Nothing then. You've already been... dosed, 
as you called it."
    "Then why will having sex make the conversion better?"
    "Energy, Ed. Sex seems to help a convertee soak up energy and makes the 
process better somehow. A convertee who just sits on his ass during the first 
week will end up with maybe half the ability of one who screws his way -- or her 
way, of course -- through that crucial first week."
    Cade decided that he'd waited long enough for her to join him in nakedness 
and said, "Thanks for the info." He thumbed toward the bathroom and added, "See 
you in a while, unless you want to come get wet with me."
    Setting her drink can on the desk, Andrea smilingly said, "Sounds good. I'll 
be right there," and took off her jacket to hang it on the chair. Her skirt came 
next, then her blouse, then her half-slip and stockings, then her earrings and 
watch.
    "You women sure do wear a lot of stuff," said Cade.

    Mandi stood on the roof and watched Andrea poke Cade's bruises as she asked 
if her activity hurt.
    'They seem to be getting along fairly well,' she thought.
    Leaving them to their own devices, she lifted upward at barely subsonic 
speed until she reached fifty thousand feet, then she poured on the coal.
    A scant few minutes later she backed her speed down to subsonic again for 
her arrival in Las Vegas and had a good look around the city as she landed.
    'Well, nothing seems to be missing or broken,' she thought as she landed on 
the roof of a friend's office building and changed into the dress she'd been 
wearing in Atlanta.
    A woman without a purse doesn't look out of place in an office building. 
People tend to assume she works there and is just out of her office for a few 
minutes.
    Mandi strode to the elevators, rode it five floors down to Lew "Jackie" 
Jackson's office, and waved as she entered.
    "Mandi!" said Jackie. "You're back!" then he muttered, "Not to mention your 
front..."
    Grinning as she sighed at the remark, Mandi said, "I heard that. Been 
watching old Groucho Marx reruns again?"
    "Are there any other kind? The guy hasn't been on TV for quite a while, 
y'know. How was Atlanta?"
    Reaching into the fridge, she said, "It's still there."
    "All because of you, according to WNN."
    "Oh, there were a few others involved."
    "They didn't show anyone else hauling cars into the sky. Hey, some guy 
called me about setting up a Mandi Steele look alike contest. Was that your 
idea?"
    "No, but it worked in Atlanta. You'll meet the guy who thought it up in a 
week or two. He's busy converting, and I'm going to call him out here to help 
with fixing up our new digs."
    "Converting, huh?" He shook his head. "Shoulda known. Let you run off to 
Atlanta and you meet some young cutie and..."
    Sighing again, Mandi said flatly, "He's fifty-three, Jackie."
    Shrugging, Jackie continued, "Okay, then, some old cutie. How many is this 
one? Six?"
    "Only five. Don't try to make me sound easy, you putz." She sipped her drink 
and said, "Anyway, if he doesn't develop flight, I'll fly him out here and we'll 
get things started."
    Indicating the 'in' basket on his desk, she asked, "Any messages for me in 
that pile?"
    "Oh, all of 'em. Of course. Nobody ever calls for me."
    "You poor thing. But if I recall correctly, they aren't supposed to call for 
you."
    "Still... It'd be nice, just once in a while, y'know?"
    Parking her butt on the edge of the desk, Mandi began pawing through the 
pile of pink 'While You Were Out' slips and said, "Pooor Baaaby. Being my 
secretary isn't enough for you anymore, huh? Don't I pay you enough?"
    The phone rang and he answered it, then held it out to her as he said, "John 
again. I'll see you later, Mandi. It's closing time and I'm shooting league 
tonight."
    Nodding, she said, "Thanks, Jackie. Have a good night."
    Grabbing his coat as he headed for the door, he grinningly said, "Always 
do."
    Perching the phone on her shoulder as she riffled through the messages, 
Mandi said, "Hi, John."
    "Hi, Mandi. Alan's in charge of the Mandi contests now. You'll be hearing 
from him soon."
    "Already have, John. Thanks."
    "You talked to Cade?"
    "I did, and he's in Andrea's hands until the conversion is finished."
    "That woman can handle him, Mandi. Cade's a sucker for eyes like hers."
    "I saw how you looked at her, John." She snickered and added, "Sucker."
    Laughing, John said, "Yeah, all right, she got me, too. Any hitches or 
glitches?"
    "A few, but I think they'll work out. Unless you need him for something, I'm 
going to bring him out here to work on the base in a couple of weeks."
    "You know us. We don't always know if we'll need somebody 'till we need him. 
Or her. Thanks again. Oh, and I covered your butt about those melted video 
tapes. The report now says a machine malfunctioned and overheated."
    "You didn't have to do that, John. Those tapes were a message to some 
people."
    "Oh, your message got through, Mandi. I just fixed the official report so 
there couldn't be any official flak later. Is there anything else?"
    "You called me, John. That's my line."
    "Ah, so it is. Well, there's nothing at this end of things. Keep me posted 
about Cade, will you?"
    "Will do."
    "Thanks, Mandi. Later. Bye."
    Before she could say 'you're welcome', he'd disconnected.
    Mandi tossed the handful of messages back in the basket and left the office 
to return to the roof. A quick change later she was in uniform and lifting into 
the sky again for a cruise around the city before going home for the evening.
    At the intersection of Las Vegas Boulevard and Lake Mead Road she dropped 
out of the sky to push a stalled truck to the side of the road and half an hour 
later she helped a Cessna land in one piece when the pilot passed out.
    When nothing else seemed to require her attention by one in the morning, 
Mandi headed home to see if a certain someone she was rather fond of had 
finished tweaking her website.

-- End, "An Encounter in Atlanta" --

Other titles by Ed Howdershelt

SCIENCE FICTION
"3rd World Products, Inc., Book 1"
"3rd World Products, Inc., Book 2"
"3rd World Products, Inc., Book 3"
"3rd World Products, Inc., Book 4"
"3rd World Products, Inc., Book 5"
"3rd World Products, Inc., Book 6"
"An Encounter in Atlanta"
"Assignment: ATLANTA"
"Bitten and Smitten"(Vampires!)
"Hunt Club"(Vampires!)
"In Service to a Goddess, Book 1"
"In Service to a Goddess, Book 2"
"In Service to a Goddess, Book 3"
"In Service to a Goddess, Book 4"
"STARDANCER"

FICTION-EROTICA-ROMANCE
"ANNE"
"Dragonfly Run"
"Field Decision"
"KIM"
"MINDY"

COMING SOON:
"ANSEN"
"Crystal River Witch"