REPORT
                                  OF THE
                     SEVERAL WORKS CONNECTED WITH THE
                       DRAINING, PAVING & LIGHTING
                                   THE
                PARISH OF SAINT MARY ABBOTTS, KENSINGTON,
                                  1856.






                          BY JAMES BROADBRIDGE,
                                Surveyor.





          PRINTED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE VESTRY OF KENSINGTON.



  BY W. BRICKHILL, STEAM MACHINE PRINTER, KENSINGTON AND WALWORTH ROADS.



                                  1857.




METROPOLIS LOCAL MANAGEMENT ACT,
18 & 19 _Vic._, _Cap._ 120.




GENTLEMEN,

IN laying before you a Statement, or Annual Report, of the various
matters in my department, and works executed under my supervision, I
would be allowed to state, that the parish of Kensington having been
regulated since 1851, by the Kensington Improvement Act, passed in that
year, has not been so substantially benefitted by the present Act, as
have many other of the metropolitan parishes.

During the four to five years the said Act was in operation, a vast
number of improvements were effected, such as repairing footways, which
were in a bad and dilapidated condition, and paving others which were not
then paved.  A total sum in this item was expended to the amount of £9024
5s. 9d.

The sanitary state of the Parish was greatly improved by the properly
scavengering and repairing roads, which had been neglected for many
years.  A large amount of material was used, and I am happy to state,
that during the term before mentioned, I was enabled to put these Roads
into a good trafficable condition.

The Act consolidated the various Lighting Districts then existing under
the 3rd & 4th Will. 4, Cap. 90, and enabled the Commissioners to supply
between two to three hundred additional lamps, and so better regulate and
diffuse the lighting over the whole parish.

Many new streets were paved and repaired by the owners, and others made
up under the 27th section, all of which were taken to by the
Commissioners.



Under the provisions of the present Act, the whole of the management of
the sewerage and drainage of the parish (the main lines excepted),
together with certain regulations as to buildings, have been imposed upon
the vestry; and I now endeavour, as briefly as possible, to describe the
general manner by which this parish is drained, and to give an epitome of
the general works done since the passing of the said Act.



THE SEWERAGE OF THIS PARISH IS RECEIVED INTO FOUR MAIN LINES; viz.: the
Counter Creek, the Church-street Sewer, the Queen-street Sewer, and
Smith-street Sewer; of these, the Counter Creek is of the most
importance, as it to a great extent serves to receive the various minor
sewers.  This sewer enters two portions of the parish, one division at
its northern, and the other at its eastern side.  At the extreme northern
boundary, at Kensal Green, it has three distinct branches, western,
central and eastern, flowing south and westerly, having two branches on
the east and one on the west.

The branch on the west is an open stream, passes as a brick sewer under
the Canal and the Great Western Railway, where it again appears as an
open ditch, and continues along on the verge of the Parish, there it
crosses into the Latimer Road out of the Parish Boundaries,—at this point
it is a brick sewer.

The central branch commences at the front of the Kensal Green Cemetery,
proceeds as a Brick Sewer under the Canal and Railway, when it appears as
an open ditch running southerly to the Walmer Road.  The eastern branch
enters this parish from Kensal New Town at the Canal Bridge as a brick
sewer, then ceases as a covered sewer, and proceeds as an open ditch,
with brick invert to its junction with the central branch,—from this
point the central and eastern branches combine as one stream to the
Bramley Road, and continue as a brick sewer, 6 ft. by 4 ft., at the west
side of St. James’ Square, Norlands: here the western branch returns from
Hammersmith parish, and forms junction with the above and central line,
and continues as one sewer, 6 ft. by 4ft., along St. Ann’s Road, across
Royal Crescent, under the Uxbridge Road, along by the western side of
Addison Road, across the Western Road, continuing along Warwick Road,
receiving at Pembroke Road the eastern branch, continuing into and across
the Old Brompton Road, along the east side of Brompton Cemetery to the
limits of the parish in the Fulham Road.



The eastern division of the Counter Creek enters the parish from
Paddington at the north end of Palace Gardens, there passes into St.
Margaret’s, Westminster, and again returns into Kensington at the
Kensington Road, by the North end of Young Street, and proceeds
south-westerly through Kensington Square, east side, along south end to
the Workhouse, continuing to and along Pembroke Road, to its junction
with the principal line in the Warwick Road.



Into the western branch of the Counter Creek are carried by various
drains the surface drainage of the meadow land, extending from Kensal
Green to the boundaries of the parish—east and west, up to the Lancaster
Road; at this point commence the sewers which have been constructed for
the drainage of the neighbourhood of Notting Hill, Norlands, and
Westbourne Grove, all of which have their outlets into the Counter Creek,
passing over the Uxbridge Road.  North of Kensington Road, east and west,
the drainage is to the Counters Creek.  On the south side of the
Kensington Road including all such portions of Kensington New Town, on
the west side of Victoria Road, extending to the Pembroke Road, the
outlet of the sewers is also into the Counters Creek.



The area of the parish extending south from its northern boundaries at
Kensal Green, east and west to the Western Road, and from thence all the
southern and western portion, including Kensington New Town are drained
into the Counters Creek.  This portion of the parish includes the highest
and lowest land, being 126 ft. at the south of Notting Hill Square, and
17ft. at St. Mark’s Road—ordnance datum.



THE CHURCH STREET SEWER, commences in the Gloucester Road, opposite
Canning Place, continues along the Gloucester Road, receiving the
Drainage from Victoria Grove, Gore Road, and adjacent Streets, proceeds
by and past Hereford Square to the termination of the Gloucester Road,
into the Old Brompton Road, turns eastward, receives the Sewers from
Gloucester Grove East and West, continues southerly down Selwood Lane
unto the limits of the parish in the Fulham Road.



This Sewer is carried through a portion of the parish, the land of which
has been till recently under culture as Market Gardens.  The newly-formed
roads here of the Royal Exhibition Commissioners Mr. Jackson and others
have given an impulse to building in this locality to which this Sewer
will be an important outlet for the drainage.



THE QUEEN STREET SEWER, commences on the east side of the Gloucester
Road, Kensington, proceeds southerly in an irregular form, through the
land belonging to the Royal Exhibition Commissioners—forms a junction
with a branch from Park Lane, continues in an irregular and uneven course
into Cromwell Lane, and then westerly into the Old Brompton Road, thence
south easterly down Pelham Road, into Pelham Place, where it receives the
drainage from Alfred Place West, Thurloe Square, and South Street—from
Pelham Place it is directed westerly into Pelham Crescent, and thence
westward along Fulham Road, receiving at Sydney Place, the partial
drainage of Onslow Square, and then it proceeds to its outlet from the
parish by Sydney Street.



THE SMITH STREET SEWER, commences at the eastern limit of Brompton Road,
proceeds westward along the Brompton Road into the Fulham Road, and
passes from the parish at Keppell Street.  This Sewer is the outlet for
the adjacent Sewers on the North side of the Brompton Road; and of Grove
Place, Michael’s Grove, and Brompton Crescent, on the South Side.



A portion of the Kensington branch of the Counter Creek sewer, taking the
drainage from Notting-hill, east of the Turnpike-gate, Uxbridge, and
other streets and places in that locality, passing through a part of St.
Margaret’s, Westminster, to Young-street, receiving the drainage from
several streets and places in the town proper, and also the whole of the
drainage from Kensington New-town.  At the Workhouse the sewer is 5 ft. 6
in. by 3 ft. 6 in., and here terminates; the sewage matter, being
conveyed from thence along the Pembroke-road, by an 18 in. glazed
stoneware pipe, which also receives the drainage of the Pembroke-road and
Hutchinson’s estate.

In consequence of the difference in size of sewers, as here marked out,
the basements of a vast number of houses in the New-town and other places
have been flooded from time to time, and serious inconveniences have in
consequence arisen to the ratepayers in those localities.

It is worthy of remark, that after representations made by the vestry to
the General Board in August last, they directed a sewer of equal size,
viz.: 5ft. 6in. by 3ft. 6in. to be substituted for the 18 in. stoneware
pipe, which will effectually remedy the very serious evil pointed out.



The total lengths of sewers in this parish, under the immediate direction
of the vestry, are as follows:

Brick Sewers       27¾ miles.
Pipe Sewers        7⅙ ,,
Open Sewers        1¾ ,,

The open sewers are not in closely populated districts, but chiefly in
that portion of the parish at present under cultivation as grass land or
market gardens.

The VESTRY have lowered the crown of sewer in New-street, to a length of
320-ft., have reconstructed a length of 42-ft. 2-in., by 2-ft. 6-in.
sewer in Charles’-mews; have laid down a length of 115 ft. of pipe sewer
in King-street; and 140-ft. of 12-in. pipe in Sloane-place, in lieu of
the old dilapidated brick drain.  These Sewers have enabled owners to
drain their several premises.



There have been 45 new Gulleys constructed for carrying off the surface
water from the roads, and many altered, repaired, and cleaned.  Air
shafts have been formed for carrying off the poisonous Gases from the
Sewers; and many Gulleys have been trapped.



The flushers have cleansed about 8 miles 3482-ft. of brick sewer,
removing deposits therein, varying from 6 inches to 2-ft. which deposits
have been carted away, and have also flushed with water from time to time
pipe sewers to an extent of 7½ miles.



232 Applications have been made and granted to drain houses and premises
both voluntarily and in consequence of notices issued by the vestry, and
in all cases where cesspools have existed they have been filled in or
broken up.

The following Sewers have been constructed by owners of property, in the
various under-mentioned places, viz.:

670-ft. 2-ft. barrel sewer in the Campden-hill Road.
1400-ft. 4-ft. 6-in. by 2-ft. 6-in., 1 brick—with brick invert, in
cement, in the Holland-road.
450-ft. 3-ft. by 2-ft. 6-in., ½ brick—in cement, with stoneware invert
in Addison-crescent.
59-ft. 12-in. pipe in Johnson-street, Notting-hill.
400-ft. 3-ft. by 2-ft., in an intended road, Old Brompton.
35-ft. 3-ft. 9-in. by 2-ft. 6-in., High-street, Notting-hill.
3000-ft. 3-ft. by 2-ft., on the Phillimore Estate.
And 216-ft. of 12-in. pipe, in Brompton-road, opposite York-cottages,
has also been completed.



These works have been done under the personal inspection of Mr. Perkins,
your Clerk of the Works, appointed for that purpose.




REPAIRS OF THE STREETS & THOROUGHFARES, & PAVING WORKS GENERALLY.


I have to call the special attention of the vestry to the subject of the
repairs of the Roads in this parish, which involves a very large annual
outlay, and requires the greatest amount of care, both as regards the
quantity and quality of the materials, and also as to the proper season
for their application.

My past experience has taught me that this portion of my duty requires
constant supervision and attention.  I have computed the length of the
roads in this parish, exclusive of the turnpike roads, at about 53 miles,
and I am happy to state, allowing for the new roads adopted by the
parish, the last annual outlay has been less in comparison to the
previous years, this may be accounted for by the fact of the roads having
become much harder, from regular scavengering, and the better form which
allows the surface water to drain into the channels.



The roads may be classed in three sections, viz.: those of great traffic,
which are repaired with granite; those having less traffic, which are
repaired with flints; and bye roads and squares of little traffic, which
are repaired with gravel.  I have considered opinions from time to time
expressed by the Paving Committee as to the more general use of granite
for the roads, and shall lose no opportunity in carrying out their wishes
wherever I can judiciously do so.

I have found many beneficial results, and much saving from the constant
employment of a mason ordered by the Paving Committee to be added to the
staff of workmen, for the purpose of attending to the repairs of the
trenches opened or disturbed by the different gas and water companies.



The following is a list of some of the principal footways, which have
been paved, viz.: St. John’s Church, Aubrey Chapel, Gloucester Road, Edge
Terrace, and Vine Place, Ladbroke Road, Old Norland Road, Kensington
Church, Yard, Queen’s Road, Northern, The Mall, St. Peter’s Church, High
Row, Silver Street, Portobello Terrace, Clifton Terrace, together with
several other minor works, also the laying crossings, pitching cab
stands, and general repairs.



The following are streets which have been paved and repaired at the
expense of the owners, and adopted by the Vestry: Kensington Park Road
North, Ovington Square, Ovington Terrace, St. John’s Terrace, Portland
Road North, Clarendon Place, Elgin Crescent, Dartmoor Street, Stanley
Gardens, Stanley Crescent, Lansdown Road North, Chepstow Villas West,
Ladbroke Terrace, Ladbroke Road, Westbourne Grove West.




LIGHTING.


The Parish is at present supplied with Gas under contracts from the
Western Gas Company, the Imperial Gas Company, and the London Gas
Company.

Great attention has been given by the Committee, in the fixing new lamps,
and including the old ones there are now upwards of 1,068 fairly and
judiciously spread over the whole parish.  Great facility has been
afforded by numbering the lamps, both in the communication with the Gas
Companies, and also as to their general repairs, and lighting.



I have endeavoured, in this my first Annual Report to draw your attention
to the works generally under your control, and executed under the powers
vested in you by the “Metropolis Local Management Act,” and I take this
opportunity of tendering my thanks for the support I have ever received
from you in the discharge of the important duties intrusted to me.

                                               I have the honor to remain,
                                                                Gentlemen,
                                                    Your obedient Servant,
                                                        JAMES BROADBRIDGE,
                                                                 SURVEYOR.