The letters were written in 1764, according to Lequinio (_Feuilles
posthumes_), who had his information from Naigeon, to Marguerite,
Marchioness de Vermandois in answer to a very touching and pitiful
letter from that lady who was in great trouble over religion. Her young
husband was a great friend of the Holbachs, but having had a strict
Catholic bringing up she was shocked at their infidelity and warned by
her confessor to keep away from them. "Yet in their home she saw all
the domestic virtues exemplified and beheld that sweet and unchangeable
affection for which the d'Holbachs were eminently distinguished among
their acquaintances and which was remarkable for its striking contrast
with the courtly and Christian habits of the day. Her natural good
sense and love for her friends struggled with her monastic education and
reverence for the priests. The conflict rendered her miserable and she
returned to her country seat to brood over it. In this state of mind she
at length wrote to the Baron and laid open her situation requesting him
to comfort, console, and enlighten her." [47:7] His letters accomplished
the desired effect and he later published them in the hope that they
would do as much for others. They were carefully revised before they
were sent to the press. All the purely personal passages were omitted
and others added to hide the identity of the persons concerned. Letters
of the sort to religious ladies were common at this time. Fréret's were
preventive, Holbach's curative, but appear to be rather strong dose
for a _dévote_. Other examples are Voltaire's _Epître à Uranie_ and
Diderot's _Entretien d'un Philosophe avec la Maréchale de..._.

6. In 1769 Holbach published two short treatises on the doctrine of
eternal punishment which claimed to be translations from English, but
the originals are not to be found. The titles are _De l'intolérance
convaincue de crime et de folie_ as it is sometimes given, and--

7. _L'Enfer détruit ou Examen raisonné du Dogme de l'Eternité des
Peines_. Londres, Amsterdam, 1769. This letter was translated into
English under the title _Hell Destroyed!_ "Now first translated from the
French of d'Alembert without any mutilations," London 1823, which led
Mr. J. Hibbert to say, "I know not why English publishers attribute this
awfully sounding work to the cautious, not to say timid d'Alembert. It
was followed by Whitefoot's _'Torments of Hell,'_ now first translated
from the French." [47:8]


Of Holbach's remaining works on religion two, _Histoire critique de
Jésus Christ_ and _Tableau des Saints_, date from 1770 when he began to
publish his more philosophical works.

8. The _Histoire critique de Jésus Christ ou Analyse raisonnée des
Evangiles_ was published without name of place or date. It was preceded
by Voltaire's _Epître à Uranie_. It is an extremely careful but
unsympathetic analysis of the Gospel accounts, emphasizing all the
inconsistencies and interpreting them with a literalness that they
can ill sustain. From this rationalistic view-point Holbach found the
Gospels a tissue of absurdities and contradictions. His method, however,
would not be followed by the critique of today.

9. The _Tableau des Saints_ is a still more severe criticism of the
heroes of Christendom. Holbach's proposition is "La raison ne connaît
qu'une mesure pour juger et les hommes et les choses, c'est l'utilité
réelle et permanente, qui en résulte pour notre espèce," (p. 111).
Judged by this standard, the saints with their eyes fixed on another
world have fallen far short. "Ils se flattèrent de mériter le ciel en
se rendant parfaitement inutile à la terre" (p. xviii). Holbach much
prefers the heroes of classical antiquity. The book is violent but
learned throughout, and deals not only with the Jewish patriarchs from
Moses on but with the church fathers and Christian Princes down to the
contemporary defenders of the faith. After a rather one-sided account
of the most dreary characters and events in Christian history,
Holbach concludes: "Tel fut, tel est, et tel sera toujours l'esprit du
Christianisme: il est aisé de sentir qu'il est incompatible avec les
principes les plus évidens de la morale et de la saine politique" (p.
208).

10. In _Recueil philosophique_, Londres (Amsterdam), 1770, edited by
Naigeon. Réflexions sur les craintes de la Mort. Problème important--La
Religion est-elle nécessaire à la morale et utile à la Politique. Par M.
Mirabaud.

11. _Essai sur les préjugés, ou De l'influence des opinions sur les
moeurs et sur le bonheur des Hommes_. Londres (Amsterdam), 1770, under
name of Dumarsais. The book pretended to be an elaboration of Dumarsais'
essay on the _Philosophe_ published in the _Nouvelles libertés de
penser_, 1750.

The special interest connected with it was the refutation Frederick the
Great published under the title _Examen de l'Essai sur les préjugés_,
Londres, Nourse, 1770 (16 mo). The King of Prussia writing from the
point of view of a practical, enlightened despot, took special exception
to Holbach's remarks on government. "Il l'outrage avec autant de
grossièreté que d'indécence, il force le gouvernement de prendre fait et
cause avec l'église pour s'opposer à l'ennemi commun. Mais, quand avec
un acharnement violent et les traits de la plus âcre satire, il calomnie
son Roi et le gouvernement de son pays, on le prend pour un frénétique
echappé de ses chaînes, et livré aux transports les plus violens de
sa rage. Quoi, Monsieur le philosophe, protecteur des moeurs et de
la vertu, ignorez vous qu'un bon citoyen doit respecter la forme de
gouvernement sous laquelle il vit, ignorez vous qu'il ne convient point
à un particulier d'insulter les Puissances..." (p. 28).

"Non content d'insulter à toutes les têtes couronnés de l'Europe, notre
philosophe s'amuse, en passant, à répandre du ridicule sur les ouvrages
de Hugo Grotius. J'oserais croire qu'il n'en sera pas cru sur sa
parole, et que le _Droit de la guerre et de la paix_ ira plus loin à la
postérité que _l'Essai sur les préjugés_" (p. 39).

Holbach in his anti-militaristic enthusiasm had used the words
"bourreaux mercenaires"; "epithète élégante," continues Frederick,
"dont il honore les guerriers. Mais souffrions nous qu'un cerveau brûlé
insulte au plus noble emploi de la Societé?" (p.49). He goes on to
defend war in good old-fashioned terms. "Vous déclamez contre la guerre,
elle est funeste en elle-même; mais c'est un mal comme ces autres
fléaux du ciel qu'il faut supposer nécessaires dans l'arrangement de cet
univers parce qu'ils arrivent périodiquement et qu'aucun siècle n'a pu
jusqu'à présent d'en avoir été exempt. J'ai prouvé que de tout temps
l'erreur a dominé dans ce monde; et comme une chose aussi constante peut
être envisagée comme une loi général de la nature, j'en conclus que ce
qui a été toujours sera toujours le même" (p. 19).

Frederick sent his little refutation to Voltaire for his compliments
which were forthcoming. A few days after Voltaire wrote to d'Alembert:

Le roi de Prusse vous a envoyé, sans doute, son petit écrit contre un
livre imprimé cette année, intitulé _Essai sur les préjugés_, ce roi a
aussi les siens, qu'il faut lui pardonner; on n'est pas roi pour rien.
Mais je voudrais savoir quel est l'auteur de cet _Essai_ contre lequel
sa majesté prussienne s'amuse à écrire un peu durement. Serait-il de
Diderot? serait-il de Damilaville? serait-il d'Helvetius? peut-être ne
le connaissez-vous point, je le crois imprimé en Hollande (Vol. LXVI, p.
304).

D'Alembert answered:

Oui, le roi de Prusse m'a envoyé son écrit contre _l'Essai sur les
préjugés_. Je ne suis point étonné que ce prince n'ait pas goûté
l'ouvrage; je l'ai lu depuis cette réfutation et il m'a paru bien long,
bien monotone et trop amer. Il me semble que ce qu'il y de bon dans ce
livre aurait pu et dû être noyé dans moins de pages et je vois que vous
en avez porté à peu près le même jugement (Vol. LXVI, p. 324).

In spite of these unfavorable judgments the _Essai_ was reprinted
as late as 1886 by the Bibliotheque Nationale in its _Collection des
meilleurs auteurs anciens et modernes_, still attributed to Dumarsais
with the account of his life by "le citoyen Daube" which graced the
edition of the year I. (1792)

12. Early in 1770 appeared Holbach's most famous book, the _Système de
la Nature_, the only book that is connected with his name in the minds
of most historians and philosophers. It seems wiser, however, to deal
with this work in a chapter apart and continue the account of his later
publications.

13. The next of which was _Le bon-sens, ou idées naturelles opposées
aux idées surnaturelles. Par l'Auteur du Système de la Nature_, Londres
(Amsterdam), 1772. This work has gone through twenty-five editions or
more and has been translated into English, German, Italian and Spanish.
As early as 1791 it began to be published under the name of the curé
Jean Meslier d'Etrépigny, made so famous by Voltaire's publication of
what was supposed to be his last will and testament in which on his
death bed he abjured and cursed Christianity. Some editions contain in
the preface Letters by Voltaire and his sketch of Jean Meslier. The
last reprint was by De Laurence, Scott & Co., Chicago, 1910. The book
is nothing more or less than the _Système de la Nature_, in a greatly
reduced and more readable form.

Voltaire, to whom it was attributed by some, said to d'Alembert, "Il y
a plus que du bon sens dans ce livre, il est terrible. S'il sort de la
boutique du _Système de la Nature_, l'auteur s'est bien perfectionné."
D'Alembert answered: "Je pense comme vous sur le _Bon-sens_ qui me
paraît un bien plus terrible livre que le _Système de la Nature_." These
remarks were inscribed by Thomas Jefferson on the title page of his copy
of _Bon-sens_. The book has gone through several editions in the United
States and was sold at a popular price. The German translation was
published in Baltimore on the basis of a copy found in a second-hand
book store in New Orleans. The most serious work written against it is
a long and carefully written treatise against materialism by an Italian
monk, Gardini, entitled _L'anima umana e sue proprietà dedotte da
soli principi de ragione, dal P. lettore D. Antonmaria Gardini, monaco
camaldalese, contro i materialisti e specialmente contro l'opera
intitulata, le Bon-Sens, ou Idées Naturelles opposées aux idées
Surnaturelles. In Padova MDCCLXXXI Nella stamperia del Seminario.
Appresso Giovanni Manfré, Con Licenza de Superiori e Privilegio_ (8vo,
p. xx + 284).

14. In 1773 Holbach published his _Recherches sur les Miracles_, a much
more sober work than his previous writings on religion. In this book he
raises the well known difficulties with belief in miracles and brings
a great deal of real learning and logic to bear on the question. The
entire work is in a reasonable and philosophic spirit. His conclusion
is that "une vraie religion doit avoir au défaut de bonnes raisons, des
preuves sensibles, capables de faire impression sur tout ceux qui la
cherchent de bonne foi. Ce ne sont pas les miracles." The same year he
published two serious but somewhat tiresome works on politics.

15. _La politique naturelle_.

16. _Système social_ in which he attempts to reduce government to the
naturalistic principles which were the basis of his entire philosophy.
The first is also attributed to Malesherbes. There is a long and keen
criticism of the _Système Social_ by Mme. d'Epinay in a letter to Abbé
Galiani Jan. 12, 1773 (Gal. _Corresp._, Vol. II, p. 167).

But the most interesting reaction upon it was that of the Abbé Richard
who criticized it from point of view of the divine right of kings in
his long and tiresome work entitled _La Défense de la religion, de
la morale, de la vertu, de la politique et de la société, dans la
réfutation des ouvrages qui ont pour titre, l'un Système Social etc.
Vautre La Politique Naturelle par le R. P. Ch. L. Richard, Professeur de
Théologie_, etc., Paris, Moulard, 1775.

In a preface of forty-seven pages the fears of the conservative old
Abbé are well expressed. The aim of these modern philosophers who are
poisoning public opinion by their writings is to "démolir avec l'antique
édifice de la religion chrétienne, celui des moeurs, de la vertu, de la
saine politique etc. rompre tous les canaux de communication entre la
terre et le ciel, bannir, exterminer du monde le Dieu qui le tira du
néant, y introduire l'impiété la plus complète, la licence la plus
consomnée, l'anarchie la plus entière, la confusion la plus horrible."

17. Holbach's next work, _Ethocratie ou Gouvernement fondé sur la
Morale_, Amsterdam, Rey, 1776, is interesting mainly for its unfortunate
dedication and peroration, inscribed to Louis XVI, who was hailed
therein as a long expected Messiah.

18. Holbach's last works dealt exclusively with morals. They are _La
morale universelle ou les devoirs de l'homme fondés sur la nature_,
Amsterdam, 1771, and

19. A posthumous work, _Elements de la Morale universelle, ou catechisme
de la nature_, Paris, 1790. This is a beautiful little book. It
is simple and clear to the last degree. There have been several
translations in Spanish for the purposes of elementary education
in morals in the public schools. It was composed in 1765. Holbach's
attitude towards morals is indicated by his _Avertissement_--"La morale
est une science dont les principes sont susceptibles d'une démonstration
aussi claire et aussi rigoureuse que ceux du calcul et de la géometrie."




CHAPTER III. THE SYSTÈME DE LA NATURE.


Early in 1770 appeared the famous _Système de la Nature, ou Des Loix du
Monde Physique et du Monde Morale, Par M. Mirabaud, Secrétaire Perpétuel
et l'un des Quarante de l'Académie Française_, Londres (Amsterdam),
1770. This work has gone through over thirty editions in France, Spain,
Germany, England and the United States. No book of a philosophic or
scientific character has ever caused such a sensation at the time of its
publication, excepting perhaps Darwin's _Origin of Species_, the thesis
of which is more than hinted at by Holbach. There were several editions
in 1770. A very few copies contain a _Discours préliminaire de l'Auteur_
of sixteen pages which Naigeon had printed separately in London. The
_Abrégé du Code de la Nature_, which ends the book was also published
separately and is sometimes attributed to Diderot, 8vo, 16 pp. [54:1]

There is also a book entitled _Le vrai sens du Système de la Nature_,
1774, attributed to Helvetius, a very clear, concise epitome largely in
Holbach's own short and telling sentences, and much more effective than
the original because of its brevity. Holbach himself reproduced the
_Système de la Nature_ in a shortened form in _Bon-sens_, 1772, and
Payrard plagiarized it freely in _De la Nature et de ses Lois_, Paris,
1773. The book has been attributed to Diderot, Helvetius, Robinet,
Damilaville and others. Naigeon is certain that it is entirely by
Holbach, although it is generally held that Diderot had a hand in it.
It was published under the name of Mirabaud to obviate persecution. The
manuscript, it was alleged, had been found among his papers as a sort
of "testament" or philosophical legacy to posterity. This work may be
called the bible of scientific materialism and dogmatic atheism. Nothing
before or since has ever approached it in its open and unequivocal
insistence on points of view commonly held, if at all, with reluctance
and reserve. It is impossible in a study of this length to deal fully
with the attacks and refutations that were published immediately. We may
mention first the condemnation of the book by the _Parlement de
Paris_, August 18, 1770, to be burned by the public hangman along
with Voltaire's _Dieu et les Hommes_, and Holbach's _Discours sur les
Miracles_, _La Contagion sacrée_ and _le Christianisme dévoilé_, which
had already been condemned on September 24, 1769. [55:2]

The _Réquisitoire_ of Seguier, _avocat général_, on the occasion of the
condemnation of the _Système de la Nature_ was so weak and ridiculous
that the _Parlement de Paris_ refused to sanction its publication, and
it was printed by the express order of the King. As Grimm observed,
it seemed designed solely to acquaint the ignorant with this dangerous
work, without opposing any of its propositions. One would look in vain
for a better example of the conservatism of the legal profession. [55:3]

Le poison des nouveautés profanes ne peut corrompre la sainte gravité
des moeurs qui caractérise les vrais Magistrats: tout peut changer
autour d'eux, _ils restent immuables avec la loi_ (page 496).

N'est-ce pas ce fatal abus de la liberté de penser, qui a enfanté cette
multitude de sectes, d'opinions, de partis, et cet esprit d'indépendance
dont d'autres nations ont éprouvé les sinstres révolutions. Le même
abus produira en France des effets peut-être plus funestes. La liberté
indéfinie trouveroit, dans la caractère de la nation, dans son activité,
dans son amour pour la nouveauté, un moyen de plus pour préparer les
plus affreuses révolutions (p. 498).

The most interesting private attacks on the _Système de la Nature_
came from two somewhat unexpected quarters, from Ferney and Sans Souci.
Voltaire, as usual, was not wholly consistent in his opinions of it, as
is revealed in his countless letters on the subject. Grimm attributed
his hostility to jealousy, and the fear that the _Système de la Nature_
might "renverse le rituel de Ferney et que le patriarcat ne s'en aille
au diable avec lui." [56:4] George Leroy went so far as to write a book
entitled _Réflexions sur la jalousie, pour servir de commentaire aux
derniers ouvrages de M. de Voltaire_, 1772. Frederick II naturally felt
bound to defend the kings who, as Voltaire said, were no better treated
than God in the _Système de la Nature_. [56:5]

Voltaire's correspondence during this period is so interesting that it
seems worth while to quote at length, especially from his letters to
Fredrick the Great. In May 1770, shortly after the publication of the
_Système de la Nature_ Voltaire wrote to M. Vernes: [56:6] "On a tant
dit de sottises sur la nature que je ne lis plus aucun de ces livres
là." But by July he had read it and wrote to Grimm: [56:7] "Si l'ouvrage
eut été plus serré il aurait fait un effet terrible, mais tel qu'il est
il en a fait beaucoup. Il est bien plus éloquent que Spinoza... J'ai
une grande curiosité de savoir ce qu'on en pense à Paris." In writing
to d'Alembert about this time he seemed to have a fairly favorable
impression of the book. "Il m'a paru qu'il y avait des longueurs, des
répétitions et quelques inconséquences, mais il y a trop de bon pour
qu'on n'éclate avec fureur contre ce livre. Si on garde le silence, ce
sera une preuve du prodigieux progrès que la tolérance fait tous les
jours." [57:8] But there was little likelihood that philosophers or
theologians would keep silent about this scandalous book. Before the end
of the month Voltaire was writing to d'Alembert about his own and
the king of Prussia's refutations of it, and the same day wrote to
Frederick: "Il me semble que vos remarques doivent être imprimées; ce
sont des leçons pour le genre humain. Vous soutenez d'un bras la cause
de Dieu et vous écrasez de l'autre la superstition." [57:9] Later
Voltaire confessed to Frederick that he also had undertaken to rebuke
the author of the Système de la Nature. "Ainsi Dieu a pour lui les deux
hommes les moins superstitieux de l'Europe, ce que devrait lui plaire
beaucoup" (p. 390).

Frederick, however, hesitated to make his refutation public, and wrote
to Voltaire: "Lorsque j'eus achevé mon ouvrage contre l'athéisme, je
crus ma réfutation très orthodoxe, je la relus, et je la trouvai bien
éloignée de l'être. Il y a des endroits qui ne saurait paraître sans
effaroucher les timides et scandaliser les dévots. Un petit mot qui
m'est échappé sur l'éternité du monde me ferait lapider dans votre
patrie, si j'y étais né particulier, et que je l'eusse fait imprimer.
Je sens que je n'ai point du tout ni l'âme ni le style théologique."
[57:10] Voltaire, in his "petite drôlerie en faveur de la Divinité"
(as he called his work) and in his letters, could not find terms harsh
enough in which to condemn the _Système de la Nature_. He called it "un
chaos, un grand mal moral, un ouvrage de ténèbres, un péché contre la
nature, un système de la folie et de l'ignorance," and wrote to Delisle
de Sales: "Je ne vois pas que rien ait plus avili notre siècle que
cette énorme sottise." [58:11] Voltaire seemed to grow more bitter about
Holbach's book as time went on. His letters and various works abound in
references to it, and it is difficult to determine his motives. He was
accused, as has been suggested, by Holbach's circle "de caresser les
gens en place, et d'abandonner ceux qui n'y sont plus." [58:12] M.
Avenel believed that he suspected Holbach himself of making these
accusations. Voltaire's letter to the Duc de Richelieu, Nov. 1, 1770,
[58:13] seems to give them foundation.

A very different reaction was that of Goethe and his university circle
at Strasburg to whom the _Système de la Nature_ appeared a harmless
and uninteresting book, "grau," "cimmerisch," "totenhaft," "die echte
Quintessenz der Greisenheit." To these fervent young men in the youthful
flush of romanticism, its sad, atheistic twilight seemed to cast a
veil over the beauty of the earth and rob the heaven of stars; and
they lightheardedly discredited both Holbach and Voltaire in favor of
Shakespeare and the English romantic school. One would look far for a
better instance of the romantic reaction which set in so soon and so
obscured the clarity of the issues at stake in the eighteenth century
thought. [58:14]

The leading refutations directed explicitly against the _Système de la
Nature_ are:

1. 1770, Rive, Abbé J. J., Lettres philosophiques contre le _ Système de
la Nature_. (Portefeuille hebdomadaire de Bruxelles.)

2. Frederick II, _Examen critique du livre intitulé, Système de la
Nature_. (Political Miscellanies, p. 175.)

3. Voltaire, Dieu, Réponse de M. de Voltaire au _Système de la Nature_.
Au château de Ferney, 1770, 8 vo, pp. 34.

4. 1771, Bergier, Abbé N. F., Examen du matérialisme, ou Réfutation du
_Système de la Nature_. Paris, Humbolt, 1771, 2 vols., 12mo.

5. Camuset, Abbé J. N., Principes contre l'incrédulité, a l'occasion du
_Système de la Nature_. Paris, Pillot, 1771, 12mo, pp. viii + 335.

6. Castillon, J. de (Salvernini di Castiglione), Observations sur le
livre intitulé, _Système de la Nature_. Berlin, Decker, 1771, 8vo. (40
sols broché.)

7. Rochford, Dubois de, Pensées diverses contre le système des
matérialistes, à l'occasion d'un écrit intitulé; _Système de la Nature_.
Paris, Lambert, 1771, 12mo.

8. 1773, L'Impie démasqué, ou remontrance aux écrivains incrédules.
Londres, Heydinger, 1773

9. Holland, J. H., Réflexions philosophiques sur le _Système de la
Nature_. Paris, 1773, 2 vols., 8vo.

10. 1776, Buzonnière, Nouel de, Observations sur un ouvrage intitulé le
_Système de la Nature_. Paris, Debure, père, 1776, 8vo, pp. 126. (Prix 1
livre, 16 sols broché.)

11. 1780, Fangouse, Abbé, La religion prouvée aux incrédules, avec
une lettre à l'auteur du _Système de la Nature_ par un homme du
monde. Paris, Debure l'aîné, 12mo, p. 150. Same under title Réflexions
importantes sur la religion, etc., 1785.

12. 1788, Paulian, A. J., Le véritable système de la nature, etc.,
Avignon, Niel, 2 vols., 12mo.

13. 1803, Mangold, F. X. von, Unumstossliche Widerlegung des
Materialismus gegen den Verfasser des _Systems der Natur_. Augsburg,
1803.


Of these and other refutations of materialism such as Saint-Martin's
_Des erreurs et de la vérité_, Dupont de Nemours' _Philosophie de
l'univers_, Delisles de Sales' _Philosophie de la nature_, etc., which
are not directed explicitly against the _Système de la Nature_, the
works of Voltaire and Frederick the Great are the most interesting but
by no means the most serious or convincing. Morley finds Voltaire very
weak and much beside the point, especially in his discussion of order
and disorder in nature which Holbach had denied. Voltaire's argument is
that there must be an intelligent motor or cause behind nature (p. 7).
This is God (p. 8). He admits at the outset that all systems are mere
dreams but he continues to insist with a dogmatism equal to Holbach's on
the validity of his dream. He repeatedly asserts without foundation that
Holbach's system is based on the false experiment of Needham (pp. 5,
6), and even goes so far as to ridicule the evolutionary hypothesis
altogether (p. 6). He speaks of the necessity of a belief in God, by
a kind of natural logic. God and matter exist in the nature of things,
"Tout nous announce un Être suprême, rien ne nous dit ce qu'il est." God
himself seems to be a kind of fatalistic necessity. "C'est ce que vous
appellerez Nature et c'est ce que j'appelle Dieu." At the end he shifts
the argument from the base of necessity to that of utility. Which is the
more consoling doctrine? If the idea of God has prevented ten crimes
I hold that the entire world should embrace it (p. 27). As Morley has
said, such arguments could scarcely have convinced Voltaire himself.

Frederick was surprised that Voltaire and D'Alembert had found anything
good in the book. His refutation was more methodical than that of
Voltaire, who called it a "homage to the Divinity" but wrote to
D'Alembert that it was written in the style of a notary. Two other
refutations emanating from the Academy of Berlin were those of Castillon
and Holland. The first of these is a very heavy and learned work,
formidable and forbidding in its logic. Castillon reduces Holbach's
propositions to three. The self-existence of matter, the essential
relation of movement to it, and the possibility of deriving everything
from it or some mode of it. Castillon concludes after five hundred pages
of reasoning that matter is contingent, movement not inherent in it,
and that purely spiritual beings exist in independence of it. Hence
the _Système de la Nature_ is a "long and wicked error." Holland's is a
still more serious work, which the Sorbonne recommended strongly as
an antidote against Holbach's _Système_ which it qualified as "une
malheureuse production que notre siècle doit rougir d'avoir enfantée."
But when it was discovered that Holland was a Protestant his work was
condemned forthwith, Jan. 17, 1773.

Bergier's refutation is interesting as an attack from a churchman
of extraordinary keenness and insight into the progress of the new
philosophy. In the _Système de la Nature_ he recognized the hand of the
author of _La Contagion sacrée_ and the _Essai sur les préjugés_
and dealt with it as he did the _Christianisme dévoilé_. Buzonniere,
Rochfort and Fangouse are milder and more naive in their demonstrations
and their works are of no weight or interest. _L'Impie démasqué_ is
a brutal work which qualifies Holbach as a "vile apostle of vice and
crime," and the _Système de la Nature_ as the most impudent treatise on
atheism that has yet dishonored the globe--one which covers the century
with shame and will be the scandal of future generations.

The work of Paulian is of a different sort. Coming comparatively late,
it attempted to review the hostile opinions of many years and then mass
them in an overwhelming final attack on the _Système de la Nature_. To
this end Paulian rewrites the entire book chapter by chapter, giving
the "true version." He then reviews Holland's outline and Bergier's
comments, together with seven articles directed explicitly against the
_Système de la Nature_ in such works as the _Lettres Helviennes_, of
Abbé Barruel, _Dict. des Philosophes_, _Dict. anti-philosophe_, his own
_Dict. théologique_, etc., besides many other writings against the
new philosophy in general. He then reviews articles by members of the
philosophic school against materialism and then goes back to Holbach's
sources, Diderot, Bayle, Spinoza, Lucretius, Epicurus, etc. The work is
not scholarly but comprehensive and evidently discouraged further formal
refutations.

The _Système de la Nature_ had many critics in the stormy days that
followed 1789. Delisle de Sales found it a monstrosity--a _fratras_; La
Harpe called it an infamous book, "un amas de bêtises qu'on ose appeler
philosophie, inconcevables inepties, un immense échafaudage de mensonge
et d'invective"; M. Villemain is much more calm and fair; Lord Brougham,
like Damiron, Buzonnière, and many others, found it seductive but full
of false reasoning; Lerminier was so severe that St.-Beuve was moved to
defend Holbach against him. Samuel Wilkinson, the English translator of
1820, is one of the few whose criticism is at all favorable. Holbach has
always appealed to a certain type of radical mind and his translators
and editors have generally been men who were often over-enthusiastic.
For example, Mr. Wilkinson says of the _Système de la Nature_, [64:15]
"No work, ancient or modern, has surpassed it in the eloquence and
sublimity of its language or in the facility with which it treats
the most abstruse and difficult subjects. It is without exception the
boldest effort the human mind has yet produced in the investigation of
Morals and Theology. The republic of letters has never produced another
author whose pen was so well calculated to emancipate mankind from all
those trammels with which the nurse, the school master, and the priest
have successively locked up their noblest faculties, before they were
capable of reasoning and judging for themselves."

It seems unnecessary to analyze the _Système de la Nature_. This has
been done by Damiron, Soury, Fabre, Lange, Morley, the historians of
philosophy, and encyclopaedists; and the book itself is easily available
in the larger libraries. The substance of Holbach's philosophy is
susceptible of clearer treatment apart from it or any one of his books,
although it permeates all of them.

M. Jules Soury has said, in describing a certain type of mind: "Il est
d'heureux esprits, des âmes fortes et saines, que n'effraie point le
silence éternel des espaces infinis où s'anéantissait la raison de
Pascal. Naïves et robustes natures, mâles et vigoureux penseurs, qui
gardent toute la vie quelque chose des dons charmants de la jeunesse et
de l'enfance même, une foi vive dans le témoinage immédiat de nos sens
et de notre conscience, une humeur alerte, toute de joyeuse ardeur,
et comme une intrépidité d'esprit que rien n'arrête. Pour eux tout est
clair et uni; ou à peu près, et là où ils soupçonnent quelque bas-bond
insondable, ils se détournent et poursuivent fièrement leur chemin.
Comme cet Epicurien dont parle Cicéron au commencement du _De natura
deorum_, ils ont toujours l'air de sortir de l'assemblée des dieux et de
descendre des intermondes d'Epicure."

Such was Holbach. His philosophy is based on the child-like assumption
that things are as they seem, provided they are observed with sufficient
care by a sufficient number of people. This brings us at once to the
very heart of Holbach's method which was experimental and inductive
to the last degree. Holbach was nourished on what might be called
scientific rather than philosophical traditions. As M. Tourneux has
pointed out, he had been a serious student of the natural sciences,
especially those connected with the constitution of the earth. These
studies led him to see the disparity between certain accepted and
traditional cosmologies and a scientific interpretation of the
terrestrial globe and the forms of life which flourish upon it. Finding
the supposed sacred and infallible records untrustworthy in one regard,
he began to question their veracity at other points. Being of a
critical frame of mind, he took the records rather more literally than
a sympathetic, allegorical apologist would have done, although it cannot
be said that he used much historical insight. After having studied the
sacred texts for purposes of writing or having translated other men's
studies on Moses, David, the Prophets, Jesus, Paul, the Christian
theologians and saints, miracles, etc., he concluded that these accounts
were untrustworthy and mendacious. He knew ancient and modern philosophy
and found in the greater part of it an unwarranted romantic or
theological trend which his scientific training had caused him to
suspect. It must be admitted that however false or illogical Holbach's
conclusions may be considered, he was by no means ignorant of the
subjects he chose to treat, as some of his detractors would have one
believe. His theory of knowledge was that of Locke and Condillac, and
on this foundation he built up his system of scientific naturalism and
dogmatic atheism.

His initial assumption is, as has been suggested, that experience
(application réitérée des sens) and reason are trustworthy guides to
knowledge. By them we become conscious of an external objective world,
of which sentient beings themselves are a part, from which they receive
impressions through their sense organs. These myriad impressions when
compared and reflected upon form reasoned knowledge or truth, provided
they are substantiated by repeated experiences carefully made. That is,
an idea is said to be true when it conforms perfectly with the actual
external object. This is possible unless one's senses are defective, or
one's judgment vitiated by emotion and passion.

Holbach's contention is that if one applies experience and reason to
the external universe, or nature, "ce vaste assemblage de tout ce qui
existe"; it reveals a _single objective reality_, i. e., _matter_, which
is in itself essentially active or in a state of motion.

From matter in motion are derived all the phenomena that strike our
senses. All is matter or a function of it. Matter, then, is not an
effect, but a cause. It is not caused; it is from eternity and of
necessity. The cardinal point in Holbach's philosophy is an inexorable
materialistic necessity. Nothing, then, is exempt from the laws of
physics and chemistry. Inorganic substance and organic life fall into
the same category. Man himself with all his differentiated faculties
is but a function of matter and motion in extraordinary complex and
involved relations. Man's imputation to himself of free will and
unending consciousness apart from his machine is an idle tale built on
his desires, not on his experiences nor his knowledge of nature. This
imputation of a will or soul to nature, independent of it or in any
sense above it, is a still more idle one derived from his renunciation
of the witness of his senses and his following after the phantoms of his
imagination. It is ignorance or disregard of nature then that has
given rise to supernatural ideas that have "no correspondence with true
sight," or, as Holbach expressed it, have no counterpart in the external
object. In other words, theology, or poetry about God, as Petrarch said,
is ignorance of natural causes reduced to a system.

Man is a purely natural or physical being, like a tree or a stone. His
so-called spiritual nature (l'homme moral) is merely a phase of his
physical nature considered under a special aspect. He is all matter in
motion, and when that ceases to function in a particular way, called
life, he ceases to be as a conscious entity. He is so organized, however
that his chief desires are to survive and render his existence happy.
By happiness Holbach means the presence of pleasure and the absence of
pain. In all his activity, then, man will seek pleasure and avoid pain.
The chief cause of man's misery or lack of well being is his ignorance
of the powers and possibilities of his own nature and the Universal
Nature. All he needs is to ascertain his place in nature and adjust
himself to it. From the beginning of his career he has been the dupe
of false ideas, especially those connected with supernatural powers,
on whom he supposed he was dependent. But, if ignorance of nature gave
birth to the Gods, knowledge of nature is calculated to destroy them and
the evils resulting from them, the introduction of theistic ideas into
politics and morals. In a word, the truth, that is, _correct ideas of
nature_ is the one thing needful to the happiness and well-being of man.

The application of these principles to the given situation in France in
1770 would obviously have produced unwelcome results. Holbach's theory
was that religion was worse than useless in that it had inculcated false
and pernicious ideas in politics and morals. He would do away completely
with it in the interest of putting these sciences on a natural basis.
This basis is self-interest, or man's inevitable inclination toward
survival and the highest degree of well-being, "L'objet de la morale est
de faire connaître aux hommes que leur plus grand intérêt exige qu'ils
pratiquent la vertu; le but du gouvernement doit être de la leur faire
pratiquer."

Government then assumes the functions of moral restraint formally
delegated to religion; and punishments render virtue attractive and vice
repugnant. Holbach's theory of social organization is practically that
of Aristotle. Men combine in order to increase the store of individual
well-being, to live the good life. If those to whom society has
delegated sovereignty abuse their power, society has the right to take
it from them. Sovereignty is merely an agent for the diffusion of truth
and the maintenance of virtue, which are the prerequisites of social and
individual well-being. The technique of progress is enlightenment and
good laws.

Nothing could be clearer or simpler than Holbach's system. As Diderot
so truly said, he will not be quoted on both sides of any question.
His uncompromising atheism is the very heart and core of his system
and clarifies the whole situation. All supernatural ideas are to be
abandoned. Experience and reason are once for all made supreme, and
henceforth refuse to share their throne or abdicate in favor of faith.
Holbach's aim was as he said to bring man back to nature and render
reason dear to him. "Il est tempts que cette raison injustement dégradée
quitte un ton pusillamine qui la rendront complice du mensonge et du
délire."

If reason is to rule, the usurper, religion, must be ejected; hence
atheism was fundamental to his entire system. He did not suppose by any
means that it would become a popular faith, because it presupposed too
much learning and reflection, but it seemed to him the necessary weapon
of a reforming party at that time. He defines an atheist as follows:
"C'est un homme, qui détruit des chimères nuisibles au genre humain,
pour ramener les hommes à la nature, à l'expérience, à la raison. C'est
un penseur qui, ayant médité la matière, ses propriétés et ses façons
d'agir, n'a pas besoin, pour expliquer les phénomènes de l'univers et
les opérations de la nature, d'imaginer des puissances idéales, des
intelligences imaginaires, des êtres de raison; qui loin de faire mieux
connaître cette nature, ne font que la rendre capricieuse, inexplicable,
et méconnaissable, inutile au bonheur des hommes."




APPENDIX

HOLBACH'S CORRESPONDENCE


 The following letters of Holbach are extant:

 Holbach to Hume, Aug. 23, 1763.
 Holbach to Hume, Mar. 16, 1766.
 Holbach to Hume, July 7, 1766.
 Holbach to Hume, Aug. 18, 1766.
 Holbach to Hume, Sept. 7, 1766.

 These were printed in Hume's _Private Correspondence_, London, 1820,
 pp. 252-263, and deal largely with Hume's quarrel with Rousseau.

 Holbach to Garrick, June 16, 1765.
 Holbach to Garrick, Feb. 9, 1766.

 These two letters are in manuscript in Lansdowne House,
 Coll. Forster, and were published by F. A. Hedgcock,
 _David Garrick et ses amis français_. Paris, 1911, pp. 251-253.

 Holbach to Wilkes, Aug., 1746, 9 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30867, p. 14).
 Holbach to Wilkes, Dec. 10, 1746 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30867, p. 18).
 Holbach to Wilkes, May 22, 1766 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 39)
 Holbach to Wilkes, Nov. 9, 1766 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 81).
 Holbach to Wilkes, Dec. 10, 1767 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 173).
 Holbach to Wilkes, July 17, 1768 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30870, p. 59).
 Holbach to Wilkes, Mar. 19, 1770 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30871, p. 16).
 Holbach to Wilkes, April 27, 1775, 9 (Wilkes, _Correspondence_,
  London, 1804, Vol. IV, p. 176).

 The first seven of these letters are published for the first time
 in the present volume, pp. 6-11 and pp. 75-80.

 Holbach to Galiani, Aug. 11, 1769 (_Critica_, Vol. I, pp. 488 sq.).

 Galiani to Holbach, April 7, 1770 (Galiani, _Correspondence_, Paris,
 1890, Vol. I, p. 92).

 Galiani to Holbach, July 21, 1770 (Galiani, _Correspondence_, Paris,
 1890, Vol. I, p. 199).

 Holbach to Galiani, Aug. 25, 1770 (_Critica_, Vol. I, p. 489).


 There are references to other letters in _Critica_ which I have not
 been able to find.

 Holbach to Beccaria, Mar. 15, 1767, published by M. Landry
 _Beccaria, Scritte e lettre inediti_, 1910, p. 146.

 Holbach to Malesherbes, April 6, 1761 (hitherto unpublished). See
 present volume, p. 30.


 HOLBACH TO HUME
 (Hume, Private Correspondence, London, 1820, pp. 252-263)
 PARIS, the 23rd. of August, 1763

 _Sir,_--

 I have received with the deepest sense of gratitude your very kind
 and obliging letter of the 8th. inst: favors of great men ought to
 give pride to those that have at least the merit of setting the value
 that is due upon them.  This is my case with you, sir; the reading
 of your valuable works has not only inspired me with the strongest
 admiration for your genius and amiable parts, but gave me the highest
 idea of your person and the strongest desire of getting acquainted
 with one of the greatest philosophers of my age, and of the best friend
 to mankind.  These sentiments have emboldened me to send formally,
 though unknown to you, the work you are mentioning to me.  I thought
 you were the best to judge of such a performance, and I took only
 the liberty of giving a hint of my desires, in case it should meet
 with your approbation, nor was I surprized, or presumed to be
 displeased, at seeing my wishes disappointed.  The reasons appeared
 very obvious to me; not withstanding the British liberty, I conceived
 there were limits even to it.  However, my late friend's book has
 appeared since and there is even an edition of it lately done in
 England: I believe it will be relished by the friends of truth,
 who like to see vulgar errors struck at the root.  This has been
 your continued task, sir; and you deserve for it the praises of all
 sincere wellwishers of humanity: give me leave to rank myself among
 them, and express to you, by this opportunity you have been so kind
 as to give me, the fervent desire we have to see you in this country.
 Messrs. Stuart, Dempster, Fordyce, who are so good as to favor me
 with their company, have given me some hopes of seeing you in this
 metropolis, where you have so many admirers as readers, and as many
 sincere friends as there are disciples of philosophy.  I don't doubt
 but my good friend M. Helvétius will join in our wishes, and prevail
 upon you to come over.  I assure you, sir, you won't perceive much
 the change of the country, for all countries are alike for people that
 have the same minds.

 I am, with the greatest veneration and esteem, sir, your most
 obedient and most humble servant.
  D'HOLBACH.
  Rue Royale, butte St. Roch, à Paris.


 HOLBACH To GARRICK
 (Coll. Forster, Vol. XXI; pub., Hedgcock, p. 253)
 PARIS, Feb ye 9th, 1766.

 I received, my very Dear Sir, with a great deal of pleasure, your
 agreeable letter of ye 24th of January, but was very sorry to hear
 that you are inlisted in the numerous troup of _gouty_ people.  Tho'
 I have myself the honour of being of that tribe I dont desire my
 friends should enter into the same corporation.  I am particularly
 griev'd to see you among the invalids for you have, more than any
 other, occasion for the free use of your limbs.  However, don't be
 cross and peevish for that would be only increasing you distemper;
 and I charge you especially of not scolding that admirable lady
 Mrs Garrick, whose sweetness of temper and care must be a great
 comfort in your circumstances.  I beg leave to present her with my
 respects and ye compliments of my wife, that has enjoyed but an
 indifferent state of health, owing to the severity of the winter.
 Mr and Made Helvetius desire you both their best wishes and so do
 all your friends, for whom I can answer that every one of them
 keeps a kind remembrance of your valuable persons.  Dr. Gem thinks
 you'll do very well to go to Bath, but his opinion is that a thin
 diet would be more serviceable to you than anything else; believe
 he is in the right.  Abbé Morellet pays many thanks for the answers
 to his queries, but complains of their shortness and laconism;
 however it is not your fault.  He is glad to hear you have receiv'd
 his translation of Beccaria's book, _Des délits et des peines_ and
 the compliments of our friend Dr Gatti to whom I gave your direction
 before he went to London.  Our friend Suard has entered his neck into
 the matrimonial halter; we are all of us very sorry for it for we know
 that nothing combin'd with love, will at last make nothing at all.

 I was not much surpris'd at the particulars you are pleas'd to mention
 about Rousseau.  According to the thorough knowledge I have had of
 him I look on that man as a mere philosophical quack, full of
 affectation, of pride, of oddities and even villainies; the work he
 is going to publish justifies the last imputation.  Is his memory so
 short as to forget that Mr Grimm, for those 9 years past, has taken
 care of the mother of his wench or _gouvernante_ whom he left to starve
 here after having debauch'd her daughter and having got her 3 or 4
 times with child.  That great philosopher should remember that
 Mr. Grimm has in his hands letters under his own hand-writing that
 prove him the most ungrateful dogg in the world.  During his last
 stay in Paris he made some attempts to see Mr Diderot, and being
 refused that favor, he pretended that Diderot endeavoured to see
 him, but that himself had refused peremptorily to comply with his
 request.  I hope these particulars will suffice to let you know what
 you are to think of that illustrious man.  I send you here a copy of
 a letter supposed to come from the King of Prussia, but done by
 Mr Horace Walpole, whereby you'll see that gentleman has found out
 his true character.  But enough of that rascal who deserves not to be
 in Mr Hume's company but rather among the bears, if there are any in
 the mountains of Wales.

 I am surprized you have not receiv'd yet the _Encyclopédie_, for a
 great number of copies have been sent over already to England unless
 you have left your subscription here, where hitherto not one copy has
 been delivered for prudent reasons.

 We have had in the French Comedy a new play called _Le Philosophie sans
 le savoir_ done and acted in a new stile, quite natural and moving: it
 has a prodigious success and deserves it extremely well.  Marmontel
 will give us very soon upon the Italian stage his comical opera of
 _La Bergère des Alpes_.  I hope it will prove very agreeable to the
 Publick, having been very much delighted by the rehearsal of it; the
 music was done by Mr Cohaut who teaches my wife to play on the luth.
 We expect a tragedy of the Dutch Barnvelt.

 Mr Wilkes is still in this town, where he intends to stay until you
 give him leave to return to his native country.  We have had the
 pleasure of seeing Mr Chanquion, your friend, who seems to be a very
 discerning gentleman and to whom in favor of your friendship I have
 shown all the politeness I could.  I hear that Sr James Macdonald has
 been ill at Parma, but is now recovered and in Rome.  Abbé Galliani is
 still at Naples and stands a fair chance of being employ'd in the
 ministry there.

 Adieu, very dear Sir and remember your affectionate friend
  D'HOLBACH


 HOLBACH TO WILKES
 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 39)
 PARIS the 22d Of May (1766)

 _My dear Sir_

 I am extremely glad to know your lucky passage and happy arrival
 in your native country.  I hope you know too well the sincere
 dispositions of my heart as to doubt of the friendship I have
 vowed to you for life; it has been of too long a duration to be
 shaken by any circumstances, and especially by those that do honor
 to you.  I shall be very happy if your affairs (that seem to be in
 a fair way) permit you to drop over very soon to spend some time
 in this place along with Miss Wilkes to whom Made D'Holbach and I
 pay our best compliments.  I can easily paint to my imagination
 the pleasure you both felt at your first meeting; everybody that
 has any sensibility must be acquainted with the grateful pangs in
 those moving circumstances.

 Your case with the hawker at your entry in London is very odd and
 whimsical you did extremely well to humour the man in his opinion
 about Mr. Wilkes.  I dare say if you had done otherwise his fist
 would have convinc'd you of the goodness of your cause, and then it
 would have been impossible for you to pass for a dead man any longer;
 which however, I think was very necessary for you in the beginning.
 I expect with great eagerness the settlement of your affairs with
 the ministry to your own satisfaction; be persuaded, Dear Sir, that
 nobody interests himself in your happiness than myself, and nothing
 will conduce more to it than your steady attachment to the principles
 of honor and patriotism.

 If you don't find a way of disposing of the little packet, you need
 not take much trouble about it, and you may bring it back along with
 you, when you come to this place, as to the kind offers you are so
 good as to make me about commissions, experience has taught me that
 it is unsafe to trust you with them, so I beg leave with gratitude
 to decline your proposals as that point.

 All our common friends and acquaintances desire their best
 compliments to you, and believe me, my dear Sir.

  Your affectionate oblig'd humble servant
  D'HOLBACH


 HOLBACH TO WILKES
 (Brit. Mus. Mss., VOL 30869, p. 81)
 PARIS 9ber 10th 1766

 _My very Dear Sir_

 I receiv'd with the greatest pleasure the news of your lucky arrival
 in Engelland.  You know the sentiments of my heart, and are undoubtedly
 convinc'd how much I wish for the good success of all your enterprises
 tho I am to be a great looser by it.  I rejoice very heartily at the
 fine prospect you have now in view and don't doubt but the persons you
 mention will succeed if they are in good earnest: which is allways a
 little doubtful in people of that Kidney.

 We have had the pleasure of seeing Miss Wilkes three or four times since
 your departure, she is extreamly well and longs for the return of her
 friend Mlle Helvetius the 20th of this month.

 Rousseau will very likely hate the English very cordially for making
 him pay so dear for his books, it is however a sign that he told us a
 lye when he pretended in his writings to have no books at all, as to
 his guitar he should buy a new one to tune his heart a little better
 than he did before.

 We have no news here, except the Election of Mr Thomas as a member of
 the french academy.  Marquis Beccaria is going to leave us very soon
 being obliged to return to Milan: Count Veri will at the same time set
 out for England.

 I'll be oblig'd to you for a copy or two of the book printed in holland
 you mentioned in your letter you may send it by some private opportunity
 to Miss Wilkes, with, proper directions.  A gentleman of our Society
 should be glad to get 2 copies of Baskervilles' virgil _in octavo_.

 Tho Mr Davenport and Rousseau seem to be pleased very much with one
 another, I suppose they may very soon be tired of their squabbling,
 and the latter like the apostles will shake of against the barbarous
 Britons the dust of his feet.

 Receive the hearty compliments of my wife and all our friends.  You
 know the true sentiments of my heart for you,
 Dear Sir.  I am with great sincerity
  your most obedient humble Servant
  D'HOLBACH


 HOLBACH TO WILKES
 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 173)

 _Dear Sir_

 I receiv'd with a great deal of pleasure your friendly letter from
 Ostende of the 26th. nov. I was extreamly glad to hear your happy
 arrival at that place, and do not doubt but you met with a lucky
 passage to Dover the following day, we are now enjoying the conversation
 of your British friends about elections; that will not be tedious for
 you if, according to your hopes, you should succeed in your projects.

 I see by your letter that instead of coming back directly by Calais
 you intend to travel with Miss Wilkes through Antwerp and the Low
 countries, which I should think not very advisable in this rigorous
 season of the year, for generally at that time the waters are lock'd
 up by the frost and travelling is bad et tedious and may be would
 prove hurtful to your tender fellow traveler to whom my wife and I
 desire our best compliments.  Such a scheme will be more advantagious
 for you both and more conformable to the wishes of your friends in
 this place.

 I hope your arrival in London will contribute to reconcile abbé
 Galliani to that place, where he complains of having not heard of
 the sun since he set his foot on British shore, however he may
 comfort himself for we have had very little of it in this country.
 The Abbé must be overjoy'd at the news of the Jesuits being expell'd
 from his Native country for now he may say _Gens inimica mihi
 Tyrrhenum navigat aquor_.  We have no material news in this country,
 except that the queen continues to be in a very bad state of health.

 If there is some good new romance I'll be oblig'd to bring it over
 along with you as, well as a couple of french books call'd
 _Militaire philosophe_ and _Théologie portative_ in case you may
 easily find them in London, for we cannot get them here.  I am told
 the works of one Morgan have been esteem'd in your country but I don't
 know the titles of them, if you should know them and meet with them
 with facility, I should be very much oblig'd to you provided you make
 me pay a little more than you have done hitherto for your commissions.

 All our common friends beg their compliments and I wish for your
 speedy return, and I am Sincerely
 Dear Sir
  Your faithful affectionate humble servant
  D'HOLBACH
 PARIS the 10th of decemb. 1767



 HOLBACH TO WILKES
 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30870, p. 59)
 GRANDVAL, 17th of July 1768

 _Dear Sir_

 I receiv'd with a great deal of pleasure your very agreeable letter
 of the 28th of last month.  I am extreamly glad that your generous
 soul is very far from sinking under the weight of these Misfortunes,
 and to see that you don't give up the hopes of carrying triumphantly
 your point notwithstanding the discouragements you have met with lately.
 I need not tell you how much your friends in Paris and I in particular
 interest ourselves in all the events that may befall you.  Our old
 friendship ought to be a sure pledge of my sincere sentiments for you,
 and of my best wishes for your good success in all your undertakings.
 I believe you can do no better but to keep strictly to the rules you
 have laid down for your conduct, and I don't doubt but you'll find it
 will answer the best to your purpose.

 I am very much oblig'd to you, Dear Sir, for the kind offers you make
 in your friendly letter.  I have desir'd already Mr Suard to bring over
 a few books lately published in your metropolis.  I am very glad to hear
 that Gentleman is pleas'd with his journey.

 There's no possibility of getting for you a compleat sett of Callots
 engravings.  Such a collection must be the business of many years; it
 is to be found only after the decease of some curious men who have taken
 a great deal of trouble to collect them.  I found indeed in two shops 8
 or 10 of them, but the proofs (les épreuves) were very indifferent and
 they wanted to sell them excessively dear; in general 200 guineas would
 procure a collection very far from being compleat.

 My wife and all our common acquaintence desire their best compliments
 to you and to Miss Wilkes and you know the sentiments wherewith I am
 for ever
 Dear Sir
  your affectionate friend and
  very humble servant
  D'HOLBACH


 HOLBACH TO WILKES
 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30871, p. 16)
 PARIS the 19th of March 1770

 _Dear Sir_

 I receiv'd with a due sense of gratitude the favour of your last
 letter, and was overjoy'd to hear from yourself that your long
 confinement has not been able hitherto to obstruct the lively flow
 of your spirits.  A little more patience and you'll reach the end
 of all your misfortunes, that have been faithfully partaken by your
 friends in England and abroad, for my own part I wish most sincerely
 that everything for the future may turn to your profit and welfare,
 without hurting that of your country, to whom, as a lover of mankind,
 I am a well wisher.

 My wife desires her best compliments to you and your beloved Daughter,
 whom we both expect to see again with a great deal of pleasure in
 this country next month.  Notwithstanding our bad circumstances we
 are making very great preparations for the Wedding of the Dauphin,
 and our metropolis begins already to be filled with foreigners that
 flock hither from all parts of the world.  Our friend Mr D'Alainville
 is to set out at the end of April to fetch the Archdutchess at
 Strasbourg and bring mask (ed) (?) her different stages on the road
 to Versailles.

 We have no news in the literary world except that Voltaire
 is become lately _le père temporal_, that is to say the benefactor
 of the _Capucins du pays de Gex_ where he lives, a title of which
 all his pranks seemd to exclude him, but grace you know, is omnipotent,
 and monks are not over nice when there is something to be got by
 their condescension.

 If the hurry of affairs whould leave you any moments to read
 curious books I would advise you to peruse two very strange
 works lately publish'd viz _Recherches philosophiques sur les
 américains_, le _Système de la Nature_ par Mirabaud.  I suppose
 you'll find them cheaper and more easily in London that at
 Paris.

 All your late acquaintances in this Town desire me to present
 you with their sincere compliments and best wishes; as to mine
 you know that they have no other object but your Welfare.

 I am, Dear Sir, for ever
  your most affectionate friend
  and humble servant
  D'HOLBACH

 P. S. I'll be very much oblig'd to you for sending over to me in
 2 vol. small octavo.



 HOLBACH TO WILKES
 (Wilkes, Correspondence, London, 1805, Vol. 4, p. 176)
 PARIS, April 27; 1775

 "_My Lord_,

 "I received with the utmost gratitude your lordship's friendly
 letter of the 28th of March. (1775?)  I should have done
 myself the honor of answering sooner to your kind propositions,
 if I had not been prevented by some gouty infirmities that have
 assailed in the beginning of this spring.  I esteem myself very
 happy to find that the hurry of business, and your exhaltation
 to the rank of chief-magistrate, could not make you forget your
 friendship to me; though my present circumstances do not permit
 me to make use of your friendly invitation, be persuaded my very
 dear lord that Madame D'Holbach and myself shall forever keep
 these signs of your kindness, in very grateful remembrance.

 We both desire our best compliments to your very amiable
 lady-mayoress: who acted so well her part lately in the Egyptian
 hall, to the satisfaction of that prodigious crowd you have
 been entertaining there.  All members of our society that have
 had the happiness of being acquainted with you, desire to be
 kindly remembered; and a continuation of your valuable friendship
 shall for ever be the utmost ambition
  my lord
  of your most sincerely devoted
  D'HOLBACH"



 GALIANI To HOLBACH
 (Galiani, Corresp., Vol. I, p. 199)
 NAPLES, le 21 juillet, 1770

 _Bonjour, mon cher Baron,_

 J'ai vu le _Système de la Nature_.  C'est la ligne où finit la
 tristesse de la morne et sèche vérité, au-delà commence la gaieté
 du roman.  Il n'y a rien de mieux que de se persuader que les dés
 sont pipés: cette idée en enfante milles autres, et un nouveau
 monde se régénère.  Le M. Mirabaud est un vrai abbé Terray
 de la métaphysique.  Il fait des réductions, des suspensions,
 et cause la banqueroute du savoir, du plaisir et de l'esprit
 humain.  Mais vous allez me dire qu'aussi il y avait trop de
 nonvaleurs: on était trop endetté, il courait trop de papiers non
 réels sur la place.  C'est vrai aussi, et voilà pourquoi la crise
 est arrivée.

 Adieu, mon cher baron.  Ecrivez-moi de longues lettres, pour que
 le plaisir en soit plus grand.  Embrassez moi longuement la
 baronne, et soyez longue dans tout que vous faites, dans tout
 ce que vous patientez, dans tout ce que vous espérer.  La
 longanimité est une belle vertu; c'est elle qui me fait espérer
 de revoir Paris.
  Adieu.



 HOLBACH To GALIANI
 (Critica, Vol. I, 1903, p. 489)

 GRANDVAL, le 25 d'août 1770

 _Bonjour, mon très délicieux abbé,_

 J'ai bien reçu votre très-précieuse lettre du 21 de juillet qui
 m'accuse la réception de celle que je vous avais écrite le 3 de
 juin.  Je vois que celle-ci a été longtemps en route, attendu
 que M. Torcia à qui M. Diderot s'était chargé de la remettre, a
 encore traînassé quelque temps à Paris, suivant la louable
 coutume des voyageurs qui nous quittent toujours avec peine.

 Je suis bien aise que vous ayez lu le livre de Mirabaud qui fait
 un bruit affreux dans ce pays.  L'abbé Bergier l'a déjà
 réfuté très-longuement et sa réponse paraîtra cet hiver.  La
 Sorbonne est, dit-on, occupée à détruire ce maudit _Système_ qui
 lui paraît au moins hérétique.  Voltaire lui-même se prépare
 à le pulvériser; en attendant nos seigneurs du Parlement y
 viennent d'y répondre par des fagots, ainsi qu'à quelque autres
 ouvrages de même trempe.  Ce qu'il y a de fâcheux c'est que
 l'ouvrage de V. qui a pour titre _Dieu et les hommes_ a été
 enveloppé dans la même condamnation, ce qui doit déplaire
 souverainement à l'auteur.  Je me rappelle à cette occasion ce
 que M. Hume dit d'un catholique que Henri VIII fit conduire au
 bûcher avec quelques hérétiques, et dont le seul chagrin était
 d'être brûlé en si mauvaise compagnie.  Nonobstant toutes ces
 réfutations, il parait tous les jours quelques nouveaux ouvrages
 impies, au point que je suis très surpris que la récolte ait été
 si bonne dans le royaume.  En dernier lieu on vient de publier un
 ouvrage sous le titre de _Droit des souverains sur les biens du
 clergé_, qui, sans contenir des impiétés n'en est pas moins déplaisant
 pour cela: Il va droit à la cuisine, et veut que pour liquider
 la dette nationale on vende tous les biens ecclésiastiques et
 que l'on met nos pontifes à la pension.  Vous sentez qu'une
 proposition si mal sonnante n'a pu manquer de mettre le ciel en
 courroux; sa colère s'est déchargé sur cinq ou six libraires et
 colporteurs qui ont été mis en prison.




[ENDNOTES]


 [1:1] Diderot, _Oeuvres_, ed. Assézat et Tourneaux, Vol. XX, p. 28.

 [2:2] Grimm, _Corr. Lit._, Vol. XV, p. 421.

 [3:3] Diderot, _Oeuvres_, Vol. XX, p. 95.

 [3:4] Among the most important are Damiron J. P., _Mémoires pour
 servir à l'histoire de la philosophie au dix-huitième siècle_ (Paris,
 1858, 3 vols., 8vo); Lange, _Geschichte des Materialismus_ (Eng. tr.,
 Boston, 1877); Morley, _Diderot and the Encyclopedists_ (N. Y., 1891,
 2 vols., 12mo); Plekhanow, G., _Beiträge zur Geschichte des Materialismus_
 (Stuttgart, 1896); Hancock, A. E., _The French Revolution and the
 English Poets_ (N. Y., 1899); Tallentyre, _The Friends of Voltaire_
 (London, 1906); Fabre, _Les Pères de la Révolution_ (Paris, 1910), etc.

 [5:5] Confessions, _Oeuvres_, Vol. XXIV, p. 338.

 [5:6] Bib. Nat. mss. _Pièces originales,_ 1529, d'Holbach, 34, 861.

 [6:7] Carlyle, Rev. Dr. A., _Autobiography_, ed. Burton, Boston, 1861,
 p. 137 sq. for Holbach's English friends mentioned in his letters to
 Wilkes.

 [12:9] See Chap. II and Bibliography, Pt. I, for these and his other works.

 [12:10] Grimm _Cor. Lit._, Vol. II, p. 283.

 [12:11] _Gazette de France_, Aug. 10, 1754.

 [12:12] Jal, _Dict. Critique_, p. 685.

 [13:13] His career is somewhat doubtful.  He travelled in Italy in 1779
 and Abbé Galiani, an old friend of Holbach's, got a very agreeable
 impression of him.  John Wilkes, in a letter to his daughter in 1781,
 seems to imply that he had not turned out very well, and hopes that the
 baron's second son will make good the deficiencies of the first.  In
 1806 he published a translation of Weiland's _Oberon_ or _Huon de
 Bordeaux_ which went thru another edition in 1825, but those are the
 only details that have come to light.

 [13:14] Diderot, in writing to Mlle Volland Sep. 17, 1760 says: "On
 nourrit, à Chenvières, les deux filles de Madame d'Holbach.  L'aînée
 est belle comme un chérubin; c'est un visage rond, de grands yeux
 bleus, des levres fines, une bouche riante, la peau la plus blanche
 et la plus animée, des cheveux châtains qui ceignent un très joli
 front.  La cadette est un peloton d'embonpoint où l'on ne distingue
 encore que du blanc et du vermillon."

 [13:15] Gazette de France, June 1, 1781.

 [14:16] Holbach's intendant was [a] Jew, Berlise.  After his death several
 of his old servants Vincent, David, and Plocque, contested Holbach's will,
 in which they thought they were legatees.  The case was in the courts
 for several years and was finally decided against them.  Douarche,
 _Les tribunaux civil de Paris pendant la révolution_, Paris, 1905, Vol. I.,
 pp. 141, 261, 325, 689.

 [14:17] Avézac-Lavigne, _Diderot_, p. 5.

 [15:18] _Critica_, Vol. I, p. 48, note.

 [15:19] He met Voltaire in Paris in 1778, however, and Naigeon relates
 that Voltaire greeted him very cordially and said that he had long
 desired to make his acquaintance.

 [15:20] Collignon, _Diderot_, p. 1.

 [16:21] Avézac-Lavigne, _Diderot_, p. 75, note.

 [16:22] Romilly, _Memoirs_, Vol. I, p. 179.

 [16:23] Diderot, _Oeuvres_, Vol. I, p. lxvi, note.

 [17:24] Journal de Paris, Dec. 2, 1789.

 [17:25] See appendix, p. 73, p. 77.

 [18:26] See appendix, p. 71.

 [19:27] See appendix, p. 72.

 [19:28] See p. 6 sq. and appendix pp. 75 sq.

 [39:2] Barbier, _Dict._, Vol. I, p. 175 sq.

 [40:3] Barbier, Vol. I, p. xxxiii, note.

 [40:4] _Oeuvres_, Vol. XVIII, p. 265.

 [44:5] _Oeuvres_, Vol. XIV, p. 352.

 [47:7] Middleton's translation, preface.

 [47:8] Cf. p. 94. [Bibliography Part I]

 [54:1] Morley, _Diderot_, Vol. II, p. 155.

 [55:2] Later _Bon-sens_ and _Théologie portative_ were doomed to the
 flames by the condemnations of Jan. 10, 1774, and February 16, 1776.

 [55:3] _Système de la Nature_, ed. 1771, Vol. II, p. 496.

 [56:4] Grimm, _Cor. Lit._, Vol. IX, p. 167.

 [56:5] Voltaire, _Oeuvres_, ed. Beuchot, Vol. LXVI, p. 404.  Subsequent
 references to Voltaire are from this edition.

 [56:6] Vol. LXVII, p. 265.

 [56:7] Grimm, _Cor. Lit._, Vol. IX, p. 90.

 [57:8] Vol. LXVI, p. 432.

 [57:9] Vol. LXVI, p. 563.

 [57:10] Vol. LXVI, p. 386.

 [58:11] Vol. LXVI, p. 394.

 [58:12] Vol. XXVIII, p. 493.

 [58:13] Vol. LXVI, p. 469.

 [58:14] Goethe, _Wahrheit und Dichtung_, 11th Book, Goethe's _Werke_,
 Stuttgart, Vol. 19, p. 55.

 Auf philosophische Weise erleuchtet und gefödert zu werden, hatten
 wir keinen Trieb noch Hang: über religiöse Gegenstände glaubten wir
 uns selbst aufgeklärt zu haben, und so war der heftige Streit
 französischer Philosophen mit dem Pfafftum uns ziemlich gleichgültig.
 Verbotene, zurn Feuer verdaminte Bücher, welche damals grossen Lärmen
 machten, übten keine Wirkung auf uns.  Ich gedenke statt aller des
 _Système de la Nature_, das wir aus Neugier in die Hand nahmen.  Wir
 begriffen nicht, wie ein solches Buch gefährlich sein könnte.  Es kam
 uns so grau, so cimmerisch, so totenhaft vor, das wir Mühe hatten,
 seine Gegenwart auszuhalten, dass wir davor wie vor einern Gespenste
 schauderten.  Der Verfasser glaubt sein Buch ganz eigens zu empfehlen,
 wenn er in der Vorrede versichert, dass er, als ein abgelebter Greis,
 soeben in die Grube stiegend, der Mit- und Nachwelt die Wahrheit verkünden
 wolle.  Wir lachten ihn aus: denn wir glaubten bemerkt zu haben, dass
 von alten Leuten eigentlich an der Welt nichts geschätzt werde, was
 liebenswürdig und gut an ihr ist.  "Alte Kirchen haben dunkle Gläser"
 "Wie Kirschen und Beeren schmecken, muss mann Kinder und Sperlinge
 fragen"--dies waren unsere Lust und Leibworte: und so schien uns jenes
 Buch, als die rechte Quintessenz der Greisenheit, unschmachhaft, ja
 abgeschmackt Alles sollte notwendig sein und deswegen kein Gott.
 "Könnte es denn aber nicht auch notwendig einen Gott geben?" fragten
 wir.  Dabei gestanden wir freilich, das wir uns den Notwendigkeiten der
 Tage und Nächte, der Jahrszeiten, der klirnatischen Einflusse, der
 physichen und animalischen Zustände nicht wohl entziehen könnten: doch
 fühlten wir etwas in uns, das als vollkommene Willkür erschien, und
 wieder etwas, das sich mit dieser Willkür ins Gleichgewicht zu setzen
 suchte.  Die Hoffnung, immer vernünftiger zu werden, uns von den aussern
 Dingen, ja von uns selbst immer unabhängiger zu machen, konnten wir
 nicht aufgeben.  Das Wort Freiheit klingt so schon, dass mann es nicht
 entbehren könnte und wenn es einen Irrtum bezeichnete.

 Keiner von uns hatte das Buch hinausgelesen; denn wir fanden uns in
 der Erwartung getäuscht, in der wir es auf geschlagen hatten.
 _System der Natur_ ward angekündigt und wir hofften also wirklich
 etwas von der Natur, unsere Abgötten, zu erfahren.  Physik und Chemie,
 Himmels- und Erdbeschriebung, Naturgeschichte und Anatomie und so
 manches andere hatte nun zeit Jahren und bis auf den letzten Tag uns
 immer auf die geschmüchte grosse Welt hingeweisen, und wir hatten gern
 von Sonnen und Sternen, von Planeten und Monden, von Bergen, Thälern,
 Flüssen und Meeren und von allem, was dann lebt und webt, das Nähere
 sowie das Allgemeinere erfahren.  Das hierbei wohl manches vorkommen
 müsste, was dem gemeinen Menschen als schädlich, der Geistlichkeit als
 gefährlich, dem Staat als unzulässig erschienen möchte, daran hatten wir
 keinen Zweifel, und wir hofften, dieses Büchlein sollte nicht unwürdig
 die Feuerprobe bestauden haben.  Allein wie hohl und leer ward uns in
 deiser tristen Atheistischen Halbnacht zu Mute, in welcher die Erde mit
 allen ihren Gebilden, der Himmel mit allen seinen Gestirnen verschwand!
 Eine Materie sollte sein von Ewigkeit und von Ewigkeit her bewegt, und
 sollte nun mit dieser Bewegung rechts und links und nach allen Seiten
 ohne weiteres die unendlichen Phänomene des Daseins hervorbringen.
 Dies alles wären wir sogar zufrieden gewesen, wenn der Verfasser
 wirklich aus seiner bewegten Materie die Welt vor unsern Augen
 aufgebaut hätte.  Aber er mochte von der Natur so wenig wissen als wir;
 denn indem er einige allgemeine Begriffe hingepfahlt, verlässt er sie
 sogleich, um dasjenige, was höher als die Natur oder als höhere
 Natur in der Natur erschient, zur materiellen schweren, zwar bewegten,
 aber doch richtungs- und gestaltlosen Natur zu verwandeln, und glaubt
 dadurch recht viel gewonnen zu haben.  Wenn uns jedoch dieses Buch
 einigen Schaden gebracht hat, so war es der, das wir allen
 Philosophie, besonderers aber der Metaphysick recht herzlich gram
 wurden, und bleiben, dagegen aber auf lebendige Wissen, Erfahren,
 Thun und Dichten uns nur desto lebhafter und leidenschaftlicher hinwarfen.

 [64:15] Vol. II, p. 261, ed. 1820.




BIBLIOGRAPHY--PART I.

 EDITIONS OF HOLBACH'S WORKS IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER.


 As the works of Holbach are not yet cataloged in the Bibliothèque
 Nationale, the following list is doubtless incomplete.  The numbers
 given are those of the Bibliothèque Nationale and the British Museum
 where the books were used, except in cases where they were available
 in Boston, New York or Washington.


 ABBREVIATIONS

 B. N., Bibliothèque Nationale.
 B. M., British Museum.
 L. C., Library of Congress.
 C. U., Columbia University.
 H. U., Harvard University.
 U. T. S., Union Theological Seminary.
 G. T. S., General Theological Seminary.
 A. T. S., Andover Theological Seminary.
 N. Y., New York Public Library.
 B. P., Boston Public Library.

 Of about 120 editions consulted, C. U. had 13; U. T. S. 7; N. Y. 7;
 H. U. 6; B. P. 5; L. C. 4; A. T. S. 3; G. T. S. I.  There are 20 or more
 editions in existence that were not to be found in the library catalogs
 consulted.

 1752.  Lettre à une dame d'un certain âge sur l'état présent de l'Opéra.
 En Arcadie aux dépens de l'Académie Royale de Musique, (Paris, 8vo, pp. 11.)
 B. M. 1103 b 21 (2).

 1752.  Arrêt rendu à l'amphithéâtre de l'Opéra, sur la plainte du
 milieu du parterre intervenant dans la querelle des deux coins.
 (Paris, 1752, 8vo, pp. 16.)
 B. N. Yf 7726 (attributed to Diderot).

 1752.  Art de la Verrerie, De Neri, Merret et Kunckel; auquel on a
 ajouté Le _Sol Sine Veste_ D'Orschall; _L'Helioscopium videndi sine
 veste solem Chymicum_; Le _Sol Non Sine Veste_: Le Chapitre XI du
 _Flora Saturnizans_ de Henckel, Sur la Vitrification des Végétaux;
 Un Mémoire sur la manière de faire le Saffre; Le Secret des vraies
 Porcelaines de la Chine et de Saxe; Ouvrages où l'on trouvera la
 manière de faire le Verre et le Crystal, d'y porter des Couleurs,
 d'imiter les Pierres Précieuses, de préparer et colorer les Emaux,
 de faire la Potasse, de peindre sur le Verre, de préparer des Vernis,
 de composer de Couvertes pour des Fayances et Poteries, d'extraire la
 Couleur Pourpre de l'Or, de contrefaire les Rubis, de faire le Soffre,
 de faire et peindre les Porcelaines, etc.  Traduits de l'Allemand Par
 M. D... A Paris Durand, rue St. Jacques, au Griffon.  Pissot, Quai des
 Augustins, à la Sagesse.  Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi (in quarto).
  B. N. V. 11028.
  C. U. A. n H 35 (Avery Library).

 1753.  Minéralogie, ou description générale des substances du règne
 minéral.  Par Mr. Jean Gotshalk Wallerius, Professeur Royale de
 Chymie, de Métallurgie et de Pharmacie dans l'Université d'Upsal,
 de l'Académie Impériale des Curieux de la Nature.  Ouvrage traduit
 de l'Allemand, A Paris, Chez Durand, rue S. Jacques, au Griffon.
 Pissot, Quai de Conti, à la Croix d'Or, MDCCLII.  Avec Approbation
 et Privilège du Roi (2 vols., 8vo, pp. xlvii + 569 + 284).  Followed
 by (second title page) Hydrologie, ou description du règne aquatique,
 divisés par classes, gendres, espèces et variétés, avec la manière de
 faire l'essai des eaux (256 p.).
  B. N., S. 1992 (2).
  B. M. 987 h. 9-10.

 --Ibid.  (Paris, Herissant, Durand, 1759, 2 vols., 8vo.) N. Y., P. W. D.
  H. U. Geol. 7257-59.
  B. M. 970 h.l.

 1756.  Introduction à la Minéralogie; ou connoissance des eaux, des
 sucs terrestres, des sels, des terres, des pierres, des minéraux, et
 des métaux: avec une description abrégée des opérations de métallurgie.
 Ouvrage posthume de M. J. F. Henckel, publié sous le titre de _Henckelius
 in Mineralogiâ redivivus_ et traduit de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez Guillaume
 Cavelier, Libraire, rue S. Jacques, au Lys d'Or.  MDCCLVI.  Avec Approbation
 et Privilège du Roi.  (2 vols., 12vo, pp. lxxi + 204 + 371.)
  B. N. 19930 (1).

 1758.  Chimie métallurgique, Dans laquelle on trouvera la Théorie et
 la Pratique de cet Art.  Avec des Experiences sur la Densité
 des Alliages des Métaux, et des demi-Métaux; et un Abrégé de
 Docimastique.  Avec Figures.  Par M. C. E. Gellert, Conseiller
 des Mines de Saxe et de l'Académie Imperiale de Petersbourg.
 Ouvrages traduits de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez Briasson, rue
 Saint Jacques; Avec Approbation et Privelège.  (2 vols., 12mo,
 pp. xii + 296 + xvii + 351.)
  B. N., R. 37032 (3).

 1759.  Traités de physique, d'histoire naturelle, de minéralogie et de
 métallurgie.  (Paris, 1759, 3 vols., 12mo.)  (General title.)
  Tome I.  L'Art des Mines, ou Introduction aux connoissances
 nécessaires pour l'exploitation des mines métalliques avec un traité
 des exhalaisons minérales ou moufettes, et plusieurs mémoires sur
 differens sujets d'Histoire Naturelle-Avec figures.  Par
 M. Jean Gotlob Lehmann, Docteur en Médecine, Conseiller des
 Mines de Sa Majesté Prussienne, de l'Académie Royale des
 Sciences de Berlin et de celle des Sciences utiles de Mayence.
 Traduit de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez Jean Thomas Herrisant
 MDCCLIX.  Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi.
  Tome II.  Traité de la formation des métaux et de leurs
 matrices ou minières, ouvrage fondé sur les principes de la
 physique et de la minéralogie et confirmé par des expériences
 chymiques.  Par M. J. G. Lehmann, etc.  Traduit de l'Allemand.
  Tome III.  Essai d'une Histoire Naturelle des couches de la
 terre.  Dans lequel on traite de leur formation, de leur situation,
 des minéraux, des métaux et des fossiles qu'elles contiennent.
 Avec des considerations physiques sur les causes des Tremblements
 de Terre et de leur propagation.  Ouvrages traduits de l'Allemand,
 et augmentés de Notes du Traducteur etc.
  H. U., M, Z.
  B. M. 990 c. 16-18.

 1759.  Les plaisirs de l'imagination, poème en trois chants, par
 M. Akenside.  Traduit de l'anglais.  A Amsterdam, Arkstée et Merkus,
 et se trouve à Paris chez Pissot, Quai de Conti MDCCLIX (8vo).
  B. N. 2 ex. Yk 2362 et 2498.
  B. M. 1162 f 20.

 --Ibid.  Les plaisirs de l'imagination, poème en trois chants, Par
 Akenside, traduit de l'Anglais par le baron d'Holbach, augmenté de
 Notes historiques et littéraires, de la vie de l'auteur et du Traducteur,
 par Pissot.  Paris, Hubert MDCCCVI (1806-18vo).
  B. N. Yk 2363.
  B. M. 1065 b 20 (2).

 1760.  Pyritologie, ou Histoire Naturelle de la Pyrite, ouvrage dans
 lequel on examine l'origine, la nature, les propriétés et les usages
 de ce Minéral important, et de la plupart des autres Substances du même
 Règne: on y a joint le Flora Saturnisans où L'Auteur dèmontre l'Alliance
 qui se trouve entre les Végétaux et les Minéraux; et les Orpuscules
 Minéralogiques, Qui comprennent un Traité de l'Appropriation, un Traité
 de L'Origine des Pierres, plusieurs Mémoires sur la Chymie et l'Histoire
 Naturelle, avec un Traité des Maladies des Mineurs et des Fondeurs.
 Par M. Jean-Frederic Henkel, Docteur en Médicine, Conseiller des Mines
 du Roi de Pologne, Electeur de Saxe; de l'Académie Imperiale des Curieux
 de la Nature et de celle de Berlin.  Ouvrages Traduit de l'Allemand [by
 Baron d'Holbach and M., Charas] à Paris, Chez jean Thomas Hérissant,
 Libraire, Rue S. Jacques, à S. Paul et à S. Hilaire. MDCCLX.  Avec
 Approbation et Privilège du Roi.  (Paris, 1760, quarto, pp. xvi + 524.)
  B. N. 5324.
  B. M. 34 c 15.

 1760.  Oeuvres Métallurgiques de M. Jean-Christian Orschall, Inspecteur
 des Mines de S. A. S. le Land-grave de Hesse-Cassel.  Contenant
 I. L'Art de la Fonderie; II. Un Traité de la Siquation;
 III.  Le Traité de la Macération des Mines; IV. Le Traité
 des Trois Merveilles; (Traduit de l'Allemand) Le prix est de 50
 sols broché et de 3 liv. relié. A Paris, Chez Hardy, Libraire, rue
 S. Jacques au dessus de celle de la Parcheminerie à la Colonne
 d'Or.  MDCCLX.  Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi.
 (12mo, pp. + 394.)
  B. N., S 19,992.

 1764.  Recueil des mémoires les plus intéressants de chymie, et d'histoire
 naturelle, contenus dans les actes de l'Académie d'Upsal, et dans les
 Mémoires de l'Académie Royale des Sciences de Stockholm; Publiés depuis
 1720 jusqu'en 1760.  Traduits du Latin et de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez
 Pierre-Fr. Didot, le jeune, Quai des Augustins, à S. Augustin.  MDCCLXIV.
 Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi. (2 vols., 12mo, pp. viii + 687.)
  B. N. R 15483 (4).

 1765.  Histoire du règne de la Reine Anne d'Angleterre, contenant Les
 Négociations de la paix d'Utrecht, et les démêlés qu'elle occasionna
 en Angleterre.  Ouvrage posthume du Docteur Jonathan Swift.  Doyen de
 S. Patrice en Irelande: Publié sur un Manuscrit corrigé de la propre
 main de l'Auteur, et traduit de l'Anglais par M... [d'Holbach and Eidous].
 A Amsterdam, Chez Marc-Michel Rey, et Arkstée et Merkus. MDCCLXV.
 (12mo, pp. xxiv + 416.)
  B. N. 8vo Nc 1718.

 1766.  Traité du Soufre, ou Remarques sur la dispute qui s'est élevée
 entre les chymistes, au sujet du Soufre, tant commun, combustible
 ou volatil, que fixe, etc.  Traduit de l'Allemand de Stahl.
 A Paris, Chez Pierre-Francois Didot, le jeune.  Quai de
 Augustins à Saint-Augustin.  MDCCLXVI.  Avec Approbation
 et Privilège du Roi.  (12mo, pp. 392.)
  B. N., R 51709.
  B. M. 233 b 15.

 1766.  L'Antiquité dévoilée par ses usages, ou Examen critique des
 principales Opinions, Cérémonies et Institutions réligieuses et
 politiques des différens Peuples de la Terre.  Par feu M., Boulanger.
 Homo, quod rationis est particeps, consequentiam cernit causas rerum
 videt, earumque progressus et quasi antecessiones non ignorat,
 similitudines compare, rebus praesentibus adjungit at anectit futuras.
 --Cicero, De Offic. Lib. I. C. 4.
 A Amsterdam, Chez Marc-Michel Rey, MDCCLXVI. (Quarto pp. viii + 412.)
  B. N., E 690.
  C. U., A P. B 66 (Avery Library).

 --Ibid.  (1766, 3 vols., 12mo.)
  B. N. *E 2446-2448.

 --Ibid.  (1772, 3 Vols., (12mo.)
  B. N. *E 2445 (VIII).
  B. M. 4506 a 1.

 --Ibid.  (Amsterdam, 1777, 3 vols., 12mo, pp. lx + 355 + 391 + 396.)
  B. M. 696 b 35.

 --Ibid.  In Oeuvres de Boulanger T. I-IV En Suisse.
 De l'Imprimerie Philosophique MDCCXCI. (4 vols., (12mo.)
  B. N., Z 24316-24319.

 --Ibid.  In _Oeuvres de Boulanger_ T. I-II Amsterdam.
 (Paris, 2 vols., 8vo.) (Quérard.)

 1767.  Le Christianisme dévoilé, ou Examen des principes et des effets
 de la religion Chrétienne.  Par feu M. Boulanger.  Superstitio error
 infanus est, amandos timet, quos colit violat; quid enim interest,
 utrum Deos neges, an infames?  Senec. Ep. 12.
 A Londres, MDCCLVI (Nancy, Leclerc, 1761, 8vo, pp. xxviii + 295).
  B. N., D2 5305.
  B. M. 4016 bb 6.
  B. M., C 2863 (another copy with MS. notes by Voltaire).

 --Ibid.  (Londres, 1767, 8vo, pp. xx + 236.)  Printed at John Wilkes'
 private press in George St. Westminster, according to MS. note in
 title page.
  B. M. 4017 de. 13.

 --Ibid.  (Londres, 1767, 8vo, pp. 244.)
  A. T. S. 6 11.

 --Ibid.  (A Paris, Chez les Libraires Associés, 1767, 8vo,
 pp. xvii + 218.)
  B. N., D2 8364.

 --Ibid.  (Londres [Amsterdam], 1767, 12mo.)
  B. M. 696 b 34

 --Ibid.  Oeuvres de Boulanger T. VII.  (En Suisse de l'Imprimerie
 philosophique, 1791, 12mo.)
  B. N., Z 23421.

 --Ibid.  Oeuvres de Boulanger T. V, 1793.

 --Christianity Unveiled; being an examination of the principles and
 effects of the Christian Religion, from the French of Boulanger,
 Author of _Researches into the Origin of Oriental Despotism_, by
 W. M. Johnson. New York, 1795, printed at the Columbian Press by
 Robertson and Gowan for the editor and sold by the principal book
 sellers in the United States. (12mo, pp. ix + 238.)
  B. M. 4017 de 4.
  B. M. 900 i. 1, (7) another copy with MS. Notes.
  B. P.... 7490 a 22.

 --Ibid.  London, printed and published by R. Carlile, 55 Fleet St.
 1819 (8vo, pp. 98.)
  B. M. 4016 d. 13.

 --Ibid.  The Deist, etc. Vol. II, published by R. Carlile, 1819.
 (8vo, pp. vii + 125.)
  B. M. 4015 f 11.

 --El Cristianismo a descurbierto, ó examen de los principios y efectos
 de la religion cristiana.  Escrito en Francés por Boulanger y traducido
 al castellano por S. D. V.... Londres en la emprenta de Davidson, 1821.
 (12mo, pp. xxvi + 246.)
  B. M. 4016 df 6.

 1767.  L'Esprit du clergé, ou Le Christianisme primitif vengé des
 entreprises et des excès de nos Prêtres modernes.  Traduit de
 l'Anglois à Londres (Amsterdam) MDCCLXVII (2 vols. 8vo,
 pp. 2 + 10 + 240).
  B. M. pp. 54.

 1767.  De l'imposture sacerdotale, ou Recueil de Pièces sur le Clergé.
 Traduites de l'Anglois. Londres (Amsterdam) MDCCLXVII.
 (12mo, pp. 144.)
  B. N., D2 8368 (7).

  Contains, Tableau fidèle des papes.  _Traduit d'une Brochure
  Anglaise_ de M. Davisson, Publie sous le titre de _a true picture
  of Popery_, pp. 1-35.

  De l'insolence pontificale, ou des Prétentions ridicules du
  Pape et des Flatteurs de la Cour de Rome.  _Extrait de la
  Profession de Foi du célèbre Giannone_, par. M. Davisson, pp. 36-54.

  Sermon.  Sur les fourberies et les impostures du Clergé
  Romain, _Traduit de l'Anglois sur une Brochure publiée à
  Londres en 1735_ par M. Bourn Birmingham, Sous le titre de
  _Popery a Craft_, pp. 55-84.

  Le Prêtrianisme opposé au Christianisme.  Ou la Religion
  des Prêtres comparée à celle de Jésus-Christ, ou examen de la
  différence qui se trouve entre les Apôtres et les Membres du
  Clergé moderne.  _Publié en Anglois en 1720 sous le titre de_
  Priestanity.  Or a View of the disparity between the Apostles
  and the Modern Clergy, pp. 85-108.

  Des Dangers de l'Eglise, _Traduit de Anglois sur une Brochure
  Publiée eu 1719_.  Par M., Thomas Gordon, Sous le titre
  d'_Apology for the danger of the Church_, etc., pp. 109-128.

  Le Simbole d'un Laïque, ou Profession de Foi d'un homme
  désintéressé.  Traduit de l'Anglois de M. Gordon, Sur une
  brochure publiée en 1720.  Sous le titre de _the creed of an
  independent Whig_, pp. 129-144.

 --Ibid.  Published under title De La Monstruosité pontificale, ou
 Tableau fidèle des Papes.  _Traduit de l'Anglois_ Londres
 MDCCLXXII.  (16vo, pp. 55.)
  B. N., H. 19859.

 1768.  Examen des Prophéties qui servent de fondement à la religion
 chrétienne, avec un Essai de critique sur les Prophètes et les
 Prophéties en général.  Ouvrages traduits de l'Anglois.
 Londres MDCCLXVIII.  (8vo, pp. 234.)
  B. N., D2 5190.
  B. M. 4017 de 18.

 Contains, Discours sur les fondements de la religion chrétienne, pp. 1-111.

 Extrait De l'Ouvrage qui a pour titre: Examen du Septème de ceux
 qui prétendent que les Prophéties se sont accomplies à la lettre.
 The Scheme of literal Prophecy considered, etc., 1727. (8vo, pp. 118-234.)

 1768.  David, ou l'Histoire de l'homme selon le coeur de Dieu, ouvrage
 traduit de l'Anglois.  Saül, et David, tragédie en 5 actes d'après
 l'Anglois.... (Londres, 1768, 8vo.)
  B. N. 3 ex. LD2 5194, Hz 1542, et Rès Z. Beuchot 798 (2).
  B. M. 4014 a 67 (1).

 1768.  Les Prêtres démasqués, ou des iniquités du clergé chrétien.
 Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois.  Londres.  MDCCLXVIII.
 (16vo, pp. 180.)
  B. N., D2 4639.
  B. M. 4017 de 29.

 1768.  Lettres philosophiques, sur l'origine des Préjugés, du Dogme de
 l'Immortalité de l'Ame, de l'Idolâtrie et de la Superstition; sur
 le Système de Spinoza et sur l'origine du mouvement dans la
 matière.  Traduites de l'Anglois de J. Toland.

  Opinionum commenta delet dies, naturae judicia confirmat.
  Cicero, de Nat. Deor. lib. II.  A Londres (Amsterdam). 1768.
  MDCCLXVIII. (8vo, pp. 267.)
   B. N., D2 5203.
   B. M. 4015 de 48.

  Containing, Préface ou Lettre à un ami, en lui envoyant les
  Dissertations suivantes, dans laquelle l'Auteur rend compte des
  motifs qui les ont fait écrire. (pp. 12-26.)

  Première Lettre.  De L'origine et de la Force de ces Préjugés.
  (pp. 27-44.)

  Seconde Lettre.  Histoire du dogme de l'Immortalité de
  l'Ame Chez les Payens. (pp. 45-93.)

  Troisième Lettre.  Sur l'origine de l'Idolâtrie et sur les
  fondements de la Religion Payenne. (pp. 94-152.)

  Quartrième Lettre.  A un Gentilhomme Hollandois pour lui
  prouver que le système de Spinoza est dépourvu de fondements
  et pèche dans ses principes. (pp. 154-186.)

  Cinquième Lettre.  Dans laquelle on prouve que le mouvement
  est essentiel à la Matière; en réponse à quelques remarques
  qui ont été faites à l'Auteur au sujet de sa réfutation du
  Système de Spinoza.

  Nunc quae mobilitas fit reddita Materiaë Corporibus paucis
  licet hinc cognoscere, Memmi.  Lucret., lib. II, vers 142.
  (pp. 187-267.)

 1768.  Théologie portative, ou Dictionnaire Abrégé de la Religion
 Chrétienne.  Par Mr. l'Abbé Bernier, Licencié en Théologie.

 Audite hoc Sacerdotes, et attendite Domus Israël, et Domus
 Regis auscultate; quia vobis Judicium est, quoniam Laquens
 facti estis Speculationi et rete expansum super Thabor. Osée,
 Chap. V, Vers. I.  Londres (Amsterdam), MDCCLXVIII (1767),
 (12mo, pp. 243).
  B. N., D2 14334.
  B. M. 703 a 25.

 --Ibid. Londres (Suisse), 1768.

 --Ibid.  A Rome, MDCCLXXV (8vo, pp. 213).
  B. N., D2 8370.

 --Ibid.  Augmentée d'un Volume.  A Rome, avec permission et privilège
 du Conclave.  (2 vols., 12mo (1776).)
  B. N., D2 8371.

 --Ibid.  Under title.  Manuel Théologique, en form de Dictionnaire.
 Ouvrage très utile aux personnes des deux sexes pour le salut de leurs
 âmes, par l'abbé Bernier etc.  Rome, 1785 Au Vatican de l'Imprimerie du
 Conclave. (2 vols., 8vo.)

 --Ibid.  1802.

 1768.  Le Militaire philosophe, ou Difficultés sur la Religion,
 proposées au R. P. Malebranche, Prêtre de l'Oratoire.  Par un ancien
 Officier.  Londres (Amsterdam) MDCCLXVIII.  (8vo, pp. 193.)
  C. U. 201 N 14.

 --Ibid.  1770 (8vo).
  B. M. 4015 bb 32.

 --Ibid.  1776 (8vo).
  B. M. 4015 de 34.
  (Last chapter by d'Holbach.)

 1768.  La Contagion sacrée, ou Histoire Naturelle de la Superstition.
 Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois.  _Prima mali labes_.  Londres
 (Amsterdam), MDCCLXVII. (2 vols. in 1, 8vo.)
  B. N., D2 5195.
  C. U. 194 H 69 P.

 --Ibid.  Avec des notes relatives aux Circonstances.  Nouvelle
 Edition.  A Paris, de l'Imprimerie de Lemaire, rue d'Enfer no. 141,
 An 5 de la Republique (1797).  (2 vols. in 1, 8vo, pp. 179-190.)
  U. T. S. 441
  B. H. 723 C.

 --El Contagion sagrado, ó Historia natural de la supersticion.
 Paris, Rodriguez, 1822.  (2 vols., 8vo.)  (Quérard.)

 1768.  Lettres à Eugénia, ou Préservatif contre les préjugés... arctis
 Relligionum animos nodis exsolvere pergo.--Lucret. de rer. nat., Lib. 4,
 v. 6-7.  A Londres, MDCCLXVIII. (2 vols., 8vo, pp. xii + 188 + 167)

 --Ibid.  Oeuvres de Nicolas Fréret, T. I, pp. 1-359. Paris, 1792.  (8vo.)
  H. U. 19-30, vol. I.

 --Cartas á Eugenia, por Mr. Freret.  Paris.  Imprenta de F. Didot,
 1810 (8vo, pp. viii + 358).
  B. M. 4015 de 23.

 --Letters to Eugenia on the absurd, contradictory and demoralizing
 Dogmas and Mysteries of the Christian Religion.  Now first translated
 from the French of Fréret, but supposed to be written by Baron Holbach,
 author of the System of Nature, Christianity Unveiled, Common Sense,
 Universal Morality, Natural Morality.  R. Carlile, The Deist, etc.,
 Vol. II, 1819, etc.  (8vo, pp. 185.)
  B. M. 4015 f. 11.

 --Cartas à Eugenia.  Madrid, 1823, por Don Benito Cano.  2v.
  N. Y., Z F F.

 --Letters to Eugenia on the absurd, contradictory and demoralizing
 Dogmas and Mysteries of the Christian Religion, by Baron d'Holbach,
 New York, published by H. M. Dubecquet, No. 190
 William Street, 1833.  (12vo, pp. 236.)
  U. T. S. 326 B.

 --Letters to Eugenia etc., translated by Anthony C. Middleton,
 M.D. Boston, Josiah P. Mendum, 1857.
  B. P. 5484 2.

 1769.  De la Cruauté religieuse.  A Londres, MDCCLXIX. (16vo, pp. 228.)
  B. N., D2 8365.
  B. M. 4017 aa 25.
  U. T. S. H 723.

 --Ibid.  Amsterdam, 1775, 12vo.

 1769.  Le la Tolérance dans la Religion, ou de la Liberté de conscience
 par Crellius.  L'Intolérance convaincue de crime et de folie.
 Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois, Londres, MDCCLXIX.  (12vo, pp. 174.)

  Contains De la Tolérance dans la religion, ou de la liberté de
  conscience (Crellius).

  De l'Intolérance dans la Religion (d'Holbach), p. 88.

  Enfer détruit ou Examen Raisonné du Dogme de l'Eternité
  des peines.  Ouvrages, tr. de L'Anglois à Londres, MDCCLXIX, p. 1.

  Dissertation critique sur les tourmens de l'enfer.  Traduit de
  L'Anglois, p. 96 (by Whitefoot).
   B. N., D2 5154.

 --Ibid.  Hell destroyed!  Now first translated from the French of
 d'Alembert without any mutilations.  London.  Printed and published
 by J. W. Trust, 126 Newgate St., 1823. (8vo, pp. 47.)
 (Followed by Whitefoot's Torments of Hell, "now first translated
 from the French," to p. 83.)

 1770.  L'Esprit du judaïsme, ou Examen raisonné de la Loi de Moyse,
 et de son influence sur la Religion Chrétienne.
  Atque utinam nunquam Judaea sub acta fuisset Pompeii
  bellis, imperioque Titi.
  Latius excisae pestes contagie serpunt, Victoresques suos
  natio victa premit.  Rutilius, Itinerar.  Lia I, vs. 394, Londres,
  MDCCLXX. (12mo, pp. xxii + 201.)
   B. N., D2 5191.
   B. M. 4034 bb 38.

 1770.  Examen critique de la vie et des ouvrages de saint Paul, Avec
 une dissertation sur saint Pierre par feu M. Boulanger.
 Londres, 1770 (8vo), (by Peter Annet).
  B. N. 3ex. [D2 5349 (2) 8367 et H. 7551].
  B. M. 48o8 aa 7.

 --Ibid.  Nouvelle Edition, Londres, 1790. (8vo.)
  B. N. [H 13032].

 --Critical Examination of the Life of St. Paul.  Translated from
 the French of Boulanger.  "Paul, thou art beside thyself, much
 learning doth make thee mad."  Acts, chap, 26, v 24.  London.
 Printed and published by R. Carlile, 5 Water Lane, Fleet St.,
 1823.  (8vo, pp. 72.)
  B. M. 4372 h g (4).

 1770.  Histoire critique de Jésus-Christ, ou Analyse raisonnée
 des Evangiles.  Ecce Homo.
 Pudet me humani generis, cuius mentis et aures talia ferre
 potuerunt.  S. Augustin. (No date [Amsterdam, 1770?], 16mo,
 pp. viii + xxxii + 298.)
  B. N, 7,549.
  B. M. 4017 a. 45.
  U. T. S. 465 H 723.

 --Ecce Homo! or a critical enquiry into the history of Jesus Christ,
 being a Rational Analysis of the Gospels.  Edinburg, 1799.

 --Ecce Homo! or a critical enquiry into the history of Jesus Christ,
 being a Rational Analysis of the Gospels.  (2d ed.) London, 1813.
 Printed, published and sold by D. I. Easton.
  G. T. S. 232 G. H. 69.

 --Historia critica de Jesus Christo, o anáilisis razonado le los
 evangelios.  Traducida del Frances, por el P. F. de T, ex-jesuita.
 Ecce Homo.  Vel. aqui el hombre.  S. Juan, cap. 19,

 v. 5. Londres, en la imprenta de Davidson, 1822.  (2 vols., 12mo,
 pp. xiii + 200 + 280.)

 Contains Advertencia del Traductor.

 1770.  Tableau des Saints, ou examen de l'esprit, de la conduite, des
 maximes, et du mérite des personnages que le Christianisme révère et
 propose pour modèles.
 Hoc admonere simplices etiam potest,
 Opinione alterius ne quid ponderent;
 Ambitio namque diffidens mortalium
 Aut gratiae subscribunt, aut odio suo;
 Erit ille nottis, quem per te cognoveris.
 Phaed., Lib. III, Fab. 10.

 A Londres, MDCCLXX.  (2 Vols., 12mo, pp. xxviii + 280 + 286.)
  B. N., H 7,552.
  B. M. 4,824 a a a a 27.

 1770.  Recueil philosophique, ou Mélange de Pièces sur la Religion et
 la Morale.  Par différents Auteurs (ed. Naigeon).

 Ovando enim ista observans quieto et libero animo esse poteris,
 ut ad vem gerendam non Superstionem habeas, sed Rationem ducem.
 --Cicero, de Divinat., Lib. 2.  Londres, MDCCLXX.  (2 vols., 12mo.)
  B. N., D2 5309.

  Vol. I, p. 129 (VI), Réflexions sur les Craintes de la Mort.

  Vol. II, p. 34 (IX), Dissertation sur l'Immortalité de l'âme.
  Traduite de l'Anglais.

  Vol. II, p. 50 (X), Dissertation sur le suicide.  Traduit de l'Anglais.

  Vol. II, p. 70 (XI).  Problème important.  La Religion est
  elle nécessaire à la Morale et utile à la Politique?  Par M.
  Mirabaud.

  Vol. II, p. 125 (XIII).  Extrait d'un Ecrit Anglais qui a pour
  titre _le christianisme aussi ancien que le monde_.

 1770.  Essai sur les préjugés, ou, De l'influence des opinions sur les
 moeurs et sur le bonheur des hommes.  Ouvrage contenant l'apologie
 de la philosophie par Mr. D. M.

 Assiduite quotidiana et consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi,
 neque admirantur, neque requerunt rationes earum rerum quas vident.
 --Cicero de Nat. Deorum, Lib. II.  Londres, MDCCLXX. (8vo, pp. 394.)
  B. N., R 20 553.
  B. M. 8463 b b b 16.
  H. U. Phil. 264840.

 --Ibid.  Paris Desray an 1 (1792).  (2 vols., 8vo, Cortina.)

 --Ibid.  Oeuvres de Dumarsais. Paris, Pougin, 1797.  T. VI
 8vo, pp. 43-352.
  B. N., Z 23766-72.
  H. U. 9578 13 VI.

 --Ibid.  Paris, Niogret, 1822.
  C. U. 3045 D 89.

 --Essayo sobre las preocupaciones ó del influjo de las opiniones
 en las costumbres y felicidad de las hombres.  Por Dumarsais.
 En Paris.  Hallase en la casa de Rosa, Librero.  Gran pacio del
 Palacio Real.  1823.  (8vo, pp. 391.)
  B. N., R 34,366.

 --(Bibliothèque Nationale. Collection des meilleurs auteurs
 anciens et modernes.)  Dumarsais.  Essai sur les Préjugés.
 Précédé d'un Discours préliminaire et d'un Précis historique de
 la vie de Dumarsais par le citoyen Daube.  Paris.  Librairie de
 la Bibliothèque Nationale.  Rue de Richelieu 8, Près le
 Théâtre Francais. Ci-devant rue de Valois 1886.  Tous droits
 resérvés (25 centimes).
  B. N. 8vo R. 15952.

 1770.  Système de la Nature, ou Des Loix du Monde Physique et du
 Monde Moral. Par M. Mirabaud, Secrétaire Perpétuel et l'un
 des Quarante de l'Académie Française.

 Natura rerum vis atque majestas in omnibus momentis fide
 caret, si quis modè partes ejus, ac non totam complectatur
 animo.--Plin. Hist., Lib. VII. Londres, MDCCLXX.
 (2 vols., 8vo, pp. 370 + 412.)
  B. M. 4017 f 32
  U. T. S. 321 H 7235.

 --Ibid, Londres, MDCCLXX. (Second edition, 2 Vols., in 8vo,
 pp. 366 + 408.)
  B. M., D2 5166-5167.
 Contains Discours préliminaire de l'Auteur (pp. 16).  Avis de
 l'Editeur. Préface de l'Auteur, etc.

 --Abrégé du Code de la Nature, par M., Mirabaud, Secrétaire
 Perpétuel et l'un des Quarante de l'Académe Française.
 Londres. MDCCLXX. (8vo, 16 p.)

 --Ibid.  Nouvelle Édition augmentée par l'auteur à laquelle on a
 joint plusieurs pièces des meilleurs Auteurs relatives aux
 mêmes objets, etc.  (Ed. Naigeon.)  Londres, MDCCLXXI.
 (2 vols. in 8vo, pp. 397-500.)

 Contains Vol. II, p. 455, Réquisitoire, sur lequel est intervenu
 l'Arrêt du Parlement du 18 Août 1770 qui condamne à
 être brûlés, differens Livres ou Brochures, intitulés.

 1. La Contagion sacrée...
 2. Dieu et les hommes.
 3. Discours sur les Miracles.
 4. Examen des Apologistes.
 5. Examen impartial des principales religions du Monde.
 6. Christianisme dévoilé.
 7. Système de la Nature.
 Imprimé par ordre exprès du Roi.
  B. M., D2 5168.
 Reprinted in 1774, 1775-1777.

 --Ibid.  Nouvelle Édition.  Londres,  1780, 8vo, pp. xii + 371 + 464.

 Contains _Sentiments de Voltaire sur le Système de la Nature_.
 Séguier's _Réquisitoire_ and Holbach's _Réplique_.
  B. M. 528 1. 2526.

 --Ibid.  Nouvelle Édition. Londres, 1781. (2 vols. in 8vo, pp. 316 + 385.)
  B. N., D2 516g.

 --Ibid.  German Translation, Schreiter.  Leipzig and Frankfort, 1783.

 --Ibid.  Paris, An. III (1795).  (3 vols. in 8vo.)

 --The System of Nature.  Translated from the French of M. Mirabeau.
 London, 1797.  Printed for G. Kearsley.
  L. of C. B 2053-S G E-12 11-15959.

 --Ibid.  Philadelphia, 1808.  Pub. by R. Benson.
  L. of C., B 2053-S G 3 E 13-11-1595 G.

 --Nature and Her Laws, as Applicable to the Happiness of Man Living
 in Society, Contrasted with Superstitions and Imaginary Systems.
 Done from the French of M. Mirabaud.  London in 1816.  W. Hodgson.
  C. U. 194 H 69 S.
  L. of C., B 2053 S g 3 E 14-11.15960

 --Système de la Nature,... Avec notes de Diderot.  Nouvelle édition.
 Ed. Lemonnier, Paris, 1820.  B. Roquefort.  (2 vols. in 8vo.)

 --The System of Nature, or the Laws of the Moral and Physical World.
 Translated by Samuel Wilkinson from the original French of M. Mirabaud.
 Printed and published by Thomas Davison. (Vols. 2, 3, R. Helder, 1821.)
 London, 1820.
 3 vols in 8vo, pp. xi + 348-311-273.)  Contains Life of Mirabaud,
 Vol. 3, pp. 263-273.
  B. M. 804. de 20?
  U. S. 321. H 723.

 --Système de la Nature... par le Baron d'Holbach.
 Nouvelle Edition avec des notes et des corrections par Diderot.
 Paris, Etienne Ledoux, 1821.  (2 vols. in 8vo, pp. xvi + 507 +502.)
  B. N., D2 5170.
  B. M. 124 9 i. 26.
  C. U, 194 H 69. R.
  N. Y., Y C O.
 Contains extract of Grimm's Literary Correspondence, Aug. 10, 1789.

 --Système de la Nature, ou des lois du monde physique et du monde
 morale, par le Baron d'Holbach.  Nouvelle Édition avec des notes et
 des corrections par Diderot etc.  Paris, Domère, 1822. (4 vols. in 12mo.)
 Contains Avis de Naigion.  Avertissement du nouvel éditeur, pp. 11-29.
 Pièces diverses, pp. 30-46.

 --Sistema de la Naturaleza, con notas y correcciones por Diderot;
 trad, al castell. por F. A. F....  Paris, Masson hijo, 1822,
 4 vols. in 18mo.
  B. N., D2 5172.

 --Selections from Mirabaud's System of Nature in the Law of Reason, etc.
 London, 1831.  (16mo, pp. 231.)
 Selections from Bon-Sens, pp. 39-81, 82-112.
  B. M. 1387. b. 3.

 --Nature and her Laws, as Applicable to the Happiness of Man Living
 in Society, Contrasted with Superstitions and Imaginary Systems.
 From the French of M. de Mirabaud.  James Watson.  London, 1834.
 (2 vols. in 12mo, pp. xxiv + 287 + 320.)
 Sold for 7 s. 6 d.
  B. M. 1133 b 29.
 Contains
 1. Publisher's Preface (by James Watson).
 2. Preface.
 3. A short account of the life and writings of the Baron d'Holbach
 (by Julian Hibbert).

 --System of Nature, new and improved edition with notes by Diderot.
 Translated by H. D. Robinson.  New York, 1835, published by Matsell.
  N. Y., Y B X.

 --System of Nature, or the laws of the moral and physical world,
 from the French of M. Mirabaud.  (New edition, pp. 8 + 520.)
 London, 1840.
  C. U. 194 H 69. R 1.

 --System der Natur von Mirabaud. Deutsch bearbeitet und mit Anmerkungen
 versehen von Biedermann.  Leipzig, 1841.
 (8vo, pp. 604.) Georg. Wigands Verlag.
  T. S. (Andover 23).

 --System der Natur....  Translated by Schreiter, 1843.

 --System of Nature, new and improved edition with notes by Diderot,
 translated by H. D. Robinson.  Stereotype edition, Boston, 1848,
 in 8vo.  Published by J. P. Mendum.
  B. P. 00.80-6105.5.

 --System der Natur..., tr. Allhusen, 1851.

 --System of Nature..., tr. Robinson, Boston. 1853. Published by
 J. P. Mendum.
  B. P. 3600.48.
  N. Y., Y C O 11-15957/
  L. of C., B. 2053. S g 3 E 6.

 --The System of Nature; or, The Laws of the Moral and Physical World,
 by the baron d'Holbach, originally attributed to M. de Mirabaud with
 memoir by Charles Bradlaugh.  Reprinted verbatim from the best edition.
 London.  Published by E. Truelove, 256 High Holborn, 1884. In 8vo,
 pp. xi + 520.
  B. M. 8467 a a 33.

 1772.  Le Bon-sens ou idées naturelles opposées aux idées surnaturelles.
    Detexit quo doloso vaticinandi furore Sacerdotes
    mysteria, illis saepe ignota, audacter publicant.
    --Petronii Satyricon.
 Londres (Amsterdam) 1772, 8vo, pp. xii - 515.
  U. T. S. 321 H. 7236.

 --Ibid.  Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier d'Etrépigny.  Rome
 (Paris), 1791, 8vo.

 --Ibid.  Another edition, 1772, 8vo, pp. x-250.

 --Ibid. Londres (Amsterdam), 1774, 16mo, pp. xii-302.
  U. T. S. 321 H. 7236.

 --Ibid.  Le Bon-sens du curé Meslier d'Etrépigny.  Rome
 (Paris), 1791, 8vo.

 --Ibid.  Nouvelle édition, suivi du Testament du curé Meslier.
 Paris, Bouqueton, l'an I de la République.  (1792, 2 vols., 12mo.)

 --Ibid.  Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier suivi de son Testament.
 Paris, 1802, 8vo, pp. 380.
  C. U. 843 M 56 D 1.

 --Ibid.  Paris, Palais des Thermes de Julien, 1802 (1822), 12mo.

 --Ibid.  Paris, Guillaumin, 1830, 12mo.

 --Ibid.  Paris, Guillaumin, 1831, 12mo.

 --Common Sense, H. D. Robinson, New York, circa 1833.

 --Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier, etc.  Paris, Bacquenois, 1833, 12mo.

 --Ibid.  Paris, Guillaumin, 1834, 12mo.

 --Ibid.  Nancy, Haener, 1834, 12mo.

 --Der gesunde Menschenverstand.  Baltimore, 1857.

 --Ibid.  Baltimore, 1859 (second edition), H. U.

 --Ibid.  Tr. into German by Miss Anna Knoop. circa 1878.

 --Ibid., under title, Superstition in all ages; by Jean Meslier...
 who left to the world the following pages entitled _Common Sense_.
 Translated from the French original by Miss Anna Knoop, New York, 1878.
  C. U. L. 211 M.

 --Ibid.  New York, Peter Eckler, 1890, pp. vi-339.
  U. T. S.

 --Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier, Paris, Palais des Thermes de
 Julien, 1802.  (Garnier Frères, 1905.)
  H. U.

 --Superstition in all ages, etc.  Translated from the French original
 by Miss Anna Knoop; arranged for publication in its present form and
 manner with new title-page and preface by Dr. L. W. deLaurence.  Same
 to now serve as "text-book" number five for "the congress of ancient,
 divine, mental and Christian masters," Chicago, Ill., DeLaurence,
 Scott & Co., 1910, pp. xx-17-339.
  L. of C. 1910, A 26880.  L. W. de Laurence.

 1772.  De la nature humaine, ou Exposition des facultés, des actions
 et des passions de l'âme, et de leurs causes, déduites d'après des
 principes philosophiques qui ne sont communément ni reçus ni connus.
 Par Thomas Hobbes; Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois.
 Londres (Amsterdam), MDCCLXXII. (8vo, pp. iv + 171.)
  B. M. 8403 c c 15.
  (Bookmark of Richard Chase Sidney.)

 --Ibid.  Oeuvres philosophiques et politiques de Thomas Hobbes.
 1787. (2 vols., 8vo.)  (Tr. by Sorbière and Holbach.)
  B. M. 528 2223.

 1773.  Recherches sur les Miracles.  Par l'auteur de l'Examen des
 Apologistes de la Religion Chrétienne.  A Genus attonitum.
 Ovid.  Metam.  Londres, MDCCLXXIII.  (8vo. pp. 172.)
  B. M. 4015 de 44.

 1773.  La politique naturelle, ou, Discours sur les vrais principes du
 Governement.  Par un ancien Magistrat.
 Vis consili expers mole ruit suâ. --Horat., Ode IV, lib. III, vers. 65
 Londres (Amsterdam), MDCCLXXIII. (2 vols. in 8vo.
 pp. vii + 232 + 280.)
  B. M. 521 h. 8.
  U. S. 269 E. H. 723 (ex libris Baron Carl de Vinck, Ministre de Belgique).
  C. U. 320 H. 691.
  (Ascribed also to C. G. Lamoignon de Malesherbes.)

 --Ibid.  Londres, 1774.  (2 vols, in 8vo.)

 --La Politica Naturale: discorsi sui veri principi di governo.
 Traduzione di Luigi Salvadori.  Mantova, Balbiani e Donelli,
 '78-80.  (2 vols., 16 (L. 5).)

 1773.  Système Social, ou principes naturels de la moral et de la
 politique, avec un examen de l'influence du governement sur les moeurs.
 Discenda virtus est, ars est bonum fieri; erras si existimas
 vitia nobiscum nasci; supervenerunt in gesta sunt. --Seneca, Epis. 124.
 Londres, MDCCLXXIII.  (8vo, pp. 218 + 174 + 166, in three parts.)
  B. N., R 20275.76 E 1919.
  C. U. 320. H. 69.
  N. Y. SC.

 --Ibid.  Par l'auteur du Système de la Nature, Londres, 1774.
 (3 vols., 8vo, pp. 208 + 174 + 167.)
  B. M. 8403. h 23.

 --Ibid.  A Paris, Servière, 1795.  (2 vols., 8vo, pp. 472 + 403.)
  B. M. 8404 dc. 25 (ex libris J. Gomez de la Cortina et amicorum.
  Fallitur hora legendo).

 --Ibid....par le baron d'Holbach.  Paris, Niogret, 1882.
 (2 vols, 8vo.)
  C. U. 320.  H. 690.

 1774.  Agriculture réduit à ses vrais principes par Jean Gottschalk
 Wallerius, Paris, Lacombe, 1774. (12mo.)

 1776.  Ethocratie ou le gouvernement fondé sur la morale.
 Constituit bonos mores civitati princips. --Seneca, de Clementia, Lib. I.
 A Amsterdam.  Chez Marc Michel Rey.  MDCCLXXVI.
 (8vo, pp. 10 + 293 + 2.)
  C. U. 320. 1 H 69.

 1776.  Morale universelle, ou Les devoirs de l'homme fondés sur la nature.
 Naturâ duce utendum est: hanc ratio observe, hanc
 consulit, idem est ergo beatè vivere et secundum naturam. --Seneca
 de Vita beata, Cap. VIII init.
 A Amsterdam.  Chez Marc-Michel Rey, MDCCLXXVI.
 (3 vols., 8vo, pp. 416 + 334 + 364.)
  B. N., R 18596-7-8..
  B. M. 231 h-3

 --Ibid.  A Tours, Chez Letourmy le jeune et compagnie, A Angers,
 De l'Imprimerie de Jahyer et Geslin.  Imprimeurs-Libraries, rue
 Milton, 1792. (8vo.)
  B. M. 527.  K. 1-3H.
  U. Phil. 2648.50.

 --Ibid.  Paris, Smith (Rey et Gravier), an 6, 1798. (3 vols., 8vo.)

 --Ibid.  Par le baron d'Holbach. Paris, Masson et fils.  Libraires,
 Rue de Tournon, No. 6, 1820.  (3 vols., 8vo, pp. xxxii + 314 + 266 + 300.)
  C. U. 170 H 2.
  B. M. 8411 k 7.

 --Moral universal ódeberes del hombre, fundatos en su naturaleza.
 Obra escrita en francès por el baron de Holbach y traducida al
 castellano por D. Manuel Diaz Moreno Zaragoza, 1838, imp. de
 M. Heras. (3 vols., 8vo.)

 --La moral universel por el baron de Holbach.  Madrid, 1840,
 imp. y lib. del Establecimiento Central. (2 vols. in 4to.)

 --Ibid.  Translated into German by Johann Umminger.  Leipzig, 1898.


 1790.  Elements de la morale universelle, ou catechisme de la nature.
 Par feu M., le Baron d'Holbach des académies de Pétersbourg de Manheim
 et de Berlin.
 Numquam aliud natura aliud sapientia dicit.--Juvenal.
 A Paris.  Chez G. de Bure.  Rue Serpente, No. 6, MDCCXC.
 (24vo, pp. vi + 208.)
  B. M. 528. a. 27.
  B. P., G. 3537.14.

 --Elementos de la moral universel, ó catecismo de la naturaleza,
 por el baron de Holbach.  Madrid, 1820, imp. que fué de Fuentenebro,
 lib de Sanchez en 8vo past.

 --Principios de moral, ó manuel de los deberes del hombre fundados
 en la naturaleza.  Obra póstuma de baron de Holbach.  Traducida al
 espanol por D. L. M. G. adoptada en su mayor parte de la escuelas
 de primera educacion para instruccion de los ninos.  Madrid, 1837,
 imp. de Ferrer y compania lib de J Sanz.  (In 16mo.)





BIBLIOGRAPHY PART II.

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.


  Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie.

  Avézac-Lavigne, Diderot et la société du Baron d'Holbach.  Paris, 1875.

  Bachaumont, Mémoires secrètes.  Paris, 1859.

  Barbier, Dictionnaire des ouvrages anonymes et pseudonymes.  Paris, 1822.

  Barni, Histoire des idées morales et politiques en France au
       dix-huitième siècle.  Paris, 1865.

  Barruel, Mémoire pour servir à l'histoire de Jacobinisme.  Hamburg, 1798.

  Lettres helviennes.  Hamburg, 1798-1799.

  Bartholmess, Histoire philosophique de l'Académie de Prusse.  Paris, 1851.

  Bergier, Apologie de la Religion Chrétienne contre l'auteur du
       _Christianisme dévoilé_.  Paris, 1769.
     Examen du matérialisme, ou Réfutation du _Système de la Nature_.
       Paris, 1771.

  Bibliothèque Nationale, Pièces originales.  1529 d'Holbach.
     Manuscrits Français, 15224, 22149 (Col. Anisson).

  Boiteau, Mémoires de Mme. d'Epinay.  Paris.

  British Museum Manuscript Index, 1876-1881.  Mss. Folios 30867-69, 70, 71.

  Brougham, A Discourse of Natural Theology.  London, 1835.

  Brunel, Les philosophes et l'Académie Française.  Paris.

  Brunet, Manuel du Librairie.  Paris, 1865.

  Bucherberger, Kirche-Lexikon.

  Burton, Life and Correspondence of David Hume.  Edinburgh, 1846.
     Letters of Prominent Persons addressed to David Hume.
       Edinburgh and London, 1849.

  Buzonnière, Observations sur un ouvrage intitulé le _Système de la Nature_.
     Paris, 1776.

  Camuset, Principes contre l'incrédulité, à l'occasion du
     _Système de la Nature_.  Paris, 1771.

  Carlile, The Deist.  London, 1819.

  Carlyle, Rev. Dr. Alexander, Autobiography, Ed. Burton.  London, 1861.

  Castillon, Observations sur un livre intitulé, _Système de la Nature_.
     Berlin, 1771.

  Catalogue des manuscrits français dans les bibliothèques départementales.

  Chaudon, Dictionnaire anti-philosophique etc.  Avignon, 1767.

  Claudon, Le Baron d'Holbach.  Paris, 1835.

  Collignon, Diderot.  Paris, 1907.

  Critica, 1903-1904

  Damiron, Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de la philosophie au 18me
       siècle.  Paris, 1858.
     Etudes sur la philosophie de d'Holbach.  Mémoires de l'Académie
       des sciences morales et politiques, Vol. IV du Compte rendu des Séances.

  Debure, Catalogue des livres de la bibliothèque du feu
     M. le baron d'Holbach.  Paris, 1789.

  Delisle de Sales, Philosophie de la Nature.  Paris, 1770.
     Mémoire en faveur de Dieu.  Paris, 1802.

  Delvaille, Essai sur l'histoire de l'idée de progrès.  Paris, 1910.

  Diderot, Oeuvres, ed Brière.  Paris, 1822.
     Mémoires, correspondance, et ouvrages inédits de Diderot.  Paris, 1830.
     Oeuvres complètes de Diderot, ed. Assézat et Tourneux.  Paris, 1877.

  Douarche, Les tribunaux civils de Paris pendant la Révolution.
       Paris, 1905-1907.

  Dupont de Nemours, Philosophie de l'univers.  Paris, l'An IV (1796).

  Duprat, Les Encyclopédists.  Paris, 1865.

  Duvoisin, L'Autorité des livres du Nouveau Testament contre les
       incrédules.  Paris, 1775.
     L'Autorité des livres de Moïse, etc.  Paris, 1778.

  Eclaircissements relatifs à la publication des _Confessions_ de
     Rousseau, avec des réflexions sur les apologies de MM. Cerutti et
      d'Holbach etc.  Paris, 1789.

  Encyclopédie des sciences religieuses.

  Epinay, Mme. d' Mémoires et correspondance.  Paris, 1818.

  Fabre, Les Pères de la Révolution.  De Bayle à Condorcet.  Paris, 1910.

  Fabry d'Autrey, Antiquité justifiée etc.  Paris, 1766.

  Fangouse, La religion prouvée aux incrédules, etc.  Paris, 1780.

  Ferraz, Histoire de la philosophie pendant la Révolution.  Paris, 1889.
     Histoire de la philosophie en France au 19me siecle.  Paris, 1882.

  Fitzmaurice, Life of William, Earl of Shelburne.  London, 1875.

  Fortnightly Review, Vol. XXVIII, 1877.

  Frederick II, King of Prussia, Examen critique du livre
       intitulé _Système de la Nature_.  Berlin, 1770.

  Fréret, Lettre de Thrasybule à Leucippe.

  Funck, Les sophistes français et la révolution européenne.  Paris, 1905.

  Galiani, Lettres, ed. E. Asse.  Paris.
     Correspondance, ed. Perey et Maugras.  Paris, 1910.

  Garrick.  Private Correspondence.  London, 1833.

  Gasté, Diderot et le curé de Montchauvet, etc.  Paris, 1898.

  Garat, Mémoires historiques sur le 18me siècle.  Paris, 1821.

  Gazette de France, Aug. 10, 1754.  June 1, 1781.

  Genlis, Mme de, Les dîners du Baron d'Holbach, etc.  Paris, 1822.

  Gibbon, Autobiography, ed. Murray.  London, 1897.
     Private Letters, 1753-1794, ed Prothero.  London, 1897.

  Grande Encyclopédie.

  Grimm, Correspondance littéraire et critique.  Paris, 1878.
     Nouveaux mémoires secrets et inédits, etc.  Paris, 1834.

  Hammard, Mme. de Genlis.  New York, 1913.

  Hancock, The French Revolution and the English Poets.  New York, 1899.

  Hedgcock, David Garrick et ses amis français.  Paris, 1911.

  Helvetius, Le vrai sens du _Système de la Nature_.  Paris, 1774.

  Herzog, Real-Encyklopedie.

  Hibbert, A Short Sketch of the Life and the Writings
       of Baron d'Holbach.  London, 1834.

  Holland, Réflexions philosophiques sur la
       _Système de la Nature_.  Paris, 1822.

  Hume, Private Correspondence, etc.  London, 1820.

  L'Impie démasqué, etc.  London, 1773.

  Independent Whig.  London, 1720.

  Jal, Dictionnaire critique de biographie et d'histoire.  Paris, 1867.

  Journal de lecture, Vol. I, 1775.

  Journal de Paris, 1789.

  Laharpe, Cours de littérature.  Paris, 1821.
     Philosophie du 18me siècle.  Paris, 1818.

  Lagrange, Oeuvres complètes de Senèque.  Paris, 1778.

  Landry, Beccaria, Scritte e lettre inediti.  1910.

  Lange, History of Materialism.  Boston, 1877.

  Lanson, Manuel bibliographique de la littérature
       française moderne 1500-1900.  Paris, 1911.

  Lenel, Un homme de lettres au 18me siècle, Marmontel.  Paris, 1902.

  Lerminier, De l'influence de la philosophie au 18 siècle.  Paris, 1833.

  Lévy-Bruhle, History of Modern Philosophy in France.  Chicago, 1899.

  Lowell, The Eve of the French Revolution.  Boston, 1892.

  Magasin encyclopédique.  Mai, 1805.

  Mangold, von, Unumstossliche Widerlegung des Materialismus
       gegen den Verfasser des Systèms der Natur.  Augsburg, 1803.

  Maréchal, Dictionnaire des athées (Paris). An. VIII (1800).

  Marmontel, Mémoires, ed. Tourneur.  Paris, 1891.

  Martin, Histoire de France, 1748-1789.  4th Ed.

  Michaud, Biographie universelle.

  Morellet, Mémoires.  Paris, 1821.
     Lettres à Lord Shelburne.  Paris, 1898.

  Mornet, Les sciences de la nature au 18me siècle.  Paris, 1911.

  Myers, Konversations-Lexikon.

  Naigeon, Mémoires historiques et philosophiques sur la
       vie et les ouvrages de Denis Diderot.  Paris, 1821.

  Nouvelle Revue, June, July, 1912.

  Paulian, La religion prouvée aux incrédules, etc. Paris, 1780.

  Paulian, Le véritable système de la nature.  Paris, 1788.

  Payrard, De la nature et de ses lois.  Paris, 1773.

  Perey et Maugras, Dernières années de Mme. d'Epinay.  Paris, 1883.

  Picavet, Les Idéologues.  Paris, 1891.

  Plechanow, Beiträge zur Geschichte des Materialismus.  Stuttgart, 1896.

  Quérard, La France littéraire.  Paris, 1833.
     Superchéries littéraires dévoilées.  Paris, 1870.
     Littérature française contemporaine (Continuation).

  Rabbe, Biographie.

  Répertoire de la Gazette de France.

  Revue Bleue, June, 1912.

  Revue de l'histoire littéraire de la France, Jan.-June, 1912.

  Revue de synthèse historique, 1903, Vol. I.

  Revue des Cours et Conférences, 1908-1910.

  Revue des deux mondes, Apr., 1886; June, 1912.

  Revue encyclopédique, Vol. XVI.

  Rey, Rousseau.  Paris, 1909.

  Rietstap, Armorial général.  Gonda, 1884.

  Robinet, Le personnel municipale de Paris pendant la Révolution.
       Paris, 1890.

  Rochfort, L'Esprit révolutionnaire avant la Révolution.  Paris, 1878.

  Romilly, Sir S., Memoirs.  London, 1840.

  Rosenkrantz, Diderot's Leben und Werke.  Leipzig, 1864.

  Rousseau, Oeuvres complètes.  Paris, 1793.

  Roustan, Les philosophes et la société française au 18me siècle.
       Paris, 1906.

  St.-Beuve, Portraits littéraires.  Paris, 1878.
     Causeries de lundi.  Paris, 1882.

  St.-Martin, Des erreurs et de la vérité.  Edinburgh, 1775.

  Soury, Bréviaire de l'histoire de matérialisme.  Paris, 1881.

  Stupuy, Chez Diderot, comédie en deux actes, en vers.  Paris, 1868.

  Tallentyre, The Friends of Voltaire.  London, 1906.

  Villemain, Cours de littérature française.  Paris, 1859.

  Voltaire, Oeuvres complètes, ed. Beuchot.  Paris, 1829-40.
     Oeuvres complètes, ed. Garnier.  Paris, 1880.

  Walpole, H., Letters, ed, Toynbee.  London, 1912.

  Weiland, Oberon, tr. Holbach fils.  Paris, 1825.

  Wetzer & Welte, Kirchen-lexikon.

  Wilkes, Correspondence with his Friends.  London, 1805.
       Letters from the year 1774 to 1796, addressed to his daughter.
        London, 1805.

  Wright, A History of French Literature.  London, 1912.





VITA


Max Pearson Cushing, born in Bangor, Maine, October 27, 1886; Bangor
High School, 1905; A.B. Bowdown College, 1909. Instructor in English,
Robert College, Constantinople, 1909-1911; Graduate Student in History,
Columbia University, 1911-1913; A.M. Columbia, 1912, Instructor in
History, Reed College, Portland, Oregon, 1913.