IN HOC SIGNO VINCES!

(UNDER THIS SIGN THOU SHALT CONQUER.)

Beneath the solemn stars that light
The dread infinitudes of night,
Mid wintry solitudes that lie
  Where lonely Hecla's toweling pyre
Reddens an awful space of sky
  With Thor's eternal altar fire!
Worn with the fever of unrest,
And spent with years of eager quest,
Beneath the vaulted heaven they stood,
  Pale, haggard eyed, of garb uncouth,
The seekers of the Hidden Good,
  The searchers for Eternal Truth!

From fiery Afric's burning sands,
From Asia's hoary templed lands,
From the pale borders of the North,
  From the far South--the fruitful West,
O, long ago each journeyed forth,
  Led hither by one glorious quest!
And each, with pilgrim staff and shoon,
Bore on his scrip a mystic rune,
Some maxim of his chosen creed,
  By which, with swerveless rule and line,
He shaped his life in word and deed
  To ends heroic and divine!

Around their dreary winter world
The great ice-kraken dimly curled
The white seas of the frozen zone;
  And like a mighty lifted shield
The hollow heavens forever shone
  On gleaming fiord and pathless field!
Behind them, in the nether deep,
The central fires, that never sleep,
Grappled and rose, and fell again;
  And with colossal shock and throe
The shuddering mountain rent in twain
  Her garments of perpetual snow!

Then Aba Seyd, grave-eyed and grand,
Stood forth with lifted brow and hand;
Kingly of height, of mien sublime,
  Like glorious Saul among his peers,
With matchless wisdom for all time
  Gleaned from the treasure house of years;
His locks rose like an eagle's crest,
His gray beard stormed on cheek and breast,
His silvery voice sonorous rang,
  As when, exulting in the fray,
Where lances hissed and trumpets sang,
  He held the Bedouin hordes at bay.

"Lo! Here we part: henceforth alone
We journey to the goal unknown;
But whatsoever paths we find,
The ties of fellowship shall bind
Our constant souls; and soon or late--
  We laboring still in harmony--
The grand results for which we wait
  Shall crown the mighty years to be!
Now scoffed at, baffled, and beset,
We grope in twilight darkness yet,
We who would found the age of gold,
  Based on the universal good,
And forge the links that yet shall hold
  The world in common Brotherhood!

"O, comrades of the Mystic Quest!
Who seek the Highest and the Best!
Where'er the goal for which we strive--
  Whate'er the knowledge we may win--
This truth supreme shall live and thrive,
  'Tis love that makes the whole world kin!
The love sublime and purified,
That puts all dross of self aside
To live for others--to uphold
  Before our own a brother's cause:
This is the master power shall mould
  The nobler customs, higher laws!

"Then shall all wars, all discords cease,
And, rounded to perpetual peace,
  The bounteous years shall come and go
Unvexed; and all humanity,
  Nursed to a loftier type, shall grow
Like to that image undefiled,
That fair reflex of Deity,
Who, first, beneath the morning skies
And glowing palms of paradise,
A God-like man, awoke and smiled!"
* * * * Like some weird strain of music, spent
In one full chord, the sweet voice ceased;
A faint white glow smote up the east,
Like wings uplifting--and a cry
Of winds went forth, as if the night
Beneath the brightening firmament
Had voiced, in hollow prophecy,
The affirmation: "By and by!"



HOW KATIE SAVED THE TRAIN.

The floods were out. Far as the bound
Of sight was one stupendous round
  Of flat and sluggish crawling water!
As, from a slowly drowning rise,
She looked abroad with startled eyes,
  The engineer's intrepid daughter.
Far as her straining eyes could see,
The seething, swoolen Tombigbee
  Outspread his turbulent yellow tide;
His angry currents swirled and surged
O'er leagues of fertile lands submerged,
And ruined hamlets, far and wide.

Along a swell of higher ground,
Still, like a gleaming serpent, wound
  The heavy graded iron trail;
But, inch by inch, the overflow
Dragged down the road bed, till the slow
  Back-water crept across the rail.
And where the ghostly trestle spanned
A stretch of marshy bottom-land,
  The stealthy under current gnawed
At sunken pile, and massive pier,
And the stout bridge hung airily where
  She sullen dyke lay deep and broad.

Above the hollow, droning sound
Of waves that filled the watery round,
  She heard a distant shout and din--
The levees of the upper land
Had crumbled like a wall of sand,
  And the wild floods were pouring in!
She saw the straining dyke give way--
The quaking trestle reel and sway.
  Yet hold together, bravely, still!
She saw the rushing waters drown
The piers, while ever sucking down
  The undermined and treacherous "fill!"

Her strong heart hammered in her breast,
As o'er a distant woody crest
  A dim gray plume of vapor trailed;
And nearer, clearer, by and by,
Like the faint echo of a cry,
  A warning whistle shrilled and wailed!
Her frightened gelding reared and plunged,
As the doomed trestle rocked and lunged--
  The keen lash scored his silken hide:
"Come, Bayard! We must reach the bridge
And cross to yonder higher ridge--
  For thrice an hundred lives we ride!"

She stooped and kissed his tawny mane,
Sodden with flecks of froth and rain;
  Then put him at the surging flood!
Girth deep the dauntless gelding sank,
The tide hissed round his smoking flank,
  But straight for life or death she rode!
The wide black heavens yawned again,
Down came the torrent rushing rain--
  The icy river clutched her!
Shrill in her ears the waters sang,
Strange fires from the abysses sprang,
  The sharp sleet stung like whip and spur!

Her yellow hair, blown wild and wide,
Streamed like a meteor o'er the tide;
  Her set white face yet whiter grew,
As lashed by furious flood and rain,
Still for the bridge, with might and main,
  Her gallant horse swam, straight and true!
They gained the track, and slowly crept
Timber by timber, torrents swept,
  Across the boiling hell of water--
Till past the torn and shuddering bridge
He bore her to the safer ridge,
  The engineer's intrepid daughter!

The night was falling wild and black,
The waters blotted out the track;
  She gave her flying horse free rein,
For full a dreadful mile away
The lonely wayside station lay,
And hoarse above his startled neigh
  She heard the thunder of the train!
"What if they meet this side the goal?"
She thought with sick and shuddering soul;
For well she knew what doom awaited
A fell mischance--a step belated--
The grinding wheels, the yawning dyke--
Sure death for her--for them--alike!

Like danger-lamps her blue eyes glowed,
As thro' the whirling gloom she rode,
  Her laboring breath drawn sharply in;
Pitted against yon rushing wheels
Were tireless grit and trusty heels,
  And with God's favor they might win!
And soon along the perilous line
Flamed out the lurid warning sign,
While round her staggering horse the crowd
Surged with wild cheers and plaudits loud.--
And this is how, thro' flood and rain,
Brave Kate McCarthy saved the train!



OFF THE SKIDLOE.

With leagues of wasteful water ringed about,
And wrapped in sheeted foam from base to peak,
A sheer, stupendous monolith, wrought out
By the slow, ceaseless labor of the deeps,
In awful isolation, old as Time,
The gray, forbidding Rock of Skidloe stands--
Breasting the wild incursions of the North--
The grim antagonist of a thousand waves!

Far to the leeward, faintly drawn against
A dim perspective of perpetual storms,
A frowning line of black basaltic cliffs
Baffles the savage onset of the surf.
But, rolled in cloud and foam, old Skidloe lifts
His dark, defiant head forever mid
The shock and thunder of contending tides,
And fixed, immovable as fate, hurls back
The rude, eternal protest of the sea!

Colossal waters coil about his feet,
Deep rooted in the awful gulfs between
The measureless walls of mountain chains submerged;
An infinite hoarse murmur wells from all
His dim mysterious crypts and corridors:
The inarticulate mutterings that voice
The ancient secret of the mighty main.

In all the troubled round of sea and air,
No glimpse of brightness lends the vivid zest
Of life and light to the harsh monotone
Of gray tumultuous flood and spectral sky;
Far off the black basaltic crags are heaved
Against the desolate emptiness of space;
But no sweet beam of sunset ever falls
Athwart old Skidloe's cloudy crest--no soft
And wistful glory of awakened dawn
Lays on his haggard brows a touch of grace.
Sometimes a lonely curlew skims across
The seething torment of the dread abyss,
And, shrieking, dips into the mist beyond;
But, solitary and unchanged for aye,
He towers amid the rude revolt of waves,
His stony face seamed by a thousand years,
And wrinkled with a million furrows, worn
By the slow drip of briny tears, that creep
Along his hollow cheek. His hidden hands
Drag down the drowned and tossing wrecks that drive
Before the fury of the Northern gales,
And mute, inscrutable as destiny,
He keeps his sombre secrets as of yore.

The slow years come and go; the seasons dawn
And fade, and pass to swell the solemn ranks
Of august ages in the march of Time.
But changeless still, amid eternal change,
Old Skidloe bears the furious brunt of all
The warring elements that grapple mid
The mighty insurrections of the sea!
Gray desolation, ancient solitude,
Brood o'er his wide, unrestful water world,
While grim, unmoved, forbidding as of yore,
He wraps his kingly altitudes about
With the fierce blazon of the thunder cloud;
And on his awful and uplifted brows
The red phylactery of the lightning shines;
And throned amid eternal wars, he dwells,
His dread regality hedged round by all
The weird magnificence of exultant storms!



LIFE'S CROSSES.

"O life! O, vailed destiny!"
  She cried--"within thy hidden hands
What recompense is waiting me
  Beyond these naked wintry sands?
For lo! The ancient legend saith:
  'Take ye a rose at Christmas tide,
And pin thereto your loving faith,
  And cast it to the waters wide;
Whate'er the wished-for guerdon be,
God's hand will guide it safe to thee!'

"I pace the river's icy brink,
  This dreary Christmas Eve," she said,
"And watch the dying sunset sink
  From pallid gold to ashen red.
My eyes are hot with weary tears,
  I heed not how the winds may blow,
While thinking of the vanished years
  Beyond the stormy heave and throe
Of yon far sea-line, dimly curled
Around my lonely island-world.

"The winds make melancholy moan;
  I hear the river flowing by,
As, heavy-hearted and alone,
  Beneath the wild December sky,
I take the roses from my breast--
  White roses of the Holy Rood--
And, filled with passionate unrest,
  I cast them to the darkening flood.
O, roses, drifting out to sea,
Bring my lost treasures back to me!

"Bring back the joyous hopes of youth!
  The faith that knew no flaw of doubt!
The spotless innocence and truth
  That clothed my maiden soul about!
Bring back the grace of girlhood gone,
  The rapturous zest of other days!
The dew and freshness of the dawn,
  That lay on life's untrodden ways--
The glory that will shine no more
For me on earthly sea or shore!

"Call back the sweet home-joys of old
  That gladdened many a Christmas-tide--
The faces hidden in the mould,
  The dear lost loves that changed or died!
O, gentle spirits, gone before,
  Come, from the undiscovered lands,
And bring the precious things of yore
  To aching heart and empty hands;
Keep all the wealth of earth and sea,
But give my lost ones back to me.

"Vain are my tears, my pleadings vain!
  O, roses, drifting with the tide,
To me shall never come again
  The glory of the years that died!
Thro' gloom and night, sweet flowers, drift on--
  Drift out upon the unknown sea;
Into the holy Christmas dawn
  Bear this impassioned prayer for me:
O, turn, dear Lord, my heart away
  From things that are but for a day;
Teach me to trust thy loving will,
And bear life's heavy crosses still."






NATHAN COVINGTON BROOKS, A.M., LL.D.


The following sketch is principally from the Third Volume of
Biographical Sketches of Eminent Americans.

"Nathan Covington Brooks, the youngest son of John and Mary Brooks, was
born in West Nottingham, Cecil county, Maryland, on the 12th of August,
1809. His education was commenced at the West Nottingham Academy, then
under the charge of Rev. James Magraw, D.D., and subsequently he
graduated as Master of Arts, at St. John's College, Annapolis, Md. His
thesis was a poem on the World's Changes. Diligent and persevering in
his studies, his rapid progress and high attainments won the regard of
his teachers, while his amiable manners endeared him to his classmates.
While his principal delight was in the study of the Classics, he devoted
much attention to mathematics and other studies. Like many other
writers, some of his earliest efforts were in verse. Indeed it may be
said of him, as of Pope, that he 'lisped in rhyme.'

Though we have no Shakespeares, or Miltons, or Byrons, there is no
scarcity of literary amateurs who, in their hours of recreation and
dalliance with letters, betake themselves to poetry as an amusement for
their leisure hours or a solace amid the rude trials of life. High in
the rank of these writers of occasional poetry stands Dr. Brooks.
Nature, in all her forms, he has made the subject of close observation
and profound reflection, and in looking at Nature, he has used his own
eyes and not the spectacles of other writers. He has a keen relish for
the beautiful, and a deep sympathy with the truthful and the good. His
taste, formed on the finest models, has been ripened and chastened by a
patient study of the great monuments of antiquity. His thoughts seem to
be the natural development of his mind; and his words the unstudied
expression of his thoughts. The music of his verse reminds us sometimes
of the soft cadences of Hemans, and not unfrequently of the mournful
harp of Byron."

In his eighteenth year he was a contributor of prose and poetry to the
_Minerva and Emerald_, and _Saturday Post_, of Baltimore; subsequently
contributed to _The Wreath_, _Monument_, _Athenæum_, and _Protestant_,
of the same city. In 1830 he edited _The Amethyst_, an annual and soon
after became a contributor of prose and poetry to _Atkinson's Casket_,
and _The Lady's Book_, of which latter he was the first paid
contributor; wrote for _Burton's Magazine_, and _Graham's_, _The New
York Mirror_, _The Ladies' Companion_, and the _Home Journal_; and the
following annuals, _The Gift_, _The Christian Keepsake_, and _The
Religious Souvenir_. He contributed also prose and poetry to _The
Southern Literary Messenger_, _The Southern Quarterly_ of New Orleans,
_The London Literary Gazette_, and _The London Court Journal_.

In 1837 Marshall, of Philadelphia, published a volume of his religious
poems, entitled "Scriptural Anthology." In 1840, Kay Brothers, of
Philadelphia, published a volume of his prose and poetry, under the name
of "The Literary Amaranth." Besides these Dr. Brooks has edited a series
of Greek and Latin classics, has written four volumes on religious
subjects, one on "Holy Week," just issued from the press, "The History
of the Mexican War," which was translated into German, "Battles of the
Revolution," etc.

In his literary career he has won three prizes that will be cherished as
heirlooms in the family, a silver pitcher, for the best prose tale,
entitled "The Power of Truth," and two silver goblets, one a prize for
the poem entitled "The Fall of Superstition," the other a prize for a
poem, "The South-sea Islander," for which fifteen of our leading poets
were competitors.

Though in his leisure moments Dr. Brooks has achieved so much in
literature, his profession has been that of an educator, in which he has
had the mental training of males and females to the number of five or
six thousand. In 1824, he was appointed to the village school in
Charlestown, Cecil county, in 1826, established a private school in
Baltimore city; in 1831 was elected principal of the Franklin Academy,
Reistertown, and in 1834 principal of the Brookesville Academy,
Montgomery county, both endowed by the State; in 1839, he was
unanimously elected over forty-five applicants as principal of the
Baltimore City High School which position he held for nine years, until
asked by the Trustees of the Baltimore Female College, in 1848, to
accept the organization of the institution. The College is chartered and
endowed by the State of Maryland, has graduated over three hundred young
ladies, and trained and sent forth two hundred teachers. Emory College,
Oxford, Georgia, conferred the degree of LL.D., on Professor Brooks in
1859, and in 1863 his name was presented, with others, for the
presidency of Girard College. Though Major Smith, a Philadelphian of an
influential family, was elected president, Professor Brooks received
more votes than any of the other competitors. In 1827, he married Mary
Elizabeth, eldest daughter of William Gobright, a lady of great beauty
and excellence, and in 1867, married Christiana Octavia, youngest
daughter of Dr. William Crump, of Virginia. Of the former union four
sons and two daughters are living; of the latter union a son. The
following poems are selected as specimens of his style.




THE MOTHER TO HER DEAD BOY.

The flowers you reared repose in sleep
With folded bells where the night-dews weep,
And the passing wind, like a spirit, grieves
In a gentle dirge through the sighing leaves.
The sun will kiss the dew from the rose,
Its crimson petals again unclose,
And the violet ope the soft blue ray
Of its modest eye to the gaze of day;
But when will the dews and shades that lie
So cold and damp on thy shrouded eye,
Be chased from the folded lids, my child,
And thy glance break forth so sweetly wild?

The fawn, thy partner in sportive play,
Has ceased his gambols at close of day,
And his weary limbs are relaxed and free
In gentle sleep by his favorite tree.
He will wake ere long, and the rosy dawn
Will call him forth to the dewy lawn,
And his sprightly gambols be seen again,
Through the parted boughs and upon the plain;
But oh! when will slumber cease to hold
The limbs that lie so still and cold?
When wilt thou come with thy tiny feet
That bounded my glad embrace to meet?

The birds you tended have ceased to sing,
And shaded their eyes with the velvet wing,
And, nestled among the leaves of the trees,
They are rocked to rest by the cool night breeze.
The morn will the chains of sleep unbind,
And spread their plumes to the freshening wind;
And music from many a warbler's mouth
Will honey the grove, like the breath of the south;
But when shall the lips, whose lightest word
Was sweeter far than the warbling bird,
Their rich wild strain of melody pour?
They are mute! they are cold! they will ope no more!

When heaven's great bell in a tone sublime
Shall sound the knell of departed Time,
And its echoes pierce with a voice profound
Through the liquid sea and the solid ground,
Thou wilt wake, my child, from the dreamless sleep
Whose oblivious dews thy senses steep,
And then will the eye, now dim, grow bright
In the glorious rays of Heaven's own light,
The limbs, that an angel's semblance bore,
Bloom 'neath living trees on the golden shore,
And the voice that's hushed, God's praises hymn
'Mid the bands of the harping seraphim.



TO A DOVE.

MOURNING AMID THE RUINS OF AN ANCIENT CHURCH.

The fields have faded, the groves look dead,
The summer is gone, its beauty has fled,
And there breathes a low and plaintive sound
From each stream and solemn wood around.
In unison with their tone, my breast
With a spirit of kindred gloom is opprest,
And the sighs burst forth as I gaze, the while,
On the crumbling stone of the reverend pile,
And list to the sounds of the moaning wind
As it stirs the old ivy-boughs entwined,--
Sighs mournful along through chancel and nave,
And shakes the loose panel and architrave,
While the mouldering branches and withered leaves
Are rustling around the moss-grown eaves.

But sadder than these, thou emblem of love,
Thy moanings fall, disconsolate dove,
In the solemn eve on my pensive ear,
As the wailing sounds of a requiem drear,
As coming from crumbling altar stone
They are borne on the winds in a dirge-like tone,
Like the plaintive voice of the broken-hearted
O'er hopes betrayed and joys departed.

Why dost thou pour thy sad complaint
On the evening winds from a bosom faint?
As if thou hadst come from the shoreless main
Of a world submerged to the ark again,
With a weary heart to lament and brood
O'er the wide and voiceless solitude.
Dost thou mourn that the gray and mouldering door
Swings back to the reverent crowd no more?
That the tall and waving grass defiles
The well-worn flags of the crowdless aisles?
That the wild fox barks, and the owlet screams
Where the organ and choir pealed out their themes?

Dost thou mourn, that from sacred desk the word
Of life and truth is no longer heard?
That the gentle shepherd, who to pasture bore
His flock, has gone, to return no more?
Dost thou mourn for the hoary-headed sage
Who has sunk to the grave 'neath the weight of age?
For the vanquished pride of manhood's bloom?
For the light of youth quenched in the tomb?
For the bridegroom's fall? For the bride's decay?
That pastor and people have passed away,
And the tears of night their graves bedew
By the funeral cypress and solemn yew?

Or dost thou mourn that the house of God
Has ceased to be a divine abode?
That the Holy Spirit, which erst did brood
O'er the Son of Man by Jordan's flood,
In thine own pure form to the eye of sense,
From its resting place has departed hence,
And twitters the swallow, and wheels the bat
O'er the mercy-seat where its presence sat?
I have marked thy trembling breast, and heard
With a heart responsive thy tones, sweet bird,
And have mourned, like thee, of earth's fairest things
The blight and the loss--Oh! had I thy wings,
From a world of woe to the realms of the blest
I would flee away, and would be at rest.



FALL OF SUPERSTITION.

A PRIZE POEM.

  The star of Bethlehem rose, and truth and light
Burst on the nations that reposed in night,
And chased the Stygian shades with rosy smile
That spread from Error's home, the land of Nile.
No more with harp and sistrum Music calls
To wanton rites within Astarte's halls,
The priests forget to mourn their Apis slain,
And bear Osiris' ark with pompous train;
Gone is Serapis, and Anubis fled,
And Neitha's unraised vail shrouds Isis' prostrate head.
  Where Jove shook heaven when the red bolt was hurled,
Neptune the sea--and Phoebus lit the world;
Where fair-haired naiads held each silver flood,
A fawn each field--a dryad every wood--
The myriad gods have fled, and God alone
Above their ruined fanes has reared his throne.[A]
  No more the augur stands in snowy shroud
To watch each flitting wing and rolling cloud,
Nor Superstition in dim twilight weaves
Her wizard song among Dodona's leaves;
Phoebus is dumb, and votaries crowd no more
The Delphian mountain and the Delian shore,
And lone and still the Lybian Ammon stands,
His utterance stifled by the desert sands.
  No more in Cnydian bower, or Cyprian grove
The golden censers flame with gifts to Love;
The pale-eyed Vestal bends no more and prays
Where the eternal fire sends up its blaze;
Cybele hears no more the cymbal's sound,
The Lares shiver the fireless hearthstone round;
And shatter'd shrine and altar lie o'erthrown,
Inscriptionless, save where Oblivion lone
Has dimly traced his name upon the mouldering stone.
  Medina's sceptre is despoiled of might--
Once stretched o'er realms that bowed in pale affright;
The Moon that rose, as waved the scimetar
Where sunk the Cross amid the storm of war,
Now pale and dim, is hastening to its wane,
The sword is broke that spread the Koran's reign,
And soon will minaret and swelling dome
Fall, like the fanes of Egypt, Greece, and Rome.
On other lands has dawned immortal day,
And Superstition's clouds have rolled away;
O'er Gallia's mounts and on Iona's shore
The Runic altars roll their smoke no more;
Fled is the Druid from his ancient oak,
His harp is mute--his magic circle broke;
And Desolation mopes in Odin's cells
Where spirit-voices called to join the feast of shells.
  O'er Indian plains and ocean-girdled isles
With brow of beauty Truth serenely smiles;
The nations bow, as light is shed abroad,
And break their idols for the living God.
Where purple streams from human victims run
And votive flesh hangs quivering in the sun,
Quenched are the pyres, as shines salvation's star--
Grim Juggernaut is trembling on his car
And cries less frequent come from Ganges' waves
Where infant forms sink into watery graves.
Where heathen prayers flamed by the cocoa tree
They supplicate the Christians' Deity
And chant in living aisles the vesper hymn
Where giant god-trees rear their temples dim.
Still speed thy truth!--still wave thy spirit sword,
Till every land acknowledge Thee the Lord,
And the broad banner of the Cross, unfurled
In triumph, wave above a subject world.
And here O God! where feuds thy church divide--
The sectary's rancor, and the bigot's pride--
Melt every heart, till all our breasts enshrine
One faith, one hope, one love, one zeal divine,
And, with one voice, adoring nations call
Upon the Father and the God of all.

[Footnote A: The Pantheon that was built to all the gods was transformed
into a Christian temple.]



THE INFANT ST. JOHN, THE BAPTIST.

O sweeter than the breath of southern wind
  With all its perfumes is the whisper'd prayer
From infant lips, and gentler than the hind,
              The feet that bear
  The heaven-directed youth in wisdom's pathway fair.

And thou, the early consecrate, like flowers
  Didst shed thy incense breath to heaven abroad;
And prayer and praise the measure of thy hours,
              The desert trod
  Companionless, alone, save of the mighty God.

As Phosphor leads the kindling glory on,
  And fades, lost in the day-god's bright excess,
So didst thou in Redemption's coming dawn,
              Grow lustreless,
  The fading herald of the Sun of Righteousness.

But when the book of life shall be unsealed,
  And stars of glory round the throne divine
In all their light and beauty be revealed,
              The brightest thine
  Of all the hosts of earth with heavenly light shall shine.



SHELLEY'S OBSEQUIES.

            Ibi tu calentem
Debita sparges lacryma favillam
Vatis amici.

--Horace.

    Percy Bysshe Shelley, an eminent English poet, while sailing in the
    Mediterranean sea, in 1822, was drowned off the coast of Tuscany in
    a squall which wrecked the boat in which he had embarked. Two weeks
    afterwards his body was washed ashore. The Tuscan quarantine
    regulations at that time required that whatever came ashore from the
    sea should be burned. Shelley's body was accordingly placed on a
    pyre and reduced to ashes, in the presence of Lord Byron and Leigh
    Hunt, who are the "brother bards" referred to in the last stanza of
    the poem.

Beneath the axle of departing day
  The weary waters on the horizon's verge
Blush'd like the cheek of children tired in play,
  As bore the surge
The poet's wasted form with slow and mournful dirge.

On Via Reggio's surf-beaten strand
  The late-relenting sea, with hollow moan
Gave back the storm-tossed body to the land,
  As if in tone
Of sorrow it bewailed the deed itself had done.

There laid upon his bed of shells--around
  The moon and stars their lonely vigils kept;
While in their pall-like shades the mountains bound
  And night bewept
The bard of nature as in death's cold arms he slept.

The tuneful morn arose with locks of light--
  The ear that drank her music's call was chill;
The eye that shone was sealed in endless night,
  And cold and still
The pulses stood that 'neath her gaze were wont to thrill.

With trees e'en like the sleeper's honors sered
  And prows of galleys, like his bosom riven,
The melancholy pile of death was reared
  Aloft to heaven,
And on its pillared height the corpse to torches given.

From his meridian throne the eye of day
  Beheld the kindlings of the funeral fire,
Where, like a war-worn Roman chieftain, lay
  Upon his pyre
The poet of the broken heart and broken lyre.

On scented wings the sorrowing breezes came
  And fanned the blaze, until the smoke that rushed
In dusky volumes upward, lit with flame
  All redly blushed
Like Melancholy's sombre cheek by weeping flushed.

And brother bards upon that lonely shore
  Were standing by, and wept as brightly burned
The pyre, till all the form they loved before,
  To ashes turned,
With incense, wine, and tears was sprinkled and inurned.



THE FOUNTAIN REVISITED.

Let the classic pilgrim rove,
  By Egeria's fount to stand,
Or sit in Vancluse's grot of love,
  Afar from his native land;
Let him drink of the crystal tides
  Of the far-famed Hippocrene,
Or list to the waves where Peneus glides
  His storied mounts between:
But dearer than aught 'neath a foreign sky
  Is the fount of my native dell,
It has fairer charms for my musing eye
  For my heart a deeper spell.

Dear fount! what memories rush
  Through the heart and wildered brain,
As beneath the old beech I list to the gush
  Of thy sparkling waves again;
For here in a fairy dream
  With friends, my childhood's hours
Glided on like the flow of thy beautiful stream,
  And like it were wreathed with flowers:
Here we saw on thy waves, from the shade,
  The dance of the sunbeams at noon;
Or heard, half-afraid, the deep murmurings made
  In thy cavernous depths, 'neath the moon.

I have heard thy waves away
  From thy scenes, dear fount, apart;
And have felt the play, in life's fevered day,
  Of thy waters through my heart;
But oh! thou art not the same:
  Youth's friends are gone--I am lone--
Thy beeches are carved with many a name
  Now graved on the funeral stone.
As I stand and muse, my tears
  Are troubling the stream whose waves
The lullaby sang to their infantile years,
  And now murmur around their graves.



DEATH OF SAMSON.

  Within Philistia's princely hall
  Is held a glorious festival,
  And on the fluctuant ether floats
  The music of the timbrel's notes,
While living waves of voices gush,
  Echoing among the distant hills,
Like an impetuous torrent's rush
  When swollen by a thousand rills.

  The stripling and the man of years,
  Warriors with twice ten thousand spears,
  Peasants and slaves and husbandmen,--
  The shepherd from his mountain glen,
Vassal, and chief arrayed in gold
  And purple robes--Philistines all
Are drawn together to behold
  Their mighty foeman held in thrall.

  Loud pealed the accents of the horn
  Upon the air of the clear morn,
  And deafening rose the mingled shout,
  Cleaving the air from that wild rout,
As, guarded by a cavalcade
  The illustrious prisoner appeared
And, 'mid the grove the dense spears made,
  His forehead like a tall oak reared.

  He stood with brawny shoulders bare,
  And tossed his nervous arms in air--
  Chains, leathern thongs, and brazen bands
  Parted like wool within his hands;
And giant trunks of gnarled oak,
  Splintered and into ribbons rent,
Or by his iron sinews broke,
  Increased the people's wonderment.

  The amphitheatre, where stood
  Spell-bound the mighty multitude,
  Rested its long and gilded walls
  Upon two pillars' capitals:
His brawny arms, with labor spent,
  He threw around the pillars there,
And to the deep blue firmament
  Lifted his sightless orbs in prayer.

  Anon the columns move--they shake,
  Totter, and vacillate, and shake,
  And wrenched by giant force, come down
  Like a disrupted mountain's crown,
With cornice, frieze, and chapiter,
  Girder, and spangled dome, and wall,
Ceiling of gold, and roof of fir,
  Crumbled in mighty ruin all.

  Down came the structure--on the air
  Uprose in wildest shrieks despair,
  Rolling in echoes loud and long
  Ascending from the myriad throng:
And Samson, with the heaps of dead
  Priest, vassal, chief, in ruin blent,
Piled over his victorious head
  His sepulchre and monument.



AN INFANT'S PRAYER.

The day is spent, on the calm evening hours,
  Like whispered prayer, come nature's sounds abroad,
And with bowed heads the pure and gentle flowers
  Shake from their censers perfume to their God;
Thus would I bow the head and bend the knee,
And pour my soul's pure incense, Lord, to Thee.

Creator of my body, I adore,
  Redeemer of my soul, I worship Thee,
Preserver of my being, I implore
  Thy light and power to guide and shelter me;
Be Thou my sun, as life's dark vale I tread,
Be thou my shield to guard my infant head.

And when these eyes in dewy sleep shall close,
  Uplifted now in love to Thy great throne,
In the defenceless hours of my repose,
  Father and God, oh! leave me not alone,
But send thy angel minister's to keep
With hovering wings their vigils while I sleep.






JOHN MARCHBORN COOLEY.


John Marchborn Cooley, the eldest son of the late Corbin Cooley, was
born at the Cooley homestead, on the Susquehanna river, in Cecil county,
a short distance below the junction of that stream and the Octoraro
creek, on the first of March, 1827; and died at Darlington, Harford
county, Maryland, April 13th, 1878.

In childhood he showed a taste for learning, and in early youth was sent
to West Nottingham Academy, where he received his education. While at
the Academy he is said to have been always willing to write the
compositions of his fellow students, and to help them with any literary
work in which they were engaged.

Mr. Cooley studied law in the office of the late Col. John C. Groome,
and was admitted to the Elkton bar on the 4th of April, 1850. He
practiced his profession in Elkton for a short time, during a part of
which he was counsel to the County Commissioners, but removed to Warsaw,
Illinois, where he continued to practice his profession for six years,
after which he came to Harford county, where he resided until the
outbreaking of the war of the rebellion, when he joined the Union army
and continued to serve his country until the close of the war. In 1866,
he married Miss Hattie Lord, of Manchester, New Hampshire, and settled
in Darlington, Harford county, Maryland, where he was engaged in
teaching a classical school until the time of his death.

Mr. Cooley was born within a few miles of the birthplace of William P.
and E.E. Ewing, and Emma Alice Brown and almost within sight of the
mansion in which Mrs. Hall wrote the poems which are published in this
book.

Mr. Cooley was a born poet, a voluminous and beautiful writer, and the
author of several poems of considerable length and great merit.

Mr. Cooley's widow and son, Marvin L. Cooley, still survive, and at
present reside in Darlington.




A STORY WITH A MORAL.

One ev'ning, as some children play'd
Beneath an oak tree's summer shade,
A stranger, travel-stained and gray,
Beside them halted on his way.
As if a spell, upon them thrown,
Had changed their agile limbs to stone,
Each in the spot where it first view'd
Th' approaching wand'rer mutely stood.
Ere silence had oppressive grown
The old man's voice thus found a tone;
"I too was once as blithe and gay--
My days as lightly flew away
As if I counted all their hours
Upon a dial-plate of flowers;
And gentle slumber oft renew'd
The joyance of my waking mood,
As if my soul in slumber caught
The radiance of expiring thought;
As if perception's farewell beam
Could tinge my bosom with a dream--
That twilight of the mind which throws
Such mystic splendor o'er repose.
Contrasted with a youth so bright
My manhood seems one dreary night,
A chilling, cheerless night, like those
Which over Arctic regions close.
I married one, to my fond eyes
An angel draped in human guise.
Alas! she had one failing;
  No secret could she keep
In spite of all my railing,
  And curses loud and deep.
No matter what the danger
  Of gossiping might be,
She'd gossip with a stranger
  As quickly as with me.
One can't be always serious,
  And talking just for show,
For that is deleterious
  To fellowship, and so
I oft with her would chatter,
  Just as I felt inclined,
Of any little matter
  I chanced to call to mind.
Alas! on one ill-fated day,
I heard an angry neighbor say,
'Don't tell John Jones of your affairs,
  Don't tell him for your life,
Without you wish the world to know,
  For he will tell his wife.'
'For he will tell his wife' did ring
  All day through heart and brain;
In sleep a nightmare stole his voice,
  And shouted it again.
I spent whole days in meditating
  How I should break the spell,
Which made my wife keep prating
  Of things she shouldn't tell.
Some awful crime I'll improvise,
  Which I'll to her confide,
Upon the instant home I rushed,
  My hands in blood were dyed.
'Now, Catharine, by your love for me,
  My secret closely hide.'
Her quiet tongue, for full three days,
  The secret kept so well,
I almost grew to hope that she
  This secret wouldn't tell.
Alas! upon the following day
  She had revealed it, for I found
Some surly men with warrants arm'd
  Were slyly lurking round.
They took me to the county jail
  My tristful Kate pursuing,
And all the way she sobb'd and cried
  'Oh! what have I been doing?'
Before the judge I was arraigned,
  Who sternly frowning gazed on me,
And by his clerk straightway inquired,
  What was the felon's plea.
May't please your honor, I exclaim'd
  This case you may dismiss--
Now hearken all assembled here,
  My whole defence is this:
I killed a dog--a thievish wretch--
  His body may be found,
Beneath an apple tree of mine,
  A few feet under ground,
This simple plot I laid in hope
  To cure my tattling wife;
I find, alas! that she must talk,
  Though talking risk my life.
So from her presence then I fled,
In spite of all the tears she shed,
And since, a wand'ring life I've led,
And told the tale where'er I sped."



FORTY YEARS AFTER.

For twenty guests the feast is laid
  With luscious wines and viands rare,
And perfumes such as might persuade
  The very gods to revel there.

A youthful company gathered here,
  Just two score years ago to-day,
Agreed to meet once ev'ry year
  Until the last one passed away.

And when the group might fewer grow
  The vacant chairs should still be placed
Around the board whereon should glow
  The glories of the earliest feast.

One guest was there, with sunken eye
  And mem'ry busy with the past--
Could he have chosen the time to die,
  Some earlier feast had been his last.

"But thrice we met" the old man said,
  But thrice in youthful joy and pride,
When all for whom this board was spread
  Were seated gaily at my side.

Then first we placed an empty chair
  And ev'ry breast was filled with gloom,
For he we knew, who should be there,
  That hour was absent in the tomb.

The jest and song were check'd awhile,
  But quickly we forgot the dead,
And o'er each face th' arrested smile
  In all its former freedom spread.

For still our circle seem'd intact.
  The lofty chorus rose as well
As when our numbers had not lack'd
  That voice the more in mirth to swell.

But we parted with a sadder mien
  And hands were clasped more kindly then,
For each one knew where death had been
  We might expect him o'er again.

Ah! wondrous soon our feast before
  A lessening group was yearly spread,
And all our joys were ruffled o'er
  With somber mem'ries of the dead.

The song and jest less rude became,
  Our voices low and looks more kind,
Each toast recall'd some cherish'd name
  Or brought a buried friend to mind.

At length, alas! we were but two
  With features shrivel'd, shrunk, and changed,
Whose faded eyes could scarcely view
  The vacant seats around us ranged.

But fancy, as we passed the bowl,
  Fill'd ev'ry empty chair again.
Inform'd the silent air with soul
  And shaped the shadowy void to men.

The breezy air around us stirr'd
  With snatches of familiar song,
Nor cared we then how fancy err'd
  Since her delusion made us strong.

But now, I am the only guest,
  The grave--the grave now covers all
Who joined me at the annual feast
  We kept in this deserted hall.

He paused and then his goblet fill'd,
  But never touch'd his lips the brim,
His arm was stay'd, his pulses still'd,
  And ah! his glazing eyes grew dim.

The farther objects in the room
  Have vanish'd from his failing sight;
One broad horizon spreads in gloom
  Around a lessening disc of light.

And then he seem'd like one who kept
  A vigil with suspended breath--
So kindly to his breast had crept
  Some gentlest messenger of death.



THE PAST.

Still--still the Earth each primal grace renews,
And blooms, or brightens with Creation's hues:
Repeats the sun the glories of the sky,
Which upward lured the earliest watcher's eye;
Yet bids his beams the glowing clouds adorn
With all the charms of Earth's initial morn,
And duplicates at eve the splendors yet
That fixed the glance, that first beheld him set.



LOVED AND LOST.

Love cannot call her back again,
  But oh! it may presume
With ceaseless accents to complain,
  All wildly near her tomb.

A madd'ning mirage of the mind
  Still bids her image rise,
That form my heart can never find
  Yet haunts my wearied eyes.

Since Earth received its earliest dead,
  Man's sorrow has been vain;
Though useless were the tears they shed,
  Still I will weep again.

The breast, that may its pangs conceal,
  Is not from torture freed,
For still the wound, that will not heal,
  Alas! must inly bleed.

Vain Sophist! ask no reason why
  The love that cannot save,
Will hover with despairing cry
  Around the dear ones grave.

Mine is not frenzy's sudden gust,
  The passion of an hour,
Which sprinkles o'er beloved dust
  Its brief though burning shower.

Then bid not me my tears to check,
  The effort would but fail,
The face, I hid at custom's beck,
  Would weep behind its veil.

The tree its blighted trunk will rear,
  With sap and verdure gone,
And hearts may break, yet many a year
  All brokenly live on.

Earth has no terror like the tomb
  Which hides my darling's head,
Yet seeking her amid its gloom,
  I grope among the dead.

And oh! could love restore that form
  To its recovered grace,
How soon would it again grow warm
  Within my wild embrace.



DEATH OF HENRY CLAY, JR.

KILLED IN ONE OF THE BATTLES OF THE MEXICAN WAR.

Fierce as the sword upon his thigh,
Doth gleam the panting soldier's eye,
But nerveless hangs the arm that swayed
So proudly that terrific blade.
The feeble bosom scarce can give
A throb to show he yet doth live,
And in his eye the light which glows,
Is but the stare, that death bestows.
The filmy veins that circling thread
The cooling balls are turning red;
And every pang that racks him now,
Starts the cold sweat up to his brow,
But yet his smile not even death
Could from his boyish face unwreath,
Or in convulsive writhing show
The pangs, that wring the brain below.

To the far fight he seeks to gaze,
Where battling arms yet madly blaze,
And with a gush of manly pride,
Weeps as his banner is descried
Above the piling smoke-clouds borne,
Like the first dubious streaks of morn
That o'er the mountains misty height
Will kindle in a lovely sight.

"A foreign soil my blood doth stain,
And the few drops that yet remain
Add but still longer to my pain.
Land of my birth! thy hills no more
May these fast glazing eyes explore,
Yet oh! may not my body rest
Beneath that sod my heart loves best?
My father--home! Joys most adored
Dwell in that simple English word--
Go, comrades! Till your field is won
Forget me--father, I die thy son."

Hark the wild cry rolls on his ear!
The foe approach who hovered near;
Rings the harsh clang of bick'ring steel
In blows his arm no more may deal.

"Beside me now no longer be,
Ye need not seek to die with me;
Go, friends"--his manly bosom swell'd
With life the stiff'ning wounds withheld;
And struggling to his knees, he shook
The sword his hand had not forsook,
But to his arm it was denied
To slay the foe his heart defied.
The faintly wielded steel was left
In the slight wound it barely cleft.
Borne to the earth by the same thrust,
That smote his en'my to the dust,
His breast receiv'd their cowardly blows--
The fluttering eye-lids slowly close,
Then parting, show the eye beneath
White with the searching touch of Death.
The last thick drops congeal around
The jagged edge of many a wound;
See breaking through the marble skin
The clammy dews that lurk within,
The lip still quivers, but no breath
Seeks the unmoving heart beneath.

Thou gallant Clay--thy name doth cast
A halo o'er the glorious past;
For in the brightness of such blaze
Even Alexander fame decays,
Yes--yes, Columbia's noble son
Died! Monarchs could no more have done.



A VALENTINE.

Oh! for a brief poetic mood
  In which to write a merry line--
A line, which might, could, would or should
  Do duty as a Valentine.
Then to the woods the birds repair
  In pairs, prepared to woo
A mate whose breast shall fondly share
This world's huge load of ceaseless care
  Which grows so light when borne by two.
But ah! such language will not suit,
I'd better far have still been mute.
My mate is dead or else she's flown
And I am left to brood alone,
To think of joys of vanish'd years
And banish thus some present tears;
But then our life is but a dream
And things are not what they seem.



LINES

SUGGESTED ON VISITING THE GRAVE OF A DEAR FRIEND.

Like him who mourns a jewel lost
  In some unfathomable sea,
The precious gem he cherish'd most--
  So, dearest, do I mourn for thee.

For oh! the future is as dark
  As is the ocean's barren plain,
Whose restless waters wear no mark
  To guide his eyes, who seeks in vain.

True, reckless Fancy dares invade
  The realm of time's uncounted hours,
As fondly gay, as if she stray'd
  In safety through a land of flowers.

And still doth hope shine bright and warm--
  But oh! the light with which it cheers,
My darling one, but glows to form
  A rainbow o'er a vale of tears.






GEORGE WASHINGTON CRUIKSHANK.


George W. Cruikshank was born in Fredericktown, Cecil county, Md., May
11th, 1838. He received his early education in the common school of
Cecilton, and was afterwards sent to a military academy at Brandywine
Springs, in New Castle county, Delaware, and graduated at Delaware
College in 1858.

He is among the very best classical and literary scholars that his
native county has produced. Mr. Cruikshank studied law for about a year
in the office of Charles J.M. Gwinn, of Baltimore, but was compelled by
the threatened loss of sight to relinquish study until 1865, when he
completed the prescribed course of reading in the office of Colonel John
C. Groome, in Elkton, and was admitted to the Elkton Bar on September
18th, 1865, and on the same day purchased an interest in _The Cecil
Democrat_, and became its editor, a position he still continues to fill.

In 1883 Mr. Cruikshank became connected with the Baltimore _Day_, which
he edited while that journal existed.

Mr. Cruikshank, in 1869, married his cousin Sarah Elizabeth Cruikshank.
They are the parents of five children--three of whom survive.

Mr. Cruikshank is one of the most forcible and brilliant editorial
writers in the State, and the author of a number of chaste and erudite
poems written in early manhood, only two or three of which have been
published.




STONEWALL JACKSON.

[1863.]

AN IMPROMPTU ON HEARING OF HIS DEATH.

Bury the mighty dead--
  Long, long to live in story!
Bury the mighty dead
  In his own shroud of glory.

Question not his purpose;
  Sully not his name,
Nor think that adventitious aid
  Can build or blight his fame,
Nor hope, by obloquizing what
  He strove for, glory's laws
Can be gainsaid, or he defiled
  Who'd honor any cause.

Question not his motives,
  Ye who have felt his might!
Who doubts, that ever saw him strike,
  He aimed to strike for right?
His was no base ambition;--
  No angry thirst for blood.
Naught could avail to lift his arm,
  But love of common good.
Yet, when he deigned to raise it,
  Who could resist its power?
Or who shall hope, or friend, or foe,
  E'er to forget that hour?

His life he held as nothing.
  His country claimed his all.
Ah! what shall dry that country's tears
  Fast falling o'er his fall?
His life he held as nothing,
  As through the flame he trod;
To duty gave he all of earth
  And all beyond to God.
The justness of his effort
  He never lent to doubt.
His aim, his arm, his all was fix'd
  To put the foe to rout.
Mistrusting earth's tribunals,
  Scorning the tyrant's rod,
He chose the fittest Arbiter,
  'Twixt foe and sword, his God.
And doubted not, a moment,
  That, when the fight was won,
Who rules the fate of nations
  Would bid His own:--Well done!
And doubted not, a moment,
  As fiercest flashed the fire,
The bullet's fatal blast would call:--
  Glad summons!--Come up higher!

And who would hence recall thee?--
  Thy work so nobly done!
Enough for mortal brow to wear
  The crown thy prowess won:--
Grim warrior, grand in battle!
  Rapt christian, meek in prayer!--
Vain age! that fain would reproduce
  A character as rare!

The world has owned its heroes;--
  Its martyrs, great and good,
Who rode the storm of power,
  Or swam the sea of blood:--
Napoleons, Cæsars, Cromwells,
  Melancthons, Luthers brave!
But, who than Jackson ever yet
  Has filled a prouder grave?

The cause for which he struggled,
  May fall before the foe:
Stout hearts, devoted to their trust,
  All moulder, cold and low.
The land may prove a charnel-house
  For millions of the slain,
And blood and carnage mark the track
  Where madmen march amain,--
Fanatic heels may scourge it,
  Black demons blight the sod;
And hell's foul desolation
  Mock Liberty's fair God.--
The future leave no record,
  Of mighty struggle there,
Save hollowness, and helplessness,
  And bitter, bald despair.--
Proud cities lose their names e'en;
  Tall towers fall to earth.--
Mount Vernon fade, and Westmoreland
  Forget illustrious birth;--
And yet, upon tradition,
  Will float the name of him
Whose virtues time may tarnish not,
  Eternity not dim.
Whose life on earth was only,
  So grand, so free, so pure,
For brighter realms and sunnier skies,
  A preparation sure.
And whose sweet faith, so child-like,
  Nor blast, nor surge nor rod,
One moment could avert from
  The bosom of his God.

Bury the mighty dead!
  Long, long to live in story!
Bury the hero dead
  In his own shroud of glory!



IN MEMORIAM.

FRANK M. CRUIKSHANK, DIED 1862.

Frank is dead! The mournful message
  Comes gushing from the ocean's roar.
Frank is dead! His mortal passage
  Has ended on the heavenly shore.
In earthly agony he died
To join his Saviour crucified.

Frank is dead! Time's bitter trials
  Drove him a wanderer from home,
To meet life's lot, share its denials,
  Or gain a rest where cares ne'er come.
His frail form sinking, his grand spirit
Careered to realms the blest inherit.

Frank is dead! In life's young morning,
  When heavenly promise lit his day,
His smitten spirit, homeward turning,
  Forsook its tenement of clay.
No more to battle here with sin;
No more to suffer mid earth's din.

Frank is dead! By fever stricken,
  How long he suffered, and how deep!
With none to feel his hot blood quicken,
  No loved one near to calm his sleep.
No mother's presence him to gladden:
Naught, naught to cheer--all, all to sadden.

Frank is dead! His pangs are over.
  His gentle spirit hence has flown.
Strangers, with earth, his body cover,
  Strangers attend his dying moan.
On stranger forms his eyes last close,
To meet A FRIEND in their repose.

Frank is dead! Aye! weep, fond mourner!
  The grand, the beautiful is lost.
Too pure for earth, the meek sojourner,
  On passion's billows tempest-tossed,
Has found a source of sweeter bliss
In realms that sunder wide from this.

Frank is dead! Yes, dead to sorrow,
  Dead to sadness, dead to pain.
Dead! Dead to all save the tomorrow
  Whose light eternally shall reign.
He's dead to young ambition's vow
And the big thought that stamped his brow.

Frank is dead! Dead to the labors
  He'd staked his life to triumph in:--
To win his friends, his dying neighbors,
  And fellows all from death and sin.
With steady faith he toiled to fit
Christ's armor on and honor it.

Frank is dead! Omniscient pleasure
  Has closed his bright career too soon
To realize how rich a treasure
  The ranks had entered ere high noon.
His brilliant promise, dashed in youth,
One less is left to fight for truth.

Frank is dead! Yes, dead to mortals.
  No more we'll see his noble brow
Or flashing eye; but in the portals
  Above, by faith I see him now
With gladden'd step and fluttering heart,
Marching to share the better part.

Frank is dead!! No, never, never!
  Not dead but only gone before.
Back,--back! Thou tear-drop, rising ever;
  Nor Heaven's fiat now deplore.
Wail not the sorrows earth can lend
To banish spirits that ascend.

And fare thee well, my noble brother!
  'Tis hard to think that thou art not;
To realize that never other
  Footstep like thine shall share my cot,
And think of all thy heart endured,
  By sore besetments often tried.
But,--Heaven be thanked,--all now is cured
  And thou, fair boy, art glorified.



NEW-YEAR ODE.

[1863.]

Let the bier move onward.--Let no tear be shed.
The midnight watch is ended: The grim old year is dead.
His life was full of turmoil. In death he ends his woes.
As fraught with toil his pilgrimage, may peaceful be its close.

Let the bier move onward.--Let no tear drop fall.
The couch of birth is waiting the egress of the pall.
Haste! Hasten the obsequies:--the natal hour is nigh.
Waste not a moment weeping when expectation's high.



Draw back the veil; the curtain lift.
  Ho! Thirsting hearts, rejoice!
The new-born is no puny gift:--
  Time's latest, grandest choice.

Nurseling and giant! Infant grown!
  Majestic even now!
'Tis well that such a restless throne
  Descends to such as thou.



Dame nature's travail bore thee;
  Her pangs a world upheaved.
A world now bending o'er thee
  Awaits those pangs relieved.
A world is waiting for thee:
  And shall it be deceived?

Ah no! Such pangs were never
  To mother giv'n in vain.
Rise, new-born! Rise and sever
  Tyranny's clanking chain.
Rise, Virtue! Rise forever!
  The New-Year comes amain!
O! Give him welcome ever!
  Can bleeding hearts refrain?



All hail! Oh beautiful New-Year!
Full, full of promise fraught with cheer.
Bright promise of the glad return
Of glowing fires that erst did burn
  On hearths long desolate!
Hail! Great deliverer from wrath,
Brave pioneer upon the path
  That leads to better fate!
Joy be to thee thy natal day,
As dawns Aurora's earliest ray,
While youth is fresh and faith is clear
And hope is bright with coming cheer!
  Thou promisest eventful life
As, giant-like, thou leap'st to earth,
Robed in full majesty at birth;
With power to do and will to dare
And arm to shield from threat'ning care,
  And eye to ken the dead past's strife.

Thy young life's hand knows yet no stain
Of blood, or greed, or guilt, or gain.
But, know, Oh Friend! thou'rt ushered in
To feel the jar and note the din
  Of war-blast's rude alarms.
Thy elder brother, gone before,
Has left upon this nether shore
  A burden for thine arms.

'Tis thine to choose the part thou'lt take,
Oh giant mighty! Thine to make
An early choice; lose not an hour.
'Tis crime to waste prodigious power.
Great, vast, appalling, is the task
By fate assigned to thee. No mask
Of indecision now is given.
The bolt of Mars the rock has riven.
The hour is dark:--the danger nigh.
The ravens caw: the eagles cry.
The breakers dash--the chasm yawns:
The skies are lurid:--chaos dawns.
Thunder with thunder-peal is riven
As if to shake earth's faith in heaven!
All, all is wild! No sun! No moon!
Earth, air and sky, in dire commune,
  Demand--what hand shall guide them now?

New-Year, stand forth and bide the call
          To thee address'd.
        We stand or fall
          As thou decree'st.
Frown, and we perish. Smile, we rise
To joys that savor of the skies.
  Bid lethargy depart thy brow
    And strike for right and truth.
    Young, thou; but hast no youth.
No hours are thine for sportive mirth.
Minerva-like, mature from birth,
Great deeds and valiant thine must be,
In wisdom guided, fair and free.--
Deeds that no year hath known before;
Fraught not with strife;--drenched not in gore.
Free from old taint of fell disease
  And ancient forms of party strife.
  Rich in the gentler modes of life
    With sweeter manners, purer laws,
Forerunner of those years of ease
    That token a sublimer cause!

What say'st thou? Giant, young and strong,
  What impulse heaves thy throbbing breast?
  Shall warrior plumes bedeck thy crest?
    Wilt whisper peace? Or shout for war?
Wilt plead for right, or bleed for wrong?
    Wilt peal the bugle-blast afar
And urge the cannon's madd'ning roar?
  Or wing the note through vale and glen:--
  Hail! Peace on earth! Good-will to men!
Reason return:--let strife be o'er?

Thou speak'st not, giant, but I feel
  Hope's roseate flush upon my brow.
  Thy deeds will seal thy silent vow.
New aims thy glory will reveal.
Thou heed'st the anguished bosom's smart,
And thou wilt choose the better part.
Thou'lt live on hist'ry's brightest page
A monarch mighty, gentle sage:
Great, great for what thou wilt have done
And blest in all the course thou'lt run:--
Thy crown not carved in brass or wood,
          To crumble or decay;
          But be in endless day,
Emblem of grandeur, shrined in good.
And truth and peace will round thee weave
  An amaranthyne wreath of love,
Its blessed motto ... trust--believe.
  And thou wilt share the realm above,
Where bleeding hearts shall triumph meet,
Around one common mercy-seat.

All hail, then, beautiful New-Year!
Hero of promise, fraught with cheer!
Bright promise of the glad return
Of glowing fires that erst did burn
  On hearths long desolate!
Thy stainless youth supports our faith
That thou wilt break the bonds of death
  And snap the web of hate.



And thou farewell, grim tyrant old!
  Who, who would call thee back!
Thou cam'st with bloody footstep, bold;
  Thou leav'st a blood-stained track.

Go! Find a grave in the billowy surge
  That ne'er can wash thee clean;
The wail of millions be thy dirge--
  Thy judge--the Great Unseen!

And when the resurrection morn
  Shall seek thy name to blot,
Ho! Heed the voice that asks in scorn,--
  Thou liv'dst and reign'dst for what?

Passion unbridled, stubborn pride,
  Avengers, thine to rue,
Of outraged virtue, truth defied,
  Shall 'balm in blood thy due,
      Lost eighteen sixty-two.



MY BIRTHDAY.

TO S---- 1864.

The night is strangely, wildly dark;
  The thunders fiercely roll,
And lightnings flash their angry spark;
  But thou absorb'st my soul.
I have no care for storm-king's cloud,
  How black soe'er it be;--
No truant thought for earth's dark shroud:
  I'm thinking, love, of thee.

To-night the God of battles views,
  With deprecating eye,
A scene where demons wild infuse
  A thirst for victory.
'Tis His, not mine to guide the storm;
  'Tis His to calm the sea:
My spirit hovers 'round thy form.
  I'm thinking, love, of thee.

Time's cycle once again has wrought
  Its round:--I'm twenty six.
Another mile-stone's gained--sad thought--
  Toward deep, silent Styx.
I count no laurels I have won;
  Years bring no joy to me,
While yet alone I wander on
  In timid thought of thee.

Years six and twenty have been mine
  To journey on alone:
Shall I as many more repine,
  Before I am undone?
Or shall the journey henceforth take
  A brighter phaze for me?
Shall I next six-and-twenty make
  My journey, love, with thee?

If so, good-bye grim doubt and fear:
  Adieu to arid sand.
All Hail! Oh prospect bright and clear!
  All Hail, oasis grand!
Hand joined in hand, heart linked with heart,
  Come joy, come hope, come glee!
United, ne'er on earth to part,
  I'll always think of thee.

If not, Good-bye! The spirit breaks;
  The fountain soon must dry.
If not, good God! The temple shakes;
  It totters! What am I?
A wreck of hope!--An aimless thing!
  A helmless ship at sea
To whose last spar love still must cling,
  And sigh:--Alas!--for thee.






MRS. ANNIE McCARER DARLINGTON.


Annie McCarer Darlington, the daughter of Charles Biles and Catharine
Ross Biles, was born July 20th, 1836, at Willow Grove, in Cecil county,
about four miles east of the village of Brick Meeting House, and near
the old Blue Ball Tavern. She is a cousin of Mrs. Ida McCormick, whose
poetry may be found in this book, their mothers being sisters. Miss
Biles was married November 20th, 1860, to Francis James Darlington, of
West Chester, Pa., and spent the next five years of her life on a farm
near Unionville, formerly the property of the sculptor, Marshall Swayne.
The family then removed to their present residence near Westtown
Friends' Boarding School, where they spend the Summer season. The
Winters are spent with their seven children, in a quiet little home in
the town of Melrose, on the banks of the beautiful Lake Santa Fe, in
Florida. Miss Biles began to write poetry when about eighteen years of
age, and for the ensuing five years was a frequent contributor to _The
Cecil Democrat_, under the _nom de plume_ of "Gertrude St. Orme."




A BIRTHDAY GREETING

TO MY LITTLE NEPHEW.

[JULY 4TH, 1886.]

I know a happy little boy,
  They call him Charlie Gray,
Whose face is bright, because you know,
  He's six years old to-day.

I scarce can think six years have passed
  Since Charlie really came,
I well remember long ago,
  We never heard his name.

But here he is, almost a man,
  With knickerbockers on,
And baby dresses packed away,
  You'll find them, every one.

And every year as time rolls on,
  And Charlie's birthdays come,
The world goes out to celebrate
  With banner, fife, and drum.

At sunrise on those happy days
  The cannon's deaf'ning roar,
Reminded us that Charlie Gray
  Was two, or three, or four.

But now those landmarks all are passed,
  He's getting fast away,
The boy's a man, no baby now,
  He's six years old to-day.

Just think of it, ye many friends
  Who wish him worlds of joy,
That Charlie Gray is six to-day,
  A patriotic boy.

And if he sometimes noisy grows,
  What matter, if he's right?
Give me the boys that make a noise
  And play with all their might.

I know 'tis whispered far and near,
  That Charlie loves his way,
But I can tell of grown up men,
  Who do the same to-day.

Who never yield or quit the field,
  Can you blame Charlie then?
For most small boys will imitate
  What's seen in grown up men.

And now good friends, I give you leave
  To find him if you can,
Another boy, more glad with joy,
  Than this brave little man.

Heigh ho! I still am in a maze,
  To think he's six to-day,
Some other time I'll tell you more,
  If--Charlie says I may.



MURMURINGS.

Falling, falling--gently falling,
  Pattering on the window pane,
Like a weird spirit calling
  Come the heavy drops of rain.

Sweeping by the crazy casement,
  Where the creeping ivy clings,
Sounds the wind in gustful musings
  Loudly speaking bitter things.

Hush! the tones are sinking lower,
  Sweetest strains of music roll;
Like Aeolian harps in Heaven,
  Pouring incense o'er the soul.

But 'tis gone! a wilder wailing
  Fills the air where music reigned,
Hoarsely groans the wild storm-demon,
  Drowning all those sweeter strains.

And the tall pines shake and quiver
  As the monarch rideth by;
Onward where the troubled river
  Dashes spray-drops towards the sky.

But he pauses not to listen,
  Onward with demoniac will;
Till Aeolian harps in Heaven
  Softly whisper, "Peace, be still."



THE OLD OAK TREE.

    Woodman, spare that tree!
      Touch not a single bough:
    In youth it sheltered me,
      And I'd protect it now.

    --George P. Morris.

'Tis living yet! Time has not dared
  To mark it, as his own,
Nor claimed one bough, but kindly spared
  This giant, firm and lone.
It stands, as stood in years gone by,
  The chieftain in its shade,
And breathed the warning, ere the cry
  Of war went through the glade.

The Council tires then brightly burned
  Beneath its spreading bough,
But oh, alas! the scene has turned,
  Where burn those fires now?
The old oak stands where it did then,
  The same fresh violets bloom,
But far down in the narrow glen,
  They deck the Indian's tomb.

Life then seemed bright and free from care;
  When this old tree was young
The Indian maiden twined her hair,
  And to her chieftain sung
A song, low, gentle, and sincere,
  In pathos rich and rare;
The warrior-lover brushed a tear,
  For thought was busy there.

Yes, busy was the fertile brain,
  That bid him onward flee,
The Indian moon was on the wane
  And drooped the hawthorne tree.
The light canoe of rounded bark
  Scarce dared to skim the flood,
For they had come with meaning dark
  To ravage lake and wood.



The conflict ended! but the bow
  Which twanged across the plain.
Dealt its proud owner death's cold blow,
  And laid him with the slain.
But to a better, happier home,
  Have gone the Indian braves;
Where cruel white men cannot come,
  To call their brothers--slaves.

Then let it stand, that aged oak,
  Among its kindred trees;
Tho' now, no more the wigwam smoke
  Will curl upon the breeze.
'Tis left alone--the last sad thing
  That marks a nation vast,
Then spare it, that its boughs may sing
  A requiem to the Past.



SWEET FLORIDA.

Beautiful Florida! land of the flowers,
  Home of the mocking bird, saucy and bold,
Sweet are the roses that perfume thy bowers,
  And brilliant thy sunshine like burnished gold.

Soft are thy rivulets, gentle thy water-falls,
  Rippling so merrily toward the broad sea;
Fringed with bright daisies, which bloom on thy borders,
  E'en Nature herself pays a tribute to thee.

Sweeter and lovelier than all thy fair sisters,
  Thy gentleness surely hath fame for thee won,
While thy star, not forgotten, shines forth in a glory
  That crowns the best flag that waves under the sun.

Thy name brings a scent of the dogwood and myrtle,
  The jessamine, too, comes in for a share,
With great yellow petals so heavy with perfume,
  That can with the tube-rose's only compare.

Tho' large be the family, there's room for the fairest;
  No house is too small for a family with love:
So Florida, thou who art brightest and dearest,
  The "Pet of the Household" forever shall prove.

Thy rivers are broad and thy lakes fringed with grasses,
  The glint of the waves of the bright Santa Fe,
With her edging of cypress and long-floating mosses,
  Forever are murmuring a sonnet to thee.

While high on a hill sits the Queen of the Villas,
  Sweet Melrose! whose name is the least of her charms,
Waves a welcome to all, to come over the billows
  And find a safe home 'neath her sheltering arms.

And so they are coming, the weak and the weary,
  From near and from far, the strong and the brave,
All ready to drink of the life giving breezes,
  The only Elixir that truly can save.



EVENING.

'Tis Evening! soul enchanting hour,
  And queenly silence reigns supreme;
A shade is cast o'er lake and bower,
All nature sinks beneath the power
  Of sweet oblivion's dream.

The Sun--the hero-god of day,
  Has from this happier half of earth,
Passed on with sweet life-giving ray,
To smile on millions glad and gay,
  In sorrow or in mirth.

While in his stead, the Heavens above
  Are shaded with a silver light,
So soft, so pure--that angels rove,
To guard from evil those who love
  The God, who made all bright.

Then soon that planetary sea
  Is studded o'er with diadems,
Shining alike on land and sea.
High, high above the loftiest tree;
  Proud Nature's priceless gems.

Who would not leave the crowded room,
  The grand, but cold musician's art;
To wander 'neath the calm still moon.
When nature speaks 'mid wild perfume,
  So sweetly to the heart.

  Who would not shun proud Fashion's hall,
    Escape her cold and torturings ways,
  To calmly rest where dew-drops fall;
  Perfumes that mind and soul enthrall,
    Beneath fair Luna's rays.

  Who would exchange a home of flowers,
    Down in a pure and modest dell,
  For palaces 'mid art-reared bowers,
  Washed o'er by artificial showers,
    Where naught but sorrows dwell.

  Blest hour of thought! to thy pure scene
    A mild and soothing charm is given,
  When hearts to hearts in love convene,
  And roses deck the silvered green
    Of mingled Earth and Heaven.

  The truth--that plainly proves a God,
    Not chance, performed the better part
  Which teaches us His Heavenly Word:
  Breathes magic for the singing bird,
    And links us heart to heart.






REV. WILLIAM DUKE.


The Rev. William Duke was born in the southern part of what is now
Harford county, but was at the time of his birth included in Baltimore
county, on the 15th of September, 1757, and died in Elkton on the 31st
of May, 1840. He became enamoured of the doctrines of Methodism in early
youth, and allied himself with that denomination before its separation
from the Protestant Episcopal Church, and was licensed to preach by Rev.
Francis Asbury when he was only seventeen years old. Mr. Duke's name
appears upon the minutes of the first Conference, held in Philadelphia
in 1774, as one of the seven ministers who were that year taken on
trial. The next year he was admitted to full membership, and remained in
connection with the Conference as a traveling preacher until 1779, when
he ceased to travel, and subsequently took orders in the Protestant
Episcopal Church; being impelled to do so by his opposition to the
erection of the Methodist Society into an independent Church.

Mr. Duke became Rector of North Elk Parish in 1793, but resigned the
charge three years later, and removed to Anne Arundel county, but
returned to Elkton about a year afterwards; soon after he removed to
Kent county, where he taught a parochial school for a short time, but
returned to Elkton again in 1799 and opened a school, and preached
during the three following years at North East, Elkton, and at the
Episcopal Church near New London, Pa.

In 1803 he was appointed Professor of Languages in St. John's College,
Annapolis, and had charge of St. Ann's Church, in that city, until 1806,
when he returned to Elkton, and the next year took charge of the Elkton
Academy.

Mr. Duke remained in Cecil county until 1812, when he took charge of
Charlotte Hall, in St. Mary's county, and continued in charge of the
school at that place until 1814, when he returned to Elkton, where he
officiated as aforetime until the Spring of 1818, when he was appointed
Principal of the Academy. He continued to reside in Elkton until the
time of his death.

In 1793 Mr. Duke married Hetty Coudon, the daughter of the Rev. Joseph
Coudon, a former Rector of North Elk Parish, and the ancestor of the
Coudon family of this county. Mr. and Mrs. Duke were the parents of Miss
Hetty Duke, who was their only child, and who died in Elkton, February
19th, 1875.

Mr. Duke was a very learned man, and is said by the Rev. Ethan Allan,
the Historian of "The Old Parishes of Maryland," to have been more of
the student than the preacher. He was the author of a pamphlet published
in Elkton in 1795, entitled "Observations on the Present State of
Religion in Maryland," which is now of great rarity and value. He also
published a small volume entitled "Hymns and Poems on Various
Occasions," which was printed by Samuel and John Adams, of Baltimore, in
1790; and several other poems of considerable length, the most popular
of which was entitled "A View of the Woods," which was descriptive of
the adventures and experience of Western emigrants in the latter part of
the last century.

The following selections have been made from "Hymns and Poems on Various
Occasions."




HYMN.

    And truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence they
    came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned; but now
    they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly.

    --Hebrews 11:15,16.

Abr'am, the father of the Jews,
  The servant, and the friend of God,
When call'd from heaven, did not refuse
  To leave his Syrian abode.

His father's house and kindred dear
  Plead, and dissuaded him in vain;
Neither could earthly hope nor fear
  The noble enterprise restrain.

Nor he alone; a host of saints
  Renounced the world, and nobly chose
That heavenly inheritance
  Which neither death nor sorrow knows.

No intervening dangers check
  Their ardent progress to the skies,
Well may they venture, who expect
  An heavenly and immortal prize.

When faith to their delighted view
  Their future blissful portion brings,
They, firm and cheerful, bid adieu
  To sin, and self, and earthly things.

Happy to leave the world behind,
  Their conduct speaks a noble aim;
They seek a city, and shall find
  The promised new Jerusalem.

Nor yet does impotence or fear
  Their sense of earthly bliss restrain,
Did they not heaven to earth prefer,
  They soon might wed the world again.

In heaven their treasure is laid up
  Beyond the reach of accident,
There shall their lively glorious hope
  Receive its full accomplishment.



HYMN.

    But yield yourselves unto God as those that are alive from the dead;
    and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God.

    --Romans 6:13.

My heart, the world forsake,
  And every earthly toy;
The Lord of all thy portion make,
  And in Him all enjoy.

May sensible delight,
  Corrected and refined,
A thirst of nobler joys excite,
  And urge the lingering mind.

Should ardent love impel
  And actuate my soul,
Still may celestial fires prevail,
  And every thought control.

Should glory stimulate,
  And daring deeds propose,
That only fame I'd emulate,
  To triumph in the cross.

Or should my yielding powers
  Acknowledge pleasure's sway,
I'd think of sacred streams and bowers,
  And sweets that ne'er decay.

Should soaring science me
  Her votary avow,
My only excellence should be
  Christ crucified to know.

Should wealth my mind impress,
  With the desire of more,
In Christ the fullness I possess,
  Of Heaven's exhaustless store.

With all that nature craves,
  Fully from thence supplied,
No aching want my bosom heaves
  No wish unsatisfied.



REJOICING IN HOPE.

Tost on the troubled sea of life,
  On every side assailed,
Involved in passion's stormy strife,
  In irksome suff'rance held.

The faithful word of promise cheers
  And bears my spirits up,
Dispels my dark desponding fears
  And stablishes my hope.

Hope that shall every toil survive,
  That smoothes the rugged path,
That mitigates the ills of life,
  And soothes the hour of death.

And when the storms of life are o'er,
  And all our conflicts cease,
When landed on the heavenly shore
  To enjoy eternal peace.

Hope at the last, her charge resigned,
  Securely we dismiss,
And an abundant entrance find,
  To the abodes of bliss.

Till then our progress she attends
  To solace and relieve:
And waits till every conflict ends
  To take her final leave.

Possessed of all we hoped below,
  Our utmost wish attained,
Our happiness complete, we know
  Our full perfection gained.

Thus may I cheerfully endure,
  Till thus my warfare past;--
Suffice for me the promise sure,
  I shall be crowned at last.



HYMN.

    There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God.

    --Hebrews 4:9.

Oh how I languish to possess,
  A safe and permanent abode!
To rest in unmolested peace,
  And cast my care on thee, my God.

In thee I joy, in thee I rest,
  Though all inferior comforts fail;
No hopeless anguish heaves my breast,
  And no tormenting fears assail.

To thee with confidence I look,
  And calmly wait thy promised aid;
I rest securely on that Rock,
  On which Almighty help is laid.

Oh may I on His firmness stand,
  The ground of my immortal hope;
Or nobly rise, at his command,
  To Pisgah's heaven-aspiring top.

That I may with ecstatic view,
  My future heritage descry,
Where pleasures spring forever new,
  And perfect love shall never die.



REMORSE.

What racking fear, what painful grief
  Ensue a pleasant sin!
In vain the world proffers relief
  For maladies within.
Its blandishments and smooth deceit
  No real succor bring;
Its remedies but irritate
  And pleasure leaves a sting.
Confusion, shame, and slavish fear
  O'erwhelm a guilty mind;
A burden more than I can bear,
  My sins upon me bind.
Oh had I weighed the matter well
  Ere my consent was given!
Avoided then the gates of hell
  And urged my way to heaven!
Lord, give me strength now to resume
  My former confidence;
Remove my terrors, bid me come
  With hopeful penitence.
In mercy hear my humble cry,
  Redeem my soul from sin,
My guilty conscience pacify
  And speak the peace serene.



MORNING.

But now the dawn of day appears,
And now the dappled East declares
Ambrosial morn again arrived,
And nature's slumbering powers revived,
And while they into action spring
The infant breeze with odorous wing,
Perfumes of sweetest scent exhales,
And the enlivened sense regales,
With sweets exempt from all alloy
Which neither irritate nor cloy.
Nor less the calmly gladdened sight
Enjoys the milder forms of light,
Reflected soft in twinkling beams,
From numberless translucent gems.
But now Aurora dries her tears,
And with a gayer mien appears,
With cheerful aspect smiles serene,
And ushers in the splendid scene
Of golden day: while feeble night
Precipitates his dreary flight
Dispelled by the all cheering sway
Of the resplendent God of day,
Who, mounted in his royal car,
And all arrayed in golden glare
With arduous career drives on
Ascending his meridian throne:
From thence a Sovereign of the day,
His full-grown glories to display.






EDWIN EVANS EWING.


Edwin Evans Ewing, son of Patrick Ewing and brother of William Pinkney
Ewing, was born on his father's farm on the Octoraro creek, not far from
Rowlandville, in this county, on the 9th of January, 1824. His family is
of Scotch-Irish extraction, and settled on the Octoraro more than a
century ago. The family has long been distinguished for the
intellectuality and literary ability of its members, among whom were the
Rev. John Ewing, one of the most eminent scientists and Presbyterian
divines of his time, and his daughter Sarah, who became the wife of John
Hall, and whose biography is published in this volume.

The subject of this sketch spent his youth and early manhood, on his
father's farm. Recently when asked for a sketch of his life Mr. Ewing
replied: "I didn't have any life. I just growed like Topsy. I didn't
have any educating. I just picked it up; and as for poetry, I never
wrote any, only rhyme." Notwithstanding this assertion, Mr. Ewing being
unable to resist the prompting of the "divinity which stirred within
him," when quite young, began to write poetry. There seems to be a
subtle influence pervading the romantic Octoraro hills, which if not the
direct cause of poetic inspiration seems to encourage its growth, Mr.
Ewing being one of five poets who claim that region as their birthplace,
or who have profited by a residence therein.

When quite young Mr. Ewing wrote poetry which was published in the local
journals of Cecil and Lancaster counties, and subsequently contributed
poetry to the Philadelphia _Dollar Newspaper_, being a contemporary
contributor to that journal with his brother, William P. Ewing, and the
late David Scott (of James.)

In 1856 Mr. Ewing made a trip to the Southwest, traveling extensively on
horseback in Texas. He gave an account of his travels and a description
of the country through which he passed in a series of letters published
in the _Cecil Whig_, which were much admired.

In 1861, Mr. Ewing became the proprietor and editor of the _Cecil Whig_,
which was the Union organ of the county. Being a man of decided
convictions, and unflinching courage, he never lost an opportunity to
advocate the cause of the Union, to which he adhered with great
devotion, through evil and through good report.

In 1876 he disposed of the _Whig_ and the next year bought an interest
in the _Kansas Farmer_ and the _Juvenile Magazine_, published in Topeka,
Kansas. He subsequently became connected with the _Daily Capital_, and
eventually became sole proprietor of the _Kansas Farmer_. The climate of
Kansas not agreeing with him, he removed to Highlands, Macon county,
N.C., where in 1882 he established the _Blue Ridge Enterprise_ which he
soon afterwards disposed of, and in 1885 became the proprietor of the
_Midland Journal_, published in the village of Rising Sun, in this
county.

Mr. Ewing is a brilliant and forcible writer. Like many others Mr. Ewing
kept none of his poems except one which is too lengthy to be given a
place in this volume. In consequence of this the compiler has only been
able to obtain the following specimens of his poetry after great labor
and trouble.




THE CHERUBIM--A VISION.

'Twas at that season, when the gloom
  Of cheerless Winter's pass'd away,
And flowers spring up, with sweet perfume,
  To scent the breeze and cheer our way,
Where'er we saunter--o'er the hill,
Or through the valley--warm and still,
Or broken only by the sound
  Of tinkling rills, which softly flow,
And busy bees, that hum around
  The flowers which on their borders grow,
That I, from life's turmoil had strayed
  To spend an hour in solitude;
And where a sparkling fountain played,
  I laid me down, in pensive mood,
To ponder o'er the fleeting day
Of youth, that hies so fast away
In golden dreams which quickly fly,
Like tints that deck a Summer sky.

Soon Fancy, on her airy wing,
  Was sporting mid Elysian bowers,
Where flowers of sweetest odor spring,
And birds of golden plumage sing,
  And wanton thro' the sylvan bowers.
There lakelets sparkled in the glow,
  Wreathed round with flowers of many a hue,
And golden pebbles shone below
The wave that bore the swan of snow,
  Reflecting, in its mirror true,
  The flowers which o'er its surface grew,
  The tints of earth--the hues of sky--
  That in its limpid bosom lie.
  And groups of happy children played
  Around the verge of each cascade;
  Or gambol'd o'er the flowery lea
  In wanton mirth and joyous glee;
Pursuing, o'er the sparkling lawn,
  The insect in its airy flight,
Which still eludes, but tempting on
  From flower to flower, with plumage bright,
  The hand that woos to stay its flight--
  Till soaring high, on pinions wild
  It leaves the charm'd and tearful child.

One maid there was, divinely fair,
  Whose cheeks, beneath her peerless eyes,
Bloomed like the roses, rich and rare,
  That yield perfume to summer skies;
Her shining locks of silky hair
  Hung round her neck like grapes of gold,
  And o'er her snowy bosom roll'd,
Hiding the blush that mantled there.

The brightest of the fairy throng,
She led the dancing group along
Through tangled brakes and fretted bowers,
Where grew the richest, rarest flowers,
That wooed the bee to banquet there,
Or yielded sweets to Summer air.
  But she who moved with elfin pace,
And taught the infant throng to play,
  Raised to heaven her cherub face,
While that bright celestial ray,
  Which halos the throne of glory round,
Illumed her azure, orient eye,
That seemed to penetrate the sky.
  Bending her gaze upon the ground,
Her gentle bosom heaved a sigh,
  And anxious faces press around,
While pearls of pity dim each eye,
As tho' they'd weep again to rest
The troubled spirit of that breast.

"Weep not for me!" the cherub said,
While o'er her seraph beauty played
A smile like evening's parting beam,
That sparkles o'er the glassy stream,
Or lingers on a lucid lake--
Whose dimpling wave the zephyrs break.
"Far thro' yon skies, where orient day
Is shedding his last lingering ray,
Bright angels beckon me away;--
I go--I go--a last farewell!"
And as she spoke around her fell,
From heaven, a bright celestial ray,
Whose lustre dimm'd the light of day;
And 'mid that heavenly blaze unfold
Her glittering pinions tipp'd with gold.
While strains of sweet unearthly sound
Awoke their dulcet chime around,
She soared away on wings of light,
Like sparkling meteor of the night;
Still lessening, as she further drew
Amid the ether of heavenly blue,
  Till lost within a blazing star
That above the horizon shown--
  As if from Paradise a car
'Twere sent to bear the cherub home.

No more that happy throng is rending,
  With gladsome shouts the summer air,
Nor songs of love to heaven ascending,
  From hearts that know no guile nor care;
But on each peerless infant brow
The gloom of care is settling now;
While passion madly fires each eye,
And swells each bosom beating high;
And tongues that lisped an infant name,
Now speak in haughty tones of Fame!
While some, in senatorial pride,
With scorn their fellow-man deride;
  And others, more sanguinary still,
From words of ire appeal to brands,
  Nor scruple a brother's blood to spill--
Cain-like!--with ensanguined hands
Polluting the flowers which smile--in vain
Wooing the heart to love again.

Long o'er this painful scene I sighed,
  Where licentious passion, unrestrained,
Was left to riot in her pride--
  Spreading destruction where'er she reigned.
"And was this bright--this fair domain--
With all its beauty, formed in vain?
Where Nature, a paradise to grace,
Hath loved her every charm to trace,
That man, enamored of distress
Should mar it into wilderness?"
  I raised my arm while thus I spoke,
And o'er Beauty's broken bowers sighed;
  But with the effort I awoke,
And found myself by Hela's side.



DEATH AND BEAUTY.

On a lone sequestered mead,
  Where silver-streamlets flow,
I saw a rose and lily twine,
  And in love and beauty grow;
Again to that lone, peaceful spot,
  From worldly cares I hied--
But the flowers that lately bloom'd so fair,
  Had wither'd, drooped, and died!

Like love's young dream, they passed away,
  With all their vernal bloom,
And they, who lately shone so fair,
  Now moulder in the tomb!
But ere the minstrels left the bowers,
  And to summer climes had fled,
They sang the dirge o'er fading flowers,
  That by their stems lay dead.

Slumbering on its mother's breast
  A beauteous infant lay,
The blush upon its dimpled cheek,
  Was like a rose in May:
But the glow that tinged that cheek so fair,
  Was but the transient bloom,
That brightens with the flitting breath--
  A flow'ret of the tomb.

The infant oped its azure eyes,
  And sweetly smiling, said,
"Mamma," its gentle spirit ebbing,
  Was numbered with the dead;
It laid its throbbing temples on
  The mother's heaving breast,
And its gentle spirit pass'd to Heaven,
  With angels bright to rest!

Lovely as the morning flowers,
  That bloom so fresh and gay,
I saw a beauteous fair one decked
  In the bridal's bright array;
But she, who had, at morning rise,
  Exulted in her bloom,
Was doom'd ere evening's sun had set,
  To grace the silent tomb.

Alas! that things so beautiful,
  So soon must pass away,
And all of earth that's loveliest
  Must moulder in the clay;
But well we know those charms so bright,
  Which Heaven hath form'd in love,
Tho' ravaged by death's icy hand,
  Shall bloom again above!



TAKE THE HARP.

TO KATE.

    'Tis supposed the muses hang a harp by every stream, where it
    remains till some lady arises to take it and sing the "loves and
    joys, the rural scenes and pleasures," the beauty and grandeur of
    the place.

Take the harp, nor longer leave it
  Sighing on the willow tree;
Pass thy gentle fingers o'er it,
  And awake its melody;
The streams tho' icy chains may bind them,
  Still will murmur back thy trill,
And the roses wild, though blasted,
  On thy cheeks are blooming still.

Then touch the harp, till its wild numbers
  The lone groves and valleys fill;
And tho' winter's frosts have sear'd them,
  Thou canst dream they're beauteous still--
Thou canst clothe their banks with verdure,
  And wild flowers above them rise;
What tho' chilly blasts have strewn them,
  Their fragrance lingers on thy sighs!

Take the harp, nor on it dirges
  Longer let Eolus play;
Touch it, and those notes of sadness
  Change to joyous rhapsody!
And tho' the grape, the gift of Autumn,
  Has been prest to crown the bowl--
Still in thy tresses shine its clusters,
  While down thy snowy neck they roll.

Take the harp, and wake its numbers
  To thy sister planet's praise,
As up the eastern sky she blazes,
  Followed by the morning rays;
Queen of starry heaven beaming,
  From her azure realm afar;
So thou dost shine midst beauty's daughters,
  Love's bright and glorious morning star.



DEATH OF THE BEAUTIFUL.

    The following poem was written in 1850 on the death of Miss Sarah E.
    McCullough, of Pleasant Grove, Lancaster county, Pennsylvania. Miss
    McCullough was a cousin of Mr. Ewing.


        I saw thy form in youthful prime,
          Nor thought that pale Decay
        Would steal before the steps of Time,
          And waste its bloom away.

        --Moore.

  And thou art dead,
        The gifted, the beautiful,
      Thy spirit's fled!
  Thou, the fairest 'mong ten thousand, art no more!
  Death culls the sweetest flowers to grace the tomb--
  He hath touched thee--thou hast left us in thy bloom!
      How oft amid the virgin throng,
      I've seen thee, fairest, dance along;
      And thine eyes, so brightly dark,
      Gleaming like the diamond's spark;
          But now how dim
        Those orbs are left--
        By Death bereft
        Of their brightness,
        And that neck of its whiteness,
      Where once the curling tress descended,
      Where once the rose and lily blended,
          As the warm blush came and flew;
      Now o'er all hath Death extended
        His pallid hue--
        Sallow and blue;
      And sunken 'neath the purple lid,
      Those eyes are hid,
          Once so bright;
And the shroud, as thine own pure spirit white,
All that remains of what was once so lovely, holds!
          In its snowy folds--
      Then fare thee well, sweet one,
      Thy bright, thy fleeting race is run,
      And with the flowers thou art sleeping,
      And o'er thy grave the friends are weeping
          Of thine early day.
      Thou wert lovely--aye, as Spring,
      When birds and blossoms bloom and sing,
      The happy, happy hours welcoming
          Of gentle May.
        In the past I see thee shining,
          Like the star of tender morning,
        A day of love and peace divining,
          And the sky of Hope adorning.
      Smiles--that dimpled mouth are wreathing;
      Music--those rosy lips are breathing,
      Like morn glancing through the sky,
      Like the zephyr's softest sigh.
      Ah, then, who'd dream that aught so fair,
      Was fleeting as the Summer air?
          Yet in that hour
Disease, so deceitful, stole upon thee,
          As blight upon a flower;
          And thou art dead!
      And thy spirit's past away.
      Like a dew-drop from the spray,
      Like a sunbeam from the mountain,
      Like a bubble from the fountain;
        And thou art now at rest,
          In thy damp, narrow cell,
        With the clod heap'd o'er thy breast;
          Fare thee well!



ASPHODEL.

I'll think of thee, I'll think of thee,
  When raging tempests wildly blow,
Mid storm and darkness--wond'rous powers!
  Heaping the stainless, virgin snow
Above thy fragile form, that bowed
  Beneath the blighting frost that fell,
Scattering o'er earth those gorgeous hues,
  Thy grace and pride, sweet Asphodel.

I'll think of thee, I'll think of thee,
  When dreary winter leaves the plain,
And smiling spring leads forth in state,
  With vestal pride, her flow'ry train,
And vernal songs of love and hope,
  In one harmonious concert swell--
Amid the floral throng I'll turn
  To thee, alone, sweet Asphodel.

I'll think of thee, I'll think of thee,
  When morning dawns upon the world,
And through the golden gates of Heaven,
  Like fiery cars his beams are hurled,
Driving the shades of somber night,
  Back to their caverned haunts to dwell--
Thou'lt come to me with charms renewed,
  My peerless flower, sweet Asphodel.






WILLIAM PINKNEY EWING.


William Pinkney Ewing, son of Patrick Ewing, was born May 28, 1828, on
his father's farm near Rowlandville. He is a brother of Edwin E. Ewing,
a sketch of whose life is published in this book, and to which the
reader is referred for other information respecting the family. Mr.
Ewing's early life was spent on his father's farm. When about eighteen
years of age he commenced to write poetry, the first of which was
published in the Philadelphia _Dollar Newspaper_. He was subsequently a
frequent contributor to the _Ladies' Garland_, the _Cecil Whig_ and
_Cecil Democrat_. In 1848, Mr. Ewing commenced the study of the law in
the office of the late John C. Groome in Elkton, and was admitted to the
Elkton Bar, April 10, 1851. In 1853 he removed to Cincinnati, and became
connected with the editorial department of the _Daily Atlas_ of that
city, and contributed editorially and otherwise to several other papers
in Cincinnati, until the _Atlas_ was merged into the _Gazette_. He then
accepted a position on the _Southern Lady's Book_, published in New
Orleans and remained in that city until the magazine changed
proprietors. Mr. Ewing returned to Elkton in 1855, and resumed the
practice of his profession, but continued to write poetry occasionally
for some years afterwards. In 1871 Mr. Ewing removed to Ashtabula, Ohio,
and has since been connected with newspapers in Chicago, Topeka and
other western cities; and has corresponded occasionally with the New
York _Tribune_, New York _Evening Post_ and _Chicago Tribune_.

In politics Mr. Ewing was originally a Democrat, but in 1850 became a
member of the Free Soil party, and an elector on the Free Soil ticket in
1856. He was a delegate to the Chicago convention that nominated Lincoln
in 1860, and also an elector for the State of Maryland on the Lincoln
ticket the same year. In 186l Mr. Ewing was appointed United States
Naval Agent for the port of Baltimore, and held the position until the
office was abolished in 1865.

In September 1863 he married Mrs. Emma P. Smith, a lady of fine literary
taste and ability who is at this time the head of the cooking school of
the State Agricultural College of Iowa.

Like many other writers Mr. Ewing took no pains to preserve his poems
and it was only after the expenditure of great labor and much trouble
that the following meagre selection was made, which it is feared will
not do full justice to the ability of their author.




THE ANGEL VOICE.

"Oh mother, dear mother,
  As calmly last night
I lay on my pallet
  An angel in white
Hover'd o'er me, and softly
  Said--'come, brother, come,
Away from this world,
  To a heavenly home!'"

"Then let me die, mother--
  Tho' sweet birds are singing,
And flowers in brightness
  And beauty are springing
On hillside and mountain,
  O'er meadow and lea,
They no longer possess
  Any sweetness for me."

"For that angelic voice,
  Ringing still in my ear,
Has attuned my heart
  To a holier sphere;
And like a caged eagle,
  My soul pines to stay
So long from its home--
  Its redeemer away."

O, pale grew that mother,
  And heavy her heart,
For she knew her dear boy
  From her sight must depart,
And be laid, cold and stiff,
  In the earth's humid breast,
Where the wicked cease troubling,
  The weary have rest;

But she smoothed down his pillow,
  And murmured a prayer,
For the Giver of mercies
  Her loved one to spare;
But ere she had finished
  Her pious request,
His spirit had flown
  To the realms of the blest!



THEN AND NOW.

[MIDNIGHT.]

I love thee, Maude, as I ne'er loved before,
And as I feel I cannot love again;
And though that love has cost me much of pain,
Of agony intense, I would live o'er
Most willingly, each bitter hour I've known
Since first we met, to claim thee as my own.
But mine thou will not be: thy wayward heart
On one by thee deemed worthier is set,
And I must bear the keen and deathless smart,
Of passion unrequited, or forget
That which is of my very life a part.
To cherish it may lead to madness, yet
I will brood over it: for oh,
The joy its memory brings, surpasses far the woe.

[DAYDAWN.]

"I love thee, Maude, as I ne'er loved before,
And as I feel I cannot love again;"
Thus wrote I many moons ago, and more
Devotedly I love thee now, than when
Those lines were written. But avails it aught?
Have I return? Hold I the slightest part
Within the boundless realm of thy confiding heart?
Or dost thou ever give to me one thought?
I dare believe so:--nor will soon resign
The dream I've cherished long, that some day thou'lt be mine.



THE NEGLECTED HARP.

I touch not that harp,
  Let it slumber alone;
For its notes but awaken
  Sad memories of one
Whose hand often swept
  The soft wires along,
And aroused them to music,
  To love, and to song.

But Death, the destroyer,
  Ere grief threw a ray
O'er her flowery path,
  Snatched her rudely away;
And the harp that resounded,
  With loveliest tone,
To her delicate touch,
  Has since slumbered alone.

Then awake not a strain--
  Let it still repose there,
And be breathed on alone
  By the sweet summer air;
For its numbers though lively,
  Though joyous and light,
But cast o'er my spirits
  A wildering blight.



ALONE.

    Never, no nevermore,
Shall thy soft hand be pressed in mine,
Or on my breast thy weary head recline,
    As oft of yore.

    And though thou wert to me
Life's only charm, I yet can bear
A little while, since thou art free from care,
    Alone to be.

    For to my heart is given,
The cheering hope, that soon, where pain
And partings are unknown, we'll meet again--
    In yonder heaven.



GONE ASTRAY.

Leila, thou art resting well,
In thy lonely, narrow cell--
  Dark and lonely, narrow cell,--
And I would with thee had died,
And was sleeping by thy side,--
  In the graveyard by thy side,--
She who gave thee being, she
Who made life a joy to me,--
  A blessing and a joy to me.

Were she with thee, I could bear
All life's agony and care,--
  Bitter agony and care,--
But alas, she went astray
From the straight and narrow way,--
  Virtue's straight and narrow way--
And, O misery, became
To her sex a thing of shame,--
  A thing of infamy and shame.

Now, of her and thee bereft,
Naught have I to live for left,--
  Naught on earth to live for left;--
And with bleeding heart I roam,
From a desecrated home,--
  A broken, desecrated home,--
Looking, longing for the day
When my life shall ebb away,--
  To its giver, ebb away.

For I feel, a God of love,
In the better land above,--
  Brighter, better land above,--
To these yearning arms again,
With a soul all free from stain,--
  Free from every earthly stain,--
Will the wanderer restore,
To be tempted nevermore--
  Passion-tempted nevermore.



LAY OF THE LAST INDIAN.

They are gone--They are gone,
  From their green mountain homes,
Where the antelope sports,
  And the buffalo roams;
For the pale faces came,
  With insidious art,
And the red men were forced
  From their homes to depart!

In the land Manitou
  Bestowed on their sires,
Oh! never again
  Round their bright council-fires,
Will they gather, to talk
  Of the feats they have done,
Or, to boast of the scalps
  By their prowess they've won.

For they've gone--they have passed,
  Like the dew from the spray,
And their name to remembrance
  Grows fainter each day;
But for this were they forced
  From their ancestors' graves;
They dared to be freemen,
  They scorned to be slaves.






CHARLES H. EVANS.


Charles H. Evans was born in Philadelphia, March 17, 1851,
and was educated in the public schools of that city. In 1866 his
father David Z. Evans, purchased a farm at Town Point in Cecil
county, and removed to that place taking his son with him.

Shortly after coming to Town Point Mr. Evans began to write
poetry, much of which was published in one of the local newspapers
under the signature of _Agricola_. In 1873 Mr. Evans married
Isabell R. Southgate, since deceased, of Christiana, Delaware.

For some years Mr. Evans has been engaged in business in
Philadelphia, but occasionally finds time to cultivate his acquaintance
with the Muses.



INFLUENCES.

Drop follows drop and swells,
  With rain, the sweeping river;
Word follows word, and tells
  A truth that lasts forever.

Flake follows flake, like sprites,
  Whose wings the winds dissever;
Thought follows thought, and lights
  The realms of mind forever.

Beam follows beam, to cheer
  The cloud a bolt would shiver;
Dream follows dream, and fear
  Gives way to joy forever.

The drop, the flake, the beam,
  Teach us a lesson ever;
The word, the thought, the dream,
  Impress the heart forever.



MUSINGS.

Few the joys--oh! few and scattered--
  That from fleeting life we borrow;
And we're paying, ever paying,
  With an usury of sorrow!

If a bright emotion, passing,
  Casts a sun-ray o'er our faces,
Plodding Time--the envious plowman--
  Soon a shadowy furrow traces!

If a hope--ambition-nurtured--
  Gilds our future, ere we've won it,
Vaunting Time--the hoary jailor--
  Shuts his somber gates upon it!

If a heart our bosom seeking,
  With a fond affection woos it,
Heartless Time--remorseless reaper--
  Sweeps his ruthless sickle through it!

Things of earth, all, all, are shadows!
  And while we in vain pursue them,
Time unclasps his withered fingers--
  And our wasted life slips through them.



LINES.

WRITTEN ON VIEWING TURKEY POINT FROM A DISTANCE.

Thou gray old cliff, like turret raised on high,
With light-house mingling with the summer sky,
How long in lonely grandeur hast thou stood,
Braving alike the wild winds and the flood?
What howling gales have swept those shores along,
What tempests dire have piped their dismal song.
And lightnings glared those towering trees among?

And oft, as now, the summer sun has shed
His golden glories round thy mountain head,
And tarried there with late and lingering hues,
While all below was steeped in twilight dews,
And night's proud queen, in ages past, as now,
Hung her pale crescent o'er thy beetling brow.
Soft lamp--that lights the happy to their rest,
But wakes fresh anguish in the hapless breast,
And calls it forth a restless ghost, to glide
In lonely sadness up the mountain side;
And couldst not thou, oh! giant of the past,
Some far off knowledge o'er my senses cast,
Sigh in the hollow moanings of the gale,
And of past ages tell mysterious tale--
Speak of those ages of primeval worth,
And all the hidden wonders of thy birth--
Convulsions strange that heaved thy mighty breast,
And raised the stately masses of thy crest?

Perchance the Indian climbed thy rugged side,
Ere the pale face subdued his warlike pride,
And bent him down to kneel, to serve, to toil,
To alien shrines upon his native soil.
It needs not thee, O mount! to tell the story
That stained the wreath of many a hero's glory;
But Nature's mysteries must ever rest
Within the gloomy confines of thy breast,
Where wealth, uncounted, hapless lies concealed,
Locked in thine inmost temple unrevealed.






MRS. SARAH HALL.


Mrs. Sarah Hall was born in Philadelphia October 30th, 1761, and died in
that city April 8th, 1830. She was the daughter of the Rev. John Ewing,
D.D., a member of the Ewing family of the Eighth district of this
county, and one of the most distinguished scholars and divines of his
time, and who was for many years Provost of the University of
Pennsylvania and pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of
Philadelphia.

Miss Ewing's early education was confined to learning to read and write,
and in acquiring a thorough knowledge of housewifery. In 1782 she
married John Hall, a member of the Hall family of the Eighth district,
and the newly wedded pair came to reside in the house near Rowlandville,
formerly owned by the late Commodore Conner, and now occupied by his son
P.S.P. Conner.

It was while residing in this old mansion, surrounded by the picturesque
scenery of the Octoraro hills, that she wrote the poem entitled "Sketch
of a Landscape," which no doubt was inspired by the beauty of the
surrounding scenery and the fine view of the "Modest Octoraro," which
may be had from the porch of the old historic mansion in which she
resided.

After a residence of about eight years in Cecil county the family
removed to Philadelphia, where Mr. Hall successively filled the offices
of Secretary of the Land Office, and United States Marshal for the
District of Pennsylvania. The family returned to Maryland in 1805, and
resided on Mr. Hall's paternal estate for about six years.

Mrs. Hall's literary career commenced with the publication of her
writings in the _Port Folio_, a literary magazine published in
Philadelphia about the beginning of this century, and of which her son,
John E. Hall, subsequently became the editor. She soon attained high
rank as a magazine writer, and, until the time of her death, occupied a
position second to none of the female writers of this country.

Mrs. Hall is best known in the literary world by her book entitled
"Conversations on the Bible." It was written after she was fifty years
of age and the mother of eleven children, and was so popular as to
astonish its author by the rapidity of its sale.




SKETCH OF A LANDSCAPE

    In Cecil county, Maryland, at the junction of the Octoraro creek
    with the Susquehanna, suggested by hearing the birds sing during the
    remarkably warm weather in February, 1806.

What joyous notes are those, so soft, so sweet,
That unexpected, strike my charmed ear!
They are the Robin's song! This genial morn
Deceives the feathered tribe: for yet the sun
In Pisces holds his course; nor yet has Spring
Advanc'd one legal claim; but though oblique
So mild, so warm, descend his cheering rays,
Impris'ning winter seems subdued. No dread
Of change retards their wing; but off they soar
Triumphing in the fancied dawn of Spring.
  Advent'rous birds, and rash! ye little think,
Though lilacs bud, and early willows burst.
How soon the blasts of March--the snowy sleets,
May turn your hasty flight, to seek again
Your wonted warm abodes. Thus prone is youth,
Thus easily allured, to put his trust
In fair appearance; and with hope elate,
And naught suspecting, thus he sallies forth,
To earn experience in the storms of life!
  But why thus chide--why not with gratitude
Receive and cherish ev'ry gleam of joy?
For many an hour can witness, that not oft,
My solitude is cheered by feelings such,
So blithe--so pleasurable as thy song
Sweet Robin, gives. Yet on thy graceful banks,
Majestic Susquehanna--joy might dwell!
For whether bounteous Summer sport her stores,
Or niggard Winter bind them--still the forms
Most grand, most elegant, that Nature wears
Beneath Columbia's skies, are here combin'd.
  The wide extended landscape glows with more
Than common beauty. Hills rise on hills--
An amphitheater, whose lofty top,
The spreading oak, or stately poplar crowns--
Whose ever-varying sides present such scenes
Smooth or precipitous--harmonious still--
Mild or sublime,--as wake the poet's lay;
Nor aught is wanting to delight the sense;
The gifts of Ceres, or Diana's shades.
The eye enraptur'd roves o'er woods and dells,
Or dwells complacent on the numerous signs
Of cultivated life. The laborer's decent cot,
Marks the clear spring, or bubbling rill.
The lowlier hut hard by the river's edge,
The boat, the seine suspended, tell the place
Where in his season hardy fishers toil.
More elevated on the grassy slope,
The farmer's mansion rises mid his trees;
Thence, o'er his fields the master's watchful eye
Surveys the whole. He sees his flocks, his herds
Excluded from the grain-built cone; all else,
While rigid winter reigns, their free domain!
Range through the pastures, crop the tender root,
Or climbing heights abrupt, search careful out,
The welcome herb,--now prematurely sprung
Through half-thawed earth. Beside him spreading elms,
His friendly barrier from th' invading north,
Contrast their shields defensive with the willow
Whose flexile drapery sweeps his rustic lawn.
Before him lie his vegetable stores,
His garden, orchards, meadows--all his hopes--
Now bound in icy chains: but ripening suns
Shall bring their treasures to his plenteous board.
Soon too, the hum of busy man shall wake
Th' adjacent shores. The baited hook, the net,
Drawn skilful round the wat'ry cove, shall bring
Their prize delicious to the rural feast.
  Here blooms the laurel on the rugged breaks,
Umbrageous, verdant, through the circling year
His bushy mantle scorning winds or snows--
While there--two ample streams confluent grace--
Complete the picture--animate the whole!
Broad o'er the plain the Susquehanna rolls,
His rapid waves far sounding as he comes.
Through many a distant clime and verdant vale,
A thousand springy caverns yield their rills,
Augmenting still his force. The torrent grows,
Spreads deep and wide, till braving all restraint
Ev'n mountain ridges feel the imperious press;
Forced from their ancient rock-bound base--they leave
Their monumental sides, erect, to guard
The pass--and tell to future days, and years,
The wond'rous tale! Meanwhile,
The conqueror flood holds on his course,
Resistless ever--sinuous, or direct.
Unconscious tribes beneath his surface play,
Nor heed the laden barques, his surface bear;
Now gliding swiftly by the threat'ning rocks,
Now swimming smoothly to the distant bay.
To meet and bring his liberal tribute too,
The modest Octoraro winds his way--
Not ostentatious like a boasting world
Their little charities proclaiming loud--
But silent through the glade retir'd and wild,
Between the shaded banks on either hand,
Till circling yonder meed--he yields his name.
Nor proudly, Susquehanna! boast thy gain,
For thence, not far, thou too, like him shall give
Thy congregated waters, title--all,
To swell the nobler name of Chesapeake!
  And is not such a scene as this the spell,
That lulls the restless passions into peace?
Yes. Cold must be the sordid heart, unmov'd
By Nature's bounties: but they cannot fill,
That ardent craving in the mind of man,
For social intercourse,--the healthful play--
The moral gem--the light of intellect--
Communion sweet with those we love!



WITH A ROSE IN JANUARY.

Will you accept this bud my dear,
Fit emblem of the coming year:
The bud expands, the flower blooms,
And gives awhile its rich perfumes:
Its strength decays, its leaf descends,
Its sweets are gone--its beauty ends,
Such is the year.--The morning brings
The bud of pleasure in its wings:
Hope, health, and fortune, smile their day,
And charm each threat'ning cloud away:
But gathering ills increase their force,
And though concealed--make sure their course.
They come--they press--they stand confest,
And disappointment tells the rest.



LIFE.

SUGGESTED BY A SUMMER EVENING.

'Tis early eve--the sun's last trembling glance,
Still hovers o'er and gilds the western wild,
And slowly leaves the haunts of solitude.
  Venus, bright mistress of the musing hour,
Above the horizon lifts her beck'ning torch;
Stars, in their order, follow one by one
The graceful movement of their brilliant queen,
Obedient to the hand that fix'd them all,
And said to each--Be this thy place.
Refreshing airs revive man's sinking strength,
And hallowed thoughts come rushing to the heart!
  Now from her eastern clime the golden Moon,
Set in a frame of azure, lifts her shield,
And all creation wakes to life renewed!
Not long she holds supreme her joyous course;
Her foes in sullen vapors fitful rise,
And envious, hovering over her splendid path,
Now thin--now dense, impede her kindly ray.
In hasty, partial gleams, of light and shade,
She holds her purposed way.--Now darker clouds
Collect, combine, advance--she falls--'twould seem
To rise no more--sudden they break--they pass,
Once more she shines--bright sovereign of the skies!
  Thus 'tis with life--it is not dubious hope
In early youth--'tis joy--joy unalloy'd;
Joy blooms within, all objects take the tint,
And glowing colors paint the vista's length.
Not long, life dances on the plastic scene,
Care's haggard form invades each flow'ry path;
Disease, with pallid hue, leads on her train,
And Sorrow sheds her tears in wasting showers!
But Pain and Grief pass on, and harrowing Care
Awhile put on some pleasing, treacherous shape;
Then hope revives, health blooms! love smiles--
And wealth and honors crown the distant day.
How long? Envenom'd ills collect all 'round,
And while short-sighted man his fragile schemes
Pursues--not grasps--blow after blow fall swift,
Fall reckless--and he sinks beneath their weight!
To rise no more? Like yon triumphant Moon,
That "walks in brightness" now, beyond the clouds,
Through patient suffering, man shall surely rise
To dwell above that orb, in light ineffable,
Where pain--where sin--where sorrows, never come!






MRS. SALLIE WILLIAMS HARDCASTLE.


Mrs. Hardcastle's maiden name was Sallie Williams Minter. She was born
in Bedford county, Virginia, June 19, 1841.

Reared in the shadow of the Peaks of Otter, whose lofty summits tower in
magnificent grandeur far above the wooded heights and billowy green
hills of the surrounding country, it is little wonder that the subject
of this sketch should have been early imbued with the spirit of poesy,
and led to the cultivation of tastes and the selection of themes which
the grand and picturesque in nature are apt to suggest. But in addition
to these favorable surroundings, a literary and thoughtful turn of mind
was inherited from her father and grandfather--the latter having been
eminent in his day as the author of a religious work, replete with keen
arguments and logical conclusions.

The former also was a writer of ability, and having a thorough knowledge
of the politics of his State, frequently discussed them in the local
journals with a ready and trenchant pen.

Mrs. Hardcastle was educated at Bedford Female College, but is indebted
to her father for her best and earliest tuition. At the age of fourteen
her first verses, written on the death of a little friend of her own
age, were published in the _Virginia Sentinel_. She was an occasional
contributor to the _Literacy Companion_, _Magnolia Weekly_, and other
Southern periodicals.

Mrs. Hardcastle was married in 1863 to Dr. Jerome H. Hardcastle, then a
surgeon in the hospital at Liberty, Va. After the war they came to
Maryland, and subsequently, in 1876, to Cecilton, in this county, where
they have since resided. They are the parents of five daughters and one
son.

Like many other persons, Mrs. Hardcastle neglected to carefully preserve
her poetical writings. And was so unfortunate as to lose most of the few
in her possession at the time of the evacuation of Richmond, in
consequence of which the following poems are all it has been practicable
to obtain, which is a matter of regret, inasmuch as they are by no means
the best of her writings.




ON RECEIPT OF A BOUQUET.

I thank thee, my friend, for thy delicate gift,
  These fair and beautiful flowers,
They come to me now, like a boon from above,
  To gladden my pensive hours.

All the brilliant bloom, of the summer days,
  These lovely flowers restore;
And my childhood's home, with its fields and flowers,
  Comes back to me once more.

How fragile and fair!--some pale, some blushing,
  All breathing rarest perfume--
But brighter and fairer they seem, my friend,
  Because from thee they come.

I know that this beauty is frail and brief--
  That their fragrance and bloom must depart,
But like the mem'ry of thee, these flowers will live
  Forever enshrined in my heart.



OCTOBER.

Oh, days of the lovely October,
  How dear thou art to me;
Words are weak, when my soul would speak,
  In language taught by thee.

Not alone do thy glorious sunsets,
  Nor thy trees of a thousand dyes,
But all touch my heart with thy sweet spell,
  Oh, earth, and air, and skies.

In the gardens that shone with beauty,
  The flowers have faded, I know,
And here, by my favorite pathway,
  The roses no longer may blow.

But the leaves are burning with splendor,
  And I'll weave them in garlands bright,
As I did in the sweet days of childhood,
  When my heart was aglow with delight.

I've ruby and sapphire, blended with gold,
  And here's an emerald green,
A parting gift, for my coronet,
  From summer's dying queen.

Oh, loveliest month of the year,
  Too soon will thy glories depart,
But not the sweet faith thou'st wakened,
  Within this worshiping heart.

For though, like all beauty of earth,
  Thou'rt trammeled by earthly decay,
Yet my soul is lifted by thine,
  To glories that fade not away.



OLD LETTERS.

TO MRS. ANNIE P----.

"Burn my old letters"--ah! for you
  These words are easy to say,
For you, who know not the light they brought
  To many a darksome day.

And, then, old letters to me are links
  To those days forever gone;
For we cling to the past as age would cling
  To youth, in its rosy dawn.

But the wintry air is chill without,
  And the fire is faint and low,
So I'll gather them up--the page of to-day
  With the date of long ago.

Gather them up and cast them in
  Like trash, to the greedy flame;
And I marvel not that the world hath said,
  "Friendship is only a name!"

For the human heart's a changeful thing,
  And sometime we would borrow
The light, that other days have given,
  To cheer us on the morrow.

And so, as I sit in the merry light
  Of the blaze that upward flashes,
I think, like these, our dearest hopes
  May come to dust and ashes.



JUNE ROSES.

What marvelous new-born glory
  Is flushing the garden and lawn!
Hath the queen of all blossoming beauty
  Come forth with the early dawn?

Like the first faint flush of morn,
  To the watchers, aweary with night,--
Like treasures long hidden away,
  Ye burst on my joyous sight.

Not e'en the "first rose of Summer,"
  Could yesterday be seen--
Only a tint like the sea-shell,
  Deep in a prison of green.

Did the lover-like kiss of the south wind,
  While wand'ring o'er forest and lake,
Bid thee start in thy slumbering beauty,
  And crimson with blushes awake?

'Tis long since the fragrant lilac
  Flourished and drooped at thy side,
While many a frail young flow'ret since
  Hath quietly blossomed and died.

And for days the pale, proud lily
  In regal beauty hath shown,
Catching the sun's warm glances
  Ere the young roses had blown.

But perfumed breezes are whispering:
  "To-day the roses have come,"
And the cottage will rival the palace,
  Decked in thy radiant bloom.



MUSIC.

The spirit is often enraptured
  With sweet tokens of love divine,
But seldom in language so plain
  As spoken through music, to mine.

Then my soul flings wide her portals,
  And visions of Paradise throng,
While I bow, in silent devotion,
  To the Author of genius and song.

The pleasures of earth are but few,
  And scarce for our sorrows repay,
But we catch, in sweet moments like this,
  A glimpse of the perfect day.

When I reach the Celestial City
  And gaze from her golden tower,
Methinks my freed spirit would turn
  Far back, to this rapturous hour.

And as angels are harping their songs--
  Sweet songs of a heavenly birth--
I'll listen to hear the same touch
  That played us this prelude on earth.



LINES

ON THE DEATH OF A FRIEND.

We loved thee--yes, we loved thee,
  But the angels loved thee too;
And so thou now art sleeping
  'Neath the sky so bright and blue.

Sleeping now thy last long slumber,
  In the low and quiet tomb,
Where life's ills can ne'er disturb thee--
  Where sorrow ne'er can come.

What tho' our hearts are bleeding,
  And our lonely spirits mourn,
That thou with Spring's sweet flow'rets
  Wilt never more return,

We would not call thee back, dear friend,
  To life's dull path again;
Where thorns amid the flowers,
  Would often give thee pain;

But sweetly rest thee, dear one,
  In thy long and dreamless sleep,
Nor heed the sighs above thee,
  And the blinding tears we weep.






MRS. MARY ELIZA IRELAND.


Mrs. Mary Eliza Ireland, the daughter of Joseph Haines and Harriet
(Kirk) Haines, was born in the village of Brick Meeting House, now
called Calvert, January 9, 1834. In early life she married John M.
Ireland, son of Colonel Joseph Ireland, of Kent county, Md. They are the
parents of three children, one of whom died in infancy. They now reside
in Baltimore, where Mr. Ireland holds the position of United States
storekeeper in the Internal Revenue Department.

Until the past few years Mrs. Ireland has always lived in the old
homestead where she was born and married, and from whence her parents
were removed by death.

Her first literary effort was a short story written when quite a young
girl, entitled "Ellen Linwood," and published in the _Cecil Whig_, then
edited by the late Palmer C. Ricketts, under the _nom de plume_ of
"Marie Norman." For several years after the publication of "Ellen
Linwood" Mrs. Ireland occasionally contributed to the _Cecil Whig_ and
Oxford _Press_.

Some years ago she wrote a story for _Arthur's Magazine_, and being in
Philadelphia soon after it was written, she took it to the publishing
house, and there met for the first time T.S. Arthur, whom she had known
from childhood through his books. He received her kindly, promised to
read her story, and to let her know his decision the next day. That
decision was, that though entertaining and well written, it was scarcely
suited to his magazine. He suggested another periodical where it would
likely meet with favor. He also asked for another story, and presented
her with a set of the magazines that she might see the style of writing
that he desired.

Her next story for _Arthur's_ was a success, and from that time until
his death he remained the candid critic of all she sent him for
publication, as well as of some stories published elsewhere, and the
kind literary adviser and friend. She retained her first story (which he
had declined) for three years, made some changes in it, and he accepted
and published it.

Since then she has been an acceptable contributor to _Cottage Hearth_,
_Household_, and other domestic magazines, besides the _Literary World_,
_Ladies' Cabinet_, _Woman's Journal_, and several church papers; and has
written two prize stories, which took first prizes.

In 1882 her short stories were collected and connected into a continued
story, which was accepted and published by J.B. Lippincott & Co., under
the title of "Timothy; His Neighbors and His Friends."

Many letters of appreciation from distant parts of the Union testified
to the merit of the book, and she was encouraged to accede to the
request of the Presbyterian Observer Company of Baltimore to write a
serial for their paper. It was entitled "Ivandale," and was warmly
commended by judges of literary work.

Wishing to read German literature in the original, she undertook the
study of German, and as she had no time which she was willing to devote
to regular lessons, she obtained a German pronouncing reader, and
without instruction from any one she succeeded in learning to read and
translate, pronouncing correctly enough to be understood by any German.
This knowledge of the language has been a well-spring of pleasure to
her, and well repays her for the few moments' attention she daily
bestowed upon it. She has translated several books, two of which were
published as serials in the _Oxford Press_, and the Lutheran Board of
Publication have published one of her translations, entitled "Betty's
Decision." Many beautiful short stories have found their way into our
language and periodicals through the medium of her pen.

Her time is well filled with her household duties, her missionary and
church work, and in reviewing new books for the press. She has no
specified time for writing, nor does she neglect her household or social
duties for the sake of it, always having looked upon her literary work
as a recreation. She leads a busy life, yet is rarely hurried; and,
although she enjoys the companionship of many people noted in
literature, it is powerless to weaken her attachment for friends who
have no inclination in that way. All have a warm place in her heart, and
a cordial welcome to her cheerful and happy home.

Mrs. Ireland, contrary to the experience of most writers, never wrote
any poetry until she had attained distinction as a writer of prose.




AT THE PARTY.

I gave her a rose, so sweet, so fair;
She picked it to pieces while standing there.

I praised the deep blue of her starry eyes;
She turned them upon me in cold surprise.

Her white hand I kissed in a transport of love;
My kiss she effaced with her snowy glove.

I touched a soft ringlet of golden brown;
She rebuked my daring with a haughty frown.

I asked her to dance in most penitent tone;
On the arm of a rival she left me alone.

This gave me a hint; I veered from my track,
And waltzed with an heiress, to win my love back.

I carried her fan, and indulged in a sigh,
And whispered sweet nothings when my loved one was nigh.

It worked like a charm; oh, joy of my life!
This stratagem wins me a sweet little wife.



MOTHER AND SON.

Postman, good postman, halt I pray,
And leave a letter for me to-day;
If it's only a line from over the sea
To say that my Sandy remembers me.

I have waited and hoped by day and by night;
I'll watch--if spared--till my locks grow white;
Have prayed--yet repent that my faith waxed dim,
When passing, you left no message from him.

My proud arms cradled his infant head,
My prayers arose by his boyhood's bed;
To better our fortunes, he traversed the main;
God guard him, and bring him to me again.

The postman has passed midst the beating rain,
And my heart is bowed with its weight of pain;
This dark, dark day, I am tortured with dread
That Sandy, my boy, may be ill or dead.

But hark! there's a step! my heart be still!
A step at the gate, in the path, on the sill;
Did the postman return? my letter forget?
Oh 'tis Sandy! Thank God, he loves me yet!



THE MISSIONARY'S STORY.

Hard were her hands, and brown;
Coarsest of stuff her gown:
    Sod hut her home.
Pale was her care-worn face,
Beauty and youth and grace
    Long since have flown.

Stern was her lot in life;
She was a drunkard's wife;
    And forests drear
Shut not temptation out;
Strong drink was sold and bought;
    Poor pioneer!

Slave he to demon rum;
Houses and lands all gone;
    Want came by stealth.
Yet her scant fare she shared
With me, who worse have fared
    In homes of wealth.

Stranger was I to her
Save as Christ's messenger;
    And for His sake
She, all her little store
Wishing it were but more,--
    Bade me to take.

Oh like the widow's mite,
Given for love of right,
    May it be blest.
When her last hour has come,
May angels bear her home,
    Ever to rest.



TRANSITION.

She is lying in state, this fair June day,
  While the bee from the rose its sweetness sips;
Her heart thrills not at the lark's clear lay,
  Though a smile illumines her pallid lips.

What glorified form did the Angel of Death
  Assume to her view, that it left the bright trace
Of a jubilant welcome, whose icy breath
  Froze the sunny smile on her fair young face?

Did angels with snow-white wings come down
  And hover about her dying bed?
Did they bear a white robe, and a starry crown
  To place on their sainted comrade's head?

Did her gaze rest on valleys and pastures green,
  Where roses in beauty supernal, bloom?
Where lilies in snowy and golden sheen
  Fill the air with their heavenly, rare perfume?

Did strains of sweet music her senses entrance
  While Earth, with her loved ones, receded in air?
Did friends who had left it, to greet her, advance
  And joyfully lead her to dwell with them, there?

Did she cross the deep Jordan without any fears
  For all were now calmed on her dear Saviour's breast?
On pinions of light did she mount to the spheres
  Where all is contentment, and pleasure, and rest?

All this we may humbly and truly believe,
  For Christ to the Bethany sisters did give
The comforting promise, which all may receive:
  "He that believeth, though dead, yet shall live."



DOROTHY MOORE.

A bachelor gray, was Valentine Brown;
He lived in a mansion just out of the town,
    A mansion spacious and grand;
He was wealthy as Vanderbilt, Astor or Tome,
Had money invested abroad and at home,
    And thousands of acres of land.

A friend of his boyhood was Archibald Gray;
And to prove what queer antics Dame Fortune will play
    When she sets about trying to plan,
She heaped all her favors on Valentine, bold,
And always left Archibald out of her fold,
    The harmless, and weak-minded man.

So, while Valentine reigned like a king on his throne,
Poor Archibald ne'er had a home of his own,
    Yet never was known to complain;
Year in and year out, he wandered around,
In mansion and farmhouse a welcome he found
    As long as he chose to remain.

The lilacs and snowballs which guarded the door
Of the ivy-decked cottage of good Parson Moore,
    Were waking from out their long sleep;
For the last month of winter was hastening by,
The last hours of Valentine's day had drawn nigh,
    When Archibald's travel-worn feet

Were heard on the door-step; he entered and smiled,
Then sat down and slept like a play-weary child,
    Woke, and told them how long he would stay;
Then slumbered again, while sweet Dorothy Moore,
The motherless daughter, who loved all God's poor,
    Made him welcome around the tea-tray.

And archly she said as she gave him his tea,
"Where's the valentine Archy, you promised to me?
    All maidens expect one to-day;"
Then forgot it; nor noticed when supper was done,
And her father had gone to his study alone,
    That Archie had stolen away.

But, drawing the curtains on darkness and night!
She sat down to spin by the cheery fire-light,
    While before it, so cozy and warm,
Slept the kitten,--a snowy white ball of content--
And her wheel, with its humming activity, lent
    To the hour, a picturesque charm.

No scene more enchanting could artist dream know,
Than this peaceful, calm spot, in the ruby-red glow
    Of the pine knots aflame on the hearth;
But Dorothy thought, "Were he but there with me
And loved me as I love, a desert would be
    The happiest place upon earth."

"Oh were he but poor, and forsaken;" she sighed,
"He then a poor maiden might seek for his bride,
    But his love will some great lady crown;
Since all is so hopeless, dear Father above
Oh help me to cast out my unreturned love!
    And forget the proud Valentine Brown."

In his elegant library, sat Valentine Brown,
The argand burned brightly, the rich curtains down,
    Luxurious home of repose;--
Yet his handsome face saddened, his heart was oppressed;
He sighed, and his spirit was full of unrest,
    For his love he should never disclose.

He had roamed over Europe, and Countesses fair
Had graciously smiled on the great millionaire.
    Yet his heart had turned coldly away;
"From her childhood, I've loved her, sweet Dorothy Moore,"
Just then the latch clicked--through the half opened door
    Crept humbly, poor Archibald Gray.

"I want you!" he whispered; "I promised her, come!"
And Valentine followed, till reaching the home
    Where Dorothy spun by the hearth;
And when he had entered with Archibald Gray
And courteously waited, commands to obey,
    Knew no lovelier picture on earth.

But the tact which had piloted Valentine there
Deserted poor Archie; then Dorothy fair,
    Blushing deeply, yet smilingly said:
"Why, Archibald, why did you leave us I pray?
You said till to-morrow at noon, you would stay,
    And in less than an hour you had fled."

The memory of Archibald took up the clew
Thus kindly supplied, and eager he grew;
    "Yes, yes; Archie promised he would;
I have brought you a valentine, Valentine Brown,"
(Here he smoothed his gray beard, and looked helplessly down),
    "He's so good to poor Archie, so good!"

The three stood in silence, two wondering no doubt
How this intricate problem would ever turn out,
    And Valentine, thoughtful and kind,--
Felt pity for Archie, who meant for the best;
And for Dorothy--flushing like clouds in the west
    And fearing he thought it designed.

He looked at the maiden--modest and sweet;
At her lovely blue eyes, her peach-blossom cheek
    And sighed for his youth which had fled;
"She never could love me, good Archibald Gray,
Her beauty and youthfulness stand in the way,
    Just look at my frost-covered head."

"Please tell him, good Archie," said Dorothy fair,
"That I love nothing better than silvery hair
    When it crowns one so noble and true;
His heart all men say is exalted and grand,
He is known for his good deeds all over the land,
    Loved by every one, equalled by few."

"That heart, my good Archie, I lay at her feet
To spurn or to thrill with an ecstasy sweet;"
    (And he reverently took her white hand,)
"That hand is his, Archie, and so is my heart
To have and to keep until death do us part
    To meet in the Heavenly land."

Good friends new and old, should you journey that way
And should anything happen, to cause a delay,
    And you call upon Valentine Brown:
In the coziest nook, you'll see Archibald Gray,
Awaiting with patience the dallying day,
    Till the sickle of Time mows him down.

And Fortune still favors her Valentine dear,
She winters and summers there year after year;
    To thank her he never forgets;
With his rosy-cheeked children and beautiful wife
The heart of his heart, and the life of his life,
    The sun of his peace never sets.



HOMEWARD BOUND.

We grow in grace if day by day
We keep in mind to watch and pray,
Thus walking in the Heavenward way.

But, drifting from the guiding hand
Of Him who rules the sea and land,
We wreck ourselves on barren strand,

In name of Him who for us died,
We cry for help, when deeply tried,
Receive it, whatso'er betide.

Of good we sow some scattered seed,
We help to shield the bruised reed,
Supply to want, the urgent need.

Then once more hope to reach the goal,
For faith with works will save a soul,
Though hostile billows round it roll.

Thus tempest-tost, we struggle on;
Now sad, now cheered, till life is gone,
And trust to hear the bless'd, well done!






GEORGE JOHNSTON.


[The editor is indebted to his friend, George A. Blake, Esq., of the
Elkton Bar, for the following sketch of his life.]

George Johnston, the editor and compiler of this book, was born in
Philadelphia, May 15, 1829, the place of his birth being on Penn street,
one door south of the southeast corner of Penn and Lombard streets. He
is the oldest son of Isaac Johnston, and was named for his grandfather,
George Johnston, the youngest son of Isaac Johnson, who lived on his
farm, one mile west of the east end of Mason and Dixon's line, as early
as 1755. There is reason to believe that the earliest member of the
family who lived in that neighborhood was Samuel Johnston, who resided
there as early as 1708.

Mr. Johnston's mother, Susan Curry, was a cousin of his father, she
being the daughter of Ann Spear, the grandmother of Emma Alice Browne, a
sketch of whose life appears in this Volume.

When about two years of age, the subject of this sketch was placed in
charge of his paternal grandmother and his uncle, George Johnston, who
resided on the homestead, in Cecil county. Here he was carefully
nurtured and trained, and here were planted the seeds which have since
sprung up and brought forth fruit in his intellectual and moral life.
The family being Presbyterian in training, and of the type from which
sprang those who in earlier years drafted the Mecklenberg Declaration,
the lad was early imbued with those religious principles which ever
serve as the true basis of mental growth and moral purpose.

The educational advantages of a half century ago were not such as are
enjoyed by the youth of to-day; but such as the neighborhood provided
and his uncle's means afforded, were placed at the disposal of the boy,
who soon manifested an aptitude to learn. When but five years of age he
was sent to what was then called a "Subscription School," kept in the
neighborhood. This he attended during the next seven years, and in the
Winter time until the year 1849, when he took charge as teacher of a
school, in the Center School House, situated near Fair Hill, in Cecil
county.

In the Spring of 1847 Mr. Johnston spent three months in Chesapeake City
(in this county) as an apprentice to the carpenter business. He
completed his trade in the neighborhood in which he had been raised, and
from the year 1851 to 1864 spent his time about equally in teaching
school and working at his trade.

When the war of the rebellion broke out in 1861, Mr. Johnston, without
hesitation, took the side of the Union, and was, during all those dark
days, an ardent supporter of the Government, the intensity of his
convictions being no doubt increased by the result of his observations
during a business trip to Texas and through the South in the Winter of
eighteen hundred and sixty and sixty-one.

In the Constitutional Convention of this State in 1864 he served with
ability as committee clerk, having accepted the position at the
solicitation of the late David Scott (of John), who was a member of that
body. While acting as committee clerk, Mr. Johnston had the honor of
engrossing that section of the Constitution which abolished slavery in
the State of Maryland. Many years afterwards he presented the pen used
on that occasion to Frederick Douglass, then United States Marshal of
the District of Columbia.

Mr. Johnston's health, which had always been precarious, became so bad
in 1875 that he was obliged to abandon his trade and turn his attention
to another occupation. Accordingly, two years later he became connected
with _The Cecil Whig_, and for about three years had charge of its local
columns. While associated with that journal, his attention was attracted
to the mine of wealth offered to the investigator by the early history
of Cecil county. Prompted by a love of historical investigation, he was
led to make researches into this mine--a task hitherto largely
unattempted or ineffectually prosecuted. The results of these studies
enriched the columns of _The Cecil Whig_ during a period of three years,
and attracted wide attention. In 1881 he published the "History of Cecil
County, Md., and the Early Settlements Around the Head of the Chesapeake
Bay and on the Delaware River, with Sketches of Some of the Old Families
of Cecil County." This work, which embodied the results of the author's
investigations during a period of some years, is one of rare value. To
those who have given but little thought to the subject, it is ever a
matter of surprise to learn how closely the history of Cecil and the
surrounding counties is interwoven with that of our common country, and
how valuable as data of the past are the materials which invited the
lover of truth to their discovery. One can scarcely estimate the
laborious research involved in the task of gathering the component parts
of a history which stretched over a period of nearly two hundred and
seventy-five years. Old volumes, musty records, masses of court
documents, correspondence (official and otherwise), previous historical
attempts, personal knowledge, tradition and personal interviews, were
all laid under contribution by the author, and served as sources of his
authority. These he has woven together with such judgment in selection,
skill in arrangement and force of style and diction, that just as
"Gray's Elegy" alone has placed him in the front rank of poets, so this
one work has given the author a high and permanent place among the
historians of our country. The work attempted is so well done, and
withal so accurate and reliable as one of reference and authority, that
in recognition of its merits Mr. Johnston has been elected a member of
the Historical Societies of Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland and
Wisconsin.

On January 1, 1883, he became local editor of _The Cecil Democrat_, and
was in such capacity connected with that newspaper for three years and a
half.

Early in life Mr. Johnston was a pupil of David Scott (of James), who
then taught a school in the Fourth district of Cecil county, and whose
sister, Miss Hannah F. Scott, he subsequently married. The scholar being
advanced in studies beyond the other pupils of the school, naturally a
close intimacy was formed between him and his teacher. This afterwards
deepened into a friendship which continued without interruption until
Mr. Scott's death, and was the means of creating in Mr. Johnston an
ardent love of poetry. Since 1851 he has written a number of poems, some
of which have appeared in print. These have been so well received by the
public that the author, in deference to the wishes of some of his
friends, has ventured to include the following rhymes in this work:




HERE AND HEREAFTER.

Sad echoes of unequal strife,
  Go sighing through the aftermath,
  That skirts the dark uncertain path,
That leads me to the close of life;--
And years ago dark shadows fell
  Athwart the amber sky of youth,
  Blighting the bloom of hope and truth,
That erst had blossom'd all too well.

The world's great heart beats wild and high,
  With wealth of bliss and love untold--
  While I with unblanch'd eye behold
Its fading phantoms wane and die.
Without a sigh I mark their flight;
  A stranger to the world unknown,
  Amid its mazes all alone,
I wander in Egyptian night.

I worship not at its cold shrine,
  Nor fear the terror of its frown,
  It cannot chain my spirit down,
The soaring of my soul confine.
For ah! we parted at the tomb,
  Where buried hopes of youthful years,
  Embalm'd in sorrow's bitter tears,
Lie mouldering within the gloom.

Ah! few and dim the lights that gleam
  Around me in life's dismal maze,
  Scarce seen amid the somber haze
That shrouds me in life's dismal dream.
I never drank the wine of bliss,
  Made sweeter by the wealth of joy;
  My cup is mix'd with griefs alloy,
And I have tasted only this.

Life's problem oft to solve, I try,
  And hope I have not lived in vain,
  And borne this galling fetter chain
Through all its years without a sigh.
Some tears, perhaps, I may have dried--
  My own in sympathy I shed
  O'er joys and hopes of others dead,
By sorrow's legions crucified.

Earthly joys, alas! are fleeting,
  Shadowy and evanescent,
  Scarce full orb'd before the crescent
Tells us of their final setting.
And soon our starry dreams are wreck'd,
  And all our earthly hopes sublime
  Lie stranded on the shores of Time,
In drapery of woe bedeck'd,

Yet I know 'tis vain repining;--
  Though to-day the sky with sorrow
  May be overcast, to-morrow
All the love-lights may be shining,
Made brighter by the long eclipse;
  And shadows of earth's dreary night,
  That shrouded from my spirit's sight,
Life's glorious Apocalypse.

To tread this weary round of Toil
  Is not the whole of mortal life;--
  There is an unseen inner strife,
Where battling for the victor's spoil,
The wrong contendeth with the right,--
  Passion and pride with gentleness
  Pity with sorrow and distress--
And faith with sin's deep with'ring blight.

And truth my spirit oft beguiles,
While her dear face is wreath'd in smiles,
  By whisp'ring sweetly unto me;
  As thou hast measured, it shall be
  In justice meted out to thee,
When thou hast reached the blissful isles
Beyond the misty veil of Time;
  Thou'lt find a rest from earthly wars,
  And healing for thy earthly scars,
Within that sweet supernal clime.



THE TURTLE'S SERMON.

An old and crafty terrapin,
  Who lately found his speech,
Like many another simple lout,
  Concluded he could preach.

And so he waddled to the shore,
  And thus address'd his friends--
The bullfrogs and the snappers bold,
  About their latter ends.

And told them all how they must be
  Made into soup at last;
And how the serpent sharp can see
  When last year's hide is cast.

And how the wary pickerel
  Enjoys the minnow sweet,
Which he doth never fail to catch,
  When it goes out to skate;

And how the beaver builds his house
  Within his winter dam;
And how the oyster lays its egg,
  And hatches out a clam;

And how the busy bumble bee,
  Doth blow his little horn,
Whene'er he goes in quest of food,
  Amid the standin' corn:

And how the gentle butterfly
  Sings many a merry tune
Because he's glad he has escaped
  From out the old cocoon;

And how the rabbit flies his kite,
  When he can find a string;
And how the owl sits up all night,
  To hear the squirrel sing;

And many other curious things
  That did his hearers good,--
Of cats that did a swimmin' go
  And eels that chew'd the cud;

And toads that dance upon their ears
  When they a courtin' go;
And moles that stand upon their heads,
  That they may see the show.

His sermon, as you see, was queer,
  And muchly out of joint;--
And 'cause the preacher took no text,
  He failed to make his point.

And soon his hearers all grew tired,
  And mortified and vex'd,
Because he chose to play the fool,
  And preach without a text.

And so they left him there alone--
  And this is what befel--
He grew so mad it broke his heart,
  And almost burst his shell.

MORAL.

If you successfully would preach,
  Be sure a text to take,
And stick unto it like a leech
  Until your point you make.



SKYE.

THE DOG WITH THE BEAUTIFUL EYE.

Someone has written a song about "Tray,"
  But no one has courage to write about Skye;
So methinks I will rhyme, in my own rugged way,
  Of the queer little dog with the beautiful eye.

The land that he came from is said to be cold,
  And nature has dress'd him its storms to defy--
In the ugliest coat that ever was seen--
  But giv'n him a charming and beautiful eye.

His coat is so ugly it makes him look old
  And scrawny and poor and most ready to die;
But you'd change your opinion, I think, if you saw
  The life and the beauty that beams from his eye.

'Twere hard to conceive of an uglier thing
  Than this queer little dog from the island of Skye--
Grotesque and uncouth, and ugly as sin--
  Yet bless'd with a mild and a beautiful eye.

Among dogs, like the heathen Chinee among men,
  His civilization is not very high;
But then his dark ways we can always excuse
  On account of his lovely and charming bright eye.

He is sad and forlorn, yet so gentle and kind,
  You could not but love him I'm sure it you'd try--
This dog so demure and so kindly inclined--
  This dog with the mild and the beautiful eye.

Sometimes he will follow his master to church;
  Tho' his piety's weak, I must say with a sigh,
Perhaps he's as good as some other ones there
  Whose piety seems to be all in their eye.

He's full of strange antics--most little dogs are--
  And tho' he's forlorn, he can mischief descry;
Indeed--I'm strongly impress'd with the fact--
  It eternally lurks in his beautiful eye.

His hair is the queerest that dog ever wore;
  Tho' kind to his master, of strangers he's shy;
He is wise in his way; deeply learned in dog lore;
  Intelligence beams from his beautiful eye.

He's patient and faithful, affectionate too;
  My love for his virtues time's lapse will defy;
I'm sure, if you knew him, you'd love him, like me,
  This dog with the mild and the beautiful eye.



IF YOU DON'T BELIEVE IT, TRY IT.

'Tis better far to wear away
  In honest strong endeavor,
Than idly rust in slow decay
  And work and labor never;
By honest toil to earn your bread,
  Or wherewithal to buy it;
'Tis very well, and truly said--
  If you don't believe it, try it.

Ye idle loafers in the streets,
  The honest workman spurning,
Know this--a living to be sweet
  Is better for the earning.
To loaf and lounge and lie about,
  On others' toil to riot,
Is only practiced by a lout;
  No honest man will try it.

Oh! him that earns his daily bread!
  Despise and spurn him never,
A thousand blessings on his head
  'Tis he that feeds you ever.
Should others work no more than you
  Quite spare would be your diet,
Your gills would turn a livid hue
  If they would stop and try it.

Then go to work with hands or head,
  You'll surely profit by it;
And strive to earn some honest bread--
  You can, if you will try it.

Ye sweeter ones of gentler sex,
  Who tread the pavement hourly,
I do not wish your hearts to vex,
  Then pray don't take it sourly--
Methinks sometimes 'tis no disgrace
  Tho' seldom you are nigh it,
To be at home, your proper place,--
  If you don't believe it, try it.
Are there no duties there to do?
  If so "be up and doing!"
No clothes to mend, that you could sew,
  No beer that's worth the brewing?
Then stay at home, sometimes, at least,
  My counsel, don't defy it,
A little rest's as good's a feast,
  If you don't believe it, try it.

'Tis easy quite to do the right,
  And in it there is beauty,
What e'er you do, do with your might,
  But always do your duty.
Be true unto yourself, and then--
  Wise counsel--don't decry it,
You can't be false to other men--
  If you don't believe it, try it.



BYE AND BYE.

Shadowy, dreamy phantoms ever rising
  Up before wild Fancy's eyes,
With their untold and beauteous splendor,
  Make us present things despise.

And procrastination whispers softly,
  Wait a little longer yet;
Rashness will defeat your purpose, mortal,
  And be cause of deep regret.

Wait with patience just a moment longer,
  Then with safety clutch them fast--
Thus the spirit of delay beguiles us,
  Till the lucky time is past.

Moments freighted deep with joy ecstatic
  All unheeded pass away;
While we musing scan the misty future,
  Hoping they will ever stay.

Bye and bye! may gaily point us forward,
  Unto scenes with joy o'ercast--
Only mirage of Life's barren desert,
  They are found to be at last.

Bye and bye! with all its artful scheming,
  Though it may seem most sublime,
Wisdom horror-stricken spurneth from her,
  Knowing only present time.

Reason tells us now's the time for action,
  And this truth will ever last,
Written as it is throughout all nature,
  On the pages of the Past.






WILLIAM JAMES JONES.


William James Jones was born in Elkton, August 25, 1829, and received
his education at the common school and Academy in that town. His youth
and early manhood was spent in mechanical pursuits and in the
improvement of his mind by a desultory course of reading, and in
perfecting himself in the knowledge of the Latin language.

In 1852, Mr. Jones purchased a half interest in the _Cecil Whig_ and
became the editor of that journal for a short time, and until its
founder P.C. Ricketts, who was then editing the _Daily News_, of
Baltimore, returned from that city and resumed the duties of editor of
the _Whig_.

In 1853, Mr. Jones commenced the study of the law in the office of John
C. Groome, Esq., in Elkton and was admitted to the Bar, September 21,
1855.

In politics Mr. Jones was a Whig, but allied himself with the American
party when it was in course of formation and continued to be an active
member as long as the party lasted. In 1857 he was appointed State's
Attorney for Cecil county, to fill a vacancy, and in 1859 was elected to
the same office for the term of four years. At the outbreak of the war
of the rebellion Mr. Jones allied himself with the Union cause and was
elected to the House of Delegates by the Union party in 1863, and was
appointed two years afterwards, United States' District Attorney for the
district of Maryland, and held the office for about a year, and until he
was removed by President Andrew Johnson for opposing his policy of
reconstruction. In 1858 he married Miss Mary Jane Smith, of Connecticut.
They are the parents of one son and two daughters, the eldest of whom is
the wife of Rev. Walter E. Avery, of the Wilmington Conference.

Mr. Jones is one of the most earnest and successful members of the
Elkton Bar, and though not a voluminous writer, in early life
contributed poetry to the columns of the _Cecil Whig_, of which the
following poems are specimens.




AUTUMN.

The autumn winds are moaning round
  And through the branches sighing,
And autumn leaves upon the ground
  All seared and dead are lying.

The summer flowers have ceased to bloom
  For autumn frosts have blighted,
And laid them in a cheerless tomb
  By summer sun unlighted.

Thus all our "fondest hopes decay"
  Beneath the chill of sorrow,
The joys that brightest seem to-day
  Are withered by the morrow.

But there are flowers that bloom enshrin'd
  In hearts by love united,
Unscathed by the autumn wind,
  By autumn frost unblighted.

And there are hearts that ever thrill
  With friendship warm and glowing,
And joys unseared by sorrow's chill
  With hallowed truth o'erflowing.



MARY'S GRAVE.

In a quiet country churchyard
  From the city far away,
Where no marble stands in mockery
  Above the mould'ring clay;
Where rears no sculptured monument--
  There grass and flowers wave
'Round a spot where mem'ry lingers--
  My once-loved Mary's grave.

They laid her down to slumber
  In this lonely quiet spot,
They raised no stone above her,
  No epitaph they wrote;
They pressed the fresh mould o'er her
  As earth to earth they gave--
Their hearts with anguish bursting,
  They turned from Mary's grave.

She knew not much of grief or care
  Ere yet by Death's cold hand,
Her soul was snatched from earth away
  To join the spirit band:
Her mild blue eye hath lost its gleam,
  No more her sufferings crave
The hand of pity, but the tear
  Falls oft o'er Mary's grave.

I too would pay my tribute there,
  I who have loved her well.
And drop one silent, sorrowing tear
  This storm of grief to quell;
'Tis all the hope I dare indulge,
  'Tis all the boon I crave,
To pay the tribute of a tear,
  Loved Mary, o'er thy grave.



TO ANSELMO.

    Anselmo was the nom de plume of David Scott, of James.

I know thee not, and yet I fain
  Would call thee brother, friend;
I know that friendship, virtue, truth,
  All in thy nature blend.

I know by thee the formal bow,
  The half deceitful smile
Are valued not; they ill become
  The man that's free from guile.

I know thee not, and yet my breast
  Thrills ever at thy song,
And bleeds to know, that thou hast felt
  The weight of "woe and wrong."

'Tis said the soul with care opprest
  Grows patient 'neath the weight,
And after years can bear it well
  E'en though the load be great.

And, that the heart oft stung by grief
  Is senseless to the pain,
And bleeding bares it to the barb,
  To bid it strike again.

I care not if the heart has borne
  All that the world can give,
Of "disappointment, hate and scorn;"
  In hope 'twill ever live,

And feel the barb'd and poison'd stings
  Of anguish, grief and care,
As keenly as in years gone by,
  When first they entered there.

The weary soul by care opprest
  May utter no complaints,
But loaths the weight it cannot bear
  And weakens till it faints.



FLOWERS.

Bring flowers for the youthful throng,
  Of variegated glow,
And twine of them a gaudy wreath
  Around each childish brow.

Bring flowers for the maiden gay,
  Bring flowers rich and rare,
And weave the buds of brightest hue
  Among her waving hair.

Bring flowers to the man of grief--
  They hold the syren art,
To charm the care-look from his brow,
  The sorrow from his heart.

Bring flowers for the sick girl's couch;
  'Twill cheer her languid eye
To know the flowers have bloomed again,
  And see them ere she die.

Bring flowers when her soul has fled,
  And place them on her breast,
Tho' ere their blooming freshness fade
  We lay her down to rest.



LIFE.

Life at best is but a dream,
We're launched upon a rapid stream,
Gushing from some unknown source,
Rushing swiftly on its course,
Save when amid some painful scene,
And then it flows calm and serene,
That we may gaze in mute despair
On every hated object there.

Fortune our bark and hope our chart,
With childish glee on our voy'ge we start,
The boat glides merrily o'er the wave.
But ah! there's many a storm to brave,
And many a dang'rous reef to clear,
And rushing rapid o'er which to steer.

Anon the stream grows wide and deep,
While here and there wild breakers leap,
O'er rocks half hidden by the flood,
Where for ages they have stood,
Upon whose bleak and rugged crest,
Many a proud form sank to rest,
And many a heart untouched by care
Laid its unstained offering there.

Ah! they have met a happier lot,
Whose bark was wrecked ere they forgot
The pleasing scenes of childhood's years,
'Mid that tempestuous vale of tears
Which farther on begirts the stream,
Where phantom hopes like lightning gleam
Through the murky air, and flit around
The brain with hellish shrieking sound
Conjuring up each mad'ning thought,
With black despair or malice fraught.

Swiftly, on in our course we go
To where sweetest flow'rs are hanging low
We stretch our hand their stems to clasp
But ah! they're crush'd within our grasp,
While forward th' rushing stream flows fast
And soon the beauteous scene is past.

At last we view another sight,
The shore with drifted snow is white,
The stream grows dark and soon we feel
An icy coldness o'er us steal,
We cast our eyes ahead and see
The ocean of Eternity.

When once amid its peaceful waves
No holier joy the bosom craves--
Ten thousand stars are shining bright
Yet one reflects a purer light--
No sooner does its glowing blaze
Attract the spirit's wand'ring gaze,
Than all is turned to joy we see--
That star is Immortality.






JOHN HENRY KIMBLE.


John Henry Kimble was born in Buckingham township, Bucks county,
Pennsylvania, September 8, 1850. He is the second son of Henry H.
Kimble, and is descended on his father's side from English stock, being
a lineal descendant from Governor John Carver, who came to this country
in the Mayflower in 1620. On his mother's side, his grandfather, Seruch
Titus, was a prominent citizen of Bucks county, and, as his name
indicates, was of Italian descent.

Mr. Kimble moved with his parents to the Fourth Election district of
Cecil county, in the Spring of 1855, and has been engaged in farming all
his life, except two years spent in teaching in our public schools. He
is a popular music teacher and performer on musical instruments, and has
won local distinction as a debater.

In 1870 his first verses were published in the _Morris Scholastic_ a
newspaper published in Grundy county, Illinois. He afterwards wrote for
the _Cecil Whig_. In 1875 he wrote "The Patrons of Husbandry," a serial
poem, which was published by the Grange organ of the State of
Pennsylvania, in seven parts, with illustrations. It was pronounced by
competent critics to be one of the "best and most natural descriptions
of farm life ever written." It attracted wide attention and received
favorable comment from the N.Y. _World_ and other leading papers. He
wrote another serial in 1876, entitled "Two Granges."

Mr. Kimble makes no pretensions as a writer and has never allowed his
love of literature to interfere with his farm work. In the Winters of
1872, '73 and '74 he taught in the public schools of this county with
satisfaction to his patrons.

In December, 1873, he was married to Miss Sarah Teresa Gallagher,
daughter of John E. Gallagher, of the Fourth district. They have five
children, three daughters and two sons. In 1880, Mr. Kimble moved from
the farm near Fair Hill, where he had spent twenty-five years, to
Appleton, where he still resides. He is now a frequent and popular
contributor to the _Cecil Democrat_.




HIS LAST TUNE.

The shade of death had haunted him
  Through many a weary day;
With dread disease his youthful frame
  Was wasting slow away.
He took his violin and sighed,--
  "I am too weak to play."

But, rising in his cushioned chair,
  He grasps, with trembling hand,
The neck and bow, and tunes the strings
  And thinks of concerts grand;
And hears the crowd applauding loud
  As when he led the band.

Inspired with supernatural power
  He plays a melody,
Forgetting all the terrors of
  His mortal malady;
And, as of yore, his soul once more
  Is with the gay and free.

Something responsive in the soul
  Wakes with melodious sound
A lively melody that makes
  The languid pulse rebound,
While recollection takes the mind
  Through many a happy round.

Now fast, now slow, he draws the bow
  To suit his changing will;
A march, a waltz, a polka, and
  An intricate quadrille,
Each in its turn is rendered with
  An artist's ready skill.

With failing strength he strikes at length
  His favorite--"Home, Sweet Home;"
His dreamy spirit ceases with
  The pleasing past to roam,
And, through the future, seems to rise
  Up, up to Heaven's high dome.

And mingling with his violin
  He hears the joyful strains
That vibrate o'er angelic hosts,
  Where song supernal reigns!
Oh! glimpse of glory! lifting him
  Above all mortal pains.

The last sweet note of that sweet tune
  Within the room has died--
And now he's playing on the harp
  Upon the other side
Of death's dark river, safe and free,
  Among the glorified.



ADVICE TO AN AMBITIOUS YOUTH.

You look with joy to-day along life's vista clear,
And great will be your deeds through many a happy year,
And smiling friends will come to crown with glad acclaim
A hero, when you reach the glittering heights of fame.

Your life will be above the common herd, I trow,
You will not toil and drudge as they are doing now:
Success attend your steps; a word I would not say
To chill your warmest hopes, or shade your sunny way.

Your mark is high, my child, then aim your arrow straight,
The world has need to-day, of heroes good and great,
You feel so strong; and wish life's battle would begin,
You'll find a chance ere long, to do your best and win.

But may be you will fail, 'tis ten to one you will,
And men will laugh, to see your lack of pluck and skill,
Perhaps you will not have one mighty thing to do;
But many little things will prove if you are true.

To carry brick and stone for someone else's wall,
To do the hardest part and get no praise at all,
To see a weaker man upheld by circumstance,
And find the path hedged high, just when you would advance;

Or, in the jostling crowd, to slip, and fall, and see,
How many men will scoff at your adversity,
And though your heart may ache, you must not shed a tear,
But plan, and push, and work, and smother all your fear.

No darling mother then can sympathize with you,--
No father when you stick, will kindly pull you through;
Through years of grasping toil the wealth you gain, and fame,
May vanish all, and leave you poverty and shame.

But you need not be lost, all people are not bad,
The Lord has servants good, as He has ever had;
They'll find you in your grief, and lend a helping hand,
And point the road that leads up to the "Better Land."

Remember this, my child, wherever you may go,
That God rules over all, though it may not seem so;
And what you sow, you'll reap, with joy or misery,
If not in time, O, surely in eternity.



TOO LATE.

A dear old friend of mine is very ill, I hear,
I have not seen his face for many a weary year.
Ah, many toilsome days we've spent with little train,
And he was poor and weak, but never would complain.

I knew his fears and hopes, he knew my hopes and fears.
We shared each other's joys and wept each other's tears!
He had his faults, and I oft sinned in word and deed;
But through our troubles all, we seldom disagreed.

And when we did, we soon were truly reconciled;
So, while we might have quarrelled, we compromised and smiled.
But fortune bade us part; we bid good-bye at last,
Each toiled as bravely on as both had in the past.

I've written him, and he has answered prompt and true;
But we have never met as we had promised to.
For he was busy there and I was busy here,
And so our lots were cast apart from year to year.

But when a mutual friend told me this afternoon
That he was very sick and wished to see me soon,
I left my home at once and on the earliest train
I'm speeding to his home across the distant plain.

He looks for me! and I, to reach him scarce can wait,
O, for the lightning's speed! that I may not be late.
The fields seem spinning round, the trees seem flying past,
The engine thunders on, the station's reached at last.

And to my friend I haste, to greet him as of yore,
Rejoicing in his thrift, I pause beside his door.
A servant asks me in, and there upon his bed,
Behold my dear old friend, who sent for me--just dead!

I speak his name once more, and check the rising tears,
And kiss his honest face, changed little through the years.
"He asked for you," they said, but could no longer wait;
Alas! alas! to be but fifteen minutes late.



AFTER THE SHOWER.

After the shower the fields are green,
  The winds are hushed, the air is cool,
The merry children now are seen
  Barefoot wading the wayside pool,
  Loitering on their way to school,
        After the morning shower.

After the shower the farmers walk
  Around their homes with thanks sincere.
The shower is foremost in their talk,
  See! how it makes their crops appear,
  The finest seen for many a year.
        Thanks for the gentle shower.

Westward the dark clouds roll away
  To vanish in the ether blue,
Eastward the curtains light and gay
  Exclude the glorious sun from view
  Till, as they shift, he flashes through
        And lights the charming scene.

Against the melting clouds, behold
  The lofty arch, the beauteous bow,
The sacred sign to saints of old,
  As bright as when first seen below,
  How fair the matchless colors glow
        After the cooling shower.

Washed by the countless, crystal drops,
  Awhile from swarming insects free,
The cattle clip the clover tops
  Forth wandering o'er the fertile lea,
  The birds sing with unusual glee
        After the drenching shower.

Over the hills and valleys green
  Wild flowers are blooming fresh and fair,
In cottage lawns and yards are seen
  The good results of woman's care,
  Tulips and pinks and lillies rare
        Fresh from the timely shower.



A TRIBUTE

TO THE MEMORY OF DAVID SCOTT (OF JOHN.)

I weep for the loss of a leader in thought,
Whose lessons of truth, with simplicity taught,
Have bless'd and encouraged the humble and poor,
Who always were welcomed with joy at his door.

How happy the hours when we gathered around,
To hear his solutions of problems profound;
And bright through my mem'ry what pleasure returns
When I think of his rendering of Byron and Burns.

The "Saturday Night," and "To Mary in Heaven,"
With true Scottish accent were touchingly given,
And reckless "Don Juan's" most comical plight,--
And pathos of "Harold" he gave with delight.

The pages of Hebraic sages divine,
Made vocal by him with new beauties did shine;
His choice conversation with children and men,
Was often enriched with a song from his pen.

In public debate, whosoever arose,
His well-grounded argument firm to oppose,
Though sharp the contention, was forced to declare,
That he was an honorable champion there.

And, those he offended, as everyone must,
Whose thoughts are progressive, whose actions are just,
With kindness he reasoned all errors to show,
And made a staunch friend of a bickering foe.

He owned like a hero the penalty dread--
"By the sweat of thy brow shalt thou earn thy bread,"
And his toil through summer, and mid-winter snows,
Has made the wild wilderness bloom as the rose.

The choicest of fruits in profusion appeared,
On trees that he planted, and vines that he reared;
And few things delighted him more than to send,
A rare little treat to an invalid friend.

He scorned false pretences and arrogant pride,
The follies of fashion he loved to deride;
But acknowledged true merit wherever 'twas shown,
By a serf in his hut, or a king on his throne.

His faults be forgotten, we've all gone astray,
Lord, show us in mercy, the straight, narrow way,
Peace, peace to his ashes, and sweet be his rest,
With angels of light, in the home of the blest.



SPRING.

Rosy morn is brightly breaking,
  Cheerful birds melodious sing,
Earth with thankful songs awaking
  Hails with joy the merry Spring,
Silver clouds in sunlight glowing
  Slowly float the azure dome,
Tender flowers are sweetly blowing
  Round each cozy cottage home.

Dreary winter's icy fingers
  Have released the bending tree,
Genial life reviving, lingers
  O'er the cold and sterile lea.
From the rocky, snow-clad mountains,
  Where the breath of sunny Spring
Has unfettered muffled fountains,
  Hear the songs of gladness ring.

In the morn of playful childhood,
  With dear friends 'mid sylvan bowers,
O'er the fields and through the wildwood,
  Culling all the choicest flow'rs;
Twining wreaths, each other crowning,
  Dew-drops bright for royal gems,
Ne'er a thought of worldly frowning
  On the precious diadems.

Marched we on with true devotion,
  While the scenes of after years,
Stirr'd the spirits deep emotion,
  With alternate hopes and fears.
While before us lay life's prizes,
  Dazzling in the sunlight gleam,--
How we gazed with sad surprises,
  When they vanished like a dream.

Many happy hearts grew weary,
  Rosy cheeks grew pale and white,
Pleasant paths grew dark and dreary,
  Swept by storms of withering blight;
How the changing years have fleeted,
  Strewing wrecks on either side,
Cherished schemes have been defeated,
  And the cares of age abide.

But when cheery Spring advances,
  Crowned with gems of beauty rare,
Pleasure like a fairy, dances
  O'er the landscape everywhere,
And the tide of life flows higher,
  Gloom's dark curtains are withdrawn,
And again youth's hidden fire,
  Thrills me as in life's fresh dawn.






JAMES McCAULEY.


James McCauley was born August 23, 1809, near Mechanics Valley, in Cecil
county, and received his education in the log schoolhouse in that
neighborhood known as Maffit's schoolhouse. He learned the trade of a
cooper with his father John McCauley. After coming of age he taught
school for a few years, and then commenced making threshing machines and
horse powers, doing the wood and iron work himself. In 1836 he removed
to New Leeds, where he has since resided.

In 1841, Mr. McCauley was appointed County Surveyor by Governor Pratt,
and served in that capacity for several years and has ever since
practiced land surveying with much success in all parts of Cecil county.
In 1857 he was elected Register of Wills and served until the Fall of
1863. In 1864 he was elected a delegate to the General Assembly of the
State, and served in the session of 1865, and the special session of
1866. Mr. McCauley has always been deeply interested in the cause of
education and was chairman of the committee on that subject in the House
of Delegates. While in the Legislature he was instrumental in securing
the passage of the law prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors in
Cecil county on election day.

In the early part of 1868 Mr. McCauley was appointed School
Commissioner, and soon afterwards Chief Judge of the Orphan's Court, to
fill the vacancy caused by the death of the late Levi H. Evans, which he
did with so much acceptability that he has since been elected for four
terms of four years each.

In 1834, Mr. McCauley married Sarah, the youngest daughter of Hugh
Beard, a well-known surveyor of this county. His first wife died in
1846, leaving five children. In 1849 he married Millicent, daughter of
Jacob Price, of Sassafras Neck.

Mr. McCauley commenced to write poetry when a young man and has
contributed poetry, but much more prose, to the newspapers of this
county during the last half century.




HENRY CLAY.

He needs no monument, no marble pile,
'Tis vain thus to commemorate a name
That must endure in noble grandeur while
His country lives,--the temple of his fame.



VIRTUOUS AGE.

As early youth in brightness vies,
  With advent of the day,
When Sol first opes his golden eyes,
  And chases night away.

So may the virtuous man compare,
  In his declining day,
With setting sun, in ev'ning fair,
  Passing from earth away.

And though his face no more we see,
  He still reflects his light,
And shines with glorious majesty,
  In other realms more bright.

And still his light doth ne'er decline,
  But gath'ring up fresh store,
Through ages yet to come, shall shine,
  And shine, forever more.



ACROSTIC.

Enraptured thoughts intuitive,
Make haste to greet thy page.
Melodious with sweet accord,
And classic too with age.

And ever may the sacred nine,
Lead thee to their embrace,
Inspire thy song with themes divine,
Choice gems select from nature's mine,
Enriched with matchless grace.

Be thine a life of social joy,
Removed from care and pain,
On earth thy early years employ,
With prospect of that gain
No mortal here can realize,
Eternal bliss beyond the skies.



WORK TO-DAY.

Youth's the time; Youth's the season!
  Learn and labor while you may,
Hear the voice of age and reason,--
                  Work to-day.

Labor hard in morning's prime,
  Hasten on without delay,
Make the most of early time--
                  Work to-day.

Up betimes, nor let the sun
  Find you sleeping or at play,
Sleep enough when life is done--
                  Work to-day.

Cull the sweets from ev'ry flower,
  Seize the moments while you may,
Nor idly pass one sunny hour--
                  Work to-day.



ON THE DEATH OF A CHILD.

Dear sister, has thy little son,
  Been snatched from thy embrace,
Thy fav'rite child, thy darling one,
  Has left a vacant place.

His father oft with little John
  Beguil'd the hours away,
To watch his little fav'rite son,
  Enjoy his childish play;

For there was laughter in his eye,
  And health was on his cheek,
I fancy that he's standing by,
  And almost hear him speak.

The patt'ring of his little feet,
  In fancy's ear is heard,
The music of his voice as sweet,
  As singing of a bird.

The objects that we fondly prize,
  How soon they pass away,
And we are left to realize,
  The emblems of decay.

Dear sister, be resigned then,
  Nor let your faith grow dim,
He cannot come to you again,
  But you can go to him.



SPRING.

Awake and sing, for early Spring
  Comes forth with beauty gay,
With joy elate, both small and great
  Now bless the happy day.

Through all the earth comes beauty forth,
  So sweet, so fresh and fair,
And ev'ry sound that echoes round,
  Comes with a gladsome air.

While from the hill the little rill,
  Comes trickling down so clear,
Its bubbling voice made me rejoice,
  In many an early year.

Along the mead where'er we tread,
  Will little flow'rets spring,
And through the air in colors rare,
  Waves many a tiny wing.

Back to their home, the songsters come,
  And gaily, blithely sing,
The sun looks gay, I love the day,
  The sweet and early spring.



HOPE.

When storms arise, and tumults jar,
  And wreck this mortal form,
There is a bright, a lovely star,
  That shines above the storm.

'Tis hope that buoys our spirits up,
  Along the chequer'd way,
And when we drain the bitter cup
  It points a brighter day.

Though all the ills of life stand by,
  It proffers still to save;
And when the shades of death are nigh,
  It looks beyond the grave.



AUTUMN.

How sad the breath of autumn sighs,
  With mourning and decay;
The woods are clothed in varying dyes,
  Of funeral array.

Where beauty bloomed of late around,
  On mountain top and vale,
Now wither'd foliage strews the ground,
  And tells a piteous tale.

And summer birds are on the wing,
  Bound for a warmer sky,
They greeted us in early spring--
  They bid us now good bye.

So pass away our early years,
  Youth sinks into decay,
And age, like autumn soon appears,
  And quick we pass away.






MRS. IDA McCORMICK.


Mrs. Ida McCormick was born at Cameron Park, the family
homestead, one mile south of the pleasant little village of Zion,
Cecil county, Maryland, December 31, 1850. She is the daughter
of William Cameron (of Robert,) and a cousin of Annie M. Biles;
her mother Anna M. Oldham, being a sister of Catherine R. Oldham,
the mother of Annie M. Darlington, whose biography may
be found in this volume. She was educated at the Church-side
Seminary, at Zion, and at an early age engaged in teaching in the
public schools of her native county. She commenced to write
poetry when quite young, and for some years occasionally contributed
to the columns of the _Cecil Whig_.

On the 7th of August, 1873, she married James McCormick, of
Woodlawn, and for about a year after her marriage resided with
her husband near that place. In 1876 the family removed to
Philadelphia where they have since resided, except short intervals
when traveling.




MY FANCY LAND.

I'm roaming to-day in a far-away land
  Where the roses and violets grow,
Where white waves break on a silvery strand,
  And are lost on the cliffs below.
High up in a palace of sparkling gold
  Where voices are hushed and still,
Where lips are silent and hearts are cold,
And the days are rich with a glory untold,
  And no one disputes my will.

The walls are rich with an amber light,
  And waters in fountains fall,
There are landscapes which vie with Italy bright,
  And servants within my call;
There are sounds of music, bewitchingly sweet,
  With tender, plaintive chords,
Like the patter of tiny innocent feet,
Or the voices of joy when loved ones meet
  And their hearts speak out, their words.

All day from my turret I watch the sails
  That fleck the sweep of the tide,--
Whose passengers all are joyous and hale,
  As into the harbor they ride.
They enter my golden castle gate,--
  They roam thro' my stately halls,--
They rest in chambers furnished in state,
Then close by my glory-throne they wait,
  Until I shall answer their call.

There are faces bright with a merry light
  And the music of long ago;
And others dark as Lethe's night
  And as cold as the winter's snow.
Hands that meet mine in a trusty clasp
  With blushes that come and go,
Strangers to pain in this world so vast,
With its pleasure now and sorrow at last,
  In the land we do not know.

They are bound for this strangely mystical land
  So shadowy, lone and so dim,
And my castle's a port on the ocean strand,
  Where they wait for the ferryman grim,
To row them away from the silvery beach
  Beyond the foam of the tide,
Where a palace looms far away from their reach,
Whose gates are closed with a clang to each
  Who have chosen the pathway wide.

They tell me I'm treading with careless feet
  This thorny, deceitful path,
When the Master cometh my face to greet
  He will open his vials of wrath.
But I turn again to the world so real,
  And my "Fancy Land" grows dim,
Time's hand has taught me not to feel
The wounds which sympathy cannot heal,
  And I anchor my faith in Him.



WITH THE TIDE.

Beneath the bright sun's dazzling ray,
She watched his vessel sail away
To distant, far-famed lands.
Her heart was gone,--upon her hand
Sparkled a diamond fair and grand,
Telling in silent jubilee
"His love is all the world to me."

Time goes by wings,--the years flew on,
The days had come,--the summers gone,
And still no loved one came
To feed the burning passion flame
Still glowing in her heart.
They told her "in another land
He captive held a heart and hand
And graced Dame Fashion's mart."

She listened to love's second tale
That came with Autumn's misty gale,
And hid her heart within the fold
Of satins rare, and lustrous gold,
Sadness so deep, must live untold
Shut in her marble palace high,
Reared almost up to touch the sky.

Haughty and cold her heart had grown,
For wealth and glory she lived alone,
Yet as oft she watched an out bound ship
Its prow in foamy waters dip,
The day came back when lip to lip
Her heart met his in a sad farewell.
Murmuring this sad and low refrain,
As cold and chill as winter rain--
"He's falser than human tongue can tell."



September's sun with yellow heat,
Fell burning where the waves had beat
With restless motion, against the shore,
And music like unto that of yore,
When a tiny speck in the clouds she saw,
Moving and nearing the pleasant land
Quietly, swiftly, as by a law.
Screening her brown eyes with her hand,
She saw it strike the pebbled sand,
And heard a glad shout cleave the air,
And saw a noble, manly form,
With locks of silvered raven hair,
And a heart with love and passion warm.

She held her breath in silent dread,
The crimson from her soft cheek fled,
Low at her feet he knelt;--
"No welcome for the leal and true?
Speak, darling, speak! it is my due,
Back through the years I've come to you
Faithful as when I went!"

"No answer still? my love, oh, why
No answer to my pleading cry?"
Thou'rt dead! Why have I lived for this?
To gain a life of shipwrecked bliss?
To distant lands to roam and then
Dead lips to welcome me again?



A funeral train,--all mourners great,
Pall-bearers clothed in robes of state,
The form they love more fair in death
Than when 'twas warmed by living breath,
A haughty man with silvered hair,
Among the strangers gathered there;--
A rose dropped by an unknown hand
With perfume from a foreign land,
Upon the casket lid,--
A ship at anchor in the bay,
That in the evening bore away
A form that landed yesterday.



THE OLD FASHION.

    "The old, old fashion,--Death! Oh, thank God, all who see it, for
    that older fashion yet, of Immortality!"

    --Dickens.

Despite all human passion,
  And all that we can do,--
There is an old, old fashion
  That comes to me and you.
It has come to me so often
  That I know its meaning well,
Nothing its pain can soften
  Nothing its power can quell.

When the battle-field was silent,
  Gone to their final rest,
Dead in their last encampment
  Lay the ones I loved the best.
And then, when my heart was lightest,
  It came with a snake-like tread,
And darkened the day that was brightest,
  Then left me with my dead.

It came in the wild March weather
  With bluster of storm and sleet,
And stilled in our home forever
  The patter of boyish feet.
And then,--God pity my treason,
  When life again had smiled,
It came in the holiday season
  And took from me my child.

"Give thanks for the old, old fashion,"
  No, that can never be.
Where is the Divine compassion
  That God has shown to me?
Fling wide each shining portal,--
  Let me--a sinner through,--
Thank God for the immortal
  Is all that I can do.

No prayer of love or passion
  Can give my dead to me,
But I bless the old, old fashion,
  Of immortality.



MY BABY AND THE ROSE.

A rose tree grew by the garden wall,
And its highest blossom was just as tall
  As my baby's curly head;
A lovely, fragrant, perfect rose,--
But sweeter from head to dimpled toes,
  Was the baby I fondly led.

Now summer is over and winter gone,
And the winds of March are whistling on
  Where the rose its petals shed;
No trace of rose perfumed and rare,
No baby face as seraph fair,
  My baby sweet is dead.

The summer sun will shine again,
And 'neath the pattering, warm June rain,
  Again the rose will bloom,
And so beyond these lowering skies
My baby dear, with smiling eyes,
  Shall peer through earthly gloom,

And guide me with her angel hand
Through Heaven's gates,--and with me stand
  Away from worldly woes,--
Where Heaven's flowers, divinely sweet,
Soften the path for weary feet
  With perfume of the rose.






FOLGER McKINSEY.


Folger McKinsey was born in Elkton, on the 29th of August, 1866, in the
cottage on Bow street now occupied by Thomas W. Green. His early life
was spent in Elkton, except a few years in childhood when his parents
resided in the West and South, until 1879, when they removed to
Philadelphia, taking their son with them. His paternal grandfather was a
Scotchman, and his grand parents on his mother's side were Germans, from
the country bordering on the Rhine. Through the marriage of his maternal
great grandmother he is distantly related to Daniel Defoe, the author of
Robinson Crusoe. Both his parents are persons of intellectual ability,
and have written verse, his mother having been a contributor to the
local newspapers of this county, and to several western journals.

Mr. McKinsey received his education at the primary school of Miss
Tabitha Jones, on Main street, in Elkton, where he was sent when seven
years of age. Except an attendance of eight months at the public school
of Elkton, he never attended any other schools. In early childhood he
showed a great desire to read, and is indebted to his relative, William
J. Jones, and to L. Marshall Haines and E.E. Ewing for the means of
gratifying his early thirst for information. Shortly after removing to
Philadelphia Mr. McKinsey entered a mercantile establishment as clerk,
but soon afterwards accepted a position in the office of a publishing
house, and subsequently entered the office of the Philadelphia and
Reading railroad company as clerk in the record department. While in the
office of the railroad company he wrote and published his first poem. It
is called "Satana Victo" and is written in blank verse. Since that time
he has been a prolific writer of both poetry and prose, much of which
has been published.

In October, 1884, Mr. McKinsey accepted the position of editor of the
_Shore Gazette_, a weekly journal published at Ocean Beach, N.J., which
he continued to fill for some months, when he returned to Philadelphia
and accepted a position as special writer on a prominent daily journal
of that city. In October, 1885, Mr. McKinsey accepted the position of
associate editor of the _Cecil Whig_, which he continued to fill until
the following March when he became editor of the _Daily_ and _Weekly
News_, of Frederick City, Maryland. During the time he was connected
with the _Whig_ he began the publication of a journal in Darby, called
the _Delaware County Independent_.

In January, 1886, Mr. McKinsey married Miss Fannie Holenrake Dungan, an
estimable young English lady of Camden, N.J. Mr. McKinsey is a great
admirer of Joaquin Miller and Walt Whitman, and a warm personal friend
of the latter.

Though young in years he writes with as much fluency and ease as if he
had been writing poetry for half an ordinary lifetime, and gives promise
of a brilliant career that will be creditable to his native town, and
beneficial to the human race.




WAITING THEIR CROWNS.

They wait, the forest monarchs tall,
  In naked beauty on the hills,
Until the snows of Winter fall,
  And icy arms embrace the rills.

The golden glory of the days,
  When Indian Summer fills the land,
Descends in gleams and dreamful haze,
  Like blessings from the Lord's right hand.

No matin call of tardy bird,
  Long stayed by sunshine in the north,
Above the fluttering clouds is heard.
  A moment's pause, then bursting forth

In all the glorious sweets of song
  That thrill from soul to soul aflame,
And die the barren hills among
  From whence the summer carols came.

All day the leafless monarchs wave
  Their hoary branches high in air,
And white-winged spirits guard the grave
  Where late they laid the Autumn fair.

A sterner nature marks the land,
  The soft blue airs of spring-time sleep,
The Summer trips it, hand in hand,
  With Autumn o'er the distant deep.

Where lift the dim, perpetual isles
  Their purple ensigns of the youth
That ever dimples, romps and smiles
  Beyond the wrinkled pale of ruth.

And deep within the wooded lane
  The oak and pine, in plaintive call,
Unto the wintry tide complain,
  As leaves and brown nuts constant fall.

They wait their crowns, the naked kings!
  And down the avenues of night
The frosty god, December, brings
  Them glistening diadems of white.

White petals of the virgin snow,
  With sprigs of ivy here and there,
They deck the forest monarch's brow,
  While breezes whistle through his hair.

A sterner nature marks the soul,
  Men's lips draw near the cup of life,
They wait to hear the centuries' roll
  That bring the kingly crowns of strife.

The spring-time months and summer years
  Beside the Autumn days are laid,
Beneath the grave of conquered fears,
  Beneath the sloping hill-side's shade.

And deeper joy, serener faith,
  Spring forth the golden crowns to grasp,
While death, the monarch, gently lay'th
  Upon their brows a kinglier clasp.

They wait no more the golden crown;
  Men, trees, the careless days of strife,
Drift onward to the far, sweet town,--
  God's kingdom of eternal life.



SEA ECHOES.

I walk not by the sounding sea;
  I dwell full many leagues from shore
And still an echo drifts to me
  Of the eternal, constant roar
Of waves, that beetle past the crags
  And moan in weary flights of song
Where wet sea moss and coral drags
  The shiny lengths of sand along.

I see beyond the friendly vales,
  And grand old hills that guard my home,
To where the seaward petrel sails
  And storm winds of the Northland moan.
I live again in brighter days,
  New-born from dreams of the dead past,
When she and I stood there to gaze
  At sparkling hull, and spar, and mast

Of some staunch sea-craft bound amain
  At will of wayward wind and fate,
Deep plunging in the waves to gain
  Some northern isle, or rich estate
Of palm and pine in southward clime,
  Where all day long the playful air
Pranks with the grizzled beard of time
  And paints his hoary visage fair.

Within the dim, old forests here,
  I wander now long leagues from shore,
And still the old song haunts my ear,
  The century singing ocean's roar;
And now I know, fond soul of love;
  Why still the murmurous echoes live,
And sound for aye the hills above
  That back to earth the music give;

She, too, walked there in dreams with me,
  In love's sweet unity we trod
The moon-bathed sands, and swore to be
  Forever true before our God.
I see it still, her pale, calm face,
  With angel love-light in her eyes,
And ever there, beside such grace,
  A dim, sweet token of surprise.

Oh, tender touch of one soft hand!
  I held it then in simple trust,
Alas, ye waves that lick the sand!
  How long has that hand lain in dust?
I see her soul in yonder star,
  I see the soft lines of her face,
And could God so unkindly mar
  That angel beauty and its grace?

Roll, murmuring echoes of the sea!
  Repeat thy sweet, immortal moan,
Drift ever inland unto me
  Within my sunny Southern home;
And it shall be a tender dream--
  Thy plaintive music thrilling me,
And her star face above--shall seem
  Like other days beside the sea
  When our lips touched eternally.



WHERE FANCY DWELLS.

The sea winds blow from western isles,
  From isles where fancy dwells and peace.
Where summer sunshine softly smiles
  And perfumes of the far off east
Float over waves white-capped with foam
  That glisten in the pale sweet light
Shed from the far eternal dome
  Where fair star faces paint the night.

Life must have rest sometime, somewhere,
  On land or wave its peace shall be,
And I have found my life's fond share
  In yon fair isle of Hebride;
In yon fair isle where all day long
  The sunlight shadows drift and float
And all the world seems bathed in song
  Borne trembling from the skylark's throat.

O! isle of peace, the waves that kiss
  Thy beaches all the centuries through,
Flow from mysterious founts of bliss
  From founts o'er run with sunny dew,
And o'er thy tree-tops lazily
  The perfumed breezes come and go
With odors from that far countree
  Where eglantine and jessamine grow.

Fair isle of summer, isle of love,
  Where souls forget their bitter strife
And mingled sadnesses that move
  In tempests o'er the sea of life;
I kiss thy fair shore with my knee,
  And lift a thankful heart to God,
For perfect joy comes unto me
  Where thy trees' blossomed branches nod.

Thy long sea waves float in beyond
  The dim blue lines of sunlit sky,
Where films of cloudy lacework frond
  The billows tumbling mountain high;
And shoreward in the still sweet eve
  The low songs of the mermaids drift,
As in some coral grot they weave
  Their seaweed robes, and sometimes lift

Their long, strong, tangled lengths of hair
  Above the bosom of the wave,
While 'mid its golden meshes fair
  The distant sunbeams stoop to lave.
Sweet isle of fancy, far beyond
  The dark dim vales of human woe,
My bark of love sails o'er the fond
  Blue waves that ever shoreward flow.

My bark sails on the unknown sea
  Led by a large, pale star alone,
That star wherein her face may be,
  Who to that better land hath gone.
O, never turn, brave white-sailed ship,
  Again towards that barren shore
But bear me on the waves that dip
  And kiss yon isle forevermore.

Sweet day of rest when toil is past,
  When hearts can lay their burdens by
And feel the peace God's angels cast
  In isleward flights from his fair sky!
Sweet isle of love where fancy dwells,
  And nature knows no pang of care,
I hear the music of its bells
  Far floating on the evening air.

I hear the lonely shepherd's song
  Flow down the green and mossy vale,
And westward all the calm night long
  The restless sea gulls sail.
I sometimes turn towards the stars
  With sudden shock of glad surprise,
And half believe these island bars
  Are but the gates to Paradise.



AT KEY'S GRAVE.

I stood one summer, friend, beside
  The foam waves of a distant sea
That muttered all the summer through
  A low sweet threnody.

A mournful song was ever on
  The lips that it were death to kiss,
A song for those who died as died
  The brave at ancient Salamis.

A thousand graves lay in the trough
  Of that great ocean of the East,
A thousand souls fled through its foam
  Towards the starlit land of peace.

And for each ship-wrecked soul that slept
  Beneath the dark inconstant waves
The wind gave songs in memory
  Of men true-hearted, pure and brave.

But I have stood, sweet-singer, by
  Thy lonely, unmarked grave to-day,
And all the songs thy memory got
  Came from the branches in their sway.

Ah, peace! ah, love! ah, friendship true!
  No wreath rests here wove by your hands
To mark the Poet's silent tomb.
  As tombs are marked in other lands.

But in my noon-day dream there came
  From the fair bosom of the hills
The voice of some sweet psalmist, thus--
  "'Tis so God wills, 'tis so God wills."



THE ETERNAL LIFE.

I care not for the life that is,
I think not of the things that are;
    I live, oh! soul of tenderness,
    Beneath an angel blessedness
That draws its light from one small star.

I know not if the world be ill,
I care not for its throb of pain,
    I live, oh heart, in fellowship
    With other hearts that rise and dip
In the great sea that floods the main

From east to west with tides of love--
The ocean of Eternal Life,
    Whose waves flow ever free and warm
    From land of snow to land of palm
And heal the naked wounds of strife.

I only know God's law is just,
And that is all we need to know,
    I live down creeds of hate and spite,
    I build the nobler creeds of right
That beautify our beings so.

The days are brief that come apace,
When morn wakes up and night sinks down,
    But far beyond the hills of jet
    The glory of the sweet sunset
Lights all the steeples of the town

Within whose walls no sadness lives,
No broken hearts, no simple strife,
    For that I live, oh soul of faith,
    For that whereof the Master saith
"Here find eternal love and life."






MRS. ROSALIENE ROMULA MURPHY.


Mrs. Rosaliene Romula Murphy, daughter of John and Hannah Mooney, was
born in Philadelphia, May, 1, 1838, and married Thomas H.P. Murphy, son
of John C. and Ann Rothwell Murphy, and grandson of Hyland Price, of
Cecil county, on the 18th of May, 1858. Her education was obtained at a
school taught by the Sisters of Mercy, and at the public schools of her
native city.

Immediately after her marriage Mrs. Murphy came to Cecil county, and for
ten years resided near the head of Bohemia river; subsequently she has
resided in Middletown, Delaware, in Chester county, Pennsylvania, and
for the last ten years in Philadelphia. Mr. and Mrs. Murphy are the
parents of eight children, four of whom are now living.

From early childhood Mrs. Murphy has shown a remarkable aptitude for
literary work, and when quite a little girl at school, frequently took
the highest average for composition. She commenced to write for the
press at an early age and while in this county contributed poetry to the
columns of the local newspapers and some of the journals of Wilmington
and Philadelphia.




WOMAN'S RIGHTS.

Woman has certain rights I own,
  That none will dare deny;
No king nor senate can destroy
  Her claims,--nor will they try.
'Tis hers to smooth the homeward path
  Of age,--her strength their stay;
To guide their feeble footsteps here,--
  To brush life's thorns away.

'Tis hers to make a sunny home,
  To cherish and support
With love, the one who claims her heart,
  Through good and bad report.
To watch the tiny sleeping babe,
  Just nestling in her breast,
To shield it with her mother-love,
  And guard it in its rest.

To watch in vigils of the night,
  The fever-tossed frame;
To cool the dry, and parched lips,
  And ease the racking pain.
To close the eyes when all is o'er,
  To weep with those who weep;
To help the weary in their task,
  Keep guard whilst others sleep.

To love and cherish, guard, protect,
  Make home a sunny spot--
Keep ever pure her mother name,
  A name not soon forgot!
To win and wear her husband's love,
  As an honored, cherished crest;
To hold her children's hearts, so "they
  Will rise and call her bless'd."

To nobly share the widow's woe,
  To dry the orphan's tears,
To pray for strength for hearts oppress'd,
  And help allay their fears;
To reach a helping, loving hand,
  To those who go astray,
And woo them back again to God,
  As they faint along the way.

She claims but loving trusting hearts!--
  Let all their wealth be shown!--
No law can take, nor ballot give
  The jewels of her crown!
These, these, are all a woman's rights--
  Quite easy to attain--
For most she governs, it is said,
  "When least she seems to reign."



ONLY A BABY.

My way was stopped, as I hurried on,
  A carriage pass'd--and again 'twas clear,
But my glance took in the tiny box,
  And the mourners bending near.
"Only a baby"--was lightly said--
  As I safely crossed the street,
But my heart went with the little group,
  With their darling at their feet.

"Only a baby,"--God but knows
  The mother's bleeding heart;
And the father's white, sad face would tell,
  How hard it is to part.
"Only a baby!" what a void,
  In a merry, cheery home;
An empty cradle, a half worn shoe;
  And a mother's broken tone.

"Only a baby!" the aching eyes
  Look out on the busy street,
And fall on other laughing babes,
  And the silent form at her feet.
"Only a baby!" a desolate home,
  Those stricken hearts will know,
When they lay their darling down to rest,
  'Neath the willows bending low.

"Only a baby!" how cold it seemed
  To speak of the angel near,--
My heart went after the snowy form.
  For its parents I breathed a prayer:
"Only a baby!" ah, the weary day
  And the sleepless night,
The feverish longing--the aching heart--
  For the baby gone from sight!

"Only a baby!" the heart sobs out,
  What hopes lie shatter'd here,
The broken bud--the tiny frame,
  An angel hovering near.
"Only a baby!"--the years creep by--
  'Twill ever be, tho' locks be gray;
Growing no older--only their babe;
  As years before it passed away.



TO HELEN,

ON WRITING A SECOND TIME IN HER ALBUM.

You plucked a grey hair from my head,
  To-day, as you stood near me:
There's plenty more, that are deftly hid
  By wavy crimps,--I fear me.
'Tis many years since last I wrote,
  With fun, and spirits plenty;
But now my fourth son has a vote,
  And my babe's not far from twenty.
Ah! so it goes; old time strides on,
  Nor cares for years, and worries,
But knocks us here; and hits us there,
  As past us quick he hurries;
We still are friends, and have our fun,
  In spite of years, and trouble;
We've planted, reaped, and had our day.
  And now we're in the stubble.






RACHEL ELIZABETH PATTERSON.


Rachel Elizabeth Patterson, better known as Lizzie Patterson, is the
daughter of William Patterson and Sarah (Catts) Patterson, and was born
in Port Deposit, February 2, 1820. She is also the granddaughter of an
Englishman who settled on Taylor's Island, in Chesapeake Bay, where he
owned considerable property, which by some means seems to have been lost
by his family.

Her father at one time kept a clothing store in Port Deposit, where he
died when the subject of this sketch was quite young, leaving a family
of helpless children, who were soon scattered among strangers. Elizabeth
was placed in a family residing a short distance south of the village of
Rising Sun. While in this family she was seized with a violent illness,
which confined her to bed for many months and from which she arose a
cripple and a sufferer for life.

Her poetic talent began to manifest itself in those early days of
suffering, and during subsequent years of confinement she found solace
and recreation by composing her "Songs in Affliction," which about
thirty years ago, in accordance with the advice of her friends, she
published in a small volume bearing that name. The first edition
consisted of eight hundred, and was so well received as to warrant the
publication of another one of five hundred copies. In 1872 she published
another small volume, entitled "The Little Streamlet," which contained
some poems written since the publication of the first volume. Miss
Patterson at present and for many years past has resided in Baltimore.




"JUDGE NOT!"

How, poor frail and erring mortal,
  Darest thou judge thy fellow-man
And with bitter words and feelings,
  All his faults and frailties scan?

Why rake out from time's dull ashes,
  And before the world display
Deeds, it may be, long repented
  And forgiven, ere this day?

Canst thou search his secret feelings?
  Canst thou read his inmost soul?
Canst thou tell the hidden motives
  Which his actions here control?

Is he erring? seek in kindness,
  Then, to win him back to peace;
Is he weak? oh try to strengthen;
  Sad? then bid his sorrows cease!

Lay thou not a heavier burden
  By an unkind look or word,
On a heart which may by anguish
  To its inmost depths be stirred.

O! forbear thy hasty judging!
  Should thy righteous God demand
Half the justice which thy brother
  Is receiving from thy hand,

What, oh what would be thy portion,
  Though more righteous thou than he,
Would not the glad gates of mercy
  Soon their portals close on thee?



THE WISH.

I do not wish thee worldly wealth--
  For it may flee away;
I do not wish thee beauty's charms--
  For they will soon decay.

I do not wish for thee the joys
  Which from earth's pleasures spring;
These give at best a fleeting bliss,
  And leave a lasting sting.

I do not wish thee mortal fame--
  This, like a meteor bright,
Gleams but a moment on the sky,
  And leaves behind no light.

I wish for thee that richer wealth,
  No earthly mines reveal,
"Which moth and rust cannot corrupt,
  And thief can never steal."

I wish for thee the sweeter joys,
  Which from religion flow;
These have the power to soothe and bless,
  In hours of deepest woe.

I wish for thee the honor pure,
  Descending from on high;
To lift thy soul away from earth,
  And raise it to the sky.

I wish that peace through all thy life,
  May on each step attend;
May rapture crown its closing hour,
  And perfect bliss its end.



THE CHRISTIAN'S ANCHOR.

How oft when youthful skies are clear,
  And joy's sweet breezes round us play,
We dream that as through life we steer,
  The morrow shall be like to-day.

We paint each scene with rainbow hues,
  And gaily sail on stormless seas,
While hope, through life's bright future, views
  The port she thinks to make with ease.

But ah! how soon dark clouds of woe
  Spread o'er those skies a deepening shade,
And waves of sorrow overflow,
  And all the rainbow glories fade.

'Tis thus earth's hopes, however bright,
  Expire and vanish, one by one,
E'en as the shore recedes from sight,
  When glides the free bark swiftly on.

Yet the redeemed, with anchor firm,
  Time's swelling billows shall outride,
And far beyond the raging storm
  Shall make the port on Canaan's side.

Oh, may this bright and blissful hope
  Fill my poor heart with joy and peace,
Bid me 'mid all life's storms look up
  To yon blest land, where storms shall cease.

And when with life's last gale I've striven,
  And all its raging waves have pass'd,
Oh, may I, in the port of heaven,
  My anchor Hope securely cast.






CALLANDER PATTERSON.


Callander Patterson was born near Perryville, Cecil county, May 6, 1820.
His education was obtained at the common schools of the neighborhood.
Many years ago he went to Philadelphia, where he studied dentistry,
which he has since practiced in that city. Mr. Patterson commenced
writing poetry when quite young, but published nothing until upwards of
forty years of age. His poetry--of which he has written much--seems to
have been of a religious character.

Owing to causes beyond our control, the following poem is the only one,
adapted to this book, that we have been able to obtain.




GOD IS GREAT.

Our God is great! and to his arm
  I'll trust my destiny;
For what in life or death can harm
  The soul that leans on thee?

Thine arm supports the universe,
  For by thy might alone
The blazing comets speed their course,
  Revolving round thy throne.

They go and come at thy command
  To do thy sovereign will;
Each one supported by thy hand,
  Its mission to fulfill.

Through boundless space, 'mid shining spheres,
  Those wingless heralds fly;
Proclaiming through the lapse of years
  That God still reigns on high.

And all those burning suns of night
  That light the distant space,
Declare thy power infinite,
  Thy wisdom and thy grace.

We try to scan those regions far
  Till vision fades away,
And yet beyond the utmost star
  Are plains of endless day.

And when we earthward turn our gaze,
  With wonder and delight,
We marvel at the lightning's blaze
  And tremble at its might.

And yet, thy hand is in it all,
  For there thy love is seen:
By it the rain is made to fall,
  And earth is robed in green.

The cyclone on its path of death
  That rises in an hour,
The fierce tornadoes' wildest breath,
  But faintly show thy power.

And though the laws are yet unknown
  That guide them in their path,
They are the agents of thy throne
  For mercy, or for wrath.

Thus I behold thy wondrous arm
  And own thy works divine:
Then what in life or death can harm
  So long as thou art mine?






TOBIAS RUDULPH.


Tobias Rudulph, the subject of this sketch, was the third person of that
name and was the grandson of the Tobias Rudulph, who was one of four
brothers who emigrated from Prussia and settled in Cecil county early in
the eighteenth century. For many years the family took a conspicuous
part in public affairs.

Tobias Rudulph's uncle and his uncle's cousin Michael, the son of Jacob,
and the uncle of Mrs. Lucretia Garfield, very early in the Revolutionary
war joined a company of Light Horsemen, which was recruited in this
county and served with great bravery and distinction in Light Horse
Harry Lee's Legion in his Southern campaigns. They were called the Lions
of the Legion.

John Rudulph won the title of "Fighting Jack" by his courage and
audacity, both of which essential requisites of a good soldier he seems
to have possessed in a superabundant degree.

Tobias, the subject of this sketch, was born in Elkton, in the old brick
mansion two doors east of the court house, on December 8, 1787. He was
the oldest of four children, namely: Zebulon, a sketch of whose life
appears in this volume; Anna Maria, who married James Sewell; and
Martha, who married the Reverend William Torbert.

Anna Maria is said to have been a poetess of no mean ability, but owing
to the state of literature in this county at the time she wrote, none of
her poetry, so far as we have been able to learn was published, and
after diligent search we have been unable to find any of her manuscript.

Tobias studied law with his mother's brother, James Milner, who resided
in Philadelphia, where he practiced law,--but who subsequently became a
distinguished Presbyterian minister and Doctor of Divinity--and was
admitted to the Elkton Bar and practiced his profession successfully
until the time of his death which occurred in the Fall of 1828. He was a
man of fine ability and amused himself when he had leisure in courting
the Muses, but owing to his excessive modesty published nothing now
extant except "Tancred, or The Siege of Antioch," a drama in three acts,
which was printed in Philadelphia, in 1827. Owing to the fact that
simultaneously with its publication, a drama of the same name by another
author appeared as a candidate for literary favor, Mr. Rudulph--though
his work was highly commended by Joseph Jefferson the elder, then in
the height of his dramatic career, through the foolish fear that he
might he accused of plagiarism--suppressed his drama and never allowed
it to be introduced upon the stage.

Mr. Rudulph married Maria Hayes. They were the parents of four children,
Amelia, James, Anna Maria and Tobias. The two first mentioned are dead,
the others reside in Elkton. Until a very recent period the family
spelled the name Rudulph, which spelling has been followed in this work,
though the name is now generally spelled Rudolph.




SELECTION FROM TANCRED.

    Tancred was the son of the Marquis of Odo, surnamed the good, and
    Emma, the sister of Robert Guiscard who figured conspicuously in the
    wars which distracted Europe just previous to the first Crusade,
    which occurred under the leadership of Peter, the Hermit, and
    Walter, the Penniless, in A.D. 1096. The scene of the drama is laid
    at Antioch in 1097. A historian of the Crusades in speaking of the
    siege of Antioch, says that the wealth of the harvest and the
    vintage spread before them its irresistible temptations, and the
    herds feeding in the rich pastures seemed to promise an endless
    feast. The cattle, the corn and the wine were alike wasted with
    besotted folly, while the Turks within the walls received tidings of
    all that passed in the crusading camps from some Greek and Armenian
    christians to whom they allowed free egress and ingress. Of this
    knowledge they availed themselves in planing sallies by which they
    caused great distress to the Crusaders. The following extract
    comprises the third scene of the first act and is laid in the camp
    of the Crusaders--the chiefs being in council.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

_Godfrey_ of Bouillon, Duke of Lorraine.
_Alexius_, Emperor of Greece.
_Bohemond_, Prince of Tarentum.
_Tancred_.
_Raymond_, Count of Thoulouse.

Alex.
  The truce being ended, I propose, my friends,
  To-morrow we should storm the walls of Antioch--
  What say my worthy allies?--

Boh.
  If any here so base and cowardly,
  As to give other counsel, let him speak.--

Ray.
  I have known those, who foremost to advise,
  Were yet the last to venture on the battle.--

Boh.
  What means the Count of Thoulouse?--

Ray.                                  Simply this;--
  That some men thoughtlessly sit down to eat,
  Without having first obtained an appetite.--

Boh.
  By the Holy Sepulchre I swear,
  That knight must have some stomach who maintains,
  What you have just now utter'd--

[Throws down his gauntlet.]
                                  There lays my guage--
  If you will wear my glove, choose with what arms
  We shall decide this quarrel.--

[Raymond advances to take up the glove.]

God.
  Hold, Thoulouse, let it lay.--
  I do impeach Bohemond of Tarentum of base wiles,
  And treachery most foul, to knighthood's cause--

Boh.
  Why then take you the glove.--

God.
  In mine own cause I do accept the challenge.--

[Takes up the glove.]

Alex.
  Is our league dissolv'd, and shall the holy cause
  For which embattled Europe is in arms,
  Be idly given to the scorn of men,
  To gratify our passions and vile feuds?--
  But speak Lorraine, for you have heretofore
  Been held the mediator in these jars--
  Upon what quarrel do you thus arraign
  Bohemond of Tarentum?--

God.
  A gorgeous canopy, a present from
  The gov'nor of Armenia I have lost--
  By what base means, Bohemond best can tell.--

Boh.
  True he can tell--and briefly thus it is--
  I won the silken bauble in a fight,
  And claim it as my spoil.--

God.
                             You basely stole
  The treasure of a friend--Pancrates had
  The conduct of the present to my camp;
  You coward-like surprised him on the way,
  And robb'd him of my prize.--

Boh. (Contemptuously)          Well be it so--
  I stole it, and will keep it--
  You may keep the glove.--

Alex.
  Christians, forbear, the Infidels will laugh,
  To know a silken toy has broke our league,
  And sav'd the Sepulchre--It must not be,
  My friends, that private discord shall cut short
  The work we have begun--Bohemond, no--
  Restore the treasure to its rightful Lord,
  And my pavilion shall replace the spoil.--

Boh.
  I do consent--provided Godfrey will
  Return my glove to the brave Count of Thoulouse--

Alex.
  That's nobly done Bohemond--but the war
  'Twixt you and Thoulouse, is a war of words--
  Like two pert game cocks picking at a straw,
  You doubt each other's courage--then make proof
  Upon the Paynim forces if you please,
  Which is the braver man--To-morrow's field
  Will afford ample scope to try your blades
  Upon the common enemy of each,
  And leave unscathed his ally--I propose,
  That he who first shall scale the citadel,
  And plant the Red-Cross banner on the walls,
  Shall be rewarded with the victor's prize,
  And hold the government of Antioch--
  What says the council?--

All the Chiefs.
  We are all agreed.--

(Bohemond and Raymond advance and shake hands in apparent token of
agreement.)

[Enter a Greek Messenger.]

Mes.
  The Persian succors are but one day's march,
  Beyond the Orontes.--

God.
  Why let them come and help to bury then,
  Their Paynim brothers.--Friends, I give you joy--
  Curse on my fortune, I do much regret
  The iv'ry tushes of that ruthless boar,
  Will keep me from the contest for fair fame.--
  Bohemond, you shall lead my Frisons on--
  And doubt not but you'll win the prize from Thoulouse.--

Boh.
  I thank your grace.






ZEBULON RUDULPH.


Zebulon Rudulph was the second son of Tobias Rudulph, an account of
whose family is given elsewhere in this volume. He was born in Elkton,
June 28, 1794. Though well remembered by some of the older residents of
the place of his nativity who knew him when they were young, but little
is known of his early life except that he was possessed of a kind heart
and an affable disposition; and appears to have been more given to the
cultivation of his literary tastes, than to the practice of those
utilitarian traits which had they been more highly developed, would have
enabled him to have reaped a richer pecuniary harvest than fell to his
lot from the cultivation of the others.

For a time in early manhood Mr. Rudulph was engaged in merchandising in
Elkton, and subsequently became the first agent of the Philadelphia,
Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad Company in that town, which office he
held from the time the company commenced business in 1837, until 1840 or
'41, when he removed to Memphis, Tennessee, where in 1847 he published a
small volume of 247 pages entitled "Every Man's Book; or, the Road to
Heaven Staked Out; being a Collection of Holy Proofs Alphabetically
Arranged as a Text Book for Preachers and Laymen of all Denominations."
Mr. Rudulph was a Universalist, and the object of the book was to
inculcate the tenets of that denomination.

Mr. Rudulph remained in Memphis for a few years and subsequently removed
to Izard county, Arkansas, where he died a short time before the
commencement of the war of the rebellion. He was a voluminous writer,
and the author of a large number of fugitive poems, many of which are
said to have been quite humorous and possessed of much literary merit.
Very few of his poems have been preserved, which is much regretted for
the reason that it is highly probable that those extant do not fully set
forth the poetical ability of their author. The following poems except
the one entitled "Thoughts on the Death of his grandchild Fanny," were
published in _The Elkton Courier_ nearly half a century ago.




THE SURPRISE.

At twilight one ev'ning, a poor old man,
  Whose tattered cloak had once seen better days,
(That now were dwindled to the shortest span:)
  Whose rimless, crownless hat provoked the gaze
Of saucy urchins and of grown-up boys:
  Whose hoary locks should e'er protect from scorn,
One who had ceased to court earth's fading joys,--
  Knock'd at a door, thus lonely and forlorn.

A pilgrim's staff supported his frail form,
  Whilst tremblingly he waited at the door;
And feeble tho' he seemed, he feared not harm,
  For 'neath his cloak a trusty sword he bore.
A menial came, and thus he spoke:--'Away!
  Old man, away! seek not to enter here:
We feed none such as you: so hence! I say:--
  Perhaps across the street you'll better fare.'

In broken accents now the pilgrim plead--
  'Friend, I have journeyed far; from lands abroad;
And bear a message from the absent dead,
  To one who dwells in this august abode.
Thy mistress,--fair Beatrice,--dwells she here?
  If so, quick, bring me to her instantly;
For I have speech that fits her private ear
  Forthwith: none else my words shall hear but she.'

Now, ushered thro' the spacious hall, he passed
  Into a gorgeous room, where sat alone,
Beatrice fair; who, on the pilgrim cast
  Inquiring looks, and scarce suppressed a groan.
'Be seated, aged father;' thus she said:
  'And tell me whence you are, and why you seek
A private conf'rence with a lonely maid
  Whose sorrows chase the color from her cheek.

'If true it is, from distant lands you come,
  Mayhap from Palestine you wend your way;
If so, be silent, be forever dumb,
  Or else, in joyful accents, quickly say,
That all is well with one most dear to me,
  Who, two long years ago, forsook his home,
And now forgets his vows of constancy,
  For bloody wars in distant lands to roam.'

As if to dash a tear, he bends his head,
  And sighing, thus the weary pilgrim speaks:
'Alas! my words are few,--thy friend is dead!'--
  As monumental marble pale, she shrieks,
And falls into the aged pilgrim's arms;
  Who, justly filled with terror and dismay,
In speechless wonder, gazed upon her charms,
  As, inwardly he seemed to curse the day.

But, slowly she revives--when, quick as light,
  His cloak and wig are instantly thrown by--
And what is that that greets her 'wildered sight?
  Ah! whose fond gaze now meets her longing eye?--
Her own dear Alfred, from the wars returned,
  Had chosen thus to steal upon his love:--
And whilst his kisses on her cheek now burned,
  He vow'd to her, he never more would rove.



THOUGHTS,

ON THE DEATH OF MY GRANDCHILD FANNY.

    And all wept and bewailed her: but He said, weep not; she is not
    dead, but sleepeth.

    --Luke 8:52.

Oh true, "she is not dead, but sleepeth--"
  Her dust alone is here;
The spirit pure that Heavenward leapeth,
  Hath gone to bliss fore'er.

'Twas but a fragile flower that lent
  Its sweets to earth a day;
From Heaven's parterre 'twas kindly sent,
  But 'twas not here to stay.

Weep not, fond mother, that lost one;
  'Tis clasped in angel's arms--
From earth's dread trials passed and gone,
  'Tis decked in seraph's charms.

See how it beckons thee to come,
  And taste its rapture there;--
No longer linger o'er that tomb--
  To join it let's prepare.



THE DECREE.

    And the king said, bring me a sword. And they brought a sword before
    the king. And the king said, divide the living child in two, and
    give half to the one, and half to the other. Then spake the woman
    whose the living child was unto the king, for her bowels yearned
    upon her son, and she said, O my lord give her the living child, and
    in no wise slay it.

    --I Kings 3:24-36.

Hark! did you not hear that loud shriek?
  Ah! do you not see that wild eye?
List--do you hear that mother speak
  For her son that is doom'd to die?

Behold the eloquence of love!
  A mother for her child distress'd:
A gush of feeling from above
  Invades and fills her yearning breast.

That flood of tears,--those wringing hands,
  Mark her abandonment of soul,
As, list'ning to the king's commands,
  Her grief refuses all control.

My child! my child!--(tho' she betray it,)
  "The living child" give to my foe!
'Where is my child?--Oh! do not slay it!
  Let me my arms around it throw!'

Thus nature's impulse bursting forth,
  Reveals the mother's kindred blood,
And stamps upon her claim the truth:
  Whilst foil'd the guilty claimant stood.

Such love breathes not in courts, where meet
  Soft, studied ease and pamper'd vice:
As soon you'll find the genial heat
  Of nature's sun in fields of ice!

And that fond soul was one like she
  Who bathed the Saviour's feet with tears:
And hers, like Mary's ecstasy,
  Flows from the influence of prayers:

For, Solomon had sought of God
  Not hoards of wealth, nor "length of days:"
But holy unction from His rod,
  The bright indwelling of Truth's rays.



A VIEW FROM MOUNT CARMEL.

    And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down
    upon the earth, and put his face between his knees. And said to his
    servant, 'Go up now, look towards the sea.' And he went up, and
    looked, and said, 'There is nothing.' And he said, Go again seven
    times. And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said,
    behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's
    hand.

    --I Kings 18:42,41.

Up Carmel's wood-clad height an aged prophet slowly creeps,
And sadly drags his weary limbs o'er rocks and mossgrown steeps.
He bows himself upon the earth, "his face between his knees,"
And thus he to his servant speaks, beneath the lofty trees.

"Go further up this craggy steep, and seaward look, I pray--"
His faithful servant goes, and strains his vision towards that way,
But says "there's nothing."--"Go sev'n times," the prophet says "for me,--"
And on the seventh time, behold! arising from the sea,

A little cloud, as 'twere, no bigger than a human hand,--
But swiftly, darkly spreading o'er the parched, thirsty land,
It widely displays its threatening armies thro' the sky,
Its lurid lightnings flash in forked streaks upon the eye.

Like countless fiery serpents thro' the troubled air,
Whilst loud the roaring thunder bursts amid the flaming glare;
And rage the winds, uprooting mountain oaks before the view,--
Refreshing show'rs descend, and quick the fainting earth renew.

Scarcely could Israel's monarch in his chariot reach his court,
Ere nature's pent up elements broke forth in airy sport,
And to earth (which for three long years had known nor rain nor dew,)
The long desired drops, their welcome downward course pursue.

Once more Samaria's people gladly tune their harps and sing
The praises of Jehovah, God, the everlasting King:--
Once more, the voice of gladness sounds where naught but anguish dwelt;
There, once again, the gush of rapture, absent long, is felt!






MRS. ALICE COALE SIMPERS.


Mrs. Alice Coale Simpers was born in the old brick mansion known as
"Traveler's Repose," a short distance south of Harrisville, in the Sixth
district of Cecil county, on the first day of December, 1843.

The Coale family of which Mrs. Simpers is a member, trace their descent
from Sir Philip Blodgett, a distinguished Englishman, who settled in
Baltimore shortly after its foundation, and are related to the Matthews,
Worthingtons, Jewetts, and other leading families of Harford county. On
her mother's side she is related to the Jacksons, Puseys, and other
well-known Friends of Chester county, Pennsylvania, and Wilmington,
Delaware.

Mrs. Simpers' early education was received at Waring's Friends' School,
near the village of Colora, which was kept up by a few families of
Friends in the neighborhood. She also attended the State Normal School
in Baltimore, and qualified herself for teaching in the public schools
of the State, in which she taught for about ten years in Cecil county,
and also in Dorchester county. She also taught school in the State of
Illinois with great acceptability and success.

When Mrs. Simpers was quite young her father removed his family to the
banks of the romantic Octoraro, near Rowlandville, and within less than
two miles of the birth-place of the two poetic Ewings and the late John
Cooley, and the romantic spot where Mrs. Hall lived when she wrote the
poems which are published in this volume. The soul-inspiring beauty of
this romantic region seems to have had the same effect upon her mind as
it had upon the other persons composing the illustrious quintette, of
which she is a distinguished member, and when only seventeen years of
age she began to write poetry. At the solicitation of her friend, E.E.
Ewing, she sent the first poem she published to him, who gave it a place
in _The Cecil Whig_, of which he was the editor and proprietor.

In 1875 Mrs. Simpers began to write for the New York _Mercury_, which
then numbered among its contributors Ned Buntline, Harriet Prescott,
George Marshall, George Arnold, Bayard Taylor, W. Scott Way, and many
other distinguished writers with whom she ranked as an equal in many
respects, and many of whom she excelled as a brilliant satirist and
pathetic painter of the quaint and the beautiful.

For ten years she continued to contribute letters, essays, stories and
poems to the _Mercury_, and to advocate the claims of her sex to the
right of suffrage, in which she still continues to be a firm believer.
Mrs. Simpers has also contributed largely to the _Woman's Journal_ and
other periodicals.

Though possessed of a brilliant poetic genius, Mrs. Simpers is best
known as a writer of prose; and, in addition to the large quantity of
matter she has contributed to the newspaper press, is the author of a
story of about two hundred pages illustrative of the principles and
practices and exemplifying the social life of the Friends, for which she
received a prize of two hundred dollars. This story was highly spoken of
by Dr. Shelton McKenzie, with whom she was on terms of intimacy for some
years immediately before his death, and also by many other distinguished
writers.

On the 22d of February, 1879, the subject of this sketch married Captain
John G. Simpers, who served with distinction in the Second Regiment
Delaware Volunteers in the war of the rebellion. They, at the time of
writing this sketch, reside near the summit of Mount Pleasant, and
within a short distance of the birth-place of Emma Alice Browne.




THE MILLER'S ROMANCE.

The miller leaned o'er the oaken door,
Quaint shadows swung on the dusty floor,
  The spider toiled in the dust o'erhead,
With restless haste, and noiseless speed,
Like one who toils for sorest need--
  Like one who toils for bread.
"Ha!" says the miller, "does he pause to hark--
        Hark! Hark! Hark!
To the voice of the waters, down in the dark--
        Dark! Dark! Dark!
Turning the lumbering, mumbling wheel;
Which moans and groans as tho't could feel?"
"Ha!" laughed the miller, "he pauses not and why--
In the sunshine pausing and musing I?
When the spiteful waves seem to repeat--
        Repeat! Repeat! Repeat!
The hateful word deceit--
        Deceit! Deceit! Deceit"
"Nay," mused the miller, "their musical drip--
        Drip! Drip! Drip!
Is like to naught but the trip--
        Trip! Trip! Trip!
In the dance of her fairy feet,
Or her rippling-laughter cool and sweet!"



          Once more,
The miller leans o'er the oaken door.
Still play the shadows upon the floor,
Still toils the spider overhead;
Like one who toils for daily bread--
    "Since the red lips unto me have lied
      The spell hath lost its power,
    For never a false heart brings my bride
      Whatever else her dower!"
And louder yet the waves repeat
Their burthen old, deceit, deceit!



In flocks of brown, the leaves haste down,
  And floods, in the wild March weather;
While the mill, the miller, and the miller's love dream,
  Have all grown old together!



THE LAST TIME.

We shall see the daylight breaking,
Watch the rosy dawn awaking;
We shall see the twilight fading--
Adown the path the elms are shading,
      For the last, last time.

We shall see the blossoms swelling,
Watch the spring-bird build his dwelling,
See the dead leaves downward sailing,
While the Autumn winds are wailing,
      For the last, last time.

We shall hear the song of pleasure,
Join the dance's merry measure;
Shrink and dread the form of sorrow,
Which may meet us on the morrow,
      For the last, last time.

We shall feel hates' venomed dart
Aimed to pierce the inmost heart;
We shall know love's sweet caressing,
Breathed from lips our own are pressing,
      For the last, last time.

But in that land where we are going,
Where the skies are ever glowing;
In that fair and fadeless clime,
Never comes the last, last time.



ONLY A SIMPLE MAID!

And this is the end of it all!
  It rounds the years completeness,
Though only a walk to the stile
  Through fields a-foam with sweetness.
Only the sunset light,
  Purple and red on the river,
Only a calm "good night,"
  That means good bye forever!

I can only go back to my simple ways--
  To my homely household cares;
And yet,--and yet--in after days
  I shall think of you in my prayers.
We can bear so much in youth;
  Who cares for a swift sharp pain?
The two-edged sword of truth
  Cuts deep, but leaves no stain,
And over the ways we have trod together,
  My foot shall fall as lightly,
As though my heart were a feather.

Only a woman's heart, strong to have and to keep;
  Patient when children cry,
Soft to lull them to sleep;
  Glad when another delving hand
Finds a gem to wear on the breast,
  While hers found only sand;
Good bye, but as oft as the blossoms come,
  The peach with its waxen pink,
The waving snow of the plum;
  I shall think how I used to wait
And watch--so happy to see you pass,
  I could almost kiss your shadow
As it fell on the dewy grass.
  A love is but half a love,
That contents itself with less
  Than love's utmost faith and truth
And love's unwavering tenderness.

Only this walk to the stile--
  This parting word by the river;
It seems to me whatever shall go or come--
  Memory shall hold forever!
Sweetheart, good bye, good bye,
  After all--drear poverty and toil
For the rich, red flower of love to grow,
  Were but a cold and barren soil:
And so, good bye, good bye!



THE MYSTIC CLOCK.

A NEW YEAR'S POEM.

"Warden, wind the clock again!
  Mighty years are going on
Through the shadows, joy and pain,
  And the happy hearted dawn."

High within Time's temple hoar
Doth this mystic timepiece stand,
And when'er twelve moons have vanished
The clock is wound by unseen hand;
But we hear the pinions rushing
Through the storied air o'erhead,
And our hearts grow sick and silent
With throbs of fear and dread;
For the temple seemeth crowded
With still forms all white and shrouded,
Like the pale, uncoffined dead;
Stirs the startled soul within
With a grief too deep for tears,
Bowing with a mighty anguish--
O'er our dead and wasted years.



"Warden, wind the clock again!"
O'er the horologe's mystic dial,
Watch the sweep of shadowy ages
Ere the pens of seers and sages
Wrote men's deeds on fadeless pages.
But lo! the warden winds again--
And see yon radiant star arise
Flaming in the Orient skies;
Hear the grand, glad, chorus ringing,
Which the joyous hosts are singing,
To the humble shepherds, keeping
Patient watch, while kings are sleeping!
See the wise men in the manger,
Bow before the Heavenly stranger!
Lowliest born beneath the sun!
Yet He the jeweled throne shall banish,
And the sword and sceptre vanish,
Ere His given work be done!



"Warden, wind the clock again!"
But in vain the charge is given,
For see the mighty Angel stand,
One foot on sea, and one on land,
Swearing with uplifted hand,
Nevermore in earth or heaven
Shall the mystic key be found
Or the mighty clock be wound!



"RUBE" AND "WILL."

AN EPISODE RELATED BY AUNT SHEBA.

He'ah dat ole gray sinna
H's jes brimful o' gas,
Singin' dat tomfool ditty
As he goes hobblin' pas'!
He betta be prayin' and mebbe
H'll git in de fold at las'!
Yes, he's gwine to de grabe up yonder
By de trees dar on de hill,
Where all alone by hisself one day
He buried po' massa Will!
You see dey war boys togedder;
To-day dey'd cuss an' fight;
But dey'd make it up to-morrow
And hunt fur coons at night.

It wasn't much ob a massa,
Ole missus made you see!
Folks sed, "dem Walden niggas
Mought about as well be free."
Once dey went fur de turkeys,
Dat's Rube and Massa Will,
Wid roastin' ears fur stuffin',
Made a barbecue behind de mill!
But dey couln'd keep it secret,
Ole missus found 'm out,
An' she vow'd to sell dat nigga--
He was a thievin' lazy lout,
He was a ruinin' Massa Willum;
Dat fac', she said, was plain;
She'd sell him! On her plantation
He'd never set his foot again.

An' suah befo' de sun next day went down.
To take dat nigga Reuben
A trader had cum from town.
I guess she was glad to sell 'm
Fur she needed de money bad,
An' meant to spen' it mos'ly
In de schoolin' ob her lad!
But jes as dat ole trader
Had slipt de han'cuffs on,
We sees young massa cumin'
Ridin' cross de lawn;
He stopped right dar afore 'm,
His face was pale as death,
With all his might he shouted,
Soon as he got his bref:
"Take dem right off dat nigga!
(and jerkin' his pistol out)
Take 'em off I tell you!
An' min' what you're about;
Or I'll send you to de debil
Faster dan you 'spec to go."
Den massa trader dusted
And he didn't trabbel slow.



Ah me! dem times seems like a dream,
It was so long ago!
Ole missus died next year,
De war cum'd on at last
And all de Souf lan' echoed
With de joyful freedom blast.
We lef' de ole plantation,
We trabbled de Norf lan' thro;
Chilled by de winds in Winter,
In Summer drenched wid dew;
But we neber cum to Canaan,
Nor found de promised lan',
And back to de ole plantation
We cum a broken ban'.
But Rube had stayed heah faithful,
Stayed by his massa's side,
And nussed him in de fever
Till in his arms he died;
But de freedum star in Hebben,
It brightens year by year,
An' our chillun has foun' de Canaan,
Oh yes! des foun' it here;
So I don't care what you call us,
De tribes ob Sham or Hem,
Dat blessed lan' o' promise,
Has come right home to dem.



THE LEGEND OF ST. BAVON!

Shaded lights were burning low--
Muffled bells swung to and fro--
Solemn monks were chanting slow--
Chanting of the Crucified;
When the good St. Bavon died.

Oft had he trod the jeering street,
With bare and bleeding feet;
Leaving crimson-flecked the snow
In memory of his Master's woe;

With grief closed lips, sat he apart,
The comrade of the dead man's heart;
At last the chanting throng were gone
And he was with th' dead alone;

When the bare uncurtained room
Grew still and ghastly like a tomb,
On the icy neck he fell
And begged the death-sealed lips to tell

If one deed were left undone,--
That in that radiance like the sun
Didst shade with grief the spirit flown,
Or dim the brightness of his crown!

Then heard his spirit's inmost ear
A voice that he alone could hear,
"A shadow walks with me akin to pain,
I seek to shun it, but in vain,

"For as I left the life of time,
And journeyed toward th' blessed clime,
I passed along that darkened shore.
Where wail the lost forevermore.

"As on that awful gulf I walked,
A black-robed demon with me talked:
'Behold yon spirit lost!' I heard him cry,
''Tis one we strove o'er, thou and I.

"'I, with the tempter's gilded snare,
Thou, with the pleading voice of prayer;
Hadst thou but prayed till set of sun,
My power had vanished; thou hadst won.'

"Above the harps and angel's songs I hear,
The demon's laugh, and taunting jeer;
Oh, comrade! brother! saint!
Pray for the tempted; oh, pray and do not faint!"






DAVID SCOTT (of James.)


DAVID SCOTT (of James,) so called to distinguish him from his first
cousin, David Scott (of John)--to a sketch of whose life the reader is
referred for other information respecting the family--was born on his
father's farm, called "Scott's Adventure," on the road leading from
Cowantown to Newark and about two miles from the former place, on
January 7, 1824 and died at Elkton, May 13, 1879.

His early life was spent on the farm, and in learning the trade of auger
making, at which his father was an expert workman. His education was
obtained at the common schools of the neighborhood, except that which he
obtained by attending Newark Academy for a few months in early manhood.

In early life he became enamoured of learning, and commenced teaching a
private school in the family mansion in the winter of 1840, when only
seventeen years old, and continued to teach in the neighborhood until
1851, when he was appointed Clerk to the County Commissioners and
removed to Elkton. Mr. Scott was a Democrat, and from early life took an
active part in the politics of his native country. After serving as
Clerk to the Commissioners for one term of two years, Mr. Scott started
a general warehouse business at the Elkton depot, in which he continued
as head of the firm of D. Scott & Bro. until the time of his death.

In 1867 he was elected Clerk of the Circuit Court for Cecil county, and
served six years with great acceptability.

In 1876 Mr. Scott was appointed Chief Weigher, and continued to have
charge of the State Cattle Scales in the city of Baltimore, until the
time of his death.

In 1852 Mr. Scott was married to Miss Mary Jane Wilson, of Newark. They
were the parents of three children, two of whom are now living. His
first wife died in 1858, and he subsequently married Miss Annie
Elizabeth Craig, who, with their four children, still survives him.

In early life Mr. Scott began to write poetry, and continued to write
for the local newspapers under the nom de plume of "Anselmo," and the
Philadelphia _Dollar Newspaper_ during the time he was engaged in
teaching school, and occasionally for the county papers until the close
of his life.

For many years Mr. Scott enjoyed the friendship of the literati of
Newark, Delaware, and was one of a large number of poetical writers who
contributed to the columns of the Philadelphia _Dollar Newspaper_, with
several of whom he enjoyed a personal acquaintance, and with several
others of whom he carried on a literary correspondence for several
years.

Mr. Scott, though not a voluminous writer, was the author of a
considerable number of poems, all of which were of a highly intellectual
character.




THE FORCED ALLIANCE.

    Can earthly commerce hush the music of the heart, and shut the door
    of memory on a friend?

    --Miss Whittlesey.

Ah, that our natural wants and best affections
  Should thus in fierce, unnatural conflict struggle!
Ah, that the spirit and its dear connections,
Whose derelictions merit such corrections,
  Must bear the illicit smuggle!

We would it were not so. This compromising,
  Which cold, severe necessity hath bidden,
Of higher natures, with the wants arising
From poor humanity--'tis a sympathizing
  That may not all be hidden.

We both have learned there is a high soul feeling,
  That lifts the heart towards the stars and Heaven;
And one of us, there is a sad congealing
Of sweet affection!--a veil the rock concealing,
  Where hearts are rent and riven.

Ah, sorrow, change and death hold sad dominion;
  And arbitrary fate is earth's arbiter;
The adverse elements of a marvelous union,
With counter-currents vex the spirit's pinion,
  When high intents invite her.

It is a truth, the sad, unwelcome hearing
  May wring the spirit with a quivering pain;
Our hearts are half of earth, and the careering
Of highest thoughts in its divinest daring,
Is but a momentary, blissful sharing,
  That flutters back again.

It may be ours to tread the vale of sorrow,
  Or wander withering in the maze of doubt,
Anticipating scarce a joy to-morrow,
Save what from the pale lamp of Song we borrow--
  That will not all go out.

Yes! there are bosom-chords--thanks to the Giver!
  The sad, low whisperings of which can never
Be all subdued, though they may shake and shiver
With death and coldness, if we brave the river
  With wise and strong endeavor.

O Song! O fount of sweetest nectar welling!
  Of thy refreshings let my sad heart drink;
'Tis past!--too late--too late, vain trump, your swelling;
My spirit ear hath heard a surer knelling--
'Tis passing sweet, what these mule wires are telling--
  O what a joy to think!



MY COTTAGE HOME.

A VESPER HYMN.

Awake, my harp! a song for thee,
  While the mellow tinge of sunset lingers;
'Tis an eve of June! and the sweets are free--
  Wilt thou trill to the touch of outwearied fingers?
      For the day's well spent,
      And I'm content,
  Tho' weary and worn, and worn and weary;
      'Tis a heaven below,
      The joys to know--
  The joys of a Cottage Home so cheery.

The world's all beauteous now and bright,
  And calm as a cradled infant sleeping,
And the chords of love are attuned aright,
  Far joyous thoughts in the heart are leaping
      As free and sweet
      As a brother's greet
  In a foreign land all strange and dreary;
      And halls more bright
      Have less delight,
  I ween, than my Cottage Home so cheery.

My Cottage Home! My Cottage Home!
  With its trellised vines around the casement clinging,
And the happy strain of that sweet refrain,
  The gentle tones of loved ones ringing,
      When the day's well spent,
      And all content.
  What though the o'er-labored limbs are weary?
      Our hearts are free
      And merry, and we
  Rejoice in a Cottage Home so cheery.

With wants so few, while hearts so true,
  With a fond concern, are beating near us;
We'll cheerfully toil while we meet the smile.
  The approving smile of Him to cheer us,
      Who makes us to know
      The poor and the low.
  Tho' weary and worn, and worn and weary,
      At last will rest
      With the truly blest--
  O! this makes a Cottage Home so cheery.



THE MIGHTY ONE.

You have felt his power--you have felt his power--
  For a mighty one is he:
He is found in the field and is known in the bower
And hid in the cup of the tenderest flower,
  He lurks where you may not see.

He's a sleepless sprite, and at dead of night
  He'll come with his feathery tread,
And dally with fancy, and play with your dreams,
And light up your vision with silver beams,
  Though he leaves you an aching head.

Away, and away, like a thought, he flies,
  His home in the air and sea;
Of all that is earth he claims a birth,
And he speaks in the wind, and his voice goes forth
  On the breeze's back, unceasingly.

In the sea's great deeps, where the mermaid sleeps,
  In chambers of coral and gold--
Where the Sirocco sweeps and Loneliness weeps
O'er temples all silent, where dark ivy creeps,
  And places that never were told--

He is everywhere, and very well known
  In palace, in court, and cot;
Though ages have crumbled, and centuries flown,
He is youthful and strong, and is still on his throne,
  And his chains are spells of thought.

The maiden has murmured in 'plaint so low,
  While the tear trickled over a smile,
That scarcely a wo could be uttered, till "no,"
Was the heart's quick response, "I would not have him go--
  The 'Annoyer' may linger awhile."

He shadows the pages of classic lore
  In the student's loneliest hour,
And wakes up a thought that had slept before--
An image is born that can die no more--
  The student feels his power.

A voice on the hill-top, a voice in the river,
  A voice in the song of birds;
It hangs on the zephyr, it comes from the quiver
Of oak, beech and fir-leaf--it speaketh forever
  In thrilling, mysterious words;

'Tis the voice of the strong one! Know ye well,
  His presence you may not shun;
For he thrones in the heart, and he rules with a spell,
And poets may sing us and sages may tell
  That Love is a mighty one!



THE SURVIVING THOUGHT.

How long, ah me! this weary heart hath striven
  With vanity, and with a wild desire!
How long, and yet how long, must this frail bark be driven,
While these unsteady, fitful hope-lights given,
  One after one expire?

These earthly visions prove, alas! unstable;
  And we are all too prone to clutch them fast,
Though false, aye, falser than the veriest fable,
To which a "thread of gossamer is cable--"
  They cannot--cannot last!

Our eye must soon behold the appalling writing--
  The settlement of proud Belshazzar's doom!
These timely buds must early feel a blighting--
This earthly strife--ah, 'tis a sorry fighting!
  The victory--the Tomb!

The dreams fond youth in years agone had cherished;
  The hopes that wove a rainbow tissue bright--
Are they all gone--forever gone, and perished--
Ev'n the last bud my silent tears had nourished--
  Have all been Death's delight?

And will he come and mock me with his booty,
  And twirl my visions round his bony finger?
And will he tell my heart no other beauty
Upon the earth is mine--no other duty,
  Than for his mandate linger?

Up, rise, thou vital spark! not yet extinguished,
  Assert thy heritage--exert thy might;
Though in the sloughs of sorrow thou hast languished,
And pain and wrong's envenomed part out-anguished,
  One ray breaks through the night.

There is, there is one blessed thought surviving;
  The heart's sure fulcrum in the saddest strait--
An overture to this unequal striving--
A hope, a home, a last and blest arriving!
  Bear up, my heart, and wait.

Bear up, poor heart! be patient, and be meekful;
  A calm must follow each untoward blast;
With steady eye look forward to the sequel;
The common road will then seem less unequal,
  That brings us home "at last."

Come trial, pain, and disappointment's shiver,
  Ye are my kindsmen--brothers of this clay;
We must abide and I must bear the quiver
A little while, and we shall part forever--
Beyond the surges of that shoreless river
  Ye cannot "come away."



THE WORKING MAN'S SONG.

            Toil, toil, toil,
    Ever, unceasingly;
The sun gets up, and the sun goes down,
Alike in the city, in field or town,
    He brings fresh toil to me,
  And I ply my hard, rough hands
    With a heart as light and free
As the birds that greet my early plow,
Or the wind that fans my sunburnt brow
    In gusts of song and glee.

            Toil, toil, toil,
    Early, and on, and late:
They may call it mean and of low degree,
But I smile to know that I'm strong and free,
    And the good alone are great.
  'Tis nature's great command,
    And a pleasing task to me,
For true life is action and usefulness;
And I know an approving God will bless
    The toiler abundantly.

            Toil, toil, toil--
    Glory awaits that word;
My arm is strong and my heart is whole,
And exult as I toil with manly soul
    That the voice of Truth is heard.
  On, Comrades! faint not now--
    Ours is a manly part!
Toil, for a glorious meed is ours--
The fulcrum of all earthly powers
    Is in our hands and heart.

            Toil, toil, toil--
    Life is labor and love:
Live, love and labor is then our song,
Till we lay down our toils for the resting throng,
    With our Architect above.
  Then monuments will stand
    That need no polish'd rhyme--
Firm as the everlasting hills,
High as the clarion note that swells
    The "praises of all time."



ODE TO DEATH.

      I do not fear thee, Death!
I have a bantering thought!--though I am told
Thou art inflexible, and stern, and bold;
      And that thy upas breath
      Rides on the vital air;
Monarch and Prince of universal clime,
Executor of the decrees of Time--
      Sin's dark, eternal heir.

      Over the land and sea
Is felt the swooping of thy ebon wings,
And on my ear thy demon-chuckle rings,
Over the feast the panting summer brings,
      "For me--'tis all for me!"
      All seasons and all climes--
In city crowded, and in solitude,
Ye gather your unsatisfying food;
Ev'n through the rosy gates of joy intrude
      Thy deep, sepulchral chimes.

      I know thee well, though young;
Thrice, ruthlessly, this little circle broke
Hast thou. A brother, sister--then the Oak,
(Ah, hadst thou spared that last and hardest stroke,)
      Round which our young hopes clung!
      Ye wantonly have crush'd,
By your untimely and avenging frost,
The buds of hope which bid to promise most;
Oh! had ye known the heart-consuming cost,
      Could ye, O! Death have hush'd

      The music that endears,
And makes this chill'd existence tolerable?
Yet will I not such selfishness--'tis well;
I hear, I hear a happier, holier swell
      From out the eternal spheres!
      I do defy thee, Death!
Why flee me, like a debtor in arrears?
To weary out the agony of years,
With nothing but the bitter brine of tears,
      And scarcer existing breath.

      My soul is growing strong,
And somewhat fretful with its house of clay,
And waiting quite impatiently to lay
It off, and soar in light away,
      To hymn th' "eternal song."
      This is a cowardice
Perhaps--a deep, mean selfishness withal.
That whets our longings in the spirit's thrall
To lay aside these trials, and forestall
      The hours of Paradise.

      Thou wise, Eternal God!
Oh, let me not offend Thy great design!
Teach thou thy erring mortal to resign,
Make me be patient, let me not repine
      Beneath this chast'ning rod;
      Though storm and tempest whelm,
And beat upon this naked barque, 'tis well;
And I shall smile upon their heaviest swell--
Hush, rebel thoughts!--my heart be calm and still,
      The Master's at the helm!






HENRY VANDERFORD.


Henry Vanderford, editor and journalist, was born at Hillsborough,
Caroline county, Md., December 23, 1811. His maternal ancestors were
from Wales, his paternal from Holland. He was educated at Hillsborough
Academy, a celebrated institution at that time, having pupils from the
adjoining counties of Queen Anne's and Talbot. He acquired a knowledge
of the art of printing in the office of the _Easton Star_, Thomas Perrin
Smith, proprietor. From 1835 to 1837 he published the _Caroline
Advocate_, Denton, Md., the only paper in the county, and neutral in
politics, though the editor was always a decided Democrat, and took an
active part in the reform movement of 1836, which resulted in the
election of the "Glorious Nineteen" and the Twenty-one Electors. The
press and type of the _Advocate_ were transferred in 1837 to
Centreville, Queen Anne's county, where he founded the _Sentinel_, the
first Democratic paper published in that county, in January, 1838. He
was appointed for three successive years by Governor Grason chief judge
of the Magistrate's Court, but declined the office. In 1840 he was
appointed Deputy Marshal for Queen Anne's, and took the census of that
county in that year. In 1842 he sold the _Sentinel_ and removed to
Baltimore, where, three years later, he resumed his profession and
founded _The Ray_, a weekly literary and educational journal, and the
subsequent year published the _Baltimore Daily News_, and the _Weekly
Statesman_, in company with Messrs. Adams and Brown, under the firm of
Adams, Vanderford & Brown. The _News_ and _Statesman_ were Democratic
papers. In February, 1848, he bought _The Cecil Democrat_ of Thomas M.
Coleman, enlarged the paper, quadrupled its circulation, and refitted it
with new material. In 1865 he sold out the _Democrat_ to Albert
Constable and Judge Frederick Stump, and bought a farm in St. Mary's
county, Md., and engaged in agriculture. Three years later, failing
health of himself and family, induced him to sell his farm and remove to
Middletown, Del., where he founded the _Transcript_, and resumed the
business of a printer and publisher. The _Transcript_ was the first
paper published in that town, and was a success from the start. It was
transferred in 1870 to his youngest son, Charles H. Vanderford. From
1870 to 1878 he was associated with his eldest son, William H.
Vanderford, in the publication of _The Democratic Advocate_,
Westminster, Md. In 1873 he was elected to the House of Delegates from
Carroll county, and in 1879 to the Senate, in which body he held the
important position of Chairman of the Committee on Finance, and was a
member of the Committee on Engrossed Bills and the Committee on
Printing.

On the 6th of June, 1839, he married Angelina, the daughter of Henry
Vanderford, of Queen Anne's county, a distant relative of his father.
Mr. Vanderford is a member of the Masonic Order, and he and his wife are
both communicants of the Protestant Episcopal Church, the Church of
their ancestors, as far back as the history of the Church can be traced
in the Eastern part of Maryland. Charles Vanderford, great grandfather
of the subject of this sketch, was a vestryman of St. Paul's Parish,
Centreville, Md., in 1719. Charles Wrench Vanderford was his
grandfather, and a member of the Old Maryland Line, in the Revolutionary
war. William Vanderford, his father, was a native of Queen Anne's
county, where the family held a grant of land of one thousand acres from
the crown, located between Wye Mills and Hall's Cross Roads, on which
the old mansion was built of brick imported from England.

Mr. Vanderford is now in retiracy, in the 76th year of his age, but
still active, and in the possession of good health and as genial and
cheerful as in the days of his prime.




ON THE MOUNTAINS.

    Written after a visit to Rawley Springs, in the mountains of
    Virginia.

On the mountains! Oh, how sweet!
The busy world beneath my feet!
Outspread before my raptur'd eyes
The wide unbounded prospect lies;
The panoramic vision glows
In beauty, grandeur and repose.
I gaze into the vaulted blue
And on the em'rald fields below;
The genial sunlight shimmers down
Upon the mountain's rugged crown,
The eye sweeps round the horizon
Until its utmost verge is won.
The hoary peaks, with forests crown'd,
Spread their vast solitudes around,
And intervening rocks and rills
The eye with very transport fills.
The bosom wells with joy serene
While viewing all the lovely scene,
The spirit soars on airy wings
Above all sublunary things.
I peer into the depths profound
Of the cerulean around,
And ether's far-off heights I scan,
As if, to feeble finite man,
The power of vision here were given
To view the battlements of heaven.
But, though I gaze and gaze intent,
Close scanning all the firmament,
No Mount of Vision unto me
Does this bold summit prove to be.
Though in elysian wrapt the while,
Where sublimated thoughts beguile,
Icarian pinions, all too frail,
Were sure my fancy's flight to fail.
Confined within this mortal clod,
Vain man would yet ascend to God,
Presumptuous, as of yore, to be
The heir of immortality.
But, from those fair, celestial heights
Of fervid fancy's loftiest flights,
My airy visions topple down
To where cool reason's realm is found,
And fancy folds her weary wings,
Content, the while, with earthly things.



PROGRESS.

    "Man hath sought out many inventions."

The planets, forced by Nature's law,
  Within their orbits ceaseless roll,
And man the lesson thence may draw--
  By industry to reach his goal.

Hail! industry's all-conquering might!
  Hail! engineering's giant skill!
That clambers up the mountain height,
  And intervening valleys fill.

The enterprise of man shall know
  No bounds upon this mundane sphere,
Whate'er his hands may find to do
  He executes with skill and care.

His genius Nature's self subdues,
  And all her powers subservient lie
At his command, and pleas'd he views
  His great resources multiply.

He mines the earth and skims the air,
  He plows the main, descends the deep,
And through its silent chambers there,
  Electric forces flash and leap.

He flies, upon the wings of steam,
  Mounts up with ærostatic pow'r,
He paints with every solar beam--
  Unfolds new wonders ev'ry hour!

Not in material things alone
  Does Progress mark its high career,
Fair science builds her regal throne,
  And morals her triumphal car.

Man stands erect--his image fair
  In God's own likeness first was cast,
His high prerogatives appear,
  He seeks his destiny at last.

Upward and onward is his course,
  In mental and in moral life,
With higher purpose, now, perforce,
  With loftier aspirations rife.

In matters both of Church and State,
  A high ambition spurs him on,
With buoyancy and hope elate,
  He plies his task till it be done.



WINTER.

    Written in the month of January, the ground covered with snow.

'Tis winter, drear winter, and cold the winds blow,
The ground is all cover'd with ice and with snow,
The trees are all gemm'd with a crystalline sheen,
No birdling or blossom are now to be seen.

The landscape is wearing a mantle of white,
Its verdure lies wither'd and hidden from sight,
Rude Borean blasts bleakly blow o'er the hills,
'Till the life-current, coursing, his icy-breath chills.

The rills in their ice-fetters firmly are bound
As the frost-spirit breathes o'er the face of the ground
The icicles pendant hang over the eaves,
And the wind whirls in eddies the rustling leaves.

It shrieks through the casement and in at the door--
All through the long night hear it fitfully roar,
The mitre ethereal silently flies
So keen and so cutting through storm-troubled skies.

The dark leaden clouds dim the light of the sun,
And the dull dreary hours drone slothfully on,
Euroclydon forges the cold biting sleet,
And the snow-drifts he piles at the traveler's feet.

The wealthy, at ease in their mansions so warm,
Heed not the rude blast of the pitiless storm--
The loud-roaring tempest, the elements din,
Serve only to heighten their comforts within.

The poor, in their hovels, feel keenly the blast,
And shudder and shake as the storm-sprite goes past;
Oh! pity the poor, in their lowly estate,
And turn them not empty away from your gate.



LINES

ON WITNESSING THREE SISTERS DEPOSITING FLOWERS ON THE GRAVE OF A FRIEND,
IN ST. ANN'S CEMETERY, MIDDLETOWN, DELAWARE.

At an early hour of the Sabbath morn,
Beside the ancient, sacred pile, I stood
Of old St. Ann's. The ivy careless clamber'd
Along its moss-grown, antique walls;
The sun-light bathed in golden glory
The calm, sequester'd scene, and silence
Reigned through all the leafy grove,
Save where the warbling songster pour'd
His wood-notes wild, or where "the gray old trunks
That high in heaven mingled their mossy boughs,"
Murmur'd with sound of "the invisible breath
That played among their giant branches,"
And "bowed the wrapt spirit with the thought
Of boundless power and inaccessible majesty."
Within the lone church no loitering footfall
O'er threshold, aisle, or chancel echoed,
No sound intruded on the hush profound
Of that ancient temple. The pale sleepers
In the weird city of the dead lay mute,
Their mouldering ashes mingling with the dust,
While sculptured tablets with memorial brief,
Their memories from oblivion rescued.

As thus upon the scene around I gazed,
The fresh-turned earth upon a new-made grave,
Within its marble confines neat enclosed,
My vision steadfast fixed, and I beheld
Three maidens, bearing each a rich bouquet,
Approach the tomb, and softly by its side
Stoop down and place thereon their floral gems
In token of the love they bore the friend
So late inurned, whom yet they fondly cherish'd.
Full preparation one had duly made
To stand beside her at the bridal altar;
But now, beside her early grave she stood,
With floral tokens of unfailing love
For the fair young wither'd flower beneath.
Touching and beautiful the lovely sight
Of such devotion deep at friendship's shrine.
My sterner heart, in welling sympathy,
Throbb'd its response to this ennobling act
Of these fair sisters, and did them homage
Deep down within its silent recesses.
Oh, when with them life's fitful fever ends
May ne'er be wanted hand of sympathy
To strew affection's token o'er their graves.



MERRY MAY.

Ethereal mildness, gentle showers.
Springing verdure, opening flowers,
Apple blossoms, bobolinks,
Budding roses, blushing pinks,
Cherries snowy, peach buds sleek,
Rivaling a maiden's cheek,
Balmy zephyrs, halcyon hours,
Song of birds and scent of flowers,
Vernal season, swelling spray,
All belong to Merry May.