[Sidenote: Unitarian Sunday School Society.]

As time went on, and the work of the Sunday-schools enlarged, it was felt
that it was necessary there should be one general organization which should
bring together all Unitarian schools into a compact working force. To meet
this growing need, a convention of the county societies and of local
schools was held in Worcester, October 4, 1854, at which time the Sunday
School Society was organized as a general denominational body. Hon. Albert
Fearing, of Boston, was made the president, and Rev. Frederick T. Gray the
secretary. The society provided itself with a desk in the rooms of the
Unitarian Association, and provision was made for the collection and sale
of all the helps demanded by the schools.

From 1855 until 1865 the society was sadly crippled by the lack of funds.
The hard times preceding the Civil War, and the absorption of public
interest in that great national event, made it difficult for the society to
continue its work with any degree of success. For some years little was
done but to hold the annual meeting in the autumn and that in anniversary
week, and to continue the publication of the Sunday School Gazette. For a
number of years, however, Teachers' Institutes were held; and these were
continued at irregular intervals until about 1875. The Sunday School
Teachers' Institute was organized in 1852, and continued in existence for
ten years.

After the death of Rev. Frederick T. Gray in 1855, he was succeeded in the
position of secretary of the Sunday School Society by Rev. Stephen G.
Bulfinch. In 1856 Rev. Warren H. Cudworth became the secretary, and the
editor of the Gazette; and he held these positions until May, 1861, when he
became the chaplain of the first Massachusetts regiment taking part in the
Civil War. In the October following, Mr. Joseph H. Allen, a Boston
merchant, afterwards the editor of The Schoolmate, became the secretary and
editor. He continued to edit the Gazette until November, 1865; but Mr. M.T.
Rice was made secretary in 1863. At the end of 1865, when the society was
in a condition of almost complete collapse, Rev. Thomas J. Mumford became
the secretary, and the editor of the Gazette for one year. He restored
confidence in the society, and made the paper a success. During the war the
paper was published monthly for the sake of economy; but with the first of
January, 1866, it was restored to its former semi-monthly issue.

The new life that came to the denomination in 1865 had its influence upon
the Sunday School Society. In the autumn of 1866, when the Unitarian
Association had secured a large increase of funds, it was proposed that the
Sunday School Society should unite with it, and that the larger
organization should have the direction of all denominational activities,
especially those of publishing. The more zealous friends of the society did
not approve of such consolidation, and succeeded in reanimating its work by
appointing as its secretary Mr. James P. Walker, who had been the head of
the publishing firm of Walker, Wise & Co., a young man of earnest purpose,
a successful Sunday-school teacher and superintendent, and an enthusiastic
believer in the mission of Unitarianism. Mr. Walker devoted his whole time
to the interests of the society, and an energetic effort was made to revive
and extend its work. He proved to be the man for the position, largely
increasing the bookselling and publishing activities, visiting schools and
conferences, and awakening much enthusiasm in regard to the interests of
Sunday-schools. He wore himself out in this work, however, and died in
March, 1868, greatly lamented throughout the denomination.[11]

After the death of Mr. Walker, consolidation with the Association was again
urged; but Rev. Leonard J. Livermore was in June elected the secretary. At
the annual meeting it was resolved to raise $5,000 for the work of the
society, and the next year it was proposed to make the annual contribution
$10,000. The name was changed to the Unitarian Sunday School Society at the
annual meeting of 1868, held in Worcester. In 1871 Mr. John Kneeland became
the secretary; and with the beginning of 1872 the Gazette was changed to
The Dayspring, which was issued monthly. In the autumn of that year the
society began the publication of monthly lessons, and there was issued with
them a Teachers' Guide for the lessons of the year. With the beginning of
1877 the Guide was discontinued, and the lesson papers enlarged. In
November, 1875, Rev. George F. Piper became the secretary,--a position he
held until May 1, 1883. During his administration about three hundred
lessons were prepared by him, and these had a circulation of about nine
thousand copies. The transition condition of the denomination made it
difficult to carry on the work of the society at this time, for it was
impossible to please both conservatives and radicals with any lessons that
might be prepared. One superintendent warned his school against the
heretical tendencies of lessons which, from the other point of view, a
minister condemned as being fit for orthodox schools, but not for
Unitarians. In the same mail came a letter from a minister saying the
lessons were too elementary, and from another saying they were much too
advanced. In the latter part of Mr. Piper's term service was begun an
important work of preparing manuals thoroughly modern in their spirit and
methods.[12]

In May, 1883, Rev. Henry G. Spaulding became the secretary; and the work of
publishing modern manuals was largely extended.[13] At the suggestion and
with the co-operation of the secretary there was organized, November 12,
1883, the Unitarian Sunday School Union of Boston, having for its object
"to develop the best methods of Sunday-school work." At about the same time
a lending library of reference books was established in connection with the
work of the society. In the autumn of 1883 the society began to hold in
Channing Hall weekly lectures for teachers. In 1885 The Dayspring was
enlarged and became Every Other Sunday, being much improved in its literary
contents as well as in its illustrations. The same year the society was
incorporated, and the number of directors was increased to include
representatives from all sections of the country; while all Sunday-schools
contributing to the society's treasury were given a delegate representation
in its membership. Mr. Spaulding continued his connection with the society
until January 1, 1892.

Rev. Edward A. Horton, who had for several years taken an active part in
the work of the society, assumed charge February 1, 1892. Mr. Horton was
made the president, it being deemed wise to have the head of the society
its executive officer. During his administration there has been a steady
growth in Sunday-school interest, which has demanded a rapid increase in
the number and variety of publications. The book department has been taxed
to the utmost to meet the demand. A new book of Song and Service, compiled
by Mr. Horton, has reached a sale of nearly 25,000 copies. A simple
statement of "Our Faith" has had a circulation of 40,000 copies, and in a
form suitable for the walls of Sunday-school rooms it has been in
considerable demand.[14] A series of lessons, covering a period of seven
years, upon the three-grade, one-topic plan, has been largely used in the
schools. Besides the twenty manuals published in this course of lessons,
forty other text-books have been published, making a total of sixty in all,
from 1892 to 1902.[15] There have also been many additions to
Sunday-school helps by way of special services for festival days, free
tracts, and statements of belief. The Channing Hall talks to Sunday-school
teachers have been made to bear upon these courses of lessons. Every Other
Sunday has been improved, and its circulation extended. The number of
donating churches and schools has been steadily increased, the number in
1901 being 255, the largest by far yet reached. At the annual meeting of
the society and at local conferences representative speakers have presented
the newest methods of Sunday-school work. Sunday-school unions have been
formed in various parts of the country, and churches are awakened to a new
interest in the work of religious instruction. "Home and School
Conferences" have been held with a view to bringing parents and teachers
into closer sympathy and co-operation.

[Sidenote: Western Unitarian Sunday School Society.]

In the west the first movement towards Sunday-school activities began in
1871 with the publication of a four-page lesson-sheet at Janesville, Wis.,
by Rev. Jenkin Lloyd Jones. This was continued for two or three years.
Through the interest of Mr. Jones in Sunday-school work a meeting for
organization was called in the fourth church, Chicago, October 14, 1873,
when the Western Unitarian Sunday School Society was organized, with Rev.
Milton J. Miller as president and Mr. Jones as secretary. At the meeting
the next year in St. Louis a committee was appointed to prepare a song-book
for the schools, which resulted in the production of The Sunny Side, edited
by Rev. Charles W. Wendte. The next step was to establish headquarters in
Chicago, where all kinds of material could be furnished to the schools,
with the necessary advice and encouragement. Through successive years the
effort of the society was to systematize the work of Unitarian
Sunday-schools, to put into them the best literature, the best song and
service books, the best lesson papers, and other tools,--in short, to
secure better and more definite teaching, such as is in accord with the
best scholarship and thought of the age.[16]

In 1882 the society became incorporated, and its work from this time
enlarged in all directions. To develop these results more fully, an
Institute was held in the Third Church, Chicago, in November, 1887, at
which five sessions were given to Sunday-school work, and two to Unity Club
interests. In the course of several years of encouraging success, the
Institute developed into a Summer Assembly of two or more weeks'
continuance at Hillside, Helena Valley, Wis., which still continues its
yearly sessions. In May, 1902, The Western Sunday School Society was
consolidated with the national organization; and the plates and stock which
it possessed were handed over to the Unitarian Sunday School Society. A
western headquarters is maintained in Chicago, where all the publications
of the two societies are kept on sale.

[Sidenote: Unity Clubs.]

As adjuncts to the Sunday-school, and to continue its work for adults and
in other spheres of ethical training, the Unity Club came into existence
about the year 1873, beginning with the work of Rev. Jenkin Ll. Jones at
Janesville. In the course of the next ten years nearly every Unitarian
church in the west organized such a club, and the movement to some degree
extended to other parts of the country. In 1887 there was organized in
Boston the National Bureau of Unity Clubs. These clubs devoted themselves
to literary, sociological, and religious courses of study; and they
furnished centres for the social activities of the churches. About the year
1878 began a movement to organize societies of young people for the
cultivation of the spirit of worship and religious development. This
resulted in 1889 in the organization of the National Guild Alliance; and in
1890 this organization joined with the Bureau of Unity Clubs and the
Unitarian Temperance Society in supporting an agency in the Unitarian
Building, Boston, with the aid of the Unitarian Association. The Young
People's Religious Union was organized in Boston, May 28, 1896; and in
large degree, it took the place of the Bureau and the Alliance, uniting the
two in a more efficient effort to interest the young people of the
churches.[17]

[Sidenote: The Ladies' Commission on Sunday-school Books.]

In the autumn of 1865, Rev. Charles Lowe, then the secretary of the
Unitarian Association, invited a number of women to meet him for the
purpose of conference on the subject of Sunday-school libraries. At his
suggestion they organized themselves on October 12 as The Ladies'
Commission on Sunday-school Books, with the object of preparing a catalogue
of books read and approved by competent persons. At the first meeting ten
persons were present, but the number was soon enlarged to thirty; and it
was still farther increased by the addition of corresponding members in
cities too remote for personal attendance. Among those taking part in the
work of the commission at first were Miss Lucretia P. Hale, Miss Anna C.
Lowell, Mrs. Edwin P. Whipple, Mrs. Ednah D. Cheney, Mrs. A.D.T. Whitney,
Mrs. S. Bennett, Mrs. Caroline H. Dall, Mrs. E.E. Hale, Mrs. E.P. Tileston,
and Miss Hannah E. Stevenson.

The commission not only aimed to select books for Sunday-school libraries,
but also those for the home reading of young persons and for the use of
teachers. It undertook also the procuring of the publication of suitable
juvenile books. The first catalogue was issued in October, 1866, and
contained a list of two hundred books, selected from twelve hundred
examined. In the spring of 1867 a catalogue of five hundred and
seventy-three books was printed, as the result of the reading of nineteen
hundred volumes.

In the beginning of its work the commission did not confine its activities
to the selecting of juvenile books; for the Sunday School Hymn and Tune
Book, published in 1869, was largely due to its efforts. Under the
administration of Mr. James P. Walker the Sunday School Society undertook
to procure the publication of a number of books of fiction suitable for
Sunday-school libraries, and offered prizes to this end. The commission
gave its encouragement to this effort, read the manuscripts, and aided in
determining to whom the prizes should be given. The result was the
publication of a half-dozen volumes by the Sunday School Society and the
Unitarian Association. The society also aided to some extent in meeting the
expenses of the commission, though these were usually met by the
Association.

For many years the books approved by the commission were grouped under
three heads: books especially recommended for Unitarian Sunday-school
libraries; those highly recommended for their religious tone, but somewhat
impaired for this purpose by the use of phrases and the adoption of a
spirit not in accord with the Unitarian faith; and those profitable and
valuable, but not adapted to the purposes of a Sunday-school library. Every
book recommended was read and approved by at least five persons, discussed
in committee of the whole, and accepted by a two-thirds vote of all the
members. Books about which there was much diversity of opinion were read by
a larger number of persons. This classification proved rather cumbersome,
and it was often found difficult to decide into which list a book should be
placed; and the result was that about 1890 the simpler plan was adopted of
putting all titles in their alphabetical order, with explanatory notes for
each book. In 1882 the list of books for teachers was discontinued as being
no longer necessary.

Annual lists of books have been published by the commission since 1866;
and, in addition, several catalogues have been issued, containing all the
books approved during a period of five years. In the early days of the
commission, supplementary lists for children and young persons were issued,
containing books of a more secular character than were thought suitable for
Sunday-school libraries. Gradually, it has extended its work to include the
needs of all juvenile libraries; and these books are now incorporated into
the one annual catalogue. In thirty-four years the commission has examined
10,957 books, and has approved 3,076, or about one-third.[18]

[1] Sunday School Times, September 15, 1860.

[2] Asa Bullard, Fifty Years with the Sabbath Schools, 37.

[3] C.A. Bartol, The West Church and its Ministers, Appendix.

[4] See the Remains of Nathaniel Appleton Haven, with a Memoir of his
    life, by George Ticknor.

[5] The Hancock Sunday-school assembled at eight in the morning and at
    one in the afternoon, Moses Grant being the first superintendent.

[6] At the school of the Twelfth Congregational Society, Carpenter's
    Catechism was used for the small children. This was followed by the
    Worcester Catechism, compiled in 1822 by the ministers of the
    Worcester Association of Ministers, Dr. Joseph Allen being the real
    author. The Geneva Catechism in its three successive parts, followed
    in order. In the Bible class, use was made of Hannah Adams's Letters
    on the Gospels, under the immediate charge of the Pastor. A hymn-book
    issued by the Publishing Fund Society was in use by the whole school.

[7] Christian Examiner, March, 1830, VIII. 49.

[8] Ibid., May, 1838, XXIV. 182.

[9] Joseph Allen, History of the Worcester Association, 261-264.

[10] In 1852 was published a graded series of eight manuals of Christian
     instruction for Sunday-schools and families,--a result of the
     activities of the Sunday School Society. The titles and authors of
     these books were Early Religious Lessons; Palestine and the Hebrew
     People, Stephen G. Bulfinch; Lessons on the Old Testament, Rev.
     Ephraim Peabody; The Life of Christ, Rev. John H. Morison; The Books
     and Characters of the New Testament, Rev. Rufus Ellis; Lessons upon
     Religious Duties and Christian Morals, Rev. George W. Briggs;
     Doctrines of Scripture, Rev. Frederic D. Huntington; Scenes from
     Christian History, Rev. Edward E. Hale. Two other books connected
     with the early history of Unitarian Sunday-schools properly demand
     notice here. In 1847 was published The History of Sunday Schools and
     of Religious Education from the Earliest Times, by Lewis G. Pray, who
     was treasurer of the Boston Sunday School Society from 1834 to 1853,
     and chairman of its board of agents from 1841 to 1848. He was one of
     the first workers in the establishing of Sunday-schools in Boston,
     and he zealously interested himself in this cause so long as he
     lived. He compiled the first book of hymns used in Unitarian schools,
     and also the first book of devotional exercises. For twenty years he
     was superintendent of the school connected with the Twelfth
     Congregational Society, holding that place from its organization in
     1827. In one of the concluding chapters of his book Mr. Pray gave an
     account of the early history of Unitarian Sunday-schools in Boston
     and its neighborhood. In 1852 was published a series of addresses
     which had been given by Rev. Frederick T. Gray at Sunday-school
     anniversaries and on other similar occasions. The volume contains
     most interesting information in regard to the origin of
     Sunday-schools in Boston, and the beginnings of the Sunday School
     Society, as well as the work of Dr. Tuckerman and his assistants in
     the ministry, at large.

[11] Memoir of James P. Walker, with Selections from his Writings, by
     Thomas B. Fox. American Unitarian Association, 1869.

[12] The first of these was Rev. Edward H. Hall's First Lessons on the
     Bible, which appeared in 1882; and it was soon followed by Professor
     C.H. Toy's History of the Religion of Israel.

[13] Among these were Religions before Christianity, by Professor Charles
     Carroll Everett, D.D., 1883; Manual of Unitarian Belief, by Rev.
     James Freeman Clarke, D.D., 1884; Lessons on the Life of St. Paul, by
     Rev. Edward H. Hall, 1885; Early Hebrew Stories, by Rev. Charles F.
     Dole, 1886; Hebrew Prophets and Kings, by Rev. Henry G. Spaulding,
     1887; The Later Heroes of Israel, by Mr. Spaulding, 1888; Lessons on
     the Gospel of Luke, by Mr. Spaulding and Rev. W.W. Fenn, 1889; A
     Story of the Sects, by Rev. William H. Lyon, in 1891. In 1890
     appeared the Unitarian Catechism of Rev. Minot J. Savage, though not
     published by the Sunday School Society. These books attracted wide
     attention, were largely used in Unitarian schools, and were adopted
     into those of other sects to some extent. In 1886 the president of
     the American Social Science Association publicly urged the use of the
     ethical manuals of the society by all Sunday-schools. Several of
     these books were republished in London, and Dr. Toy's manual was
     translated into Dutch. The society also published a new Service Book
     and Hymnal, which went into immediate use in a large number of
     schools, and did much for the enrichment of the devotional exercises
     and the promotion of an advanced standard of both words and music in
     the hymns.

[14] The Fatherhood of God, the Brotherhood of Man, the leadership of
     Jesus, salvation by character, the progress of mankind onward and
     upward forever.

[15] Among the publications under Mr. Horton's administration, which may
     justly be called significant, are: Beacon Lights of Christian
     History, in three grades; Noble Lives and Noble Deeds, Dole's
     Catechism of Liberal Faith, Mott's History of Unitarianism,
     Pulsford's various manuals on the Bible, Mrs. Jaynes's Illustrated
     Primary Leaflets, Miss Mulliken's Kindergarten Lessons, Story of
     Israel and Great Thoughts of Israel, in three grades, Fenn's Acts of
     the Apostles, Chadwick's Questions on the Old Testament Books in
     their Right Order, Mrs. Kate Gannett Wells's forty Illustrated
     Primary Lessons, and Walkley's Helps for Teachers. Mr. Horton, during
     this ten years, has written fourteen manuals on various subjects.
     Co-extensive with the large increase of text-books has been the
     enrichment of lessons by pictorial aids. Excellent half-tone pictures
     have been prepared from the best subjects.

[16] Among the publications of the Western Unitarian Sunday School Society
     have been Unity Services and Songs, edited by Rev. James Vila Blake,
     and published in 1878; a service book called The Way of Life, by Rev.
     Frederick L. Hosmer, issued in 1877; and Unity Festivals, services
     for special holidays, 1884. Of the lesson-books published by the
     society, those that have been most successful have been Corner-stones
     of Character, by Mrs. Kate Gannett Wells; A Chosen Nation, or the
     Growth of the Hebrew Religion, by Rev. William C. Gannett; and The
     More Wonderful Genesis, by Rev. Henry M. Simmons. In 1890 the society
     entered upon the publication of a six-year course of studies, which
     included Beginnings according to Legend and according to the Truer
     Story, by Rev. Allen W. Gould; The Flowering of the Hebrew Religion,
     by Rev. W.W. Fenn; In the Home, by Rev. W.C. Gannett; Mother Nature's
     Children, by Rev. A.W. Gould; and The Flowering of Christianity, the
     Liberal Christian Movement toward Universal Religion, by Rev. W.C.
     Gannett.

[17] The objects of The Young People's Religious Union are: (a) to foster
     the religious life; (b) to bring the young into closer relations with
     one another; and (c) to spread rational views of religion, and to put
     into practice such principles of life and duty as tend to uplift
     mankind. The cardinal principles of the Union are truth, worship, and
     service. Any young people's society may become a member of the Union
     by affirming in writing its sympathy with the general objects of the
     Union, adopting its cardinal principles, making a contribution to its
     treasury, and sending the secretary a list of its officers. The
     annual meeting is held in May at such day and place as the executive
     board may appoint. Special union meetings are held as often as
     several societies may arrange. The Union has its headquarters at Room
     11, in the Unitarian Building, Boston, in charge of the secretary,
     whose office hours are from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. daily. Organization
     hints, hymnals, leaflets, helps for the national topics, and other
     suggestive materials are supplied. The national officers furnish
     speakers for initial meetings, visit unions, and help in other ways.
     The Union maintains a department in The Christian Register, under the
     charge of the secretary, for notes, notices, helps on the topics, and
     all matters of interest to the unions, and also publishes a monthly
     bulletin in connection with the National Alliance of Unitarian Women.

[18] In the thirty-five years which comprise the life of the commission a
     gradual but marked change has been in operation. Sunday-school
     libraries are being used less and less, and town libraries have
     become much more numerous and better patronized by both old and
     young. In the spring of 1896 the question arose in the commission
     whether, with the decline of the Sunday-school library, the need
     which called it into being had not ceased to exist; and, in order to
     secure information as to the advisability of continuing its work,
     cards were sent to 305 ministers of the denomination and to 507
     public libraries, mostly in New England, asking if the lists of the
     commission were found useful, and whether it was desired that the
     sending of them should be continued. From Unitarian ministers 209
     replies were received, one-half using the lists frequently and the
     other half occasionally or for the selection of special books. From
     the town libraries cordial replies were received in 220 instances,
     most of them warmly approving of the lists, which had been found very
     useful. The result of this investigation was to bring the commission
     more directly into touch with the various libraries, and to give it a
     better understanding of their needs.




XII.


THE WOMEN'S ALLIANCE AND ITS PREDECESSORS.

The Unitarian body has been remarkable for the women of intellectual power
and philanthropic achievement who have adorned its fellowship. In
proportion to their numbers, they have done much for the improvement and
uplifting of society. In the early Unitarian period, however, the special
work of women was for the most part confined to the Sunday-school and the
sewing circle. Whatever the name by which it was known, whether as the
Dorcas Society, the Benevolent Society, or the Ladies' Aid, the sewing
circle did a work that was in harmony with the needs of the time, and did
it well. It helped the church with which it was connected in many quiet
ways, and gave much aid to the poor and suffering members of the community.
Nor did it limit its activities to purely local interests; for many a
church was helped by it and the early missionary societies received its
contributions gladly.

Before the organization of the Benevolent Fraternity of Churches, the women
of Boston raised the money necessary for the support of the ministry at
large in that city. One of the earliest societies organized for general
service, was the Tuckerman Sewing Circle, formed in 1827. Its purpose was
to assist Dr. Tuckerman in his work for the poor of the city by providing
clothing and otherwise aiding the needy. The work of this circle is still
going on in connection, with the Bulfinch Place Church; and every year it
raises a large sum of money for the charitable work of the ministry at
large.

The civil war helped women to recognize the need of organization and
co-operation, on their part. In working for the soldiers, not only in their
homes and churches, but in connection with the Sanitary Commission, and
later in seeking to aid the freedmen, they learned their own power and the
value of combination with others. In Massachusetts the work of the Sanitary
Commission was largely carried on by Unitarians. In describing this work,
Mrs. Ednah D. Cheney has indicated what was done by Unitarian women.
"During the late war," she wrote, "a woman's branch of the Sanitary
Commission was organized in New England. Mary Dwight (Parkman) was its
first president; but Abby Williams May soon took her place, which she held
till the close of the war. With unwearied zeal Miss May presided over its
councils, organized its action, and encouraged others to work. She went
down to the hospitals and camps, to judge of their needs with her own eyes,
and travelled from town to town in New England, arousing the women to new
effort. These might be seen, young and old, rich and poor, bearing bundles
of blue flannel through the streets, and unaccustomed fingers knitting the
coarse yarn, while the heart throbbed with anxiety for the dear ones gone
to the war. A noble band of nurses volunteered their services, and the
strife was as to which should go soonest and do the hardest work. Hannah E.
Stevenson, Helen Stetson, and many another name became as dear to the
soldiers as that of mother or sister. A committee was formed to supply the
colored soldiers with such help as other soldiers received from their
relations; and, when one of the noblest of Boston's sons passed through her
streets at their head, his mother 'thanked God for the privilege of seeing
that day.' The same spirit went into the work of educating the freedmen.
Young men and women, the noblest and best, went forth together to that work
of danger and toil."[1]

[Sidenote: Women's Western Unitarian Conference.]

It was such experiences as these that encouraged Unitarian women to enter
upon other philanthropic and educational labors when the civil war had come
to an end. Leaders had been trained during this period who were capable of
guiding such movements to a successful issue. The example of the women of
the evangelical churches in organizing their home and foreign missionary
associations also undoubtedly influenced, to a greater or lesser degree,
the women of the liberal churches. After the organization of the National
Conference, Unitarian women began to realize, as never before, the need of
co-operation in behalf of the cause they had at heart.[2] It was in the
central west, however, that the first effort was made to organize women in
the interest of denominational activities. In 1877, at the meeting of the
Western Unitarian Conference held in Toledo, it was voted that the women
connected with that body be requested to organize immediately for the
purpose of co-operating in the general work of the conference. At this
meeting two women, Mrs. E.P. Allis of Milwaukee and Mrs. Mary P. Wells
Smith of Cincinnati, were placed on the board of directors.

At the next annual meeting of the Western Conference, held in Chicago, the
committee on organization, consisting of thirteen women, reported the
readiness of the women to give their aid to the conference work, saying in
their report "that we signify not only our willingness, but our earnest
desire to share henceforth with our brothers in the labors and
responsibilities of this Association, and that we pledge ourselves to an
active and hearty support of those cherished convictions which constitute
our liberal faith." In response to their request, the conference selected
an assistant secretary to have charge of everything relating to the work of
women. They also recommended that the women of the several churches
connected with the conference should organize for "the study and
dissemination of the principles of free thought and liberal religious
culture, and the practical assistance of all worthy schemes and enterprises
intended for the spread and upholding of these principles." In 1881, at St.
Louis, there was organized the Women's Western Unitarian Conference, with
Mrs. Eliza Sunderland as president and Miss F.L. Roberts as secretary.
During the seventeen years of its existence this conference raised much
money for denominational work, developed many earnest workers, and
accomplished much in behalf of the principles for which it stood. It aided
in the support of several missionaries, organized the Post-office Mission
and made it effective, and encouraged a number of women to enter the
ministry.

[Sidenote: Women's Auxiliary Conference.]

At the National Conference session of 1878, held at Saratoga, where much
enthusiasm had been awakened, it was suggested that the women, who had been
hitherto listeners only, should take an active part in, denominational
work. At a gathering in the parlor of the United States Hotel, called by
Mrs. Charles G. Ames, Mrs. Fielder Israel, Mrs. J.P. Lesley, and one or two
others, a plan of action was adopted that led, in 1880, to the formation of
the Women's Auxiliary Conference. The aim of this organization was to
quicken the religious life of the churches, to stimulate local charitable
and missionary undertakings, and to raise money for missionary enterprises;
but its work was to be done in connection with the National Conference, and
not as an independent organization. The purpose was stated in a circular
sent to the churches immediately after the organization was effected.
"Hitherto," it was said, "women have not been specially represented upon
the board of the National Conference, and have not fully recognized how
helpful they might be in its various undertakings or how much they
themselves might gain from a closer relation with it. But the time has now
come when our service is called for in the broad field, and also when we
feel the need of being at work there; for our faith in the great truths of
religion is no less vital than that of our brethren; and since the service
we can render, being different from theirs, is needed to supplement it, and
because it is peculiarly women's service, we must do it, or it will be left
undone. It is one of the glories of such a work as ours that there is need
and room in it for the best effort of every individual; indeed, without the
faithful service of all it must be incomplete."

In 1890, after ten years of active existence, the conference had about
eighty branches, with a membership of between 3,000 and 4,000 women. Much
of the success of the conference was due to its president, Abby W. May.
Miss May was well known as a philanthropist and educator, and had occupied
many prominent positions before she assumed the presidency of the
auxiliary; but this was her first active work in connection with the
denomination.

[Sidenote: The National Alliance.]

Admirable as were the aims, and excellent as was the work of this
organization, it was auxiliary to the National Conference, and had no
independent life. After the first enthusiasm was past, it failed to gain
ground rapidly, the membership remaining nearly stationary during the last
few years of its existence. As time went on, therefore, it became evident
that a more complete organization was needed in order to arouse enthusiasm
and to secure the loyalty of the women of all parts of the country. The New
York League of Unitarian Women, including those of New York, Brooklyn, and
New Jersey, organized in 1887, showed the advantages of a closer union and
a more definite purpose; and the desire to bring into one body all the
various local organizations hastened the change. It was seen that, in the
multiplication of organizations, there was danger of wasting the energies
used, and that one efficient body was greatly to be desired.

In May, 1888, a committee was formed for the purpose of drafting a
constitution for a new association, "to which all existing organizations
might subscribe." The constitution provided by this committee was adopted
October 24, 1890, and the new organization took the name of the National
Alliance of Unitarian and Other Liberal Christian Women. The object
proposed was "to quicken the life of our Unitarian churches, and to bring
the women of the denomination into closer acquaintance, co-operation, and
fellowship." In 1891 there were ninety branches, with about 5,000 members.
While the membership, doubled under the impulse of the new organization,
the increase in the amount of money raised was fivefold.

The admirable results secured by the Women's Alliance, which has finally
drawn all the sectional organizations into co-operation with itself, are in
no small measure due to the energy and the organizing skill of the women
who have been at the head of its activities. Mrs. Judith W. Andrews, of
Boston, was the president during the first year of its existence. From 1891
to 1901 the president was Mrs. B. Ward Dix, of Brooklyn, who was succeeded
by Miss Emma C. Low, of the same city. Mrs. Emily A. Fifield, of Boston,
has been the recording secretary; Mrs. Mary B. Davis, of New York, the
corresponding secretary; and Miss Flora L. Close, of Boston, the treasurer
from the first.

[Sidenote: Cheerful Letter and Post-office Missions.]

In 1891 the executive board appointed a committee to organize a Cheerful
Letter Exchange, of which Miss Lilian Freeman Clarke was made the chairman.
One of its chief purposes is to cheer the lonely and discouraged, invalids
and others, by interchange of letters and by gifts of books and
periodicals. To young persons in remote places it affords facilities for
securing a better education, with the aid of correspondence classes. By
means of a little monthly magazine, The Cheerful Letter, religious teaching
is brought to many persons, who in this find a substitute for church
attendance where that is not possible. Through the same channel, as well as
by correspondence, these workers help young mothers in the right training
of their children. Libraries have been started in communities destitute of
books, and struggling libraries have been aided with gifts. Forty
travelling libraries are kept in circulation.

Although much had been done to circulate Unitarian tracts and the other
publications of the American Unitarian Association, by means of
colporteurs, by the aid of the post-office, as well as by direct gift of
friend to friend, it remained for Miss Sallie Ellis, of Cincinnati, in
1881, to systematize this kind of missionary effort, and to make it one of
the most valuable of all agents for the dissemination of liberal religious
ideas. Miss Ellis was aided by the Cincinnati branch of the Women's
Auxiliary, but she was from the first the heart and soul of this mission.
"If there had been no Miss Ellis," says one who knew her work intimately,
"there would have been no Post-office Mission. Many helped about it in
various ways, but she was the mission."

Miss Ellis was a frail little woman, hopelessly deaf and suffering from an
incurable disease. Notwithstanding her physical limitations, she longed to
be of service to the faith she cherished; and the missionary spirit burned
strong within her. "I want," she said often, "to do something for
Unitarianism before I die"; but the usual avenues of opportunity seemed
firmly closed to her. At last, in the winter of 1877-78, Rev. Charles W.
Wendte, then her pastor, anxious to find something for her to do, proposed
that she should send the Association's tracts and copies of the Pamphlet
Mission to persons in the west who were interested in the liberal faith.
She took up this work gladly, and during that winter distributed 1,846
tracts and 211 copies of the Pamphlet Mission in twenty-six States.

A tract table in the vestibule of the church was started by Miss Ellis; and
she not only distributed sermons freely in this way, but she also sold
Unitarian books. It was in 1881 that she was made the secretary of the
newly organized Women's Auxiliary in Cincinnati, and that her work really
began systematically. At the suggestion of Mrs. Mary P. Wells Smith,
advertisements were inserted in the daily papers, and offers made to send
Unitarian publications, when requested. Many doubted the advisability of
such an enterprise, but the letters received soon indicated that an
important method of mission work had been discovered. Rev. William C.
Gannett christened this work the Post-office Mission, and that name it has
since retained.

Only four and one-half years were permitted to Miss Ellis in which to
accomplish her work,--a work dear to her heart, and one for which her many
losses and sufferings had prepared her. During this period she wrote 2,500
letters, sent out 22,000 tracts and papers, sold 286 books, and loaned 258.
The real value of such work cannot be rightly estimated in figures. Through
her influence, several young men entered the ministry who are to-day doing
effective work. She saved several persons from doubt and despair, gave
strength to the weak, and comfort to those who mourned. At her death, in
1885, the letters received from many of her correspondents showed how
strong and deep had been her influence.[3]

The movement initiated by Miss Ellis grew rapidly, and has become one of
the most valuable of all agents for the dissemination of liberal religious
ideas. In the year 1900 the number of correspondents was about 5,000, and
the number of tracts, sermons, periodicals, and books distributed was about
200,000. The extent of this mission is also seen in the fact that in that
year about 8,000 letters were written by the workers, and about 6,000 were
received.

By means of the Post-office Mission the literature of the denomination, the
tracts of the Unitarian Association, copies of The Christian Register, and
other periodicals have been scattered all over the world. Thousands of
sermons are distributed also from tables in church vestibules. Several
branches publish and exchange sermons, and a loan library has been
established to supplement this work.[4]

From the distribution of tracts and sermons has grown the formation of
"Sunday Circles" and "Groups" of Unitarians, carefully planned circuit
preaching, the employment of missionaries, and the building of chapels or
small churches. Two of these are already built; and the Alliance has
insured the support of their ministers for five years, and two others are
in the process of erection.

[Sidenote: Associate Alliances.]

The women on the Pacific coast have been compelled in a large measure to
organize their own work and to adopt their own methods, the distance being
too great for immediate co-operation with the other organizations. In this
work they have not only displayed energy and perseverance, but, says one
who knows intimately of their efforts, "they have shown executive ability
and power as organizers that have furnished an example to many
non-sectarian organizations of women, and have made the Unitarian women
conspicuous in all charitable and social activities."

The oldest society of Unitarian women on the Pacific coast was connected
with the First Church in San Francisco. In 1873 it was reorganized as the
Society for Christian Work. Its work has been mainly social and
philanthropic, contributing reading matter to penal institutions, money for
the care of the poor of the city, and aiding every new Unitarian church in
the State. The Channing Auxiliary combines the activities of the churches
in the vicinity of San Francisco with those in the city. Its objects are
"moral and religious culture, practical literary work, and co-operation
with the denominational and missionary agencies of the Unitarian faith."
From 1890 to 1899 this society spent over $6,000 in aid of denominational
enterprises, and it appropriates annually a large sum for Post-office
Mission work. While these two organizations represent San Francisco and its
neighborhood, the women up and down the coast have also been earnest
workers. In 1890 they felt the need of a closer bond of union, and
organized the Women's Unitarian Conference of the Pacific Coast. In 1894
this conference became a branch of the National Alliance, and has
co-operated cordially with it since that time.

The New York League of Unitarian Women has been active in forming Alliance
branches and new churches, as well as in affording aid to Meadville
students. The Chicago Associate Alliance, the Southern Associate Alliance,
and the Connecticut Valley Associate Alliance were organized in 1890. The
Worcester League of Unitarian Women began its existence in 1889, and was
reorganized in connection with the National Alliance in 1892.

[Sidenote: Alliance Methods.]

In thus coming into closer relations with each other and forming a national
organization, each local branch continues free in its own action, chooses
its own methods of carrying on its work, but keeps close knowledge of what
the Alliance as a whole is doing, that all interference with others and
overlapping of assistance may be avoided, and the greatest mutual benefit
may be secured. This method gives the utmost independence to the branches,
while preserving the element of personal interest in all financial
disbursements, and creates a strong bond of sympathy between those who give
and those who receive.

The first duty of each branch is to strengthen the church to which its
members belong; and the value of such an organized group of women, meeting
to exchange ideas and experiences on the most vital topics of human
interest, has been everywhere recognized. Each branch is expected to engage
in some form of religious study, not only for the improvement of the
members themselves, but to enable them to gain, and to give others, a
comprehensive knowledge of Unitarian beliefs. A study class committee
provides programmes for the use of the branches, arranges for the lending
and exchange of papers, and assists those who do not have access to books
of reference or are remote from the centres of Unitarian thought and
activity.

With this preparation the Alliance undertakes the higher service of joining
in the missionary activities of the denomination, supplementing as far as
possible the work of the American Unitarian Association. This includes
sending missionaries into new fields, aiding small and struggling churches,
helping to found new ones, supporting ministers at important points, and
and distributing religious literature among those who need light on
religious problems.

[1] Memorial History of Boston, IV. 353.

[2] See later chapters for account of admission of women to National
    Conference, Unitarian Association, the ministry, Boston school board,
    and various other lines of activity.

[3] Mary P.W. Smith, Miss Ellis's Mission.

[4] This library is in the Unitarian Building, 25 Beacon Street, Boston.




XIII.


MISSIONS TO INDIA AND JAPAN.

Foreign missions have never commanded a general interest on the part of
Unitarians. Their dislike of the proselyting spirit, their intense love of
liberty for others as well as for themselves, and the absence of sectarian
feeling have combined to make them, as a body, indifferent to the
propagation of their faith in other countries. They have done something,
however, to express their sympathy with those of kindred faith in foreign
lands.

In 1829 the younger Henry Ware visited England and Ireland as the foreign
secretary of the Unitarian Association; and at the annual meeting of 1831
he reported the results of his inquiries.[1] This was the beginning of
many interchanges of good fellowship with the Unitarians of Great Britain,
and also with those of Hungary, Transylvania, France, Germany, and other
European countries. During the first decade or two of the existence of the
Unitarian Association much interest was taken in the liberal movements in
Geneva; and the third annual report gave account of what was being done in
that city and in Calcutta, as well as in Transylvania and Great Britain.
Some years later, aid was promised to the Unitarians of Hungary in a time
of persecution; but they were dispossessed of their schools before help
reached them. In 1868 the Association founded Channing and Priestley
professorships in the theological school at Kolozsvár, and Mrs. Anna
Richmond furnished money for a permanent professorship in the same
institution. Soon after the renewed activity of 1865 an unsuccessful
attempt was made to establish an American Unitarian church in Paris; and
aid was given to the founding of an English liberal church in that city.
These are indications of the many interchanges of fellowship and
helpfulness between the Unitarians of this country and those of Europe.

[Sidenote: Society respecting the State of Religion in India.]

As early as 1824 began a movement to aid the native Unitarians of India,
partly the result of a lively interest in Rammohun Roy and the
republication in this country of his writings. On June 7, 1822, The
Christian Register gave an account of the adoption of Unitarianism by that
remarkable Hindoo leader; and it often recurred to the subject in later
years. In February of the next year it described the formation of a
Unitarian society in Calcutta, and the conversion to Unitarianism of a
Baptist missionary, Rev. William Adam, as a result of his attempt to
convert Rammohun Roy. There followed frequent reports of this movement, and
after a few months a letter from Mr. Adam was published. Even before this
there had appeared accounts of William Roberts, of Madras, a native Tamil,
who had been educated in England, and had there become a Unitarian. On his
return to his own country he had established small congregations in the
suburbs of Madras.

In 1823 a letter from Rev. William Adam was received in Boston, addressed
to Dr. Channing. It was put into the hands of the younger Henry Ware, who
wrote to Mr. Adam and Rammohun Roy, propounding to them a number of
questions in regard to the religious situation in India. In 1824 were
published in a volume the letter of Ware and the series of questions sent
by him to India, together with the replies of Rammohun Roy and William
Adam.[2] This book was one of much interest, and furnished the first
systematic account that had been given to the public of the reformatory
religious interest awakened at that time in India. In February, 1825, was
organized the Society for obtaining Information respecting the State of
Religion in India, "with a view to obtain and diffuse information and to
devise and recommend means for the promotion of Christianity in that part
of the world." The younger Henry Ware was made the president, and Dr.
Tuckerman the secretary. Already a fund had been collected to aid the
British Indian Unitarian Association of Calcutta in its missionary efforts,
especially in building a church and maintaining a minister.

During the year 1825 there was published at the office of The Christian
Register a pamphlet of sixty-three pages, written by a member of the
Information Society, being An Appeal to Liberal Christians for the Cause of
Christianity in India. In 1826 Dr. Tuckerman addressed A Letter on the
Principles of the Missionary Enterprise to the executive committee of the
Unitarian Association, in which he gave a noble exposition of the work of
foreign missions, especially with reference to the Indian field. This
letter and other writings of Tuckerman served to arouse much interest. The
Appeal urged what many Unitarians had large faith in,--the promulgation of
"just and rational views of our religion" "upon enlarged and liberal
principles, from which we may hope for the speedy establishment and the
wider extension there of the uncorrupted truth as it is in Jesus."

In 1826 the sum of $7,000 was secured for this work; and in the spring of
1827 a pledge was made to send yearly to Calcutta the sum of $600 for ten
years. These pledges were in connection with like efforts made by the
British and Foreign Unitarian Association. In 1839 Mr. Adam visited the
United States, and spoke at the annual meeting of the Unitarian
Association. Following this, he was for a few years professor of Oriental
literature in Harvard University.

[Sidenote: Dall's Work in India.]

In 1853 Rev. Charles T. Brooks, who was for many years the minister of the
church in Newport, visited India in search of health; and he was
commissioned by the Unitarian Association to make inquiries as to the
prospects for missionary labors in that country. In Madras he met William
Roberts, the younger son of the former Unitarian preacher there and visited
the several missions carried on by him. In Calcutta he found Unitarians,
but the work of Mr. Adam had left almost no results. The report of Mr.
Brooks was such that an effort was at once made to secure a missionary for
India.[3] In 1855 Rev. Charles H.A. Dall undertook this mission. He had
been a minister at large in St. Louis, Baltimore, and Portsmouth, and
settled over parishes in Needham and Toronto. Mr. Ball was given the widest
liberty of action in conducting his mission, as his instructions indicate:
"There you are to enter upon the work of a missionary; and whether by
preaching, in English or through an interpreter, or by school-teaching or
by writing for the press, or by visiting from house to house, or by
translating tracts, or by circulation of books, you are instructed, what we
know your heart will prompt you to do, to give yourself to a life of
usefulness as a servant of the Lord Jesus Christ."

On his arrival at Calcutta, Mr. Ball was in a prostrate condition, and had
to be carried ashore. After a time he rallied and began his work. He
gathered a small congregation about him, then began teaching; and his work
grew until he had four large and flourishing schools under his charge. In
these he gave special attention, to moral and religious training, and to
the industrial arts. In his school work he had the efficient aid of Miss
Chamberlain, and after her death of Mrs. Helen Tompkins. One of the native
teachers, Dwarkanath Singha, was of great service in securing the interest
of the natives, being at the head, for many years, of all the schools under
Mr. Dall's control. Mr. Dall founded the Calcutta School of Industrial Art,
the Useful Arts' School, Hindoo Girls' School, as well as a school for the
waifs of the streets. In these schools were 8,000 pupils, mostly Hindoos,
who were taught a practical religion,--the simple principles of the gospel.
In education Mr. Dall accomplished large results, not only by his schools,
but by talking and lecturing on the subject. His influence was especially
felt in the education of girls and in industrial training, in both of which
directions he was a pioneer. Only one of his schools is now in existence,
simply because the government took up the work he began, and gave it a
larger support than was possible on the part of any individual or any
society.

Mr. Dall wrote extensively for the leading journals of India, and in that
way he reached a larger number of persons throughout the country. This
brought him a large correspondence, and he frequently journeyed far to
visit individuals and congregations thus brought to his knowledge. For many
years he was one of the leading men of Calcutta. Few great public meetings
of any reformatory or educational kind were held without his having a
prominent part in them. He published great numbers of tracts and
lectures,[4] and translated the works of the leading Unitarians of
America and Great Britain into Hindostanee, Bengali, Tamil, Sanscrit, and
other native languages. His zeal in circulating liberal writings was great,
and met with a large reward. He distributed hundreds of copies of the
complete Works of Dr. Channing, and these brought many persons to the
acceptance of Unitarianism. When Rev. Jabez T. Sunderland was in India, in
1895-96, he found many traces of these volumes, even in remote parts of the
country. When he was in Madras, a very intelligent Hindoo walked one
hundred and fifty miles to procure of him a copy of Channing's biography to
replace a copy received from Mr. Dall, which, had been reread and loaned
until it was almost worn out.

A considerable part of Mr. Ball's influence was in connection with the
Brahmo-Somaj, in directing its religious, educational, and reformatory
work. He did not make many nominal Unitarians; but he had a very large
influence in shaping the life of India by his personal influence and by the
weight of his religious character. Everywhere he was greatly beloved. He
earned considerable sums as a reporter and author in aid of his mission,
and he lived in a most abstemious manner in order to devote as much money
as possible to his work.[5] In this devoted service he continued until
his death, which took place July 18, 1886.

[Sidenote: Recent Work in India.]

Since the death of Mr. Dall the aid given to India by American Unitarians
has been through the natives themselves. The work of Pundita, Ramabai has
received considerable assistance, as has also that of Mozoomdar. Early in
the year 1888, Rev. Brooke Herford, then minister of the Arlington Street
Church in Boston, received from India a letter addressed "To the chief
pastor of the Unitarian congregation at Boston." It proved to be from a
young lawyer or pleader in Banda, North-west Provinces, named Akbar Masih.
His father was an educated Mohammedan, who in early life had been converted
to Calvinistic Christianity, and had become a missionary. At the Calcutta
University the son had outgrown the faith he had been taught; and a volume
of Channing's Works, put in circulation by Mr. Dall, had given him the
mental and spiritual teaching he desired. Tracts and books were sent him,
and a correspondence followed. He read with great delight what he received,
and in a year or two he desired to become a missionary. Mr. Herford sent
him money, and he was employed to spend one-third of his time in the
missionary service of Unitarianism. When Mr. Herford removed to London, the
support of Akbar Masih was arranged for in England; and he has done a large
work in preaching, lecturing, holding conferences, and publishing tracts
and books.

Nearly in the same week in which Mr. Herford received his first letter from
Akbar Masih, Mr. Sunderland, in Ann Arbor, received one from Hajam Kissor
Singh, Jowai, Khasi Hills, Assam. He was a young man employed by the
government as a surveyor, was well educated, but belonged to one of the
primitive tribes that retain their aboriginal religion and customs to a
large extent. He had been taught orthodox Christianity, however; but it was
not satisfactory to him. A Brahmo friend loaned him a copy of Channing, and
furnished him with Mr. Dall's address. In the bundle of tracts sent him by
Mr. Dall was a copy of The Unitarian, which led him to write to its editor,
Mr. Sunderland. A correspondence followed, and the sending of many tracts
and books. Mr. Singh began to talk of his new views to others, who gathered
in his room on Sunday afternoons for religious inquiry and worship. Soon
there was a call for similar meetings in another village, and Mr. Singh
began to serve as a lay-preacher. A church was organized in Jowai, and then
a day school was opened. Tracts and books being necessary in order to carry
on the work successfully, Mr. Sunderland raised the necessary money,
printed them in Khasi at Ann Arbor, and forwarded them to Assam, thus
greatly facilitating the labors of Mr. Singh and his assistants. Also,
through the help of American Unitarians, Mr. Singh was able to secure the
aid of two paid helpers. When Mr. Sunderland visited the Khasi Hills, in
1895, as the agent of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association, he
helped to ordain a regular pastor; and he found church buildings in five
villages, day-schools in four, and religious circles meeting in eight or
nine others. This mission is now being supported by the English Unitarians.

[Sidenote: The Beginnings in Japan.]

After the death of Mr. Dall it was not found desirable to continue his
educational work, and the missionary activities in India naturally came
under the jurisdiction of the British Unitarian Association. At the same
time, Japan offered an inviting field for missionary effort, and one not
hitherto occupied by Unitarians. In 1884 a movement began in that country,
looking to the introduction of a rational Christianity, the leader being
Yukichi Fukuzawa, a prominent statesman, head of the Keiogijiku University
and editor of the leading newspaper. In 1886 Fumio Yano, after a visit to
England, took up the same mission, and urged the adoption of Christianity
as a moral force in the life of the nation. The latter interpreted
Unitarianism as being the form of Christianity needed in Japan, and
strongly urged its acceptance. Other prominent men joined with these two in
commending a rational Christianity to their countrymen. Not long afterwards
the American Unitarian Association was asked to establish a mission in that
country. In 1887 Rev. Arthur M. Knapp was sent to Japan to investigate the
situation, and in the spring of 1889 he returned to report the results of
his inquiries. He had; been welcomed; by the leading men, such as the
Marquis Tokujawa and Kentaro Kaneko, who opened to him many avenues of
influence. He had written for the most important newspapers, had come into
personal contact with the leading men of all parties, had lectured; on many
occasions to highly educated audiences, and had opened a wide-reaching
correspondence.

On his return to Japan, in 1889, Mr. Knapp was prepared to begin systematic
work in behalf of rational Christianity. It was not his purpose, however,
to seek to establish Unitarianism there as the basis of a new Japanese
sect, but to diffuse it as a leaven for the moral and spiritual elevation
of the people of Japan. "The errand of Unitarianism in Japan," said Mr.
Knapp to the Japanese, "is based upon the familiar idea of the sympathy of
religions. With the conviction that we are the messengers of distinctive
and valuable truths which have not yet been emphasized, and that, in
return, there is much in your faith and life which to our harm we have not
emphasized, receive us not as theological propagandists, but as messengers
of the new gospel of human brotherhood in the religion of man."

With Mr. Knapp were associated Rev. Clay MacCauley as colleague, and also
Garrett Droppers, John H. Wigmore, and William Shields Liscomb, who were to
become, professors in the Keiogijiku, a leading university, situated in
Tokio, and to give such aid as they could to the Unitarian mission. With
these men was soon associated Rev. H.W. Hawkes, a young English minister,
who gave his services to this important work. There also accompanied the
American party Mr. Saichiro Kanda, who had become a Unitarian while
residing in San Francisco, and had attended the Meadville Theological
School. In the winter of 1890-91, Mr. Knapp returned to the United States,
and a little later Mr. Hawkes went back to England. In 1891 Rev. William I.
Lawrance joined the mission force; and he continued with it until 1894,
when a severe illness compelled his resignation. Professor Wigmore returned
to America in 1892 to accept a chair in the North-western University;
Professor Liscomb came home in 1893, dying soon after his return; while
Professor Droppers remained until the winter of 1898, when he became the
president of the University of South Dakota. In the beginning of 1900, Mr.
MacCauley, after having had direction of the mission for nine years,
returned to America; and it was left in control of the Japanese Unitarian
Association, the American Association continuing to give it generous
financial aid and counsel.

As already indicated, the purpose of the mission has not been Unitarian
propagandism as such. It has been that of religious enlightenment, the
bringing to the Japanese, in a catholic and humanitarian spirit, of the
body of religious truths and convictions known as Unitarianism, and then
permitting them to organize themselves after the manner of their own
national life. No churches were organized by the representatives of the
American Unitarian Association. Those that have come into existence have
been wholly at the initiative of the natives. Early in 1894 was erected, in
Tokio, Yuiitsukwan, or Unity Hall, with money furnished largely from the
United States. This building serves as the headquarters for Unitarian work,
including lectures and social and religious meetings. In 1896 was organized
the Japanese Unitarian Association for the work of diffusing Unitarian
principles throughout the country. The mission is organized into the three
departments of church extension, publication, and education. Of this
Association, Jitsunen Saji, formerly a prominent Buddhist lecturer and a
member at present of the city council of Tokyo, is the superintendent. The
secretary has been Saichiro Kanda, who has faithfully given his time to
this work since he returned to Japan with the mission party, in 1889. The
broad purposes of the Japanese Unitarian Association have been clearly
defined in its constitution: "We desire to act in accordance with God's
will, which we perceive by our inborn reason. We strive to follow the
guidance of noble religion, exact science and philosophy, and to discover
their truth. We believe it to be a natural law of the human mind to
investigate freely all phenomena of the universe. We aim to maintain the
peace of the world, and to promote the happiness of mankind. We endeavor to
assert our rights, and to fulfil our duties as Japanese citizens; and to
increase the prosperity of the country by all honorable means."

Early in 1891 was begun the publication in Japanese of a magazine called at
first The Unitarian, but afterwards Religion. The paid circulation was
about 1,000 copies, but it was largely used as a tract for free
distribution. In 1897 this magazine was merged into a popular religious
monthly called Rikugo-Zasshi or Cosmos, which has a large circulation. It
is published at the headquarters of the Japanese Unitarian Association, and
is the organ of the liberalizing work carried on by that institution. The
Association has translated thirty or forty American and English
tracts,--some have been added by native writers; and these were distributed
to the number of 100,000 in 1900. A number of important liberal books,
including Bixby's Crisis in Morals, Clarke's Steps in Belief, and Fiske's
Idea of God, have been translated into Japanese, and obtain a ready sale.
An extensive work of education, is carried on through the press, nearly all
the leading journals having been freely open to the Unitarians since the
beginning of the mission.

The direct work of education has been the most important of all the phases
of the mission's activities. A library of several thousand volumes,
representing all phases of modern thought, has been collected in Unity
Hall; and it is of great value to the teaching carried on there. Lectures
are given every Sunday in Unity Hall, and listened to by large audiences.
Much has been done in various parts of Tokyo, as well as elsewhere, to
reach the student class, and educated persons in all classes of society;
and many persons have thus been brought to an acceptance of Unitarianism.
In 1890 were begun systematic courses of lectures, with a view to giving
educated Japanese inquirers a thorough knowledge of modern religious ideas;
and these grew into the Senshin Gakuin, or School of Advanced Learning, a
theological school with seven professors, and an annual attendance of
thirty or forty students, nearly all of whom have been graduates of
colleges and universities. Unhappily, the failure of financial support
compelled the abandonment of this school in 1898. The chief educational
work, however, has been done in the colleges and universities, through the
general diffusion of liberal religious principles, and by the free spirit
of inquiry characteristic of all educated Japanese.

The success of the Japanese mission is chiefly due to Rev. Clay MacCauley,
who gave it the wise direction and the organizing skill necessary to its
permanent growth. It is a noble monument to his devotion, and to his
untiring efforts for its advancement. His little book on Christianity in
History is very popular, both in its English and Japanese versions; and
thousands of copies are annually distributed.

The results of the Japanese mission are especially evident in a general
liberalizing of religious thought throughout the country in both the
Buddhist and Christian communions, and in the wide-spread approval shown
towards its methods and principles among the upper and student classes. Its
chief gain, however, consists of the scholarly and influential men who have
accepted the Unitarian faith, and given it their zealous support. Among
these men are the late Hajime Onishi, president of the College of
Literature in the new Imperial University at Kyoto; Nobuta Kishimoto,
professor of ethics in the Imperial Normal School; Tomoyoshi Murai,
professor of English in the Foreign Languages School of Japan; Iso Abe,
professor in the Doshisha University; Kinza Hirai, professor in the
Imperial Normal School; Yoshiwo Ogasawara, who is leading an extensive work
of social and moral reform in Wakayama; Saburo Shimada, proprietor of the
Mainichi, one of the largest daily newspapers of the empire; and Zennosuki
Toyosaki, professor in the Kokumin Eigakukwai, and associate editor of the
Rikugo Zasshi.[6] These men are educating the Japanese people to know
Christianity in its rational forms; and their influence is being rapidly
extended throughout the country. In their hands the future of liberal
religion in Japan is safe; and what they do for their own people is more
certain of permanent results than anything that can be accomplished by
foreigners. The real significance of the Japanese Unitarian mission is that
it has inaugurated a new era in religious propagandism; that it has been
for the followers of the religions traditional to Japan, as well as for
those of the Christian missions, eminently a means for presenting them with
the world's most advanced thought in religion, and that it has been a
stimulus to a purer faith and a larger fellowship.

[1] First Report of the Executive Committee of the American Unitarian
    Association, 16. "The thoughts of the committee have been turned to
    their brethren in other lands. A correspondence has been opened with
    Unitarians in England, and the coincidence is worthy of notice, that
    the British and Foreign Unitarian Association, and the American
    Unitarian Association were organized on the same day, for the same
    objects, and without the least previous concert. Our good wishes have
    been reciprocated by the directors of the British Society. Letters
    received from gentlemen who have recently visited England speak of
    the interest which our brethren in that country feel for us, and of
    their desire to strengthen the bonds of union. A constant
    communication will be preserved between the two Associations and your
    committee believe it will have a beneficial effect, by making us
    better acquainted with one another, by introducing the publications
    of each country into the other, by the influence which we shall
    mutually exert, and by the strength which will be given to our
    separate, or it may be, to our united efforts for the spread of the
    glorious gospel of our Lord and Saviour."

[2] Correspondence relative to the Prospects of Christianity and the
    Means of Promoting its Reception in India. Cambridge: Billiard &
    Metcalfe. 1824. 138 pp.

[3] Christian Examiner, LXIII 36, India's Appeal to Christian Unitarians,
    by Rev. C.T. Brooks.

[4] Some Gospel Principles, in Ten Lectures, by C.H.A. Dall, Calcutta,
    1856. Also see The Mission to India instituted by the American
    Unitarian Association. Boston: Office of the Quarterly Journal.
    1857.

[5] See Out Indian Mission and Our First Missionary, by Rev. John H.
    Heywood, Boston, 1887.

[6] The Unitarian Movement in Japan: Sketches of the Lives and Religious
    Work of Ten Representative Japanese. Tokyo, 1900.




XIV.


THE MEADVILLE THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL.

In a few years after the movement began for the organization of churches
west of the Hudson River, the needs of theological instruction for
residents of that region were being discussed. In 1827 the younger Henry
Ware was interested in a plan of uniting Unitarians and "the Christian
connection" in the establishment of a theological school, to be located in
the eastern part of the state of New York. In July of that year he wrote to
a friend: "We have had; no little talk here within a few days respecting a
new theological school. Many of us think favorably of the plan, and are
disposed to patronize it, if feasible, but are a little fearful that it is
not. Others start strong objections to it _in toto_. Something must be done
to gain us an increase of ministers."[1] This proposition came from the
Christians, and their plan was to locate the school on the Hudson.

Although this project came to nothing for the time being, it was revived a
decade later. When the Unitarian Association had entered upon its active
missionary efforts west of the Alleghanies, the new impulse to
denominational life manifested itself in a wide-spread desire for an
increase in the number of workers available for the western field. The
establishment of a liberal theological school in that region was felt to be
almost a necessity, if the opportunities everywhere opening there for the
dissemination of a purer faith were not to be neglected. Plans were
therefore formed about 1836 for the founding of a theological school at
Buffalo under the direction of Rev. George W. Hosmer, then the minister in
that city; but, business becoming greatly depressed the following year, the
project was abandoned. In 1840 the importance of such a school was again
causing the western workers to plan for its establishment, this time in
Cincinnati or Louisville; but this expectation also failed of realization.
Then Rev. William G. Eliot, of St. Louis, undertook to provide a
theological education for such young men as might apply to him. But the
response to his offer was so slight as to indicate that there was little
demand for such instruction.

[Sidenote: The Beginnings in Meadville.]

The demand for a school had steadily grown since the year 1827, and the fit
occasion only was awaited for its establishment. It was found at Meadville,
Penn., in the autumn of 1844. In order to understand why it should have
been founded in this country village instead of one of the growing and
prosperous cities of the west, it is necessary to give a brief account of
the origin and growth of the Meadville church. The first Unitarian church
organized west of the Alleghanies was that in Meadville, and it had its
origin in the religious experiences of one man. The founder of this church,
Harm Jan Huidekoper, was born in the district of Drenthe, Holland, at the
village of Hogeveen, in 1776. At the age of twenty he came to the United
States; and in 1804 he became the agent of the Holland Land Company in the
north-western counties of Pennsylvania, and established himself at
Meadville, then a small village. He was successful in his land operations,
and was largely influential in the development of that part of the state.
When his children were of an age to need religious instruction, he began to
study the Bible with a view to deciding what he could conscientiously teach
them. He had become a member of the Reformed Church in his native land, and
he had attended the Presbyterian church in Meadville; but he now desired to
form convictions based on his own inquiries. "When I had become a father,"
he wrote, "and saw the time approaching when I should have to give
religious instruction to my children, I felt it to be my duty to give this
subject a thorough examination. I accordingly commenced studying the
Scriptures, as being the only safe rule of the Christian's faith; and the
result was, that I soon acquired clear, and definite views as to the
leading doctrines of the Christian religion. But the good I derived from
these studies has not been confined to giving me clear ideas as to the
Christian doctrines. They created in me a strong and constantly increasing
interest in religion itself, not as mere theory, but as a practical rule of
life."[2] As the result of this study, he arrived at the conclusion that
the Bible does not teach the doctrines of the Trinity, the total depravity
of man, and the vicarious atonement of Christ. Solely from the careful
reading of the Bible with reference to each of the leading doctrines he had
been taught, he became a Unitarian.

With the zeal of a new convert Mr. Huidekoper began to talk about his new
faith, and he brought it to the attention of others with the enthusiasm of
a propagandist. In conversation, by means of the distribution of tracts,
and with the aid of the press he extended the liberal faith. He could not
send his children to the church he had attended, and he therefore secured
tutors for them from Harvard College who were preparing for the ministry;
and in October, 1825, one of these tutors began holding Unitarian services
in Meadville.[3] In May, 1829, a church was organized, and a goodly
number of thoughtful men and women connected themselves with it. But this
movement met with persistent opposition, and a vigorous controversy was
carried on in the local papers and by means of pamphlets. This was
increased when, in 1830, Ephraim Peabody, afterwards settled in Cincinnati,
New Bedford, and at King's Chapel in Boston, became the minister, and
entered upon an active effort for the extension of Unitarianism. With the
first of January, 1831, he began the publication of the Unitarian Essayist,
a small monthly pamphlet, in which the leading theological questions were
discussed. In a few months Mr. Peabody went to Cincinnati; and the Essayist
was continued by Mr. Huidekoper, who wrote with vigor and directness on the
subjects he had carefully studied.

In 1831 the church for the first time secured an ordained minister, and
three years later one who gave his whole time to its service.[4] A church
building was erected in 1836, and the prosperity of the congregation was
thereby much increased. In 1843 a minister of the Christian connection,
Rev. E.G. Holland, became the pastor for a brief period. At this time
Frederic Huidekoper, a son of the founder of the Unitarian church in
Meadville, had returned from his studies in the Harvard Divinity School and
in Europe, and was ordained in Meadville, October 12, 1843. It was his
purpose to become a Unitarian evangelist in the region about Meadville, but
his attention was soon directed by Rev. George W. Hosmer to the importance
of furnishing theological instruction to young men preparing for the
Unitarian ministry. He was encouraged in this undertaking by Mr. Holland,
who pointed out to him the large patronage that might be expected from the
Christian body. It was at first intended that Mr. Huidekoper should give
the principal instruction, and that he should be assisted by the pastor of
the Independent Congregational Church (Unitarian) and by Mr. Hosmer, who
was to come from Buffalo for a few weeks each year, exchanging pulpits with
the Meadville minister. When the opening of the school was fixed for the
autumn of 1844, the prospective number of applicants was so large as to
necessitate a modification of the proposed plan; and it was deemed wise to
secure a competent person to preside over the school and to become the
minister of the church. Through the active co-operation of the American
Unitarian Association, Rev. Rufus P. Stebbins, then settled at Leominster,
Mass., was secured for this double service.

The students present at the opening of the school on the first day of
October, 1844, were but five; but this number was increased to nine during
the year. The next year the number was twenty-three, nine of them from New
England. For several years the Christian connection furnished a
considerable proportion of the students, and took a lively interest in the
establishment and growth of the school, although contributing little or
nothing to its pecuniary support. It was also represented on the board of
instruction by a non-resident lecturer. At this time the Christian body had
no theological school of its own, and many of its members even looked with
disfavor upon all ministerial education. What brought them into some degree
of sympathy with Unitarians of that day was their rejection of binding
creeds and their acceptance of Christian character as the only test of
Christian fellowship, together with their recognition of the Bible,
interpreted by every man for himself, as the authoritative standard of
religious truth. The churches of this denomination in the northern states
were also pronounced in their rejection of the doctrines of the Trinity and
predestination. Unitarians themselves have not been more strenuous in the
defence of the principle of religious liberty than were the leaders among
the Christians of the last generation. The two bodies also joined in the
management of Antioch College, in southern Ohio; and when Horace Mann
became its president in 1852, he was made a minister of the Christian
connection, in order that he might work more effectually in the promotion
of its interests.

The Meadville school began its work in a simple way, with few instructors
and a limited course of study. Mr. Stebbins taught the Old Testament,
Hebrew, Biblical antiquities, natural and revealed religion, mental and
moral philosophy, systematic theology, and pulpit eloquence. Mr. Huidekoper
gave instruction in the New Testament, hermeneutics, ecclesiastical
history, Latin, Greek, and German. Mr. Hosmer lectured on pastoral care for
a brief period during each year. A building for the school was provided by
the generosity of the elder Huidekoper; and the expenses of board,
instruction, rent, fuel, etc., were reduced to $30 per annum. Many of the
students had received little education, and they needed a preliminary
training in the most primary studies. Nevertheless, the school at once
justified its establishment, and sent out many capable men, even from among
those who came to it with the least preparation.

Dr. Stebbins was president of the school for ten years. During his term of
service the school was incorporated by the legislature of Pennsylvania in
the spring of 1846. The charter was carefully drawn with a view to securing
freedom in its administration. No denominational name appeared in the act
of incorporation, and the original board of trustees included Christians as
well as Unitarians. Dr. Stebbins was an admirable man to whom to intrust
the organization of the school, for he was a born teacher and a masterful
administrator. He was prompt, decisive, a great worker, a powerful
preacher, an inspirer of others, and his students warmly admired and
praised him.

[Sidenote: The Growth of the School.]

The next president of the school was Oliver Stearns, who held the office
from 1856 to 1863. He was a student, a true and just thinker, of great
moral earnestness, fine discrimination, and with a gift for academic
organization. He was a man of a strong and deep personality, and his
spiritual influence was profound. He had been settled at Northampton and
over the third parish in Hingham before entering upon his work at
Meadville. In 1863 he went to the Harvard Divinity School as the professor
of pulpit eloquence and pastoral care until 1869, when he became the
professor of theology; and from 1870 to 1878 he was the dean of the school.
He was a preacher who "held and deserved a reputation among the foremost,"
for his preaching was "pre-eminently spiritual." "In his relations to the
divinity schools that enjoyed his services, it is impossible to
over-estimate the extent, accuracy, and thoroughness of his scholarship,
and his unwearying devotion to his work."[5]

During Dr. Stearns' administration the small building originally occupied
by the school was outgrown; and Divinity Hall was built on land east of the
town, donated by Professor Frederic Huidekoper, and first occupied in 1861.
In 1857 began a movement to elevate, the standard of admission to the
school, in order that its work might be of a more advanced character. To
meet the needs of those not able to accept this higher standard, a
preparatory department was established in 1858, which was continued until
1867.

Rev. Abiel A. Livermore became the president of the school in 1863, and he
remained in that position until 1890. He had been settled in Keene,
Cincinnati, and Yonkers before going to Meadville. He was a Christian of
the finest type, a true gentleman, and a noble friend. Under his direction
the school grew in all directions, the course of study being largely
enriched by the addition of new departments. In 1863 church polity and
administration, including a study of the sects of Christendom, was made a
special department. In 1868 the school opened its doors to women, and it
has received about thirty women for a longer or shorter term of study. In
1872 the academic degree of Bachelor of Divinity was offered for the first
time to those completing the full course. In 1879 the philosophy of
religion, and also the comparative study of religions, received the
recognition they deserve. The same year ecclesiastical jurisprudence became
a special department. In 1882 Rev. E.E. Hale lectured on charities, and
from that time this subject has been systematically treated in connection
with philanthropies. A movement was begun in 1889 to endow a professorship
in memory of Dr. James Freeman Clarke, which was successful. These
successive steps indicate the progress made under the faithful
administration of Dr. Livermore. He became widely known to Unitarians by
his commentaries on the books of the New Testament, as well as by his other
writings, including volumes of sermons and lectures.

In 1890 George L. Cary, who had been for many years the professor of New
Testament literature, became the president of the school, a position he
held for ten years. Under his leadership the school has largely advanced
its standard of scholarship, outgrown studies have been discarded, while
new ones have been added. New professorships and lectureships have been
established, and the endowment of the school has been greatly increased.
Huidekoper Hall, for the use of the library, was erected in 1890, and other
important improvements have been added to the equipment of the school. In
1892 the Adin Ballou lectureship of practical Christian sociology was
established, and in 1895 the Hackley professorship of sociology and ethics.

From the time of its establishment the Huidekoper family have been devoted
friends and benefactors of the Theological School.[6] Frederic Huidekoper
occupied the chair of New Testament literature from 1844 to 1855, and from
1863 to 1877 that of ecclesiastical history. His services were given wholly
without remuneration, and his benefactions to the school were numerous. He
also added largely to the Brookes Fund for the distribution of Unitarian
books. His historical writings made him widely known to scholars, and added
to the reputation of the school. His Belief of the First Three Centuries
concerning Christ's Mission to the Underworld appeared in 1853; Judaism at
Rome, 1876; and Indirect Testimony of History to the Genuineness of the
Gospels, 1879. He also republished at his own expense many valuable works
that were out of print.

Among the other professors have been Rev. Nathanial S. Folsom, who was in
charge of the department of Biblical literature from 1848 to 1861. Of the
regular lecturers have been Rev. Charles H. Brigham, Rev. Amory D. Mayo,
and Dr. Thomas Hill. There has been an intimate relation between the
Meadville church and the Theological School, and several of the pastors
have been instructors and lecturers in the Theological School, including
Rev. J.C. Zachos, Rev. James T. Bixby, and Rev. James M. Whiton. The
Christian denomination has been represented among the lecturers by Rev.
David Millard and Rev. Austin Craig.

The whole number of graduates of the Meadville Theological School up to
April, 1902, has been 267; and eighty other students have entered the
ministry. At the present time 156 of its students are on the roll of
Unitarian ministers. Thirty-two of its students served in the civil war,
twenty per cent of its graduates previous to the close of the war being
engaged in it as privates, chaplains, or in some other capacity. The
endowment of the school has steadily increased until it now is somewhat
more than $600,000.

[1] Memoir of Henry Ware, Jr. 202.

[2] J.F. Clarke, Christian Examiner, September, 1854, LVII. 310. "Mr.
    Huidekoper had the satisfaction, in the later years of his life, of
    seeing a respectable society worshipping in the tasteful building
    which he loved and of witnessing the prosperity of the theological
    school in which he was so much interested. We have never known any
    one who seemed to live so habitually in the presence of God. The form
    which his piety mostly took was that of gratitude and reliance. His
    trust in the Divine goodness was like that of a child in its mother.
    His cheerful views, of this life and of the other, his simple tastes,
    his enjoyment of nature, his happiness in society, his love for
    children, his pleasure in doing good, his tender affection for those
    nearest to him,--these threw a warm light around his last days and
    gave his home the aspect of a perpetual Sabbath. A well-balanced
    activity of faculties contributed still more to his usefulness and
    happiness. He was always a student, occupying every vacant hour with
    a book, and so had attained a surprising knowledge of biography and
    history." Mr. Huidekoper died in Meadville, May 22, 1854.

[3] John M. Merrick, afterwards settled in Hardwick and Walpole, Mass.,
    who was in Mr. Huidekoper's family from October, 1825, to October,
    1827. He was succeeded by Andrew P. Peabody, who did not preach. In
    1828-30 Washington Gilbert, who had settlements in Harvard, Lincoln,
    and West Newton, was the tutor and preacher.

[4] Rev. George Nichols, July, 1831, to July, 1832; Rev. Alanson Brigham,
    who died in Meadville, August 24, 1833; Rev. John Quincy Day,
    October, 1834, to September, 1837.

[5] A.P. Peabody, Harvard Reminiscences, 165, 166

[6] The first treasurer of the school was Edgar Huidekoper, who was
    succeeded by Professor F. Huidekoper, and he in turn by Edgar
    Huidekoper, the son of the first treasurer. Among the other generous
    friends and benefactors of the school have been Alfred Huidekoper,
    Miss Elizabeth Huidekoper, and Mrs. Henry P. Kidder.




XV.


UNITARIAN PHILANTHROPIES.

The liberal movement in religion was characterized in its early period by
its humanitarianism. As theology grew less important for it, there was an
increase in its philanthropy. With the waning of the sectarian spirit there
was a growth in desire for practical reforms. The awakened interest in man
and enlarged faith in his spiritual capacities showed itself in efforts to
improve his social condition. No one expressed this tendency more perfectly
than Dr. Channing, though he was a spiritual teacher rather than a reformer
or philanthropist.

Any statement concerning the charities in connection with which Channing
was active will give the most inadequate idea of his actual influence in
this direction. He was greatly interested in promoting the circulation of
the Bible, in aiding the cause of temperance, and in bringing freedom to
the slave. His biographer says that his thoughts were continually becoming
concentrated more and more upon the terrible problem of pauperism, "and he
saw more clearly each year that what the times demanded was that the axe
should be laid at the very root of ignorance, temptation and strife by
substituting for the present unjust and unequal distribution of the
privileges of life some system of cordial, respectful brotherly
co-operation."[1] His interest in education was most comprehensive, and
he sought its advancement in all directions with the confident faith that
it would help to uplift all classes and make them more truly human.[2]

[Sidenote: Unitarian Charities.]

The liberals of New England, in the early years of the nineteenth century,
were not mere theorizers in regard to human helpfulness and the application
of Christianity to life; for they endeavored to realize the spirit of
charity and service. Largely under their leadership the Massachusetts Bible
Society was organized in 1809. A more distinctly charitable undertaking was
the Fragment Society, organized in 1812 to help the poor by the
distribution of garments, the lending of bedding to the sick and clothes to
children in charity schools, as well as the providing of such children with
shoes. This society also undertook to provide Bibles for the poor who had
none. Under the leadership of Rev. Joseph Tuckerman, then settled in
Chelsea, there was organized, May 11, 1812, the Boston Society for the
Religious and Moral Improvement of Seamen, "to distribute tracts of a
religious and moral kind for the use of seamen, and to establish a regular
divine service on board of our merchant vessels." In 1813 the Massachusetts
Society for the Suppression of Intemperance, in 1815 the Massachusetts
Peace Society, and at about the same time the Society for the Employment of
the Poor came into existence.

Of the early Unitarians Rev. Octavius B. Frothingham justly said: "They all
had a genuine desire to render the earthly lot of mankind tolerable. It is
not too much to say that they started every one of our best secular
charities. The town of Boston had a poor-house, and nothing more until the
Unitarians initiated humane institutions for the helpless, the blind, the
insane. The Massachusetts General Hospital (1811), the McLean Asylum for
the Insane (1818), the Perkins Blind Asylum (1832), the Female Orphan
Asylum (1800), were of their devising."[3] What this work meant was well
stated by Dr. Andrew P. Peabody, when he said there was "probably no city
in the world where there had been more ample provision for the poor than in
Boston, whether by private alms-giving, benevolent organizations, or public
institutions."[4] Nor was this altruistic spirit manifested alone in
Boston, for Mr. Frothingham quotes the saying of a lady to Dr. E.E. Hale:
"A Unitarian church to you merely means one more name on your calendar. To
the people in this town it means better books, better music, better
sewerage, better health, better life, less drunkenness, more purity, and
better government."[5] The Unitarian conception of the relations of
altruism and religion was pertinently stated by Dr. J.T. Kirkland,
president of Harvard College during the early years of the nineteenth
century, when he said that "we have as much piety as charity, and no
more."[6] One who knew intimately of the work of the ministry at large
has truly said of the labors of Dr. Tuckerman: "From the beginning he had
the moral and pecuniary support of the leaders of life in Boston; her first
merchants and her statesmen were watching these experiments with a curious
interest, and although he was often so radical as to startle the most
conservative notions of men engaged in trade, or learned in the
old-fashioned science of government, there was that in the persistence of
his life and the accuracy of his method which engaged their support."[7]

Another instance of Unitarian philanthropy is to be found in the support
given to Rev. Edward T. Taylor, usually known as "Father Taylor," in his
work for sailors. When he went to Boston in 1829 to begin his mission, the
first person he visited was Dr. Channing, and the second Ralph Waldo
Emerson, then a settled pastor in the city. Both of these men made generous
contributions to his mission, and aided him in securing the attention of
wealthy contributors.[8] In fact, his Bethel was almost wholly supported
by Unitarians. For thirty years Mr. Albert Fearing was the president of the
Boston Port Society, organized for the support of Taylor's Seamen's Bethel.
The corresponding secretary was Mr. Henry Parker. Among other Unitarian
supporters of this work was Hon. John A. Andrew.[9]

We have no right to assume that the Unitarians alone were philanthropic,
but they had the wealth and the social position to make their efforts in
this direction thoroughly effective.[10] That the results were beneficent
may be understood from the testimony of Mrs. Horace Mann. "The liberal
sects of Boston," she wrote to a friend, "quite carried the day at that
time in works of benevolence and Christian charity. They took care of the
needy without regard to sectarianism. Such women as Helen Loring and
Elizabeth Howard, (Mrs. Cyrus A. Bartol), Dorothea Dix, Mary Pritchard
(Mrs. Henry Ware), and many others less known to the world, but equally
devoted to the work, with many youthful coadjutors, took care of the poor
wonderfully."[11] After spending several weeks in Boston in 1842, and
giving careful attention to the charities and philanthropies of the city,
Charles Dickens wrote: "I sincerely believe that the public institutions
and charities of this capital of Massachusetts are as nearly perfect as the
most considerate wisdom, benevolence, humanity, can make them. I never in
my life was more affected by the contemplation of happiness, under
circumstances of privation and bereavement, than in my visits to these
establishments."[12]

[Sidenote: Education of the Blind.]

The pioneer in the work of educating the blind and the deaf was Dr. Samuel
G. Howe, who had been one of those who in 1824 went to Greece to aid in the
establishment of Greek independence. On his return, in 1832, he became
acquainted with European methods of teaching the blind; and in that year he
opened the Massachusetts School and Asylum for the Blind, "the pioneer of
such establishments in America, and the most illustrious of its class in
the world."[13] In his father's house in Pleasant Street, Dr. Howe began
his school with a few pupils, prepared books for them, and then set about
raising money to secure larger facilities. Colonel Thomas H. Perkins, of
Boston, gave his house in Pearl Street, valued at $50,000, on condition
that a like sum should be contributed for the maintenance of the school. In
six weeks the desired sum was secured, and the school was, afterwards known
as the Perkins Institution for the Blind. Dr. Howe addressed seventeen
state legislatures on the education of the blind, with the result of
establishing schools similar to his own. His arduous task, however, was
that of providing the blind with books; and he used his great inventive
skill in perfecting the necessary methods. He succeeded in making it
comparatively easy to print books for the blind, and therefore made it
possible to have a library of such works.

In the autumn of 1837 Dr. Howe discovered Laura Bridgman, who had only the
one sense of touch remaining in a normal condition; and his remarkable
success, in her education made him famous. In connection with her and other
pupils he began the process of teaching the deaf to use articulate speech,
and all who have followed him in this work have but extended and perfected
his methods. While teaching the blind and deaf, Dr. Howe found those who
were idiotic; and he began to study this class of persons about 1840, and
to devise methods for their education. As a member of the Massachusetts
legislature in 1846, he secured the appointment of a commission to
investigate the condition of the idiotic; and for this commission he wrote
the report. In 1847, the state having made an appropriation for the
teaching of idiotic, children, ten of them were taught at the Blind Asylum,
under the care of Dr. Howe. In 1851 a separate school was provided for such
children.

Dr. Howe was called "the Massachusetts philanthropist," but his
philanthropy was universal in its humanitarian aims. He gave large and
faithful attention, in 1845 and later, to prisons and prisoners; he was a
zealous friend of the slave and the freedman; and in 1864 he devoted
arduous service to the reform of the state charities of Massachusetts. His
biographer justly says of his spirit of universal philanthropy: "He joined
in the movement in Boston which abolished imprisonment for debt; he was an
early and active member of the Boston Prison Discipline Society, which once
did much service; and for years, when interest in prison reform was at a
low ebb in Massachusetts, the one forlorn relict of that once powerful
organization, a Prisoner's Aid Society, used to hold its meetings in Dr.
Howe's spacious chamber in Bromfield Street. He took an early interest in
the care of the insane, with which his friends Horace Mann, Dr. Edward
Jarvis, and Dorothea Dix were greatly occupied; and in later years he
introduced some most useful methods of caring for the insane in
Massachusetts. He favored the temperance reform, and wrote much as a
physician on the harm done to individuals and to the human stock by the use
of alcoholic liquors. He stood with Father Taylor of the Seamen's Bethel in
Boston for the salvation of the sailors and their protection from cruel
punishments, and he was one of those who almost abolished the flogging of
children in schools. During his whole career as a reformer of public
schools in New England, Horace Mann had no friend more intimate or helpful
than Dr. Howe, nor one whose support was more indispensable to Mann
himself."[14]

Dr. Howe was an attendant upon the preaching of Theodore Parker, and was
his intimate friend. In after years he was a member of the congregation of
James Freeman Clarke at the Church of the Disciples. "After our return to
America," says Mrs. Howe of the year 1844, "my husband went often to the
Melodeon, where Parker preached until he took possession of the Music Hall.
The interest which my husband showed in these services led me in time to
attend them, and I remember as among the great opportunities of my life the
years in which I listened to Theodore Parker."[15]

[Sidenote: Care of the Insane.]

Another among the many persons who came under the influence of Dr. Channing
was Dorothea Dix, who, as a teacher of his children, lived for many months
in his family and enjoyed his intimate friendship. Her biographer says:
"She had drunk in with passionate faith Dr. Channing's fervid insistence on
the presence in human nature, even under its most degraded types, of germs,
at least, of endless spiritual development. But it was the characteristic
of her own mind that it tended not to protracted speculation, but to
immediate, embodied action."[16] Her work for the insane was the
expression of the deep faith in humanity she had been taught by Channing.

When she entered upon her humanitarian efforts, but few hospitals for the
insane existed in the country. A notable exception was the McLean Asylum at
Somerville, which had been built as the result of that same philanthropic
spirit that had led the Unitarians to establish the many charities already
mentioned in these pages. In March, 1841, Miss Dix visited the House of
Correction in East Cambridge; and for the wretched condition of the
inmates, she at once set to work to provide remedies. Then she visited the
jails and alms-houses in many parts of the state, and presented a memorial
to the legislature recounting what she had found and asking for reforms.
She was met by bitter opposition; but such persons as Samuel G. Howe, Dr.
Channing, Horace Mann, and John G. Palfrey came to her aid. The bill
providing for relief to the insane came into the hands of a committee of
which Dr. Howe was the chairman, and he energetically pushed it forward to
enactment. Thus Miss Dix began her crusade against an enormous evil.

In 1845 Miss Dix reported that in three years she had travelled ten
thousand miles, visited eighteen state penitentiaries, three hundred jails
and houses of correction, and five hundred almshouses and other
institutions, secured the establishment or enlargement of six hospitals for
the insane, several county poorhouses, and several jails on a reformed
plan. She visited every state east of the Rocky Mountains, and also the
British Provinces, to secure legislation in behalf of the insane. She
secured the erection of hospitals or other reformatory action in Rhode
Island, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Indiana, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Missouri, Mississippi, Louisiana, Alabama, South Carolina, Nova Scotia, and
Newfoundland. Her labors also secured the establishment of a hospital for
the insane of the army and navy, near Washington. All this was the work of
nine years.

In 1853 Miss Dix gave her attention to providing an adequate life-saving
equipment for Sable Island, one of we most dangerous places to seamen on
the Atlantic coast; and this became the means of saving many lives. In 1854
she went to England for needed rest; but almost at once she took up her
humanitarian work, this time in Scotland, where she secured a commission of
inquiry, which in 1857 resulted in reformatory legislation on the part of
Parliament. In 1855 she visited the island of Jersey, and secured great
improvements in the care of the insane. Later in that year she visited
Switzerland for rest, but in a few weeks was studying the charities of
Paris and then those of Italy. In Rome she had two interviews with the
pope, and the erection of a new hospital for the insane on modern
principles resulted. Speaking only English, and without letters of
introduction, she visited the insane hospitals and the prisons of Greece,
Turkey, Austria, Sclavonia, Russia, Germany, Sweden, Norway, Denmark,
Holland, and Belgium. "Day by day she patiently explored the asylums,
prisons, and poor-houses of every place in which she set her foot, glad to
her heart's core when she found anything to commend and learn a lesson
from, and patiently striving, where she struck the traces of ignorance,
neglect, or wrong, to right the evil by direct appeal to the highest
authorities."

On her return home, in September, 1856, she was met by many urgent appeals
for help in enlarging hospitals and erecting new ones; and she devoted her
time until the outbreak of the civil war in work for the insane in the
southern and middle north-western states. As soon as the troops were
ordered to Washington, she went there and offered her services as a nurse,
and was at once appointed superintendent of women nurses for the whole
army. She carried through the tasks of this office with energy and
devotion. In 1866 she secured the erection of a monument to the fallen
soldiers in the National Cemetery, at Hampton.

Then she returned at once to her work in asylums, poorhouses, and prisons,
continuing this task until past her seventy-fifth year. "Her frequent
visits to our institutions of the insane now, and her searching
criticisms," wrote a leading alienist, "constitute of themselves a better
lunacy commission than would be likely to be appointed in many of our
states."[17] The last five years of her life were spent as a guest in the
New Jersey State Asylum at Trenton, it being fit that one of the thirty-two
hospitals she had been the means of erecting should afford her a home for
her declining years.

Miss Dix was called by many "our Lady," "our Patron Saint"; and well she
deserved these expressions of reverence. President Fillmore said in a
letter to her, "Wealth and power never reared such monuments to selfish
pride as you have reared to the love of mankind." She had the unreserved
consecration to the needs of the poor and suffering that caused her to
write: "If I am cold, they are cold; if I am weary, they are distressed; if
I am alone, they are abandoned."[18] Her biographer justly compares her
with the greatest of the saints, and says, "Precisely the same
characteristics marked her, the same absolute religious consecration, the
same heroic readiness to trample under foot the pains of illness,
loneliness, and opposition, the same intellectual grasp of what a great
reformatory work demanded."[19] Truly was it said of her that she was "the
most useful and distinguished woman America has produced."[20]

[Sidenote: Child-saving Missions.]

As was justly said by Professor Francis G. Peabody, "the Boston Children's
Mission was the direct fruit of the ministry of Dr. Tuckerman, and
antedates all other conspicuous undertakings of the same nature. The first
president of the Children's Mission, John E. Williams, a Unitarian layman,
moved later to New York, and became the first treasurer of the newly
created Children's Aid Society of that city, formed in 1853. Thus the work
of the Children's Mission and the kindred service of the Warren Street
Chapel, under the leadership of Charles Barnard, must be reckoned as the
most immediate, if not the only American antecedent, of the great modern
works of child-saving charity."[21]

The Children's Mission to the Children of the Destitute grew out of the
work of the Howard Sunday-school, then connected with the Pitts Street
Chapel. When several men connected with that school were discussing the
fact that a great number of vagrant children were dealt with by the police,
Fanny S. Merrill said to her father, Mr. George Merrill, "Father, can't we
children do something to help those poor little ones?" This question
suggested a new field of work; and a meeting was held on April 27, 1849,
under the auspices of Rev. Robert C. Waterston, to consider this
proposition. On May 9 the society was organized "to create a special
mission to the poor, ignorant, neglected children of this city; to gather
them into day and Sunday schools; to procure places and employment for
them; and generally to adopt and pursue such measures as would be most
likely to save or rescue them from vice, ignorance and degradation." In the
beginning this mission was supported by the Unitarian Sunday-schools in
Boston, but gradually the number of schools contributing to its maintenance
was enlarged until it included nearly all of those connected with Unitarian
churches in New England.

As soon as the mission was organized, Rev. Joseph E. Barry was made the
missionary; and he opened a Sunday-school in Utica Street. Beginning in
1853, one or more women were employed to aid him in his work. In May, 1857,
Rev. Edmund Squire began work as a missionary in Washington Village; but
this mission was soon given into the hands of the Benevolent Fraternity. In
June, 1858, Mr. B.H. Greene was engaged to visit the jail and lockup in aid
of the young persons found there. In 1859 work was undertaken in East
Boston, and also in South Boston. From this time onward from three to five
persons were constantly employed as missionaries, in visiting throughout
the city, persuading children to attend day-schools, sewing-schools, and
Sunday-schools, securing employment for those old enough to labor, and in
placing children in country homes. In April, 1857, Mr. Barry took a party
of forty-eight children to Illinois; and five other parties followed to
that state and to Michigan and Ohio. Since 1860 homes have been found in
New England for all children sent outside the city.

In November, 1858, a hall in Eliot Street was secured for the religious
services of the mission, which included boys' classes, Sunday-school, and
various organizations of a moral and intellectual character. In 1859 a
house was rented in Camden Street especially for the care of the boys who
came under the charge of the mission. In March, 1867, was completed the
house on Tremont Street in which the work of the mission has, since been
carried on. An additional building for very young children was provided in
October, 1890. For years Mr. Barry continued his work as the missionary of
this noble ministry to the children of the poor. Since 1877 Mr. William
Crosby has been the efficient superintendent, having served for eighteen
years previously as the treasurer. The mission has cared for more than five
thousand children.

[Sidenote: Care of the Poor.]

It has been indicated already that much attention was given to the care of
the poor and to the prevention of pauperism. It is safe to assume that
every Unitarian minister was a worker in this direction. It is well to
notice the efforts of one man, because his work led to the scientific
methods of charitable relief which are employed in Boston at the present
time. When Rev. Ephraim Peabody became the minister of King's Chapel, in
1846, he turned his attention to the education of the poor and to the
prevention of pauperism. In connection with Rev. Frederick T. Gray he
opened a school for those adults whose education had been neglected.
Especial attention was given to the elementary instruction of emigrant
women. Many children and adults accepted the opportunity thus afforded, and
a large school was maintained for several years.

With the aid of Mr. Francis E. Parker another important work was undertaken
by Mr. Peabody. Although Dr. Tuckerman had labored to prevent duplication
of charitable gifts and to organize the philanthropies of Boston in an
effective manner, with the increase of population the evils he strove to
prevent had grown into large proportions. In order to prevent overlapping,
imposition, and failure to provide for many who were really needy, but not
eager to push their own claims, Mr. Peabody organized the Boston Provident
Association in 1851. This society divided the city into small districts,
and put each under the supervision of a person who was to examine every
case that came before the society within the territory assigned him. The
first president of this society was Hon. Samuel A. Eliot, who was a mayor
of the city, a representative in the lower house of Congress, and an
organizer of many philanthropies. This society was eminently successful in
its operations, and did a great amount of good. Its friendly visits to the
poor and its judicious methods of procuring the co-operation of many
charity workers prepared the way for the introduction, in 1879, of the
Associated Charities of Boston, which extended and effectively organized
the work begun by Mr. Peabody.[22] Numerous other organizations might be
mentioned that have been initiated by Unitarians or largely supported by
them.[23]

[Sidenote: Humane Treatment of Animals.]

The work for the humane treatment of animals was begun, and has been
largely carried on, by Unitarians. The founder of the American Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was Henry Bergh, who was a member of
All Souls' Church in New York, under the ministry of Dr. Bellows. In 1865
he began his work in behalf of kindness to animals in New York City, and
the society he organized was incorporated April 10, 1866. It was soon
engaged in an extensive work. In 1873 Mr. Bergh proceeded to organize
branch humane societies; and, as the result of his work, most of the states
have legislated for the humane care of animals.

A similar work of a Unitarian is that of Mr. George T. Angell in Boston,
who in 1868 founded, and has since been the president of, the Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. In 1889 he became the
president of the American Humane Education Society, a position he continues
to hold. He is the editor of Our Dumb Animals, and has in many ways been
active in the work of the great charity with which he has been connected.

[Sidenote: Young Men's Christian Unions.]

The initiative in the establishment of Christian unions for young men in
cities, on a wholly unsectarian basis, was taken by a Unitarian. Mr. Caleb
Davis Bradlee, a Harvard undergraduate, who was afterward a Boston pastor
for many years, gathered together in the parlor of his father's house a
company of young men, and proposed to them the formation of a society for
mutual improvement. This was on September 17, 1851; and the organization
then formed was called the Biblical Literature Society. Those who belonged
to the society during the winter of 1851-52 were so much benefited by it
that they decided to enlarge their plans and to extend their influence to a
greater number. At the suggestion of Rev. Charles Brooks, minister of the
Unitarian church in South Hingham, the name was changed to the Boston Young
Men's Christian Union, the first meeting under the new form of organization
being held March 15, 1852. On October 11 of the same year the society was
incorporated, many of the leading men of the city having already given it
their encouragement and support.[24]

[Sidenote: Educational Work in the South.]

After the close of the civil war there was a large demand for help in the
South, especially amongst the negroes. Most of the aid given by Unitarians
was through other than denominational channels; but something was done by
the Unitarian Association as well as by other Unitarian organizations. Miss
Amy Bradley, who had been a very successful worker for the Sanitary
Commission, opened a school for the whites in Wilmington, N.C. Her work
extended to all the schools of the city, and was eminently successful. She
became the city and then the county superintendent of schools. She was
supported by the Unitarian Association and the Soldiers' Memorial Society.
Among the Unitarians who at that time engaged in the work of educating the
negroes were Rev. Henry F. Edes in Georgia, Rev. James Thurston in North
Carolina, Miss M. Louisa Shaw in Florida, Miss Bottume on Ladies' Island,
and Miss Sally Holley and Miss Caroline F. Putnam in Virginia.

In 1868 the Unitarian Association entered upon a systematic effort to aid
the negroes through co-operation with the African Methodist Episcopal
Church. The sum of $4,000 was in that year devoted to this work; and it was
largely spent in educational efforts, especially in aid of college and
theological students. Wilberforce University had the benefit of lectures
from Dr. George W. Hosmer, president of Antioch College, and of Edward
Orton, James K. Hosmer, and other professors in that institution. Libraries
of about fifty volumes of carefully selected books, including elementary
works of science, history, biography, and a few theological works, were
given to ministers of that church who applied for them. This connection
continued for several years, and was of much importance in the advancement
of the South.

With the first of January, 1886, the Unitarian Association established a
bureau of information in regard to southern education, of which General
J.B.F. Marshall, who had been for many years the treasurer of the Hampton
Institute, was made the superintendent. This bureau, during its existence
of three years, investigated the claims of various schools, and recommended
those most deserving of aid.

In 1891 Miss Mabel W. Dillingham and Miss Charlotte R. Thorn, who had been
teachers for several years in the Hampton Institute, opened a school for
negroes in Calhoun, Ala. Miss Dillingham died in 1894; and she was
succeeded by her brother, Rev. Pitt Dillingham, as the principal of the
school. The Calhoun School has been supported mostly by Unitarians, and it
has been successful in doing a practical and important work.

During the first eight years of the Tuskegee Institute it received $5,000
annually from Unitarians, and in more recent years $10,000 annually. This
has been given by individuals, churches, and other organizations, but in no
sense as a denominational work. Concerning the aid given to the Hampton
Institute this statement has been made by the principal: "The Unitarian
denomination has had a very important part in the work of Hampton. Our
first treasurer was General J.F.B. Marshall, a Unitarian who made it
possible for General Armstrong first to gain access to Boston and secure
friends there, many of whom have been lifelong contributors to this work.
General Marshall came to Hampton in 1872, and for some twelve years took a
most important part in building up this institution. He trained young men
for the treasurer's office, who still hold important positions in the
school, and others who have been sent to various institutions. The home of
General and Mrs. Marshall here was of incalculable help in many ways,
brightening and cheering the lives of our teachers and students. Unitarians
have always had a prominent part in the support of Hampton. Mrs. Mary
Hemenway was the largest donor to the Institute during her lifetime. She
gave $10,000 for the purchase of our Hemenway Farm, and helped General
Armstrong in many ways."[25]

[Sidenote: Educational Work for the Indians.]

At three different periods the Unitarian Association has undertaken
educational work amongst the Indians. The first of these proved abortive,
but is of much interest. James Tanner,[26] a half-breed Chippeway or
Ojibway from Minnesota, appeared before the board of the Association,
February 12, 1855, in behalf of his people. He had been a Baptist
missionary to the Ojibways, but had found that he could accomplish little
while the Indians continued their roving life and their wars with the
Sioux. He therefore wished to have his people adopt a settled agricultural
life. The Baptist Home Missionary Society, with which he was laboring,
would not accede to his plans in this respect, and desired that he should
confine himself to the preaching of the gospel. Unable to do this on
account of his liberal views, he went to Boston with the hope that he might
secure aid from the Baptists there. He was soon told that he was a
Unitarian, and he sought a knowledge of those of that faith. He was thus
led to apply to the Unitarian Association for help, which was granted. He
secured an outfit of agricultural and other implements, and returned to his
people in the spring of 1855. In December of that year Mr. Tanner attended
a meeting of the board of the Association, accompanied by six Ojibway
chiefs. On this unique occasion the calumet was smoked by all present, and
addresses were made by the Indians. In April, 1856, the board reluctantly
abandoned this enterprise, because the money for the yearly expenditure of
$4,000, which it required, could not be secured.[27]

In 1871 President Grant inaugurated the policy of educating the Indians
under the direction of the several religious denominations of the country.
To the Unitarians were assigned the Utes of Colorado. The reservation at
White River was placed in charge of Mr. J.S. Littlefield, and that at Los
Pinos of Rev. J. Nelson Trask. Several other persons took up this work,
including Rev. Henry F. Bond and his wife. In 1885 the Utes were removed to
a reservation in Utah. In the spring of 1886 Mr. Bond returned to them for
the purpose of establishing a boarding-school amongst them; but, not
getting sufficient encouragement, he went to Montana, where in the autumn
he opened the Montana Industrial School, with eighteen pupils from the
Crows in attendance. Buildings were erected, farm work begun, carpenter and
blacksmith shops put in operation, all at a cost of $20,000. The school was
located on the Big Horn River, thirty miles from Fort Custer.

It was the object of the Montana Industrial School to remove the Indian
children from their nomadic conditions and to give them a practical
education, with so much of instruction in books as would be of real help to
them. The boys were taught farm work and the use of tools, while the girls
were trained in sewing, cooking, and other useful employments. At the same
time there was constant training in cleanliness, good manners, and right
living. The school was fairly successful; and the results would doubtless
have been important, could the experiment have gone on for a longer period.
In 1891 Mr. Bond withdrew from the school on account of his age, and it was
placed in charge of Rev. A.A. Spencer. With the 1st of July, 1895, however,
the care of the school was assumed by the national government.

Extended as this chapter has become, it has failed to give anything like an
exhaustive statement of the philanthropies of Unitarians. Their charitable
activities have been constant and in many directions. This may be seen in
the wide-reaching philanthropic interests of Dr. Edward Everett Hale, whose
Lend-a-hand Clubs, King's Daughters societies, and kindred movements
admirably illustrate the practical side of Unitarianism, its broad
humanitarian spirit, its philanthropic and reformatory purpose, and its
high ideal of Christian fidelity and service.

[1] Memoir, III. 17; one-volume edition, 465.

[2] Memoir, III. 61, 62; one-volume edition, 487, 488.

[3] Boston Unitarianism, 127.

[4] Harvard Graduates, 155.

[5] Boston Unitarianism, 253.

[6] Elizabeth P. Peabody, Reminiscences of Dr. W.E. Channing, 290.

[7] Eber R. Butler, Lend a Hand, October, 1890, V. 681.

[8] Elizabeth P. Peabody, Reminiscences of W.E. Channing, 273.

[9] Gilbert Haven, Anecdotes of Rev. Edward T. Taylor, 114.

[10] Ibid., 119.

[11] Gilbert Haven, Anecdotes of Rev. Edward T. Taylor, 330.

[12] American Notes, chap. iii.

[13] Frank B. Sanborn, Biography of Dr. S.G. Howe, Philanthropist, 110.

[14] Frank B. Sanborn, Biography of Dr. S.G. Howe, Philanthropist, 170.

[15] Reminiscences, 161.

[16] Francis Tiffany, Life of Dorothea Lynde Dix, 58.

[17] Francis Tiffany, Life of Dorothea Lynde Dix, 355.

[18] Ibid., 327.

[19] Ibid., 290.

[20] Ibid., 375.

[21] Report of the National Conference, 1895, 205.

[22] Sermons of Ephraim Peabody, introductory Memoir, xxv; Memorial
     History of Boston, IV. 662, George S. Hale on the Charities of
     Boston; A.P. Peabody, Harvard Graduates, 155.

[23] Besides the Fragment Society, the Children's Mission, and the Boston
     Provident Society, already mentioned and still vigorously at work,
     several other societies are wholly supported by Unitarians. Of these
     may be named the Howard Benevolent Society in the City of Boston,
     organized in 1812, incorporated in 1818; Young Men's Benevolent
     Society, organized in 1827, incorporated in 1852; Industrial Aid
     Society for the Prevention of Pauperism, organized in 1835,
     incorporated in 1884.

[24] Alfred Manchester, Life of Caleb Davis Bradlee, 8; First Anniversary,
     address before the Boston Young Men's Christian Union by Rev. F.D.
     Huntington, Appendix.

[25] Personal letter from Mr. H.B. Frissell.

[26] Edwin James, A Narrative of the Captivity and Adventures of John
     Tanner during Thirty Tears' Residence among the Indians of North
     America. (John Tanner was the father of James.)

[27] Quarterly Journal, II. 326, 344; III. 64, 257, 449, 625.




XVI.


UNITARIANS AND REFORMS.

The belief of Unitarians in the innate goodness of man and in his progress
towards a higher moral life, together with their desire to make religion
practical in its character and to have it deal with the actual facts of
human life, has made it obligatory that they should give the encouragement
of their support to whatever promised to further the cause of justice,
liberty, and purity. Their attitude towards reforms, however, has been
qualified by their love of individual freedom. They have had a dread of
ecclesiastical restriction and of any attempt to coerce opinions or to
establish a despotism over individual convictions. And yet, with all this
insistence upon personal liberty, no body of men and women has ever been
more devoted to the furthering of practical reforms than those connected
with Unitarian churches. No one, for instance, was ever more zealous for
individual freedom than Theodore Parker; but he was essentially a reformer.
He was a persistent advocate of peace, temperance, education, the rights of
women, the rights of the slave, the abolition of capital punishment, reform
in prison discipline, and the application of humanitarian principles to the
conduct of life.

[Sidenote: Peace Movement.]

"It may be doubted whether any man who ever lived contributed more to
spread just sentiments on the subject of war and to hasten the era of
universal peace," said Dr. Channing of Noah Worcester, who has been often
called "the Apostle of Peace." It was the second contest with Great Britain
that led Dr. Worcester to consider the nature and effects of war. In
August, 1812, on the day appointed for a national fast, he preached a
sermon in which he maintained that the war then beginning was without
sufficient justification, and that war is always an evil. In 1814 he
further studied the subject, with the result that he wrote a little book
which he called A Solemn Review of the Custom of War.[1]

The Solemn Review was widely circulated, it was translated into many
languages, it made a deep and lasting impression, and it had a world-wide
influence in preparing the minds of men for the acceptance of peace
principles. The remedy for war it proposed was an international court of
arbitration.[2] Through the efforts of Dr. Worcester the Massachusetts
Peace Society was organized December 28, 1815, one of the first societies
of the kind in the world.[3] William Phillips was made the president, and
Dr. Noah Worcester the corresponding secretary, with Dr. Henry Ware, Dr.
Channing, and Rev. Francis Parkman among his councillors. On the executive
committee with Dr. Worcester in 1819 were Rev. Ezra Ripley and Rev. John
Pierce. Other Unitarian members and workers were James Freeman, Nathaniel
L. Frothingham, Charles Lowell, Samuel C. Thacher, J.T. Kirkland, and
Joseph Tuckerman; and, of laymen, Moses Grant, Josiah Quincy, and Colonel
Joseph May. In 1819 Dr. Worcester began the publication of The Friends of
Peace, a small quarterly magazine, a large part of the contents of which he
wrote himself. After the first number, having obtained the assistance of
several wealthy Friends, he relinquished the copyright; and the numbers
were republished in several parts of the country, thus obtaining a wide
circulation. He devoted himself almost wholly to this publication and the
advocacy of the cause of peace until 1829, when he relinquished its
editorship. "This must be looked upon as a very remarkable work," wrote
Henry Ware, the younger. "To his wakeful mind everything that occurred and
everything that he read offered him materials; he appeared to see nothing
which had not a bearing on this one topic; and his book becomes a boundless
repository of curious, entertaining, striking extracts from writers of all
sorts and the history of all times, displaying the criminality and folly of
war, and the beauty and efficacy of the principles of peace."[4]

In his efforts hi behalf of peace, Dr. Worcester had the support of Dr.
Channing's "respectful sympathy and active co-operation."[5] According to
Dr. John Pierce, Channing was the life and soul of the Massachusetts Peace
Society. "For years," says his biographer, "he devoted himself to the work
of extending its influence with unwavering zeal, as many of his papers of
that period attest."[6] From his pulpit Dr. Channing frequently expressed
his faith in the principles of peace, and he strongly advocated those
Christian convictions and that spirit of good will which would make war
impossible if they were applied to the conduct of nations.

Not less devoted to the cause of peace was Dr. Ezra S. Gannett, of whom his
son says: "He thought that reason, religion, the whole spirit as well as
the letter of the gospel, united in forbidding war. Probably, he was
non-resistant up to, rather than in, the absolutely last extremity;
although he writes that an English book which Dr. Channing lent him as the
best he knew upon the subject, 'has made me a thorough peace man!'"[7]
"Let the fact of brotherhood be fairly grasped," wrote Dr. Frederic H.
Hedge, "and war becomes impossible."[8] "The tremendous extent and
pertinacity of the habit of human slaughter in battle," wrote Dr. William
R. Alger, "its shocking criminality, and its incredible foolishness, when
regarded from an advanced religious position, are three facts calculated to
appall every thoughtful man and startle him into amazement." "It is vain,"
he said, "to undertake to impart a competent conception of the crimes and
miseries belonging to war. Their appalling character and magnitude stun the
imagination and pass off like the burden of a frightful dream."[9]

Worcester's Solemn Review convinced Rev. Samuel J. May "that the precepts,
spirit, and example of Jesus gave no warrant to the violent, bloody
resistance of evil; that wrong could be effectually overcome by right,
hatred by love, violence by gentleness, evil of any kind by its opposite
good. I preached this," he said, "as one of the cardinal doctrines of the
gospel, and endeavored especially to show the wickedness and folly of the
custom of war."[10] In 1826 he organized a county peace society, the first
in the country; and his first publication was in advocacy of this
reform.[11]

Of the men connected with political life, Charles Sumner was the most
devoted and influential friend of the peace cause. As early as March, 1839,
he wrote to a friend, "I hold all wars, as unjust and, unchristian." His
address on The True Grandeur of Nations, given before the mayor and other
officials of Boston, July 4, 1845, was one of the noblest and most
effective utterances on the subject. Though a considerable part of the
audience was in military array, Sumner showed the evils of war in
uncompromising terms, denouncing it as cruel and unnecessary, while with
true eloquence, great learning, and deep conviction he made his plea for
peace. "The effect was immediate and striking," wrote George W. Curtis.
"There were great indignation and warm protest on the one hand, and upon
the other sincere congratulation and high compliment. Sumner's view of the
absolute wrong and iniquity of war was somewhat modified subsequently; but
the great purpose of a peaceful solution of international disputes he never
relinquished."[12] He said in this oration that "in our age there can be
no peace that is not honorable; there can be no war that is not
dishonorable." This statement was severely criticised, but it indicates his
uncompromising acceptance of peace principles.[13] He added these
pertinent sentences: "The true honor of a nation is to be found only in
deeds of justice and in the happiness of its people, all of which are
inconsistent with war. In the clear eye of Christian judgment vain are its
victories, infamous are its spoils."[14] He further declared that "war is
utterly and irreconcilably inconsistent with true greatness."[15] These
views he continued to hold throughout his life, though in a more
conciliatory spirit; and on several occasions he presented them before the
Peace Society and elsewhere. When in the Senate he was a leader of the
cause of arbitration, and exerted his large influence in securing its
adoption by the United States as a means of preventing war with foreign
countries. As late as July, 1873, he wrote to one of his friends: "I long
to witness the harmony of nations, which I am sure is near. When an evil so
great is recognized and discussed, the remedy must be near at hand."[16]

The work done by Julia Ward Howe for the cause of peace is eminently worthy
of recognition. One chapter of her Reminiscences is devoted to her "Peace
Crusade" of 1870. The cruel and unnecessary character of the
Franco-Prussian war led her to write an appeal to mothers to use their
influence in behalf of peace. "The august dignity of motherhood and its
terrible responsibilities now appeared to me in a new aspect," she writes,
"and I could think of no better way of expressing my sense of these than of
sending forth an appeal to womanhood throughout the world, which I then and
there composed."[17] She printed and distributed her appeal, had it
translated into French, Spanish, Italian, German, and Swedish, and then
spent many months in corresponding with leading women in various countries.
She invited these women to a Women's Peace Congress to be held in London.
After holding two successful meetings in New York, she began her crusade in
England, holding meetings in many places, and also attending a Peace
Congress in Paris. She hired a hall in London, and held Sunday meetings to
promote the reform she had deeply at heart. The Women's Congress was a
success, and after two years of earnest effort Mrs. Howe had the
satisfaction of knowing that she had done something to promote peace on
earth and good will among men.

[Sidenote: Temperance Reform.]

Unitarians have been active in the cause of temperance, but again as
individuals rather than as a denomination. The emphasis they have put on
the importance of individual opinion and personal liberty has made them
often reluctant to join societies that sought to promote this reform by
restrictive and coercive measures. As a body, therefore, they have shown a
greater inclination to the use of moral suasion than legislative power.

From Dr. Channing this reform had the most earnest approval. "The
temperance reform which is going on among us," he wrote, "deserves all
praise, and I see not what is to hinder its complete success. I believe the
movements now made will succeed, because they are in harmony with and are
seconded by the general spirit and progress of the age. Every advance in
knowledge, in refined manners, in domestic enjoyments, in habits of
foresight and economy, in regular industry, in the comforts of life, in
civilization, good morals and religion, is an aid to the cause of
temperance; and believing as we do that these are making progress, may we
not hope that drunkenness will be driven from society?"[18] He regarded
the subject from a broader point of view than many, and urged that a sound
physical education for all youth, as well as larger opportunities for
intellectual improvement on the part of workingmen, would do much to
prevent intemperance.[19] He maintained that to give men "strength within
to withstand the temptations of intemperance" is incalculably more
important than to remove merely outward temptations. Better education,
innocent amusements, a wider spirit of sympathy and brotherhood,
discouragement of the use and sale of ardent spirits, were among the means
he recommended for suppressing this evil.[20]

The Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intemperance was organized
at the State House in Boston on February 5, 1813, "to discountenance and
suppress the too free use of ardent spirits, and to encourage and promote
temperance and general morality." This was one of the first temperance
societies organized in the country, and its chief promoters were
Unitarians. Dr. John C. Collins, who published the records of the society,
said of the year 1827, when he became a member, that "Channing, Gannett,
and others were the most active men at that time in the temperance
cause."[21] Dr. Abiel Abbot was the first corresponding secretary of the
society, and on the council were Drs. Kirkland, Lothrop, Worcester, and
Pierce. Among the other Unitarian ministers who were active in the society
were Charles Lowell, the younger Henry Ware, John Pierpont, and John G.
Palfrey. Among the laymen were Moses Grant, Nathan Dane, Dr. John Ware,
Stephen Fairbanks, Dr. J.F. Flagg, William Sullivan, Amos Lawrence, Samuel
Dexter, and Isaac Parker.[22] Auxiliary societies were organized in Salem,
Beverly, and other towns; and these gave to the temperance cause the
activities of such Unitarians as Theophilus Parsons, Robert Rantoul, and
Samuel Hoar.[23]

Of the more recent interest of Unitarians in questions of temperance reform
there may be mentioned the thorough study made by the United States
Commissioner of Labor, and printed in 1898 under the title of Economic
Aspects of the Liquor Problem.[24] This investigation was ordered by
Congress as the result of a petition sent to that body by the Unitarian
Temperance Society. Probably few petitions have ever been sent to Congress
that contained so many prominent names of leading statesmen, presidents of
colleges and universities, bishops, clergymen, well-known literary men, and
other persons of influence. The Unitarian Temperance Society was organized
September 23, 1886, in connection with the meeting of the National
Conference at Saratoga. Its purpose is "to work for the cause of temperance
in whatever ways may seem to it wise and right; to study the social
problems of poverty, crime, and disease, in their relation to the use of
intoxicating drinks, and to diffuse whatever knowledge may be gained; to
discuss methods of temperance reform; to devise and, so far as possible, to
execute plans for practical reform; to exert by its meetings and by its
membership such influence for good as by the grace of God it may possess."
It has held annual meetings in Boston, and other meetings in connection
with the National Conference; it has published a number of important
tracts, temperance text-books, and temperance services for Sunday-schools;
and it has exerted a considerable influence on the denomination in shaping
public opinion in regard to this reform. The presidents of the society have
been Rev. Christopher R. Eliot, Rev. George H. Hosmer, and Rev. Charles F.
Dole.

The subject of temperance reform has been before the National Conference on
several occasions and in various forms. At the session of 1882 a resolution
offered by Miss Mary Grew was adopted:--

  That the unutterable evils continually wrought by intemperance, the
  easy descent from moderate to immoderate drinking, and the moral wrecks
  strewn along that downward path, call upon Christians and patriots to
  practise and advocate abstinence from the use of all intoxicating
  liquors as a beverage.

In 1891 a series of resolutions recommended by the Unitarian Temperance
Society were adopted as expressing the convictions of the Conference:--

  First, that the liquor saloon, as it exists to-day in the United
  States, is the nation's chief school of crime, chief college of
  corruption in politics, chief source of poverty and ruined homes, chief
  menace to our country's future, is the standing enemy of society, and,
  as such, deserves the condemnation of all good men.

  Second, that, whatever be the best mode of dealing with the saloon by
  law, law can avail little until those who condemn the saloon consent to
  totally abstain themselves from the use of alcoholic drink for
  pleasure.

  Third, that we affectionately and urgently call on every minister and
  all laymen and women in our denomination--our old, our young, our rich,
  our poor, our leaders, and our humblest--to take this stand of total
  abstinence, remembering those that are in bonds as bound with them, and
  throw the solid influence of our church against the influence of the
  saloon.

[Sidenote: Anti-slavery.]

In proportion to its numbers no religious body in the country did so much
to promote the anti-slavery reform as the Unitarian. No Unitarian defended
slavery from the pulpit or by means of the press, and no one was its
apologist.[25] Many, however, did not approve of the methods of the
abolitionists, and some strongly opposed the extreme measures of a part of
that body of reformers. The desire of Unitarians to be just, rational, and
open-minded, exposed many of them to the criticism of being neither for nor
against slavery. But it is certain that they were not indifferent to its
evils nor recreant to their humanitarian principles.

The period of the anti-slavery agitation was truly one that tried the souls
of men; and those who were equally conscientious, desirous of serving the
cause of justice and humanity, and solicitous for the welfare of the slave,
widely differed from one another as to what was the wise method of action.
Among those severely condemned by the anti-slavery party were several
Unitarian ministers of great force of character and of a genuinely
humanitarian spirit. Three of them may be selected as representative.

Dr. Orville Dewey had seen something of slavery, and was strongly opposed
to it. He thought the system hateful in itself and productive of nearly
unmingled evil, and yet he was not in favor of immediate emancipation. His
frequent indictments of slavery in his sermons and lectures were severe in
the extreme; but his demand for wise and patient counsel, and for a
rational method of gradual emancipation, subjected him to severe
condemnation. "And nothing else brings out the nobleness of Dr. Dewey into
such bold relief as the fact," says Rev. John W. Chadwick, "that the
immeasurable torrent of abuse that greeted his expressed opinion did not in
any least degree avail to make him one of the pro-slavery faction. He
differed from the most earnest of the anti-slavery men only as to the best
method of getting rid of the curse of human bondage."[26]

As early as 1830 Dr. E.S. Gannett said that "the greatest evil under which
our nation labors is the existence of slavery. It is the only vicious part
of our body politic, but this is a deep and disgusting sore. It must be
treated with the utmost judgment and skill." The violence of the
abolitionists he did not approve, however; for his respect for law and
constituted authority was so great that he was not ready for radical
measures. He abhorred slavery, but he was not willing to condemn the
slaveholder. He was therefore regarded by the abolitionists as more hostile
to them than any other Unitarian minister. His attitude as a peace man, his
strong regard for justice and fair dealing, as well as his earnest faith in
the gentle influence of the gospel, forbade his accepting the strenuous
methods of the abolitionists. He would not, however, permit anti-slavery
ministers to be silenced in Unitarian meetings. When he saw something of
slavery, in 1833, he expressed his convictions in regard to it in these
forcible words: "It is the attempt to degrade a human being into something
less than a man,--not the confinement, unjust as this is, nor the blows,
cruel as these are,--but the denial of his equal share in the rights,
prerogatives, and responsibilities of a human being, which brands the
institution of slavery with its peculiar and ineffaceable odiousness."[27]

Another minister who came under the condemnation of the abolitionists was
Rev. John H. Morison, and yet he preached sermons against slavery that met
with the vigorous disapproval of his congregation. "We all agree," he wrote
in 1844, "in the sad conviction that slavery in its political influence,
more than all other subjects, threatens to upturn the foundation of our
government; that in its moral and religious bearings it is a grievous wrong
to master and slave; and that, as it is in violation of the fundamental
principles of Christian duty, it must, if continued beyond the absolute
necessity of the case, be attended with consequences the most disastrous."
Again, when Daniel Webster made his 7th of March speech in 1850, Dr.
Morison, then the editor of The Christian Register, took the earliest
possible opportunity to express himself as strongly as he could against it.
"We at the North," he wrote, "believe that slavery is morally wrong." He
said that the government, in its attempt to defend slavery as against the
moral convictions of a large number of the people, was doing the country a
great harm.[28]

The position of these men and of others who thought and acted with them can
best be understood by recognizing the fact that they were opposed to
sectarian methods in promoting reforms as in advancing the interests of
religion. It is probable that in these heated times neither party did full
justice to the spirit and purposes of the other. Even so gentle and
charitable a man as Rev. Samuel J. May speaks of the "discreditable
pro-slavery conduct of the Unitarian denomination." "The Unitarians as a
body," he says again, "dealt with the question of slavery in anything but
an impartial, courageous, and Christian way. Continually in their public
meetings the question was staved off and driven out because of technical,
formal, verbal difficulties which were of no real importance, and ought not
to have caused a moment's hesitation. Avowing among their distinctive
doctrines the fatherly character of God and the brotherhood of man, we had
a right to expect from the Unitarians a steadfast and unqualified protest
against so unjust, tyrannical, and cruel a system as that of American
slavery. And considering their position as a body, not entangled with any
pro-slavery alliances, not hampered with any ecclesiastical organization,
it does seem to me that they were pre-eminently guilty in reference to the
enslavement of the millions in our land with its attendant wrongs,
cruelties, horrors. They refused to speak as a body, and censured,
condemned, execrated their members who did speak faithfully for the
down-trodden, and who co-operated with him whom a merciful Providence sent
as the prophet of the reform."[29]

The testimony of Rev. O.B. Frothingham is fully as condemnatory of
Unitarian timidity and conservatism, even of the moral cowardice betrayed
by many of the leaders. He says the Unitarians, as such, "were indifferent
or lukewarm; the leading classes were opposed to the agitation. Dr.
Channing was almost alone in lending countenance to the reform, though his
hesitation between the dictates of natural feeling and Christian charity
towards the masters hampered his action, and rendered him obnoxious to both
parties,--the radicals finding fault with him for not going further, the
conservatives blaming him because he went so far."[30] Mr. Frothingham
finds, however, that the transcendentalists were quite "universally
abolitionists, their faith in the natural powers of man making them zealous
promoters of the cause of the slave." He insists that as a class "the
Unitarians were not ardent disciples of any moral cause, and took pride in
being reasoners, believers in education and in general social influence, in
the progress of knowledge and the uplifting of humanity by means of ideas,"
but that they permitted these qualities to cool their ardor for reform and
to mitigate their love of humanity.[31]

The biographers of William Lloyd Garrison are never tired of condemning Dr.
Channing for what they call his timidity, his shunning any personal contact
with the great abolitionist, his failure to grapple boldly with the evils
of slavery, and his half-hearted espousal of the cause of abolition. The
Unitarians generally are by these writers regarded in the same manner.[32]

Most of the accounts mentioned were written by those who took part in the
agitation against slavery, in condemnation of those who had not kept step
with their abolition pace or in apology for those whose words and conduct
were thought to need defence. The time has come, perhaps, when it is
possible to consider, the attitude of individuals and the denomination
without a partisan wish to condemn or to defend. In this spirit the
statement of Samuel J. May is to be accepted as true and just, when he
says: "We Unitarians have given to the anti-slavery cause more preachers,
writers, lecturers, agents, poets, than any other denomination in
proportion to our numbers, if not without any comparison."[33]

Among those who listened to William Lloyd Garrison when in October, 1830,
he first presented in Boston his views in favor of immediate emancipation,
were Samuel J. May, Samuel E. Sewall, and A.B. Alcott; and these men at
once became his disciples and friends.[34] When Garrison organized the New
England Anti-slavery Society in December, 1832, he was actively supported
by Samuel E. Sewall, David Lee Child, and Ellis Gray Loring. It was to the
financial support of Sewall and Loring, though they did not at first accept
his doctrine of immediate emancipation, that Garrison owed his ability to
begin The Liberator, and to sustain it in its earliest years.[35] For many
years, Edmund Quincy was connected with The Liberator, serving as its
editor when Garrison was ill, absent on lecturing tours, or journeying in
Europe. The Massachusetts Anti-slavery Society, which in 1835 succeeded the
New England Society, had during many years Francis Jackson as its
president, Edmund Quincy as its corresponding secretary, and Robert F.
Walcutt as its recording secretary, all Unitarians.

In 1834 was formed the Cambridge Anti-slavery Society, under the leadership
of the younger Henry Ware; and the membership was largely Unitarian,
including the names of Dr. Henry Ware, Sidney Willard, Charles Follen,
William H. Charming, Artemus B. Muzzey, Barzillai Frost, Charles T. Brooks,
and Frederic H. Hedge. The purposes of the society were stated in its
constitution:--

  We believe that the emancipation of all who are in bondage is the
  requisition, not less of sound policy, than of justice and humanity;
  and that it is the duty of those with whom the power lies at once to
  remove the sanction of the law from the principle that man can be the
  property of man,--a principle inconsistent with our free institutions,
  subversive of the purposes for which man was made, and utterly at
  variance with the plainest dictates of reason and Christianity.

In 1843 Samuel May visited England, and at Unitarian meetings described the
obstacles in the way of the abolition of slavery, and spoke of the apathy
of American Unitarians. He advised the sending a letter of fraternal
counsel to the Unitarian ministers of the United States "in behalf of the
unhappy slave." Such a letter was prepared, and signed by eighty-five
ministers. It was published in the Unitarian papers in this country, a
meeting was held to consider it, and a reply sent to England signed by one
hundred and thirty ministers. Mr. May was severely condemned for his part
in causing such a letter to be sent, and the reply was rather in the nature
of a protest than a friendly acceptance of the advice given.

A year later, however, this letter was again the subject of earnest
discussion. In anniversary week, 1845, a meeting of Unitarian ministers was
held to "discuss their duties in relation to American slavery." The call
for this meeting was signed by James Thompson, Joseph Allen, Caleb Stetson,
Samuel Ripley, Converse Francis, William Ware, Samuel J. May, Artemus B.
Muzzey, Oliver Stearns, James W. Thompson, Alonzo Hill, Andrew P. Peabody,
Henry A. Miles, Frederic H. Hedge, James F. Clarke, George W. Briggs,
Samuel May, Barzillai Frost, Nathaniel Hall, David Fosdick, and John Weiss.
At the third session, by a vote of forty-seven to seven, it was declared
"that we consider slavery to be utterly opposed to the principles and
spirit of Christianity, and that, as ministers of the gospel, we feel it
our duty to protest against it, in the name of Christ, and to do all we may
to create a public opinion to secure the overthrow of the institution." It
was also decided to appoint a committee to draw up, secure signatures to,
and publish "a protest against the institution of American slavery, as
unchristian and inhuman." Though some of those who spoke at these meetings
condemned the abolitionists, yet all of them expressed in the strongest
terms their opposition to slavery.

The committee selected to prepare this protest consisted of Caleb Stetson,
James F. Clarke, John Parkman, Stephen G. Bulfinch, A.P. Peabody, John
Pierpont, Samuel J. May, Oliver Stearns, George W. Briggs, William P.
Tilden, and William H. Channing. The protest was written by James Freeman
Clarke and was accepted essentially as it came from his hands. It was
signed by one hundred and seventy-three ministers,[36] the whole number of
Unitarian ministers at that time being two hundred and sixty-seven. Some of
the most prominent ministers were conspicuous by the absence of their names
from this protest. It must be understood, however, that those who did not
sign it were as much opposed to slavery as those who did. "This protest,"
said the editor of The Christian Register, in presenting it to the
public,[37] "is written with great clearness of expression and moderation
of spirit. It exhibits unequivocally and distinctly the sentiments of the
numerous and most enlightened body of clergy whose names are attached to
it, as well as many other ministers of the denomination who may be
disinclined to act conjointly, or do not feel called upon to act at all in
any prescribed way, on the subject." It was not a desire to defend slavery
that kept these ministers from signing the protest, but their excessive
individualism, and their unwillingness to commit the denomination to
opinions all might not accept. A few paragraphs from the protest will
indicate its spirit and purpose:--

"Especially do we feel that the denomination which takes for its motto
Liberty, Holiness and Love should be foremost in opposing this system. More
than others we have contended for three great principles,--individual
liberty, perfect righteousness, and human brotherhood. All of these are
grossly violated by the system of slavery. We contend for mental freedom;
shall we not denounce the system which fetters both mind and body? We have
declared righteousness to be the essence of Christianity; shall we not
oppose the system which is the sum of all wrong? We claim for all men the
right of brotherhood before a universal Father; ought we not to testify
against that which tramples so many of our brethren under foot?"

"We, therefore, ministers of the gospel of truth and love, in the name of
God the universal Father, in the name of Christ the Redeemer, in the name
of humanity and human brotherhood, do solemnly protest against the system
of slavery as unchristian, and inhuman," "because it is a violation of
right, being the sum of all unrighteousness which man can do to man,"
"violates the law of love," "degrades man, the image of God, into a thing,"
"necessarily tends to pollute the soul of the slave," "to defile the soul
of the master," "restricts education, keeps the Bible from the slave, makes
life insecure, deprives female innocence of protection, sanctions adultery,
tears children from parents and husbands from wives, violates the divine
institutions of families, and by hard and hopeless toil makes existence a
burden," "eats out the heart of nations and tends every year more and more
to sear the popular conscience and impair the virtue of the people."

"We implore all Christians and Christian preachers to unite in unceasing
prayer to God for aid against this system, to leave no opportunity of
speaking the truth and spreading the light on this subject, in faith that
the truth is strong enough to break every yoke." "And we do hereby pledge
ourselves, before God and our brethren, never to be weary of laboring in
the cause of human rights and freedom until slavery be abolished and every
slave made free."

Although many ministers and laymen took the position that the question of
slavery was not one that should receive attention in the meetings of the
Unitarian Association or other religious organizations, that these should
be kept strictly to their own special purposes, it was not possible to
exclude the one great exciting topic of the age. How persistently it
intruded itself is clearly indicated in words used by Dr. Bellows at the
annual meeting of the Association, in 1856. "Year after year this horrid
image of slavery come in here," he said, "and obtruded itself upon our
concerns. It has prevented our giving attention to any other subject; we
could not keep it out of our minds; and why is that awful crime against
humanity still known in the world, still supported and active in this age
of Christendom, but because it is in alliance with certain views of
theology with which we are at war?"[38] At the same meeting strong
resolutions of sympathy with the free settlers of Kansas, and with Charles
Sumner because "the barbarity of the slave power had attempted to silence
him by brutal outrage," were unanimously adopted.[39]

In 1857 the subject of slavery came before the Western Conference in its
session at Alton. The most uncompromising anti-slavery resolutions were
presented at the opening of the meeting, and everything else was put aside
for their consideration, a day and a half being devoted to them. The
opinion of the majority was, in the words of one of the speakers, that
slavery is a crime that "denies millions marital and parental rights,
requires ignorance as a condition, encourages licentiousness and cruelty,
scars a country all over with incidents that appall and outrage the human
world." Dr. W.G. Eliot, of St. Louis, and others, thought it not expedient
to press the subject to an issue, though he regarded slavery in much the
same way as did the other members of the conference. When the conference
finally took issue with slavery, he and his delegates withdrew from its
membership. His assistant, Rev. Carlton A. Staples, and Rev. John H.
Heywood, of Louisville, went with the majority. A committee appointed to
formulate a statement the conference could accept said that it had no right
to interfere with the freedom of action of individual churches; but it
recommended them to do all they could in opposition to slavery, and said
that the conference was of one mind in the conviction "that slavery is an
evil doomed by God to pass away." This report was accepted by the
conference with only one opposing vote.[40] When the year 1860 had
arrived, Unitarians were practically unanimous in their condemnation of
slavery.

When the names of individual Unitarians who took an active part in the
anti-slavery movement are given, it is at once seen how important was the
influence of the denomination. Early in the century Rev. Noah Worcester
uttered his word of protest against slavery. Rev. Charles Follen joined the
Massachusetts Anti-slavery Society in the second year of its existence, and
no nobler champion of liberty ever lived. If Dr. Channing was slow in
applying his Christian ideal of liberty to slavery, there can be no
question that his influence was powerful on the right side, and all the
more so because of his gentle and ethical interpretation of individual and
national duty. His various publications on the subject, his identification
of himself with the abolitionists by joining their ranks in the
Massachusetts State House in 1836, his speech in Faneuil Hall in protest
against the killing of Lovejoy in Alton during the same year, exerted a
great influence in behalf of abolition throughout the North. It is only
necessary to mention John Pierpont, Theodore Parker, William H. Furness,
William H. Channing, William Goodell, Theodore D. Weld, Ichabod Codding,
Caleb Stetson, and M.D. Conway in order to recognize their uncompromising
fidelity to the cause of freedom. Only less devoted were such men as
Charles Lowell, Nahor A. Staples, Sylvester Judd, Nathaniel Hall, Thomas T.
Stone, O.B. Frothingham, Abiel A. Livermore, Samuel Johnson, Samuel
Longfellow, Thomas J. Mumford, and many others.

Samuel J. May and his cousin, Samuel May, were both employed by the
Massachusetts Anti-slavery Society. From 1847 until 1865 the latter was the
general agent of that organization; and his assistant was another Unitarian
minister, Robert F. Walcutt. James Freeman Clarke, though settled at
Louisville from 1833 to 1840, was opposed to slavery; and in the pages of
The Western Messenger, of which he was publisher and editor, he took every
occasion to press home the claims of emancipation. John G. Palfrey
emancipated the slaves that came into his possession from his father's
estate, insisting on receiving them for that purpose, though the
opportunity was given him to accept other property in their stead. In
accordance with this action was his attitude toward slavery in the pulpit
and on the platform, as well as when he was a member of the lower house of
Congress.

Of Unitarian laymen who were loyal to the ideal of freedom, the list may
properly open with the name of Josiah Quincy, afterwards mayor of Boston
and president of Harvard College, who began as early as 1804 his opposition
to slavery, and carried it faithfully into his work as a member of the
national House of Representatives soon after. The fidelity of John Quincy
Adams to freedom during many years is known to every one, and his service
in the national House has given him a foremost place in the company of the
anti-slavery leaders. Not less loyal was the service of Charles Sumner,
Horace Mann, John P. Hale, George W. Julian, John A. Andrew, Samuel G.
Howe, Henry I. Bowditch, William I. Bowditch, Thomas W. Higginson, George
F. Hoar, Ebenezer R. Hoar, George S. Boutwell, and Henry B. Anthony. Of the
poets the anti-slavery reform had the support of Longfellow, Lowell,
Bryant, and Emerson. The Unitarian women were also zealous for freedom. The
loyalty of Lydia Maria Child is well known, as are the sacrifices she made
in publishing her early anti-slavery books. Lucretia Mott, of the Unitarian
branch of the Friends, was a devoted supporter of the anti-slavery cause.
Mrs. Maria W. Chapman was one of the most faithful supporters of Garrison,
doing more than any one else to give financial aid to the anti-slavery
reform movement in its earlier years. With these women deserve to be
mentioned Eliza Lee Follen, Angelina Grimké Weld, Lucy Stone, and many
more.

A considerable group of persons who had been trained in evangelical
churches became essentially Unitarians as a result of the anti-slavery
agitation. Of these may be mentioned William Lloyd Garrison, Gerrit Smith,
Beriah Green, Joshua R. Giddings, Myron Holley, Theodore D. Weld, and
Francis W. Bird. Of the first four of these men, George W. Julian has said:
"They were theologically reconstructed through their unselfish devotion to
humanity and the recreancy of the churches to which they had been attached.
They were less orthodox, but more Christian. Their faith in the fatherhood
of God and the brotherhood of man became a living principle, and compelled
to reject all dogmas which stood in its way."[41]

[Sidenote: The Enfranchisement of Women.]

It is not surprising that the first great advocate of "the rights of women"
in this country should have been the Unitarian, Margaret Fuller. She did no
more than apply what she had been taught in religion to problems of
personal duty, professional activity, and political obligations. With her
freedom of faith and liberty of thought meant also freedom to devote her
life to such tasks as she could best perform for the good of others. It was
inevitable that other Unitarian women should follow her example, and that
many women, trained in other faiths, having come to accept the doctrine of
universal political rights, should seek in Unitarianism the religion
consonant with their individuality of purpose and their sense of human
freedom.

Among the leaders of the movement for the enfranchisement of women have
been such Unitarians as Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, Lucy
Stone, Julia Ward Howe, Mary A. Livermore, Maria Weston Chapman, Caroline
H. Dall, and Louisa M. Alcott. The first pronounced woman suffrage paper in
the country was The Una, begun at Providence in 1853, with Mrs. Caroline H.
Dall as the assistant editor. Among other Unitarian contributors were
William H. Charming, Elizabeth P. Peabody, Thomas W. Higginson, Ednah D.
Cheney, Amory D. Mayo, Elizabeth Oakes Smith, Lucy Stone, and Mrs. E.C.
Stanton. The next important paper was The Revolution, begun at New York in
1868, with Susan B. Anthony as publisher and Elizabeth Cady Stanton and
Parker Pillsbury as editors. Then came The Woman's Journal, begun at Boston
in 1870, with Mary A. Livermore, Lucy Stone, Julia Ward Howe, T.W.
Higginson, and Henry B. Blackwell, all Unitarians, as the editors.

The first national woman's suffrage meeting was held in Worcester, October
28 and 24, 1850; and among those who took part in it by letter or personal
presence were Emerson, Alcott, Higginson, Pillsbury, Samuel J. May, William
H. Channing, William H. Burleigh, Elizabeth C. Stanton, Catherine M.
Sedgwick, Caroline Kirkland, and Lucy Stone. In April, 1853, when the
Constitution of Massachusetts was to receive revision, a petition was
presented, asking that suffrage should be granted to women. Of twenty-seven
persons signing it, more than half were Unitarians, including Abby May
Alcott, Lucy Stone, T.W. Higginson, Anna Q.T. Parsons, Theodore Parker,
William I. Bowditch, Samuel E. Sewall, Ellis Gray Loring, Charles K.
Whipple, and Thomas T. Stone. Among other Unitarians who have taken an
active part in promoting this cause have been Lucretia Mott, Mary Grew,
Caroline M. Severance, Celia C. Burleigh, Angelina Grimké Weld, and Maria
Giddings Julian. Of men there have been Dr. William F. Channing, James F.
Clarke, George F. Hoar, George W. Curtis, John S. Dwight, John T. Sargent,
Samuel Johnson, Samuel Longfellow, Octavius B. Frothingham, Adin Ballou,
George W. Julian, Frank B. Sanborn, and James T. Fields.

Unitarians have been amongst the first to recognize women in education,
literature, the professions, and in the management of church and
denominational interests. At the convention held in New York in 1865, which
organized the National Conference, no women appeared as delegates; and the
same was true at the second session, held at Syracuse in 1866. At that
session Rev. Thomas J. Mumford moved "that our churches shall be left to
their own wishes and discretion with reference to the sex of the delegates
chosen to represent them in the conference"; and this resolution was
adopted. At the third meeting, held at New York in 1868, thirty-seven women
appeared as delegates, including Julia Ward Howe and Caroline H. Dall. The
lay delegates to the session held at Washington in 1899 numbered four
hundred and two; and, of these, two hundred and twenty seven were women.

At the annual meeting of the Unitarian Association in 1870, Rev. John T.
Sargent brought forward the subject of the representation of women on its
board of directors. Dr. James F. Clarke made a motion looking to that
result, which was largely discussed, much opposition being manifested. It
was urged by many that women were unfit to serve in a position demanding so
much business capacity, that they would displace capable men, and that it
was improper for them to assume so public a duty. Charles Lowe, James F.
Clarke, John T. Sargent, and others strongly championed the proposition,
with the result that Miss Lucretia Crocker was elected a member of the
board.[42]

The first woman ordained to the Unitarian ministry was Mrs. Celia C.
Burleigh, who was settled over the parish in Brooklyn, Conn., October 5,
1871. The sermon was preached by Rev. John W. Chadwick, and the address to
the people was given by Mrs. Julia Ward Howe. A letter was read from Henry
Ward Beecher, in which he said to Mrs. Burleigh: "I do cordially believe
that you ought to preach. I think you had a _call_ in your very nature."
Mrs. Burleigh continued at Brooklyn for less than three years, ill-health
compelling her to resign.

The second woman to enter the Unitarian ministry was Miss Mary H. Graves,
who was ordained at Mansfield, Mass., December 14, 1871. She was subjected
to a thorough examination; and the committee reported "that her words have
commanded our thorough respect by their freedom and clearness, and won our
full sympathy and approval by their earnest, discreet, and beautiful
spirit." Mrs. Eliza Tupper Wilkes was ordained by the Universalists at
Rochester, Minn., May 2, 1871, though she had preached for two or three
years previously; and she subsequently identified herself with the
Unitarians. Mrs. Antoinette Brown Blackwell was ordained in Central New
York, in 1853, by the Orthodox Congregationalists; but somewhat later she
became a Unitarian.

The first woman to receive ordination who has continued without
interruption her ministerial duties was Miss Mary A. Safford, ordained in
1880. She has held every official position in connection with the Iowa
Unitarian Association, and she has also been an officer of the Western
Conference and a director of the American Unitarian Association.

Several women have also frequently appeared in Unitarian pulpits who have
not received ordination or devoted themselves to the ministry as a
profession. Among these are Mrs. Caroline H. Dall, Mrs. Julia Ward Howe,
and Mrs. Mary A. Livermore. In 1875 Mrs. Howe was active in organizing the
Women's Ministerial Conference, which met in the Church of the Disciples,
and brought together women ministers of several denominations. Of this
conference Mrs. Howe was for many years the president.

In most Unitarian churches there is no longer any question as to the right
of women to take any place they are individually fitted to occupy. On
denominational committees and boards, women sit with entire success, their
fitness for the duties required being called in question by no one. In
those conferences where women have for a number of years been actively
engaged in the work of the ministry they are received on a basis of perfect
equality with men, and the sex question no longer presents itself in regard
to official positions or any other ministerial duty.

[Sidenote: Civil Service Reform.]

The first advocate of the reform of the civil service was Charles Sumner,
who as early as December, 1847, anticipated its methods in a series of
articles contributed to a newspaper.[43] He was the first to bring this
reform before Congress, which he did April 30, 1864, when he introduced a
bill to provide a system of competitive examinations for admission to and
promotion in the civil service, which made merit and fitness the conditions
of employment by the government, and provided against removal without
cause. This bill was drawn by Sumner without consultation with any other
person, but the time had not yet arrived when it could be successfully
advocated.

The next person to advocate the reform of the civil service in Congress was
Thomas A. Jenckes, of Rhode Island, who in 1867 brought the merit system
forward in the form of a report from the joint committee on retrenchment,
which reported on the condition of the civil service, and accompanied its
report with a bill "to regulate the civil service and to promote its
efficiency." The next year Mr. Jenckes made a second report, but it was not
until 1871 that action on the subject was secured.[44] George W. Curtis
says that at first he "pressed it upon an utterly listless Congress, and
his proposition was regarded as the harmless hobby of an amiable man, from
which a little knowledge of practical politics would soon dismount
him."[45] Most members of Congress thought the reform a mere vagary, and
that it was brought forward at a most inopportune time.[46] Mr. Jenckes
was the pioneer of the reform, according to Curtis, who says that he
"powerfully and vigorously and alone opened the debate in Congress."[47]
He drew the amendment to the appropriation bill in 1871 that became the
law, and under which the first civil service commission was appointed. "By
his experience, thorough knowledge, fertility of resource and suggestion
and great legal ability, he continued to serve with as much efficiency as
modesty the cause to which he was devoted."[48]

One of the first persons to give attention to this subject was Dorman B.
Eaton, an active member of All Souls' Church in New York, who was for
several years chairman of the committee on political reform of the Union
League Club of New York. In 1866, and again in 1870 and 1875, he travelled
in Europe to secure information in regard to methods of civil service. The
results of these investigations were presented in his work on Civil Service
in Great Britain, a report made at the request of President Hayes. In 1873
he was appointed a member of the Civil Service Commission by President
Grant; in 1883 he was the chairman of the committee appointed by President
Arthur; and in 1885 he was reappointed by President Cleveland. The bill of
January, 1883, which firmly established civil service by act of Congress,
was drawn by him. He was a devoted worker for good government in all its
phases; and the results of his studies of the subject may be found in his
books on The Independent Movement in New York and The Government of
Municipalities. He was described by George William Curtis as "one of the
most conspicuous, intelligent, and earnest friends of reform."[49]

The most conspicuous advocate of the merit system was Mr. George William
Curtis, another New York Unitarian, who was the chairman of the Civil
Service Commission of 1871. In 1880 he became the president of the New York
Civil Service Reform Association, a position he held until his death. The
National Civil Service Reform League was organized at Newport in August,
1881; and he was the president from that time as long as he lived. His
annual addresses before the league show his devoted interest in its aims,
as well as his eloquence, intellectual power, and political integrity.[50]
In an address before the Unitarian National Conference, in 1878, Mr. Curtis
gave a noble exposition and vindication of the reform which he labored
zealously for twelve years to advance.[51]

It has been justly said of Mr. Curtis that "far above the pleasures of life
he placed its duties; and no man could have set himself more sternly to the
serious work of citizenship. The national struggle over slavery, and the
re-establishment of the Union on permanent foundations enlisted his whole
nature. In the same spirit, he devoted his later years to the overthrow of
the spoils system. He did this under no delusion as to the magnitude of the
undertaking. Probably no one else comprehended it so well. He had studied
the problem profoundly, and had solved every difficulty, and could answer
every cavil to his own satisfaction." There can be no question that "his
name imparted a strength to the movement no other would have given." Nor
can there be much question that "among public men there was none who so won
the confidence of sincere and earnest men and women by his own personality.
The powers of such a character, with all his gifts and accomplishments, was
what Mr. Curtis brought to the civil service reform."[52]

[1] American Unitarian Biography, edited by William Ware; Memoir of
    Worcester, by Henry Ware, Jr., I. 45, 46.

[2] Solemn Review, edition of 1836 by American Peace Society, 7.

[3] It had been preceded by societies in Ohio and New York, results of
    the influence of the Solemn Review.

[4] Unitarian Biography, I. 49.

[5] Memoir, II. 284; one-volume edition, 111.

[6] Ibid., III. 111; one-volume edition, 284.

[7] Memoir, 139.

[8] Christian Examiner, May, 1850, XLVIII. 378.

[9] Ibid., November, 1861, LXXI. 313.

[10] Life, 83.

[11] Ibid., 115.

[12] Cyclopedia of American Biography, V. 746.

[13] Memoir, II. 348.

[14] Memoir.

[15] Ibid., 351.

[16] Ibid., IV. 572.

[17] Reminiscences, 328.

[18] Memoir, III. 36; one-volume edition, 477.

[19] Memoir, III. 31; one-volume edition, 474, 475.

[20] Works, II. 301.

[21] When will the Day come? and other tracts of the Massachusetts
     Temperance Society, 135.

[22] Of the twenty-seven annual addresses given before this society from
     1814 to 1840, at least sixteen were by Unitarians; and among these
     were John T. Kirkland, Abiel Abbot, William E. Channing, Edward
     Everett, the younger Henry Ware, Gamaliel Bradford, Charles Sprague,
     James Walker, Alexander H. Everett, William Sullivan, and Samuel K.
     Lothrop. The first four presidents of this society--Samuel Dexter,
     Nathan Dane, Isaac Parker, and Stephen Fairbanks--were Unitarians. Of
     the same faith were also a large proportion of the vice-presidents
     and other officers. Many of the tracts published by the society were
     written by Unitarians.

[23] Unitarians of every calling have been the advocates of temperance.
     Among those who have been loyal to it in word and action may be named
     John Adams, Jeremy Belknap, Jonathan Phillips, Charles Lowell, Ezra
     S. Gannett, John Pierpont, Samuel J. May, Amos Lawrence, Horace Mann,
     William H. and George S. Burleigh, Governor Pitman, William G. Eliot,
     Rufus P. Stebbins, and William B. Spooner. "Many of the leading men
     and women who were eminent as lawyers, judges, legislators, scholars,
     also prominent in the business walks of life, and in social position,
     gave this cause the force of their example, and the inspiration of
     their minds. By their contributions of money, by their personal
     efforts, by their public speeches and writings, and by their practice
     of total abstinence, they rendered very valuable service."

[24] Twelfth Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, 1897.

[25] Theodore Clapp, of New Orleans, may be an exception, though he is
     claimed by the Universalists. See S.J. May's Recollections of the
     Anti-slavery Conflict, 335.

[26] Autobiography and Letters, 117, 127, 129. The criticism of Dr. Dewey
     may be found in S.J. May's Recollections, 367.

[27] Memoir, 139, 284, 296. See S.J. May, Recollections, 341, 367, for an
     anti-slavery indictment of Dr. Gannett.

[28] Memoir, chapter on Slavery.

[29] Recollections of the Anti-slavery Conflict, chapter on the
     Unitarians, 335.

[30] See Lydia Maria Child's account of conversations with Channing on
     this subject, in her Letters from New York.

[31] Recollections and Impressions, 47, 183.

[32] The Story of his Life as Told by his Children.

[33] Recollections, 335.

[34] S.J. May, Recollections, 19; Life of A.B. Alcott, 220; Life of
     Garrison, I. 212.

[35] Life of Garrison, I. 223.

[36] The more prominent names are herewith given as they were printed in
     The Christian Register: Joseph Allen, J.H. Allen, S.G. Bulfinch, C.F.
     Barnard, Charles Briggs, W.G. Babcock, C.T. Brooks, Warren Burton,
     C.H. Brigham, Edgar Buckingham, William H. Channing, James F. Clarke,
     S.B. Cruft, A.H. Conant, C.H.A. Dall, R. Ellis, Converse Francis,
     James Flint, William H. Furness, N.S. Folsom, Frederick A. Farley,
     Frederick T. Gray, Henry Giles, F.D. Huntington, E.B. Hall, N. Hall,
     F.H. Hedge, F. Hinckley, G.W. Hosmer, F.W. Holland, Thomas Hill,
     Sylvester Judd, James Kendall, William H. Knapp, A.A. Livermore, S.J.
     May, Samuel May, M.I. Mott, A.B. Muzzey, J.F. Moors, Henry A. Miles,
     William Newell, J. Osgood, S. Osgood, Andrew P. Peabody, John
     Parkman, John Pierpont, Theodore Parker, Cyrus Pierce, J.H. Perkins,
     Cazneau Palfey, O.W.B. Peabody, Samuel Ripley, Chandler Robbins,
     Caleb Stetson, Oliver Stearns, Rufus P. Stebbins, Edmund Q. Sewall,
     Charles Sewall, John T. Sargent, George F. Simmons, William Silsbee,
     William P. Tilden, J.W. Thompson, John Weiss, Robert T. Waterston,
     William Ware, J.F.W. Ware, E.B. Willson, Frederick A. Whitney, Jason
     Whitman.

[37] Printed in The Christian Register, October 4, 1845.

[38] Quarterly Journal, III. 567.

[39] Ibid., 572.

[40] Unity, Sept. 4, 1886, Mrs. S.C.Ll. Jones, Historic Unitarianism in
     the West.

[41] Life of Joshua R. Giddings, 399.

[42] Memoir of Charles Lowe, 486. In 1901 four of the eighteen directors
     of the American Unitarian Association were women.

[43] Life, III. 149.

[44] Life of Charles Sumner, IV. 191; Works, VII. 452.

[45] G.W. Curtis, Orations and Addresses, II. 30.

[46] Ibid., 173.

[47] Ibid., 180.

[48] Ibid., 223.

[49] G.W. Curtis, Orations and Addresses, II. 458.

[50] See Curtis's Orations and Addresses, II.; also, his Reports as civil
     service commissioner, and various addresses before the Social Science
     Association.

[51] Edward Cary, Life of Curtis, American Men of Letters, 294.

[52] George William Curtis and Civil Service Reform, by Sherman S. Rogers,
     in Atlantic Monthly, January, 1893, LXXI. 15.




XVII.


UNITARIAN MEN AND WOMEN.

Many of the most influential Americans have been in practical accord with
Unitarianism, while not actually connected with Unitarian churches. They
have accepted its principles of individual freedom, the rational
interpretation of religion, and the necessity of bringing religious beliefs
into harmony with modern science and philosophy. Among these may be
properly included such men as Benjamin Franklin, John Marshall, Gerrit
Smith, John G. Whittier, William Lloyd Garrison, Andrew D. White, and
Abraham Lincoln. Whittier was a Friend, and White an Episcopalian; but the
religion of both is acceptable to all Unitarians. Marshall was undoubtedly
a Unitarian in his intellectual convictions, and he sometimes attended the
Unitarian church in Washington; but his church affiliations were with the
Episcopalians. John C. Calhoun was all his life a member of an Episcopal
church and a communicant in it; but he frequently attended the Unitarian
church in Washington, and intellectually he discarded the doctrines taught
in the creeds of his church.

Lincoln belonged to no church, and had no interest in the forms and
disputes that constitute so large a part of outward religion; but he was
one of those men whose great deeds rest on a basis of simple but
profoundest religious conviction. The most explicit statement he ever made
of his faith was in these words: "I have never united myself to any church,
because I have found difficulty in giving my assent, without mental
reservation, to the long, complicated statements of Christian doctrine
which characterize their articles of belief and confessions of faith. When
any church will inscribe over its altar, as its sole qualification of
membership, the Saviour's condensed statement of both law and gospel, 'Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul and
with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thyself,' that church will I join
with all my heart and all my soul."[1] This declaration brings Lincoln
into fullest harmony with the position of the Unitarian churches.

[Sidenote: Eminent Statesmen.]

The intellectual tendencies of the eighteenth century led many of the
leading Americans to discard the Puritan habit of mind and the religious
beliefs it had cherished. An intellectual revolt caused the rejection of
many of the Protestant doctrines, and a political revolt in the direction
of democracy led to the acceptance of religious principles not in harmony
with those of the past. Many Americans shared in these protests who did not
openly break with the older faiths. Washington was of this class; for,
while he remained outwardly a churchman, he had little intellectual or
practical sympathy with the stricter beliefs. Franklin was thoroughly of
the Deistic faith of the thinkers of England and France in his time. These
tendencies had their effect upon such men as John Adams, Timothy Pickering,
Joseph Story, and Theophilus Parsons, as well as upon Thomas Jefferson and
William Cranch. They showed themselves with especial prominence in the case
of Jefferson, who always remained outwardly faithful to the state religion
of Virginia, in which he had been educated, attended the Episcopal church
in the neighborhood of his home, sometimes joining in its communion, but
who was, nevertheless, intellectually a pronounced Unitarian.

With Jefferson his Unitarianism was a part of his democracy, for he was
consistent enough to make his religion and his politics agree with each
other. As he would have kings no longer rule over men, but give political
power into the hands of the people, so in religion he would put aside all
theologians and priests, and permit the people to worship in their own way.
It was for this reason that he rejoiced in the emancipating work of
Channing, of which he wrote in 1822, "I rejoice that in this blessed
country of free inquiry and belief, which has surrendered its creeds and
conscience neither to kings nor priests, the genuine doctrine of only one
God is reviving; and I trust there is not a young man now living who will
not die a Unitarian."[2] Jefferson's revolt against authority was tersely
expressed in his declaration: "Had there never been a commentator, there
never would have been an infidel."[3] This was in harmony with his
saying, that "the doctrines of Jesus are simple and tend all to the
happiness of man."[4] It also fully agrees with the claims of the early
Unitarians with regard to the teachings of Jesus. "No one sees with greater
pleasure than myself," he wrote, "the progress of reason in its advance
toward rational Christianity. When we shall have done away with the
incomprehensible jargon of the Trinitarian arithmetic, that three are one,
and one are three; when we shall have knocked down the artificial
scaffolding reared to mask from view the simple structure of Jesus; when,
in short, we shall have unlearned everything taught since his day, and got
back to the pure and simple doctrines he inculcated--we shall then be truly
and worthily his disciples; and my opinion is that, if nothing had ever
been added to what flowed purely from his lips, the whole world would at
this day have been Christian."[5]

However mistaken Jefferson may have been in the historical opinions thus
expressed, we cannot question the sincerity of his beliefs or fail to
recognize that he had the keenest interest in whatever gave indication of
the growth of a rational spirit in religion. These opinions he shared with
many of the leading men of his time; but he was more outspoken in their
utterance, as he was more consistent in holding them. That Washington,
though remaining an Episcopalian, was in fullest accord with Jefferson in
his principles of toleration and religious freedom, is apparent from one of
his letters. "I am not less ardent in my wish," he wrote, "that you may
succeed in your toleration in religious matters. Being no bigot myself to
any mode of worship, I am disposed to indulge the professors of
Christianity in the church with that road to heaven which to them shall
seem the most direct, easiest, and least liable to exception."[6]
Intellectually, Franklin was a Deist of essentially the same beliefs with
Jefferson, as may be seen in his statement of faith: "I believe in one God,
the creator of the universe; that he governs it by his providence; that he
ought to be worshipped; that the most acceptable service we render to him
is doing good to his other children; that the soul of man is immortal, and
will be treated with justice in another life respecting its conduct in
this. These I take to be the fundamental points in all sound religion. As
to Jesus of Nazareth, I think his system of morals and his religion, as he
left them to us, the best the world ever saw, or is likely to see; but I
apprehend it has received various corrupting changes, and I have some
doubts of his divinity; though it is a question I do not dogmatize upon,
having never studied it."[7] Franklin was a member of a Unitarian church
in London.

[Sidenote: Some Representative Unitarians.]

The church in Washington, not having been popular or of fine appointments,
has been a test of the Unitarian faith of those frequenting the capital
city. It has included in its congregation, from time to time, such men as
John Adams, John Quincy Adams,[8] John Marshall, Joseph Story, Samuel F.
Miller, Millard Fillmore, William Cranch, George Bancroft, Nathan K. Hall,
James Moore Wayne, and Senators Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun, William S.
Archer, Henry B. Anthony, William B. Allison, Timothy O. Howe, Edward
Everett, Justin S. Morrill, Charles Sumner, William E. Chandler, George F.
Hoar, and John P. Hale. William Winston Seaton and Joseph Gales, once
prominent in Washington as editors and publishers of The National
Intelligencer, were both Unitarians.

In New York the Unitarian churches have had among their attendants and
members such persons as William Cullen Bryant, Catherine M. Sedgwick, Henry
D. Sedgwick, Henry Wheaton, Peter Cooper, George William Curtis, George
Ticknor Curtis, Moses H. Grinnell, Dorman B. Eaton, and Joseph H. Choate.
The churches in Salem have had connected with them such men as John Prince,
Nathaniel Bowditch, Benjamin Peirce, Timothy Pickering, John Pickering,
Leverett Saltonstall, Joseph Story,[9] Jones Very, William H. Prescott,
and Nathaniel Hawthorne.[10]

[Sidenote: Judges and Legislators.]

During the early Unitarian period "the judges on the bench" included such
men as Theophilus Parsons, Isaac Parker, and Lemuel Shaw, all of whom held
the office of chief justice in Massachusetts. Other lawyers, jurists, and
statesmen were Fisher Ames, political orator and statesman; Nathan Dane,
who drew the ordinance for the north-western territory; Samuel Dexter,
senator, and secretary of the treasury under John Adams; Christopher Gore,
senator, and governor of Massachusetts; and Benjamin R. Curtis, of the
United States Supreme Court. Other chief justices of the Supreme Court of
Massachusetts have been George T. Bigelow, John Wells, Pliny Myrick,
Walbridge A. Field, Charles Allen; and of associates in that court have
been Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar, Benjamin F. Thomas, Seth Ames, Samuel S.
Wilde, Levi Lincoln, and John Lowell. Among the governors of Massachusetts
have been Levi Lincoln, Edward Everett, John Davis, John H. Clifford, John
A. Andrew, George S. Boutwell, John D. Long, Thomas Talbot, George D.
Robinson, J.Q.A. Brackett, Oliver Ames, Frederic T. Greenhalge, and Roger
Wolcott. The first mayors of Boston, John Phillips, Josiah Quincy,[11] and
Harrison Gray Otis, were Unitarians. Then, after an interval of one year,
followed Samuel A. Eliot and Jonathan Chapman.

It has often been assumed that Unitarianism attracts only intellectual
persons; but it also appeals to practical business men, legislators, and
the leaders of political life. In Maine have been Vice-President Hannibal
Hamlin, Governor Edward Kent, and Chief Justice John Appleton. In New
Hampshire it has appealed to such men as Chief Justices Cushing, Henry A.
Bellows, Jeremiah Smith, and, Charles Doe, as well as to Governors Onslow
Stearns, Charles H. Bell, Benjamin F. Prescott, and Ichabod Goodwin; in
Rhode Island, Governors Lippitt and Seth Paddelford, Chief Justices Samuel
Ames and Samuel Eddy, General Ambrose E. Burnside, and William B. Weeden,
historian and economist. Alphonso Taft and George Hoadly, both governors of
Ohio, were Unitarians, as were Austin Blair, John T. Bagley, Charles S.
May, and Henry H. Crapo, governors of Michigan. Among the prominent
Unitarians of Iowa have been Senator William B. Allison and General George
W. McCrary. In California may be named Leland Stanford, Horace Davis, Chief
Justice W.H. Beatty, and Oscar L. Shafter of the Supreme Court.

[Sidenote: Boston Unitarianism.]

What Unitarianism has been in the lives of its men and women may be most
conspicuously seen in Boston and the region about it, for there throughout
the first half of the nineteenth century Unitarianism was the dominant form
of Christianity. Of the period from 1826 to 1832, when Dr. Lyman Beecher
was settled in Boston, Mrs. Stowe has given this testimony: "All the
literary men of Massachusetts were Unitarians. All the trustees and
professors of Harvard College were Unitarians. All the élite of wealth and
fashion crowded Unitarian churches. The judges on the bench were Unitarian,
giving decisions by which the peculiar features of church organization, so
carefully ordained by the Pilgrim fathers, had been nullified."[12] Of the
same period Dr. Beecher wrote, "All offices were in the hands of
Unitarians."[13]

These statements were literally true, except in so far as they implied that
Unitarians used high positions in order to overthrow the old institutions
of Massachusetts and substitute those of their own devising. The calmer
judgment of the present day would not accept this conclusion, and it has no
historic foundation. The religious development of Boston brought its
churches into the acceptance of a tolerant, rational, and practical form of
Christianity, that was not dogmatic or sectarian. It took the Unitarian
name, but only in the sense of rejecting the harsher interpretations of the
doctrine of the Trinity and of election. The members of the Unitarian
churches during this period were devout in an unostentatious manner, pious
after a simple fashion, loyal Christians without excess of zeal, lovers of
liberty, but in a conservative spirit. This simple form of piety enabled
the men who accepted it to govern the state in a most faithful manner. They
managed its affairs justly, wisely, and in the true intent of economy.
Sometimes it was complained that they held a much larger number of offices
than was their proportion according to population; but to this John G.
Palfrey replied that the people of the state had confidence in them, and
elected them because nobody else governed so well.

With the aid of the biography of James Sullivan, judge, legislator,
attorney-general, and diplomatist,[14] we may study the constituency of a
single church in Boston, the Brattle Street Church. We find there James
Bowdoin and John Hancock, rival candidates for the position of governor of
the state in 1785. The same rivalry occurred twenty years later between
James Sullivan and Caleb Strong, both of the number of its communicants. On
the parish committee of this church at one time were Hancock, Bowdoin, and
Sullivan, who became governors of the state, and Judges Wendell and John
Lowell.[15] Some years later there were included in the congregation such
men as Daniel Webster, Harrison Gray Otis, Abbott Lawrence, and Amos
Lawrence, who was one of the deacons for many years.

Of the distinguished business men of Boston may be named John Amory Lowell,
John C. Amory, Jonathan Phillips (the confidential friend and supporter of
Dr. Channing), Thomas Wigglesworth, J. Huntington Wolcott, Augustus
Hemenway, Stephen C. Phillips, and Thomas Tileston. Francis Cabot Lowell
was largely concerned in building up the manufacturing interests of
Massachusetts, especially the cotton industry; and the city of Lowell took
his name in recognition of the importance of his leadership in this
direction. For similar reasons the city of Lawrence was named after Abbott
Lawrence, minister of the United States to Great Britain, who was one of
the leading merchants of Boston in the China trade, and was also largely
concerned in the development of cotton manufacturing. With these business
and manufacturing interests Amos Lawrence was also connected. Nathan
Appleton[16] was associated with Francis C. Lowell in the establishment of
the great manufacturing interests that have been a large source of the
wealth of Massachusetts. Thomas H. Perkins, from whom was named the Perkins
Institute for the Blind, was also concerned in the China trade and in the
first development of railroads. Robert Gould Shaw was another leading
merchant, who left a large sum of money for the benefit of the children of
mariners. John Murray Forbes was a builder of railroads, notably active in
the financial support of the national government during the civil war, and
a generous friend of noble men and interests.[17] Nathaniel Thayer was a
manager of railroads, erected Thayer Hall at Harvard College, and bore the
expenses of Agassiz's expedition to South America.

A Boston man by birth and training, who knew the defects as well as the
merits of the class of men and women who have been named, has given
generous testimony to the high qualities of mind and heart possessed by
these Unitarians. In writing of his maternal grandfather, Octavius Brooks
Frothingham has said: "Peter C. Brooks was an admirable example of the
Unitarian laymen of that period, industrious, honest, faithful in all
relations of life, charitable, public-spirited, intelligent, sagacious,
mingling the prudence of the man of affairs with the faith of the
Christian.... As one recalls the leading persons in Brattle Street, Federal
Street, Chauncy Place, King's Chapel, the New North, the New South,--men
like Adams, Eliot, Perkins, Bumstead, Lawrence, Sullivan, Jackson, Judge
Shaw, Daniel Webster, Jacob Bigelow, T.B. Wales, Dr. Bowditch,--forms of
dignity and of worth rise before the mind. Better men there are not. More
honorable men, according to the standard of the time, there are not likely
to be.... He joined the church and was a consistent church member. He was
not effusive, demonstrative, or loud-voiced. His name did not stand high on
church lists or among the patrons of the faith. His was the calm, rational,
sober belief of the thoughtful, educated, honorable men of his day,--men
like Lemuel Shaw, Joseph Story, Daniel A. White,--intellectual, noble
people, with worthy aims, a lofty sense of duty, a strong conviction of the
essential truths of revealed Christianity; sincere believers in the gospel,
of enduring principle, of pure, consistent, blameless life and conduct.
Speculative theology he cared little or nothing about. He was no disputant,
no doubter, no casuist; of the heights of mysticism, of the depths of
infidelity, he knew nothing. He was conservative, of course, from
temperament rather than from inquiry. He took the literal, prose view of
Calvinism, and rejected doctrines which did not commend themselves to his
common sense. In a word, he was a Unitarian of the old school.... The
Unitarian laity in general, both men and women, had a genuine desire to
render the earthly lot of mankind more tolerable. It is not too much to say
that they started every one of our best secular charities. They were
exceedingly liberal in their gifts to Harvard College, and to other
colleges as well--for they were not at all sectarian, as their large
subscriptions to the Roman Catholic cathedral proved. Whatever tended to
exalt humanity, in their view, was encouraged. They were as noble a set of
men and women as ever lived."[18]

This estimate of the Unitarians of Boston during the first half of the
nineteenth century is eminently just and accurate. To a large extent these
men and their associates in the Unitarian churches gave to the city its
worth and its character; and they built up the industries, the commerce,
the educational and philanthropic interests, and the progressive
legislation of Massachusetts. They were men of integrity and sincerity, who
were generous, faithful, and just. They accepted the religion of the
spirit, and they gave it expression in daily conduct and character.

[1] F.B. Carpenter, Six Months in the White House, 190.

[2] James Parton, Life of Thomas Jefferson, 711.

[3] Charles W. Upham, Life of Timothy Pickering, IV. 327.

[4] P.L. Ford's edition Jefferson's Works, X.220.

[5] Life of Pickering, IV. 326.

[6] P.L. Ford, The True George Washington, 81.

[7] P.L. Ford, The Many-sided Franklin, 174. See Diary of Ezra Stiles,
    III. 387.

[8] John Quincy Adams, in reply to a question about the church in
    Washington, said: "I go there to church, although I am not decided in
    my mind as to all the controverted doctrines of religion." Years
    later he said to a preacher in the Unitarian church at Quincy: "I
    agree entirely with the ground you took in your discourse. You did
    not speak of any particular class of doctrines that were everlasting,
    but of the great, fundamental principles in which all Christians
    agree; and these, I think, are what will be permanent." See A.B.
    Muzzey, Reminiscences and Memorials of the Men of the Revolution and
    their Families, 53.

[9] William W. Story, Life and Letters of Joseph Story, 57, 93. Joseph
    Story grew away from Calvinism in early manhood, and accepted a
    humanitarian view of the nature of Christ. "No man was ever more free
    from a spirit of bigotry and proselytism," says his biographer. "He
    gladly allowed every one freedom of belief and claimed only that it
    should be a genuine conviction and not a mere theologic opinion,
    considering the true faith of every man to be the necessary exponent
    of his nature, and honoring a religious life more than a formal
    creed. He admitted within the pale of salvation Mohammedan and
    Christian, Catholic and infidel. He believed that whatever is sincere
    and honest is recognized by God--that as the views of any sect are
    but human opinion, susceptible of error on every side, it behooves
    all men to be on their guard against arrogance of belief--and that in
    the sight of God it is not the truth or falsehood of our views, but
    the spirit in which we believe which alone is of vital consequence.
    His moral sense was not satisfied with a theory of religion founded
    upon the depravity of man and recognizing an austere and vengeful
    God, nor could he give his metaphysical assent to the doctrine of the
    Trinity. In the doctrines of liberal Christianity he found the
    resolution of his doubts, and from the moment he embraced the
    Unitarian faith he became a warm and unhesitating believer."

[10] For an interesting picture of New England Unitarianism see
     Recollections of my Mother (Mrs. Anne Jean Lyman), by Mrs. J.P.
     Lesley. Mrs. Lyman's home was in Northampton, Mass. The Reminiscences
     of Caroline C. Briggs describe life in the same town and under
     similar conditions. Also Memoir of Mary L. Ware, Memorial of Joseph
     and Lucy Clark Allen by their Children, and Life of Dr. Samuel
     Willard.

[11] Edmund Quincy, Life of Josiah Quincy, 532. In a speech to the
     overseers of Harvard University in 1845, Josiah Quincy said: "I never
     did and never will call myself a Unitarian; because the name has the
     aspect, and is loaded by the world with the imputation of
     sectarianism." His biographer says: "He regarded differences as of
     slight importance, especially as to matters beyond the grasp of the
     human intellect. His catholicity of spirit fraternized with all who
     profess to call themselves Christians, and who prove their title to
     the name by their lives." It was precisely this catholicity of spirit
     that was the most characteristic feature of early American
     Unitarianism, and not the rejection of the doctrine of the Trinity.
     However, Josiah Quincy was undoubtedly a Unitarian, both in what he
     rejected and in what he affirmed, as may be seen from these words
     recorded in his diary in 1854: "From the doctrines with which
     metaphysical divines have chosen to obscure the word of God,--such as
     predestination, election, reprobation, etc.,--I turn with loathing to
     the refreshing assurance which, to my mind, contains the substance of
     revealed religion,--in every nation he who feareth God, and worketh
     righteousness, is accepted of him."

[12] Autobiography, Correspondence, etc., of Lyman Beecher, II. 109.

[13] Ibid., 144.

[14] Thomas C. Amory. Life of James Sullivan.

[15] John Lowell, a son of Judge John Lowell, and a brother of Dr. Charles
     Lowell of the West Church, was the author of an effective
     controversial pamphlet entitled Are you a Christian or a Calvinist?
     Or do you prefer the Authority of Christ to that of the Genevan
     Reformer? Both the Form and Spirit of these Questions being suggested
     by the Late Review of American Unitarianism in The Panoplist, and by
     the Rev. Mr. Worcester's Letter to Mr. Channing. By a Layman. Boston,
     1815.

[16] Nathan Appleton's interest in theology may be seen in his book
     entitled The Doctrine of Original Sin and the Trinity, discussed in a
     Correspondence between a Clergyman of the Episcopal Church, in
     England, and a Layman of Boston, United States, published in Boston
     in 1859. "I was brought up," he said in one of these letters, "in the
     strictest form of Calvinistic Congregationalism; but since arriving
     at an age capable of examining the subject, and after a careful study
     of it, I have renounced what appear to me unworthy views of the
     Deity, for a system which appears to me more worthy of him, and less
     abhorrent to human reason." "I can say," he wrote in another letter,
     "that the Unitarian party embraces the most intelligent and
     high-minded portion of the community. It is my opinion that the views
     of the Unitarians are the best and only security against the spirit
     of infidelity which is prevailing so extensively amongst the most
     highly educated and intelligent men in Europe." See Memoir of Nathan
     Appleton, by Robert C. Winthrop.

[17] John Murray Forbes: Letters and Recollections, edited by his
     daughter, Sarah Forbes Hughes.

[18] Boston Unitarianism, 93, 94, 101, 127.




XVIII.


UNITARIANS AND EDUCATION.

The interest of Unitarians in education has always been very great, but it
has not been in the direction of building and fostering sectarian
institutions. As a body, Unitarians have not only been opposed to
denominational colleges, but they have been leaders in promoting
unsectarian education. Freedom of academic teaching and the scientific
study of theology may be found where Unitarianism has no existence, and yet
it is significant that in this country such mental liberty should have
first found expression under Unitarian auspices. From the first, American
Unitarianism has been unsectarian and liberty-loving, taking an attitude of
toleration, free investigation, and loyalty to truth. That it has always
been faithful to its ideal cannot be maintained, and yet its history shows
that the open-mindedness and the spirit of freedom have never been wholly
ignored.

[Sidenote: Pioneers of the Higher Criticism.]

The attitude of the early Unitarians towards the Bible, their trust in it
as the revealed word of God and the source of divine authority in all
matters of faith, and their confidence that a return to its simple
principles would liberate men from superstition and bigotry, naturally made
them the first to welcome the higher criticism of the Bible in this
country. Such men as Noah Worcester and his successors brought to the Bible
new and common-sense interpretations, and began the work of pointing out
the defects in the common version. The Unitarians were not hampered by the
theory of the verbal infallibility of the Bible; and they were therefore
prepared to advance the critical work of the scholars, as it came to them
from England and Germany, as was no other religious body in this country.

Joseph, S. Buckminster was an enthusiastic student of the Bible, securing
when in Europe all the apparatus of the more advanced criticism that could
then be procured; and after his return to Boston he gave his attention to
bringing out the New Testament in the most scholarly form that was then
possible. In 1808, in connection with William Wells, and under the
patronage of Harvard College, he republished Griesbach's Greek Testament,
with a selection of the most important various readings. He also formed a
plan of publishing in this country all the best modern English versions of
the Hebrew prophets, with introductions and notes; but he did not find the
necessary support for this project. In The Monthly Anthology and in The
General Repository he "first discussed subjects of Biblical criticism in a
spirit of philosophical and painstaking learning, and took the critical
study of the Scriptures from the old basis on which it had rested during
the Arminian discussions and placed it on the solid foundation of the text
of the New Testament as settled by Wetstein and Griesbach, and elucidated
by the labors of Michaelis, Marsh, Rosenmüller, and by the safe and wise
learning of Grotius, Le Clerc, and Simon." "It has," wrote George Ticknor,
"in our opinion, hardly been permitted to any other man to render so
considerable a service as this to Christianity in the western world."[1]
In 1811 Mr. Buckminster was made the first lecturer in Biblical criticism
at Harvard, on, the foundation established by the gift of Samuel Dexter;
and he entered with great interest and enthusiasm upon the work of
preparing for the duties of this office. We are assured that "this
appointment was universally thought to be an honor most justly due to his
pre-eminent attainments in this science";[2] but his death the next year
brought these plans to an untimely end.

To some extent the critical work of Buckminster was continued by Edward
Everett, his successor in the Brattle Street Church. Mr. Everett's
successor in that pulpit, Rev. John G. Palfrey, became the professor of
sacred literature in the Harvard Divinity School in 1831, and was the dean
of that institution. In his lectures on the Jewish Scriptures and
Antiquities, published in four volumes, from 1833 to 1852, he gave the most
advanced criticism of the time. A more important work was done by Professor
Andrews Norton, who was as radical in his labors as a Biblical critic as he
was conservative in his theology. For the time when they were published,
his Statement of Reasons, the first edition of which appeared in 1819,
Historical Evidences of the Genuineness of the Gospels, 1837-44,
Translation of the Gospels, with Notes, 1855, Internal Evidences of the
Genuineness of the Gospels, 1855, have not been surpassed by any other work
done in this country. As a scholar, he was careful, thorough, honest, and
uncompromising in his search for the truth. In an extended note added to
the second volume of his work on the Genuineness of the Gospels he
investigated the origin of the Pentateuch and the validity of its
historical statements. He showed that the work could not have bee its man
written by Moses, that it was a compilation from prior accounts, and that
its marvels were not to be accepted as authentic history.[3] In dealing
with the New Testament, Professor Norton discarded the first two chapters
of Matthew, regarding them as later additions. Frothingham speaks of Norton
as "an accomplished and elegant scholar," and says that his interpretations
of the Bible were by Unitarians "tacitly received as final." "He was the
great authority, as bold, fearless, truthful, as he was exact and
careful."[4] Although these words of praise intimate that Unitarians were
too ready to accept the conclusions of Professor Norton as needing no
emendation, yet his work was searching in its character and thoroughly
sincere in its methods. Considering the general attitude of scholarship in
his day, it was bold and uncompromising, as well as accurate and just.

Another scholar was George Rapall Noyes, who was a country pastor in
Brookfield and Petersham from 1827 to 1840, and devoted his leisure to
Biblical studies. He became the professor of Hebrew and, lecturer on
Biblical Literature in the Harvard Divinity School in 1840. His
translations, with notes, of the poetical books of the Old Testament,
beginning with Job in 1827, were of great importance as aids, to the
interpretation of the Hebrew Scriptures. His translation of the New
Testament, which appeared after his death, in 1868, gave the best results
of critical studies in homely prose, and with painstaking fidelity to the
original. That Noyes was in advance of the criticism of his time may be
indicated by the fact that, when he published his conclusions in regard to
the Messianic prophecies in 1834,[5] he was threatened with an indictment
for blasphemy by the attorney-general of Massachusetts. Better judgment
prevailed against this attempt to coerce opinion, but that such an
indictment was seriously considered shows how little genuine criticism
there was then in existence. What are now the commonplaces of scholarship
were then regarded as destructive and blasphemous. Noyes said that the
truth of the Christian religion does not in any sense depend upon the
literal fulfilment of any predictions in the Old Testament by Jesus as a
person.[6] He said that the apostles partook of the errors and prejudices
of their age,[7] that the commonly received doctrine of the inspiration
of the whole Bible is a millstone about the neck of Christianity,[8] and
that the Bible contains much that cannot be regarded as revelation.[9]
Even as early as 1835 these opinions were generally accepted by Unitarians;
and they were not thought to impair the true worth of the spiritual
revelation contained in the Bible, and especially not the divine nature of
the teachings of Christ. It was very important, as Dr. Joseph Henry Allen
has said, in speaking of Norton and Noyes, that "these decisive first steps
were taken by deliberate, conscientious, conservative scholars,--the best
and soberest scholars we had to show."[10]

The work of Ezra Abbot especially deserves notice here, because of "the
variety and extent of his learning, the retentiveness and accuracy of his
memory, the penetration and fairness of his judgment."[11] For fourteen
years previous to his death, in 1884, he was the professor of New Testament
criticism and interpretation in the Harvard Divinity School. He also
rendered important service as a member of the American committee on the
revision of the New Testament. His essay on The Authorship of the Fourth
Gospel was one of the ablest statements of the conservative view of the
origin of that writing. The volume of his Critical Essays, collected after
his death, shows the ripe fruits of his "punctilious and vigilant
scholarship." He was a zealous Unitarian, and did much to show that the New
Testament is in harmony with that faith. In 1843 Rev. Theodore Parker
published his translation of De Wette's Introduction to the New Testament,
with learned notes. The extreme views of Baur and Zeller were interpreted
by Rev. O.B. Frothingham in his The Cradle of the Christ, 1872.

Various attempts were also made by those who were not professional scholars
to bring the Bible into harmony with modern religious ideas. One of the
most notable of these was that of Dr. William Henry Furness, pastor of the
church in Philadelphia from 1825 to 1875. His Remarks on the Four Gospels
appeared in 1835, and was followed by Jesus and his Biographers, 1838,
Thoughts on the Life and Character of Jesus of Nazareth, 1859, and The Veil
Partly Lifted and Jesus Becoming Visible, 1864, as well as several other
works. His attempt was to give a rational interpretation of the life of
Jesus that should largely eliminate the miraculous and yet preserve the
spiritual. These works have little critical value, and yet they have much
of charm and suggestiveness as religious expositions of the Gospels. Of
somewhat the same nature was Dr. Edmund H. Sears's The Fourth Gospel: The
Heart of Christ, 1872, a work of deep spiritual insight.

[Sidenote: The Catholic Influence of Harvard University.]

The catholic and inclusive spirit manifested by the Unitarians in their
Biblical studies is worthy of notice, however, much more than any definite
results of scholarship produced by them. In the cultivation of the broader
academic fields which their control of Harvard University brought within
their reach this attitude is especially conspicuous. At no time since it
came under their administration has it been used for sectarian purposes, to
make proselytes or to compel acceptance of their theology. During the first
half of the nineteenth century, Harvard was in some degree distinctly
Unitarian; but since 1870 it has been wholly non-sectarian. When the
Divinity School was organized, it was provided in its constitution that no
denominational requirements should be exacted of professors or students;
yet the school was essentially Unitarian until 1878. In that year the
president, Charles W. Eliot, asked of Unitarians the sum of $130,000 as an
endowment for the school; but he insisted that it should be henceforth
wholly unsectarian, and this demand was received with approval and
enthusiasm by Unitarians themselves.

In 1879 President Eliot said at a meeting held in the First Church in
Boston for the purpose of appealing to Unitarians in behalf of the school:
"The Harvard Divinity School is not distinctly Unitarian either by its
constitution or by the intention of its founders. The doctrines of the
unsectarian sect, called in this century Unitarians, are indeed entitled to
respectful consideration in the school so long as it exists, simply because
the school was founded, and for two generations, at least, has been
supported, by Unitarians. But the government of the University cannot
undertake to appoint none but Unitarian teachers, or to grant any peculiar
favors to Unitarian students. They cannot, because the founders of the
school, themselves Unitarians, imposed upon the University the following
fundamental rule for its administration: that every encouragement shall be
given to the serious, impartial, and unbiassed investigation of Christian
truth, and that no assent to the peculiarities of any denomination of
Christians shall be required either of the instructors or students."[12]
Dr. Charles Carroll Everett, dean of the school from 1878 to 1900, has said
that "in some respects it differs from every other theological seminary in
the country." "No pains are taken to learn the denominational relations of
students even when they are applicants for aid." "No oversight is exercised
over the instruction of any teacher. No teacher is responsible for any
other or to any other."[13]

In 1886 compulsory attendance upon prayers was abolished at Harvard
University. Religious services are regularly held every week-day morning,
on Thursday afternoons, and on Sunday evenings, being conducted by the
Plummer professor of Christian morals, with the co-operation of five other
preachers, who, as well as the Plummer professor, are selected irrespective
of denominational affiliations. In this and other ways the university has
made itself thoroughly unsectarian. Its attitude is that of scientific
investigation, open-mindedness towards all phases of truth, and freedom of
teaching. Theology is thus placed on the same basis with other branches of
knowledge, and religion is made independent of merely dogmatic
considerations.

This undenominational temper at Harvard University has been developed
largely under Unitarian auspices. Its presidents for nearly a century have
been Unitarians, namely: John T. Kirkland, 1810-28; Josiah Quincy, 1829-45;
Edward Everett, 1846-49; Jared Sparks, 1849-53; James Walker, 1853-60;
Cornelius C. Felton, 1860-62; Thomas Hill, 1862-68; and Charles W. Eliot
since 1869. Kirkland, Everett, Sparks, Walker, and Hill were Unitarian
ministers; but under their administration the university was as little
sectarian as at any other time.

When the new era of university growth began in 1865, with the founding of
Cornell University, the influence of Harvard was widely felt in the
development of great unsectarian educational institutions. Although Ezra
Cornell was educated as a Friend, he was expelled from that body, and
connected himself with no other religious sect. He was essentially a
Unitarian, often attending the preaching of Dr. Rufus P. Stebbins. The
university which took his name was inspired with the Harvard ideal, and,
while recognizing religion as one of the great essential phases of human
thought and life, gave and continues to give equal opportunity to all
sects.

Another instance of the same spirit is Washington University, which began
under Unitarian auspices, but soon developed into an entirely
undenominational institution. Members of the Unitarian church in St. Louis
secured a charter for a seminary, which in 1853 was organized as the
Washington Institute. In 1857 it was reorganized as Washington University,
and the charter declared, "No instruction, either sectarian in religion or
party in politics, shall be allowed in any department of said university,
and no sectarian or party test shall be allowed in the selection of
professors, teachers, or other officers of said university or in the
admission of scholars thereof, or for any purpose whatever." Sectarian
prejudice, however, regarded the university as essentially Unitarian; and
for the first twenty years of its existence three-fourths of the gifts and
endowments came from persons of that religious body.

Although Dr. William G. Eliot knew nothing of the original movement for
forming a seminary under liberal auspices, he gave the institution his
unstinted support and encouragement. He was the president of the board of
management from the first, and in 1871 he became the chancellor. At his
death, in 1887, the university included Smith Academy, Mary Institute, and
a manual training school, these being large preparatory schools; the
college proper, school of engineering, Henry Shaw school of botany, St.
Louis school of fine arts, law school, medical school, and dental college.
It then had sixteen hundred students and one hundred and sixty instructors.
The endowments have since been largely increased, the number of students
has increased to two thousand, and important new buildings have been added.
Dr. Eliot gave the university its direction and its unsectarian methods,
and it has attained its present position because of his devoted labors. The
Leland Stanford Jr. University in California, and Clark University in
Massachusetts, both founded by Unitarians, further illustrate the Harvard
spirit in education.

[Sidenote: The Work of Horace Mann.]

Horace Mann was an earnest and devoted Unitarian, the intimate friend of
Channing and Parker, to both of whom he was largely indebted for his
intellectual and spiritual ideals. He was inspired by their ideas of reform
and progress, and to their personal sympathy he owed much. It is now
universally conceded that to him we are indebted for the diffusion of the
common-school idea throughout the country, that he developed and brought to
full expression the conception of universal education. In full sympathy
with him in this work were such men as Dr. Channing, Edward Everett,
Theodore Parker, Josiah Quincy, Samuel J. May, and the younger Robert
Rantoul; but he made the common school popular, and put it forward as a
national institution. When Mann became the secretary of the Massachusetts
Board of Education on its creation, in 1837, the theory that all children
should be educated by the state, if not otherwise provided for, was by no
means generally accepted; nor was it an accepted theory that such education
should be strictly unsectarian.[14] Mann fought the battle for these two
ideas, and virtually established them for the whole nation. On the first
board one-half the members were Unitarians,--Horace Mann, the younger
Robert Rantoul, Jared Sparks, and Edmund Dwight. Some of the staunchest and
most devoted and most liberal friends of Mann were of other denominations;
but the work for common schools was thoroughly in harmony with Unitarian
principles. Edmund Dwight was largely instrumental in securing the
establishment of a Board of Education in Massachusetts, and he brought
about the election of Horace Mann to fill the position of its secretary. He
was a leading merchant in Boston, and his house was a centre for meetings
and consultations relating to educational interests. He contributed freely
for the purpose of enlarging and improving the state system of common
schools, his donations amounting to not less than $35,000.[15]

The first person to clearly advocate the establishment of schools for the
training of teachers was Rev. Charles Brooks, minister of the Second
Unitarian Church in Hingham from 1821 to 1839, afterwards professor of
natural history in the University of the City of New York, and a reformer
and author of some reputation in his day. In 1834 he began to write and
lecture in behalf of common schools, and especially in the interest of
normal schools.[16] He spoke throughout the state in behalf of training
schools, with which he had become acquainted in Prussia; he went before the
legislature on this subject; and he carried his labors into other
states.[17]

Horace Mann took up the idea of professional schools for teachers and made
it effective. Edmund Dwight gave $10,000 to the state for this purpose, and
schools were established in 1838. When the first of these normal schools
opened in Lexington, July 3, 1839, its principal was Rev. Cyrus Peirce, who
had been the minister of the Unitarian church in North Reading from 1819 to
1829, and then had been a teacher in North Andover and Nantucket. "Had it
not been for Cyrus Peirce," wrote Henry Barnard, "I consider the cause of
Normal Schools would have failed or have been postponed for an indefinite
period."[18] Dr. William T. Harris has said that "all Normal School work
in this country follows substantially one tradition, and this traces back
to the course laid down by Cyrus Peirce."[19] In the Lexington school
Peirce was succeeded by Samuel J. May, who had been settled over Unitarian
churches in Brooklyn and Scituate.[20]

The work done by Horace Mann for education includes his labors as president
of Antioch College from 1852 to 1859. He maintained that the chief end of
education is the development of character; and he sought to make the
college an altruistic community, in which teachers and students should
labor together for the best good of all. He put into practice the
nonsectarian principle, made the college coeducational, and developed the
spirit of individual freedom as one of cardinal importance in education.
"The ideas for which he stood," has written one who has carefully studied
his work in all its phases, "spread abroad among the people of the Ohio
valley, and showed themselves in various state institutions, normal
schools, and high schools that were planted in the central west.
Altogether, apart from Mr. Mann's visible work in Antioch College may be
found agencies which he set at work, whose influence only eternity can
measure. It was a great thing to the new west that a high standard of
scholarship should be placed before her sons and daughters, and that a few
hundred of them should be sent out into every corner of the state, and
ultimately to the farthest boundaries of the nation, with a sound
scholarship and a love for truth there and then wholly new. His reputation
for scholarship and zeal gave his opinions greater weight than those of
almost any other man in the country. As a result the most radical
educational ideas were received from him with respect; and he carried
forward the work of giving a practical embodiment to co-education,
non-sectarianism, and the requirements of practical and efficient moral
character, as perhaps no other educator could have done. His influence
among people, and the aspirations which he kindled in thousands of minds by
public addresses and personal contact, did for the people of the Ohio
valley a work, the extent and value of which can never be measured."[21]

[Sidenote: Elizabeth Peabody and the Kindergarten.]

Horace Mann was largely influenced by Dr. Channing throughout his career as
an educational reformer,[22] as was his wife and her sister, Elizabeth P.
Peabody. It was to Channing that Miss Peabody owed her interest in the work
of education; and his teachings brought her naturally into association with
Bronson Alcott, and made her the leader in introducing the kindergarten
into this country. She was influenced by the kindergarten method, at an
early date, and she gave years of devoted labor to its extension. In
connection with her sister, Mrs. Horace Mann, she wrote Culture in Infancy,
1863, Guide to the Kindergarten, 1877, and Letters to Kindergartners, 1886.
As a result of her enthusiastic efforts, kindergartens were opened in
Boston in 1864; and it was in 1871 that she organized the American Froebel
Union, which became the kindergarten department of the National Educational
Association in 1885. The Kindergarten Messenger was begun by her in 1873,
and was continued under her editorship until 1877, when it was merged in
The New Education.

Miss Peabody's Kindergarten Guide has been described as one of the most
important original contributions made to the literature of the subject in
this country. Her name is most intimately associated with the educational
progress of the country because of her enthusiasm for the right training of
children and her spiritual insight as a teacher.

[Sidenote: Work of Unitarian Women for Education.]

Much has been done by Unitarian women to advance the cause of education.
The conversations of Margaret Fuller, held in Boston from 1839 to 1844,
were an important influence in awakening women to larger intellectual
interests; and many of those who attended them were afterwards active in
promoting the educational enterprises of the city. In 1873 Miss Abby
Williams May, Mrs. Ann Adeline Badger, Miss Lucretia Crocker, and Miss
Lucia M. Peabody were elected members of the school committee of Boston,
but did not serve, as their right to act in that capacity was questioned.
Thereupon the legislature took action, making women eligible to the office.
The next year Misses May, Crocker, and Peabody, with Mrs. Kate Gannett
Wells, Mrs. Mary Safford Blake, and Miss Lucretia Hale, were elected, and
served. In 1875 Misses Crocker, Hale, May, and Peabody were re-elected; and
in 1876 Miss Crocker was elected one of the supervisors of the public
schools of Boston. It is significant that the first women to hold these
positions were Unitarians. It is also worthy of note that Miss Sarah
Freeman Clarke, sister of James Freeman Clarke, was the first landscape
painter of her sex in the country; and that Mrs. Cornelia W. Walter was the
first woman to edit a large daily newspaper, she having become the editor
and manager of the Boston Transcript at an early date.

In 1873 was organized by Miss Anna E. Ticknor, daughter of Professor George
Ticknor, the historian, the Society to encourage Studies at Home. During
the twenty-four years of its existence it conducted by correspondence the
reading and studies of over 7,000 women in all parts of the country, and
did an important work in enlarging the sphere of women, preparing them for
the work of teachers and for social and intellectual service in many
directions. The society was discontinued in 1897, because, largely through
its influence, many other agencies had come in to do the same work; but the
large lending library, which had been an important feature of the
activities of the society, was continued under the management of the Anna
Ticknor Library Association until 1902. The memorial volume, published in
1897, shows how important had been the work of the Society to encourage
Studies at Home, and how many women, who were otherwise deprived of
intellectual opportunities, were encouraged, helped, and inspired by it. It
was said of Miss Ticknor, by Samuel Eliot, the president of the society
throughout the whole period of its existence: "While appreciative of the
restrictions which she wished to remove, she was desirous to gratify, if
possible, the aspirations of the large number of women throughout the
country who would fain obtain an education, and who had little, if any,
hope of obtaining it. She was very highly educated herself, and thought
more and more of her responsibility to share her advantages with others not
possessing them. In addition to these moral and intellectual
qualifications, she possessed an executive ability brought into constant
prominence by her work as secretary of the society. She was a teacher, an
inspirer, a comforter, and, in the best sense, a friend of many and many a
lonely and baffled life."[23]

The service of Mrs. Mary Hemenway to education also deserves recognition.
Possessed of large wealth, she devoted it to advancing important
educational and intellectual interests. She established the Normal School
of Swedish Gymnastics in Boston, and provided for its maintenance until it
was adopted by the city as a part of its educational system. With her
financial support the Hemenway South-western Archaeological Expedition was
carried on by Frank H. Cushing and J.W. Fewkes. It was largely because of
her efforts that the Montana Industrial School was established, and
maintained for about ten years. Her chief work, however, was in the
promotion of the study of American history on the part of young persons.
When the Old South Meeting-house was threatened with destruction, she
contributed $100,000 towards its preservation; and by her energy and
perseverance it was devoted to the interests of historical study. The Old
South Lectures for Young People were organized in 1883, soon after was
begun the publication of the Old South Leaflets, a series of historical
prizes was provided for, the Old South Historical Society was organized,
and historical pilgrimages were established. All this work was placed in
charge of Mr. Edwin D. Mead; and the New England Magazine, of which he was
the editor, gave interpretation to these various educational efforts.

Mrs. Hemenway devoted her life to such works as these. It is impossible to
enumerate here all her noble undertakings; but they were many. "Mrs.
Hemenway was a woman whose interests and sympathies were as broad as the
world," says Edwin D. Mead, "but she was a great patriot; and she was
pre-eminently that. She had a reverent pride in our position of leadership
in the history and movement of modern democracy; and she had a consuming
zeal to keep the nation strong and worthy of its best traditions, and to
kindle this zeal among the young people of the nation. With all her great
enthusiasms, she was an amazingly practical and definite woman. She wasted
no time nor strength in vague generalities, either of speech or action.
Others might long for the time when the kingdom of God should cover the
earth as the waters cover the sea, and she longed for it; but, while others
longed, she devoted herself to doing what she could to bring that corner of
God's world in which she was set into conformity with the laws of God,--and
this by every means in her power, by teaching poor girls how to make better
clothes and cook better dinners and make better homes, by teaching people
to value health and respect and train their bodies and love better music
and better pictures and be interested in more important things. Others
might long for the parliament of man and the federation of the world, and
so did she; but while others longed, she devoted herself to doing what she
could to make this nation, for which she was particularly responsible,
fitter for the federation when it comes. The good state for which she
worked was a good Massachusetts; and her chief interest, while others
talked municipal reform, was to make a better Boston."[24]

[Sidenote: Popular Education and Public Libraries.]

The interest of Unitarians in popular education and the general diffusion
of knowledge may be further indicated by a few illustrations. One of these
is the Lowell Institute in Boston, founded by John Lowell, son of Francis
Cabot Lowell, and cousin of James Russell Lowell. He was a Boston merchant,
became an extensive traveller, and died in Bombay, in 1836, at the age of
thirty-four. In his will he left one-half his fortune for the promotion of
popular education through lectures, and in other ways. John Amory Lowell
became the trustee of this fund, nearly $250,000; and in December, 1839,
the Lowell Institute began its work with a lecture by Edward Everett, which
gave a biographical account of John Lowell, and a statement of the purposes
of the Institute. Since that time the Lowell Institute has given to the
people of Boston, free of charge, from fifty to one hundred lectures each
winter. The topics treated have taken a wide range, and the lecturers have
included many of the ablest men in this and other countries. The work of
the Lowell Institute has also included free lectures for advanced students
given in connection with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, science
lectures to the teachers of Boston, and a free drawing school.

In 1846 Louis Agassiz came to this country to lecture before the Lowell
Institute. The result was that he became permanently connected with Harvard
University, and transferred his scientific work to this country. This was
accomplished by means of the gift of Abbott Lawrence, who founded the
Lawrence Scientific School in 1847. Although the Lowell Institute was
founded by a Unitarian, and although it has always been largely managed by
Unitarians, it has been wholly unsectarian in its work. Many of its
lecturers have been of that body, but only because they were men of science
or of literary attainments.

In 1854 Peter Cooper founded the Cooper Union in New York for the
Advancement of Science and Art, to promote "instruction in branches of
knowledge by which men and women earn their daily bread; in laws of health
and improvement of the sanitary conditions of families as well as
individuals; in social and political science, whereby communities and
nations advance in virtue, wealth, and power; and finally in matters which
affect the eye, the ear, and the imagination, and furnish a basis for
recreation to the working classes." He erected a large building, and
established therein the Cooper Institute, with its reading-room, library,
lectures, schools, and other facilities for bringing the means of education
within reach of those who could not otherwise obtain them.

Peter Cooper was an earnest Unitarian in his opinions, attending the church
of Dr. Bellows; but he was wholly without sectarian bias. In a letter
addressed to the delegates to the Evangelical Alliance, at its session held
in New York in 1873, he expressed the catholicity and the humanitarian
spirit of his religion. "I look to see the day," he wrote, "when the
teachers of Christianity will rise above all the cramping power and
influence of conflicting creeds and systems of human device, when they will
beseech mankind by all the mercies of God to be reconciled to the
government of love, the only government that can ever bring the kingdom of
heaven into the hearts of mankind either here or hereafter."

About 1825 there was opened in Dublin, N.H., under the auspices of Rev.
Levi W. Leonard, minister of the Unitarian church in that village, the
first library in the country that was free to all the inhabitants of a town
or city. In the adjoining town of Peterboro, in 1833, under the leadership
of Rev. Abiel Abbot, also the Unitarian minister, a library was established
by vote of the town. This library was maintained by the town itself, being
the first in the country supported from the tax rates of a municipality. In
the work of these Unitarian ministers may be found the beginnings of the
present interest in the establishment and growth of free public libraries.

In the founding and endowment of libraries, Unitarians have taken an active
part. What they have done in this direction may be illustrated by the gift
of Enoch Pratt of one and a quarter million dollars to the public library
in Baltimore. Concerning the time when Jared Sparks was the minister of the
Unitarian church in Baltimore, Professor Herbert B. Adams has said: "Some
of the most generous and public-spirited people of Baltimore were connected
with the first independent church. Afterwards, men who were to be most
helpful in the upbuilding of Baltimore's greatest institutions--the Peabody
Institute, the Pratt Library, and the Johns Hopkins University--were
associated with the Unitarian society."[25]

Professor Barrett Wendell speaks of George Ticknor as "the chief founder of
the chief public library in the United States."[26] Ticknor undoubtedly
did more than anybody else to make the Boston Public Library the great
institution it has become, not only in giving it his own collection of
books, but also in its inception and in its organization. The best working
library in the country, that of the Boston Athenaeum, also owes a very
large debt to the early Unitarians, with whom it originated, and by whom it
was largely maintained in its early days.

[Sidenote: Mayo's Southern Ministry of Education.]

One of the most important contributions to the work of education has been
that of Rev. Amory D. Mayo, known as the "Ministry of Education in the
South." After settlements over churches in Gloucester, Cleveland, Albany,
Cincinnati, and Springfield, Mr. Mayo began his southern work in 1880. He
had an extensive preparation for his southern labors, having served on the
school boards of Cincinnati and Springfield for fifteen years, lectured
extensively on educational subjects, and been a frequent contributor to
educational periodicals. He has written a History of Common Schools, which
is published by the national Bureau of Education, prepared several of the
Circulars of Information of that bureau, and printed a great number of
educational pamphlets and addresses.

"One of the most helpful agencies in the work of free and universal
education in the South, for the last twenty years," says Dr. J.L.M. Curry
in a personal letter, "has been the ministry of A.D. Mayo. His intelligent
zeal, his instructive addresses, his tireless energy, have made him a
potent factor in this great work; and any history of what the Unitarian
denomination has done would be very imperfect which did not make proper and
grateful recognition of his valuable services."

[1] Christian Examiner, XLVII. 186; Mrs. E.B. Lee, Memoirs of the
    Buckminsters, 325.

[2] Memoir of Buckminster, introductory to his Sermons, published in
    1814, xxxii.

[3] The Pentateuch and its Relation to the Jewish and Christian
    Dispensation. By Andrews Norton. Edited by John James Tayler, London,
    1863. This was the Note, with introduction.

[4] Boston Unitarianism, 244.

[5] Hengstenberg's Christology, Christian Examiner, July, 1834, XVI. 321.

[6] Ibid., 327.

[7] Ibid., 356.

[8] Ibid., 357.

[9] Ibid., 358.

[10] Our Liberal Movement in Theology, 68.

[11] The Authorship of the Fourth Gospel and Other Critical Essays
     selected from the published papers of Ezra Abbot, edited, with
     preface, by Professor J.H. Thayer.

[12] The Divinity School of Harvard University: Its History, Courses of
     Study, Aims, and Advantages, published by the University, 9.

[13] The Divinity School as it is, Harvard Graduates' Magazine, June,
     1897.

[14] B.A. Hinsdale, Horace Mann and the Common School Revival in the
     United States, 127.

[15] B.A. Hinsdale, Horace Mann and the Common School Revival in the
     United States, 148.

[16] Henry Barnard, Normal Schools, 125.

[17] B.A. Hinsdale, Horace Mann, 147.

[18] Quoted by J.P. Gordy, Rise and Growth of the Normal School Idea in
     the United States, Circular of Information of the Bureau of
     Education, 1891, 49.

[19] Ibid., 43.

[20] S.J. May, Memoir of Cyrus Peirce, Barnard's American Journal of
     Education, December, 1857.

[21] G.A. Hubbell, Horace Mann in Ohio: A Study of the Application of his
     Public School Ideals to College Administration, No. IV. of Vol. VII.,
     Columbia University Contributions to Philosophy, Psychology, and
     Education, 50.

[22] Mary Mann, Life of Horace Mann, 44; Henry Barnard, Normal Schools,
     93.

[23] Memorial Volume, 2.

[24] Edwin D. Mead, The Old South Work, 1900; also Memorial Sermon, by
     Charles G. Ames, 17.

[25] Life and Writings of Jared Sparks, I. 141.

[26] A Literary History of America, 266.




XIX.


UNITARIANISM AND LITERATURE.

The history of American literature is intimately connected with the history
of Unitarianism in this country. The influences that caused the growth of
Unitarianism were those, to a large extent, that produced American
literature. It was not merely Harvard College that had this effect, as has
been often asserted; for the other colleges did not become the centres of
literary activity. It was more distinctly the freedom, the breadth of
intellectual interest, and the sympathy with what was human and natural
developed by the Unitarian movement that were favorable to the growth of
literature. Yet from the beginning of the eighteenth century Harvard
fostered the spirit of inquiry, and helped to set the mind free from the
theological and classical predispositions that had checked its natural
growth. A taste for literature was encouraged, theology took on a broad and
humanitarian character, and there was a growing appreciation of art and
poetry. Harvard College helped to bring men into contact with European
thought, and thus opened to them fresh and stimulating sources of
intellectual interest.

During the last quarter of the eighteenth century and the first half of the
nineteenth New England was largely devoted to commercial enterprises.
Every coast town of any size from Newport to Belfast was concerned with
ship-building and with trade to foreign ports. Such towns as Boston and
Salem traded with China, India, and many other parts of the world. Not only
was wealth largely increased by this commercial activity, but the influence
upon life and thought was very great. The mind was emancipated, and
religion grew more liberal and humane, as the result of this contact with
foreign lands. Along the whole coast, within the limits named, there was an
abandonment of Puritanism and a growth into a genial and humanitarian
interpretation of Christianity. In New York City somewhat the same results
were produced, at least on social and intellectual life, though with less
immediate effect upon religion. It was in these regions, in which
commercial contact with the great outside world set the mind free and
awakened the imagination, that American literature was born.

[Sidenote: Influence of Unitarian Environment.]

The influence of Unitarian culture and literary tastes is shown by the
considerable number of literary men who were the sons of Unitarian
ministers. Ralph Waldo Emerson was the son of William Emerson, the minister
of the First Church in Boston at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
George Bancroft was the son of Aaron Bancroft, the first Unitarian minister
in Worcester, and the first president of the American Unitarian
Association. To Charles Lowell, of the West Church in Boston, were born
James Russell Lowell and Robert T.S. Lowell. The father of Francis Parkman
was of the same name, and was for many years the minister of the New North
Church in Boston. Richard Hildreth was the son of Hosea Hildreth, Unitarian
minister in Gloucester. Octavius Brooks Frothingham was the son of
Nathaniel L. Frothingham, minister of the First Church in Boston. Joseph
Allen, father of Joseph Henry Allen and William Francis Allen, was the
minister in Northboro for many years. Of literary workers now living
William Everett is the son of Edward Everett, Charles Eliot Norton of
Andrews Norton, and William Wells Newell of William Newell, minister of the
First Church in Cambridge for many years.

This influence is shown in the large number of literary men who studied at
the Harvard Divinity School and began their career as Unitarian ministers.
It may be partly accounted for by the fact that at the beginning of the
nineteenth century literature offered but a precarious opportunity to men
of talent and genius. The respect then accorded to ministers, the wide
influence they were able to exert, and the many intellectual opportunities
offered by the profession, naturally attracted many young men. During the
first part of the nineteenth century no other profession was so attractive,
and enthusiasm for it was large amongst the students of Harvard College. As
literary openings began to present themselves, many of these men found
other occupations, partly because their tastes were intellectual rather
than theological, and partly because the radical ferment made the pulpit no
longer acceptable. Such a man as Edward Everett would never have entered
the pulpit, had it not been socially and intellectually most attractive at
the time when he began his career. In the instance of Samuel A. Eliot, who
took the full course in the Divinity School, but did not preach, being
afterward mayor of Boston and member of Congress the influences at work
were probably much the same.

George Bancroft is another instance of a graduate of the Divinity School
who did not enter the pulpit, but, beginning his career as a teacher,
devoted his life to literature and diplomacy. With such men as Christopher
P. Cranch, artist and poet; George P. Bradford, teacher, thinker, and
friend of literary men; H.G.O. Blake, editor of Thoreau's Journals; J.L.
Sibley, librarian; John Albee, poet and essayist; and William Cushing,
bibliographer, the cause operating was probably the same,--the discovery
that the chosen profession was not acceptable or that some other was
preferable. Another group of men, including John G. Palfrey, Jared Sparks,
William Ware, Horatio Alger, James K. Hosmer, Edward Rowland Sill and
William Wells Newell, who occupied Unitarian pulpits for brief periods,
were drawn into literary occupations as more congenial to their tastes. The
same influence doubtless served to withdraw Emerson, George Ripley, John S.
Dwight, Thomas W. Higginson, Moncure D. Conway, and Francis E. Abbot, from
the pulpit; but with these men there was also a break with traditional
Christianity.

[Sidenote: Literary Tendencies.]

The early Unitarian movement in New England was literary and religious
rather than theological. The men who have been most influential in
determining the course of Unitarian development, such as Charming, Dewey,
Parker, and Hedge, not to include Emerson, who has been a greater
affirmative leader than either of the others, were first of all preachers,
and their published works were originally given to the world from the
pulpit. They made no effort to produce a Unitarian system of theology; and
it would have been quite in opposition to the genius of the movement, had
they entered upon such a task.

With the advent of the Unitarian movement, for the first time in the
history of the American pulpit did the sermon become a literary product.
Channing and his coworkers, especially Buckminster and Everett, departed
widely from the pulpit traditions of New England, ceased to quote texts,
abandoned theological exposition, refrained from the exhortatory method,
and addressed men and women in literary language about the actual interests
of daily life. Their preaching was not metaphysical, and it was not
declamatory. The illustrations used were human rather than Biblical, a
preference was given to what was intellectual rather than to what was
emotional, and the effect was instruction rather than conversion. It
resulted in faithful living, good citizenship, fidelity to duty, love of
the neighbor, and an earnest helpfulness toward the poor and unfortunate.

[Sidenote: Literary Tastes of Unitarian Ministers.]

In studying any considerable list of Unitarian ministers, and taking note
of their personal tastes and their avocations, it will be seen that a large
number of them were lovers of literature, and ardently devoted much of
their time to literary pursuits. Not only was there a decidedly literary
flavor about their preaching, but they were frequent contributors to The
Christian Examiner and The North American Review; and they wrote poems,
novels, books of travel, essays, and histories. They were conspicuous in
historical and scientific societies, in promoting scientific
investigations, in advancing archaeological researches, in every kind of
learned inquiry. Their intellectual interests were so catholic and so
vigorous that they were not contented with parish and pulpit, and in some
cases it would seem that the avocation was as important as the vocation
itself.

Dr. Channing would be named as the man who has done most to give direction
to the currents of Unitarian thought on theological problems, but he was
also conspicuously a philanthropist and reformer. He was less a theologian,
in the technical sense, than one who taught men to live in the spirit. His
spiritual insight, humanitarian sympathies, and imaginative fellowship with
all forms of human experience gave his writings a literary charm and power
of a high order. He was a great religious teacher and inspirer, a preacher
of unsurpassed gifts of spiritual interpretation, and a prophet of the
truer religious life.

The Unitarian leaders who were influenced by the transcendental movement,
of which the most prominent were Parker, Hedge, Clarke, and C.C. Everett,
interpreted theology in the broadest spirit. Parker was essentially a
preacher and reformer. It was the one conspicuous aim of his life to
liberate religion from the intellectual thraldom of the past, and to bring
it into the open air of the world, where it might be informed of daily
experience and gain for itself a rightful opportunity. He was therefore
literary, imaginative, ethical, practical. He wrote for The Dial, and
established The Massachusetts Review, he was one of the most widely heard
of popular lecturers, and he was a leader in the most radical of the
reforms prominent in his day. Parker made all wisdom subservient to his
religion, treated a wide range of subjects in his pulpit, and brought
religion into immediate contact with human life.

Frederic H. Hedge did more than any other man to give Unitarianism a
consistent philosophy and theology. His Reason in Religion and Ways of the
Spirit have had a profound influence in shaping the thought of the
denomination, and have led all American Unitarians to accept his view of
the universality of incarnation and the consubstantiality of man and God.
He was wise as an interpreter, and by no means wanting in originality, a
brilliant essayist, a philosophical historian, and a student of high
themes. His Prose Writers of Germany, Hours with the German Classics,
Primeval World of Hebrew Tradition, and Atheism in Philosophy show the
range of his interests and his ability as a thinker.

James Freeman Clarke may be selected as a typical Unitarian minister, who
wrote poetry, was more than once an editor, often appeared on the lecture
platform, was a frequent contributor to the leading periodicals, wrote
several works of biography and history, gave himself zealously to the
advocacy of the noblest reforms, and produced many volumes of sermons that
have in an unusual degree the merit of directness, literary grace,
suggestiveness, and spiritual warmth and insight. His theological writings
have been widely read by Unitarians and those not of that fellowship. His
Self-culture has been largely circulated as a manual of practical ethics.
His Ten Great Religions and its companion volume opened the way in this
country for the recognition of the comparative study of religious
developments. Not content with so wide a range of studies, he wrote Thomas
Didymus, an historical romance concerned with New Testament characters, How
to find the Stars, and Exotics, a volume of poetical translation. He was a
maker of many books, and all of them were well made. His theology was all
the more humane, and his preaching was all the more effective, because he
was interested in many subjects and had a real mastery of them.

Charles Carroll Everett was a philosophical thinker and theologian, and the
younger generation of Unitarian ministers has been largely influenced by
him. His theological work was done in the lecture-room, but it was of
first-rate importance. He was a profound thinker, a vigorous writer, and an
inspiring teacher. He was an able theologian, philosophical in thought, but
deeply spiritual in insight. His work on The Science of Thought shows the
depth and vigor of his thinking; but his volumes on The Gospel of Paul,
Religions before Christianity, Poetry, Comedy, and Duty, suggest the
breadth of his inquiries and the richness of his philosophical
investigations. In his position as the dean of the Harvard Divinity School
he accomplished his best work, and there his great ability as theologian
and philosophical thinker made itself amply manifest.

Another group of men largely influenced by the transcendental movement
included David A. Wasson, John Weiss, Samuel Johnson, Samuel Longfellow,
Cyrus A. Bartol, Octavius K Frothingham, and William J. Potter. Here we see
the literary tendency showing itself distinctly and to much advantage. The
first four of these men wrote exquisite hymns and spiritual lyrics, and all
of them were contributors to periodical literature or writers of books.
Weiss was a literary critic of no mean merit in his lectures on Greek and
Shakespearean subjects; and his volumes on American Religion and Immortal
Life were purely literary in their method. However deficient were Johnson's
books on the religions of India, China, and Persia, from the point, of view
of the science of religion, they have not yet been surpassed as
interpretations of the inner spirit of Oriental religions. Bartol was a
master of an incisive literary method in the pulpit, that gives to his
Radical Problems, The Rising Faith, and Principles and Portraits a
scintillating power all their own, with epigram and flash of wit on every
page. Frothingham published many a volume of sermons; but his biographies
of Parker, Gerrit Smith, Wasson, Johnson, Ripley, Channing, and his volume
on the History of Transcendentalism in New England, as well as his Boston
Unitarianism, and Recollections and Impressions, indicate that his literary
interests were quite as active as his theological.

The literary tastes of Unitarian ministers are indicated by the large
number of them who have written poetry that passes beyond the limits of
mediocrity. The names of John Pierpont, Andrews Norton, Samuel Gilman,
Nathaniel L. Frothingham, the younger Henry Ware, W.B.O. Peabody, William
Henry Furness, William Newell, William Parsons Lunt, Frederic H. Hedge,
James F. Clarke, Theodore Parker, Chandler Robbins, Edmund H. Sears,
Charles T. Brooks, Robert C. Waterston, Thomas Hill, and others, have been
lovingly commemorated in Alfred P. Putnam's Singers and Songs of the
Liberal Faith. Hymns of nearly all these men are in common use in many
congregations, and some of their work has found a place in every hymnal.

No one can read the sermons of Thomas Starr King without feeling their
literary grace and finish of style, as well as their intellectual vigor.
His lectures marked his literary interest, which shows itself in his
Christianity and Humanity and his Substance and Show. Especially does it
appear in his delightful book on The White Hills, their Legends, Landscape,
and Poetry. In his day, Henry Giles was widely known as a lecturer; and his
numerous volumes of literary interpretation and criticism, especially his
Human Life in Shakespeare, were read with appreciation. In his District
School as it was, and My Religious Experience at my Native Home, Warren
Burton described in simple but effective prose a kind of life that has long
since passed away. His educational lectures and books helped on the cause
of public school education, a subject in which he was greatly interested.

Unitarian ministers have also made many contributions to local and general
history. The history of King's Chapel by Francis W.P. Greenwood may be
mentioned as a specimen of the former kind of work; but Greenwood also
published several volumes of sermons, as well as biographical and literary
volumes. A History of the Second Church in Boston, with Lives of Increase
and Cotton Mather, was published by Chandler Robbins. The theological
history of Unitarianism was ably discussed by George E. Ellis in A
Half-century of the Unitarian Controversy. He devoted much attention to the
history of New England, gave many lectures and addresses on subjects
connected therewith, published biographies of Anne Hutchinson, William
Penn, Count Rumford, Jared Sparks, and Charles W. Upham. His volumes on The
Red Man and the White Man in North America, The Puritan Theocracy, and
others, show his historical ability and his large grasp of his subjects.
Joseph Henry Allen published an Historical Sketch of the Unitarian Movement
since the Reformation, in the American Church History series. In Our
Liberal Movement in Theology, and its Sequel, he critically and
appreciatively treated of the history of Unitarianism in New England, and
of the men who were most important in its development. His taste for
historical studies appeared in his Christian History in its Three Great
Periods, a work of admirable critical judgment, sobriety of statement, and
concise presentation of the essential facts.

Alvan Lamson produced a book of critical value in The Church of the First
Three Centuries, which treats of the origin of the Trinitarian beliefs
during that period. A work of a similar character was done by Frederic
Huidekoper, in whose books were included the results of many years of
minute research, and of critical investigation into the origins of
Christianity.

Books of a widely different nature were written by Artemas B. Muzzey in his
Personal Recollection of the Men in the Battle of Lexington, and
Reminiscences of Men of the Revolution and their Families. He published
several volumes of sermons, as well as a number of educational works.
Somewhat of a theologian and an ardent student and expounder of philosophy,
William R. Alger has made himself widely known by his books on The Genius
of Solitude, Friendships of Women, and The School of Life. His fine
literary judgments, his artistic appreciations, and his richness of
sentiment and imagination show themselves in these attractive volumes. He
has also published a Life of Edwin Forrest, with a Critical History of the
Dramatic Art. His Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life is a
work of ripe scholarship and great literary merit, and is everywhere
recognized as an authority.

[Sidenote: Unitarians as Historians.]

In the chapter on historians, in his American Literature, Professor Charles
F. Richardson enumerates seventeen writers, twelve of whom were Unitarians.
It was in Cambridge and Boston, amongst the graduates of Harvard College,
that American historical writing began, and that it attained its greatest
successes. The same causes that had given the Unitarians pre-eminence in
other directions made them especially so in this, where wide learning and
sound criticism were of importance. Wealth, leisure, intellectual
emancipation, sympathetic interest in all that is human, combined with
scholarship and plodding industry, gave the historians an unusual equipment
for their tasks.

It may be justly said that historical writing in this country began with
Jeremy Belknap, the predecessor of Dr. Channing in the Federal Street
Church. When settled in Dover, he wrote his History of New Hampshire; and
after his removal to Boston he produced a biography of Watts and two
volumes of American Biographies. He first voiced the historical interest
that was awakened by the establishment of national independence, and the
desire to know of the past of the American people. His chief service to
historical studies, however, was in the formation of the Massachusetts
Historical Society.

Hannah Adams was not only a Unitarian, but the first woman in this country
to enter upon a literary career. Her View of Religious Opinions, first
issued in 1784, afterwards changed to a Dictionary of Religions, was the
earliest work attempting to give an account of all the religions of the
world. It was followed by her History of New England, and by her History of
the Jews. She also took part in the religious controversies of the day, her
contest with Dr. Jedediah Morse being one of the minor phases of the
struggle between the Unitarians and the Orthodox Congregationalists; and
her Evidences of Christianity, as well as her letters on the Gospels, were
written from the Unitarian point of view. Her books had no literary value,
but in their time they helped to foster the growing interest in American
subjects.

Alexander Young, minister of the New South Church in Boston, rendered
valuable service to historical investigations by his Chronicles of the
Pilgrim Fathers of the Colony of Plymouth and his Chronicles of the First
Planters of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay, works that were scholarly,
accurate, and judicious. Perhaps his most important service was the editing
of the Library of Old English Prose Writers, in nine volumes, which
appeared from 1831 to 1834, and included such works as Sidney's Defence of
Poesie and Sir Thomas Browne's Urn Burial. Of his historical works, O.B.
Frothingham has justly said that "they showed extensive and accurate
knowledge, extraordinary zeal in research, singular impartiality of
judgment, great activity of mind, a strong inclination towards ethical as
distinguished from speculative subjects, a passionate love of books and
elegant letters."[1]

Of the greater historians, Bancroft, Prescott, Motley, Hildreth, Sparks,
Palfrey, Ticknor, Parkman, Higginson, Parton, and Fiske were Unitarians.
Three of these men were sons of Unitarian ministers, and four of them
prepared for that profession or entered upon its duties. It is not
desirable that any attempt should be made here to estimate their historical
labors, for their position and their achievements are well known.

It would be interesting to give an account of the Unitarian connections and
sympathies of these writers, but the materials are not at hand in the case
of most of them. One or two illustrations will suffice for them all,
indicating their religious tastes and preferences. In 1829 Prescott made a
careful examination of the evidences for belief in Christianity, and his
biographer says that "the conclusions at which he arrived were, that the
narratives of the Gospels were authentic; and that, even if Christianity
were not a divine revelation, no system of morals was so likely to fit him
for happiness here and hereafter. But he did not find in the Gospels or in
any part of the New Testament the doctrines commonly accounted orthodox,
and he deliberately recorded his rejection of them." At a later time he
stated his creed in these words: "To do well and act justly, to fear and to
love God, and to love our neighbor as ourselves--in these is the essence of
religion. To do this is the safest, our only safe course. For what we can
believe we are not responsible, supposing we examine candidly and
patiently. For what we do we shall indeed be accountable. The doctrines of
the Saviour unfold the whole code of morals by which our conduct should be
regulated."[2] Prescott was a regular attendant at the First Church in
Boston.

In his biography of George Ticknor, George S. Hilliard says that "the
strong religious impressions which Mr. Ticknor received in early years
deepened as his character matured into personal convictions, the confirmed
and ruling principles of his life. He had been brought up in the doctrines
of Calvinistic orthodoxy, but later serious reflection led him to reject
those doctrines; and soon after his return from Europe he joined Dr.
Channing's church, of which he continued through life a faithful member. He
was a sincere Liberal Christian, and his convictions were firm, but they
were held without bigotry, and he never allowed them to interfere with
kindliness and courtesy." It may be added that Ticknor was an active member
of the church with which he was connected, that in 1822 he took charge of a
class of boys in the Sunday-school, which he kept for eight years. In 1839
and the next year he gave a course of instruction in the history and
contents of the Bible to a class of young girls, for which he prepared
himself carefully.[3]

The influence exerted by the historians in teaching love of country and a
true patriotism may be accounted as very large. That men thoroughly
grounded in principles of religious liberty, in high ideals of justice and
humanity, in the broadest spirit of toleration and freedom of opinion,
should have written our histories, is of no small importance in the
formation of American character. That they have made many Unitarians we
cannot suppose, but that their influence has been large in the development
of a true spirit of nationality we have a right to think. They have
indicated concretely the effects of bigotry and intolerance, and they have
not failed to point out the defects in the practices of the Puritans. In so
far as they have had to deal with religious subjects, they have taught the
true Unitarian idea of liberty of conscience and freedom of opinion. They
have wisely helped to make it possible for many religions to live kindly
side by side, and to give every creed the right of utterance. These ideals
had been developed before our historians began to write, but these men have
helped to make them the inheritance of the whole nation. All the more
effective has been their teaching that it has grown out of the events of
our history, and has not been the voice of a merely personal opinion. But
we owe much to them that they have seen the true meaning of our history,
and that they have uttered it with clearness of interpretation and with
vigorous moral emphasis.

[Sidenote: Scientific Unitarians.]

A considerable number of the leading men of science have been Unitarians.
Notable among the mathematicians were Nathaniel Bowditch, Benjamin Peirce,
and Thomas Hill, who was president of Antioch College and of Harvard
University. Among the astronomers have been Benjamin Gould, Maria Mitchell,
Asaph Hall, and Edward C. Picketing. Of Maria Mitchell it was said that she
"was entirely ignorant of the peculiar phrases and customs of rigid
sectarians." Her biographer says she "never joined any church, but for
years before she left Nantucket she attended the Unitarian church, and her
sympathies, as long as she lived, were with that denomination, especially
with the more liberally inclined portion."[4] James Jackson, the first
physician of the Massachusetts General Hospital, should be named in this
connection. Joseph Lovering, the physicist, and Jeffries Wyman, the
comparative anatomist, are also to be included. And here belongs Louis
Agassiz, who has had more influence than any other man in developing an
interest in science among the people generally. He gave to scientific
investigations the largest importance for scientific men themselves. At the
same time he was a religious man and a theist. "In religion," says his
biographer, "Agassiz very liberal and tolerant, and respected the views and
convictions of every one. In his youth and early manhood, Agassiz was
undoubtedly a materialist, or, more exactly, a sceptic; but in time, and
little by little, his studies led him to belief in a divine Creative Power.
He was more in sympathy with Unitarianism than with any other Christian
denomination."[5]

[Sidenote: Unitarian Essayists.]

A considerable number of essayists, lecturers, and general writers have
been Unitarians. Among these have been Edwin P. Whipple, George Ripley,
Mrs. Ednah D. Cheney, John S. Dwight, Professor Charles Eliot Norton, Henry
T. Tuckerman, James T. Fields, and Professor Francis J. Child. These
writers represent several phases of Unitarian opinion, but they belong to
this fellowship by birthright or intellectual sympathies. In the same
company may be placed Henry D. Thoreau and John Burroughs, not because they
had any direct connection with Unitarianism, but because the religious
convictions they expressed are such as most Unitarians accept.

To the Unitarian fellowship belong Margaret Fuller, Lydia Maria Child,
Caroline M. Kirkland, Grace Greenwood (Mrs. Lippincott), and Julia Ward
Howe. All the early associations of Margaret Fuller were with Unitarians;
and her brother, Arthur Fuller, became a Unitarian minister. In her maturer
life she was with the transcendentalists, finding in Rev. W.H. Channing and
Emerson her spiritual teachers. Writing of her debt to Emerson, she said,
"His influence has been more beneficial to me than that of any American;
and from him I first learned what is meant by an inward life."[6] She was
a pronounced individualist, an intense lover of spiritual liberty, a friend
of those who live in the spirit. This may be seen in what she called her
credo, a sentence or two from which will indicate her type of thought. "I
will not loathe sects, persuasions, systems," she writes, "though I cannot
abide in them one moment; for I see that by most men they are still
needed." "Ages may not produce one worthy to loose the shoes of the Prophet
of Nazareth; yet there will surely be another manifestation of this word
which was in the beginning. The very greatness of this manifestation
demands a greater. We have had a Messiah to teach and reconcile. Let us now
have a man to live out all the symbolical forms of human life, with the
calm beauty of a Greek god, with the deep consciousness of Moses, with the
holy love and purity of Jesus."[7]

[Sidenote: Unitarian Novelists.]

Among the novelists have been several who were Unitarian ministers,
including Sylvester Judd, William Ware, Thomas W. Higginson, and Edward
Everett Hale. Judd's Margaret was of the very essence of transcendentalism,
besides being an excellent interpretation of some of the phases of New
England character. Ware's historical novels were popular in their day, and
are now worth going back to by modern readers, and especially by those who
do not insist upon having their romances hot from the press. Catherine M.
Sedgwick is another novelist worth returning to by modern readers, and
especially by those who would know of New England life in the early part of
the nineteenth century. She became an ardent Unitarian, and her biography
gives interesting glimpses of the early struggles of that faith in York
City. Other Unitarian women novelists were Lydia Maria Child, Grace
Greenwood, Helen Hunt Jackson, Louisa M. Alcott, and Harriet Prescott
Spofford.

In naming John T. Trowbridge, Bayard Taylor, Bret Harte, William D.
Howells, and Nathaniel Hawthorne as Unitarians, no merely sectarian aim is
in view. In the common use of the word, Hawthorne was not a religious man;
for he rarely attended church, and he had no interest in ecclesiastical
formalities. No man who has written in this country, however, was more
deeply influenced than he by those spiritual ideas and traditions which may
be properly called Unitarian. The same may be said of Howells, who is not a
Unitarian in any denominational sense; but his religious interests and
convictions bring him into sympathy with the movement represented by
Unitarianism.

It may be said of the most popular novels of Edward Everett Hale, such as
Ten Times One Is Ten, In His Name, His Level Best, that they are the best
possible interpretations of the Unitarian spirit; for it is not merely a
certain conception of God that characterizes Unitarianism, nor yet a
particular theological attitude. It is the wish to make religion real,
practical, altruistic.

[Sidenote: Unitarian Artists and Poets.]

Unitarianism has been as friendly to poetry and the other arts as it has
been to philosophy and science. In its early days it fostered the artistic
careers of Washington Allston, the painter, and Charles Bulfinch, the
architect. It has also nurtured the sculptors, William Wetmore Story, who
was also poet and essayist; Harriet Hosmer, whose career shows what a woman
can accomplish in opening new opportunities for her sex; Larkin G. Mead and
Daniel C. French. To these must be added the actors Fanny Kemble and
Charlotte Cushman.

It is as one of the earliest of our poets that Charles Sprague is to be
mentioned, and one or two of his poems are deservedly remembered. Jones
Very was one of the best of the transcendental poets, and a few of his
religious poems have not been surpassed. The younger William Ellery
Channing and Edward R. Sill belong to the same school, and deservedly keep
their places with those who admire what is choice in thought and individual
in artistic workmanship. As a biographer of O.B. Frothingham and as a
member of his congregation, it may be proper to add here the name of Edmund
C. Stedman.

Among our greater poets, Bryant, Longfellow, Emerson, Holmes, Lowell,
Stoddard, and Bayard Taylor were Unitarians. As being essentially of the
same way of thinking and believing, Whittier and Whitman might also be so
classed. Though Whittier was a Friend by education and by conviction, he
was of the liberal school that places religion above sect and interprets
dogmas in the light of human needs and affections. If he had been born and
bred a Unitarian, he could not have more sympathetically interpreted the
Unitarian faith than he has in his poems. Whitman had in him the heart of
transcendentalism, and he was informed of its inmost spirit. To the more
radical Unitarians his pleas for liberty, his intense individualism, and
his idealistic conceptions of nature and man would be acceptable, and, it
may be, enthusiastically approved.

William Cullen Bryant early became a Unitarian; and he listened to the
preaching of Follen, Dewey, Osgood, and Bellows. "A devoted lover of
religious liberty," Bellows said of him, "he was an equal lover of religion
itself--not in any precise, dogmatic form, but in its righteousness,
reverence, and charity. He was not a dogmatist, but preferred practical
piety and working virtue to all modes of faith."[8] It would be difficult
to give a better definition of Unitarianism itself; and it was the large
humanity of it, and its generous outlook upon the lives of individuals and
nations, that made of Bryant a faithful Unitarian.

Henry W. Longfellow was educated as a Unitarian, his father having been one
of the first vice-presidents of the Unitarian Association,--a position he
held for many years. Stephen Longfellow was an intimate friend of Dr.
Channing in his college years, and he followed the advance of his classmate
in the growth of his liberal faith. "It was in the doctrine and the spirit
of the early Unitarianism that Henry Longfellow was nurtured at church and
at home," says his brother. "And there is no reason to suppose that he ever
found these insufficient, or that he ever essentially departed from them.
Of his genuine religious feeling his writings, give ample testimony. His
nature was at heart devout; his ideas of life, of death, and of what lies
beyond, were essentially cheerful, hopeful, optimistic. He did not care to
talk much on theological points; but he believed in the supremacy of good
in the world and in the universe."[9]

Although Oliver Wendell Holmes was educated in the older forms of religious
beliefs, he became one of the most devoted of Unitarians. His rejection of
Calvinism is marked by his intense aversion to it, shown upon many a page
of his prose and poetry. No other prominent Unitarian was so aggressive
against the doctrines of the older time. He was a regular attendant at
King's Chapel upon the preaching of Dr. F.W.P. Greenwood, Dr. Ephraim
Peabody, and Rev. H.W. Foote; but, when he was in Pittsfield, for a number
of years he went to the Episcopal church, and at Beverly Farms in his later
years, during the summer, he attended a Baptist church. He was, therefore,
a conservative Unitarian, but with a generous recognition of the good in
other religious bodies. At the Unitarian Festival of 1859 Dr. Holmes was
the presiding officer, and in his address he gave a statement of the
Unitarian faith that clearly defines his own religious position:--

  We believe in vital religion, or the religion of life, as contrasted
  with that of trust in hierarchies, establishments, and traditional
  formulae, settled by the votes of wavering majorities in old councils
  and convocations. We believe in evangelical religion, or the religion
  of glad tidings, in distinction from the schemes that make our planet
  the ante-chamber of the mansions of eternal woe to the vast majority of
  all the men, women, and children that have lived and suffered upon its
  surface. We believe that every age must judge the Scriptures by its own
  light; and we mean, by God's grace, to exercise that privilege, without
  asking permission of pope or bishop, or any other human tribunal. We
  believe that sin is the much-abused step-daughter of ignorance, and
  this not only from our own observation, but on the authority of him
  whose last prayer on earth was that the perpetrators of the greatest
  crime on record might be forgiven, for they knew not what they were
  doing. We believe, beyond all other beliefs, in the fatherly relation
  of the Deity to all his creatures; and, wherever there is a conflict of
  Scriptural or theological doctrines, we hold this to be the article of
  faith that stands supreme above all others. And, lastly, we know that,
  whether we agree precisely in these or any other articles of belief, we
  can meet in Christian charity and fellowship, in that we all agree in
  the love of our race, and the worship of a common Father, as taught us
  by the Master whom we profess to follow.[10]

Educated as a Unitarian, James Russell Lowell felt none of the animosity
toward Calvinism that was characteristic of Holmes; but his poetry
everywhere indicates the liberality and nobleness of his religious
convictions. That he was not sectarian, that he felt no active interest in
dogmatic theology as such, is only saying that he was a genuine Unitarian.
Writing in 1838, Lowell said, "I am an infidel to the Christianity of
to-day."[11] In a letter to Longfellow written in 1845, he made a more
explicit statement of his attitude: "Christ has declared war against the
Christianity of the world, and it must down. There is no help for it. The
church, that great bulwark of our practical paganism, must be reformed from
foundation to weathercock."[12] These passages indicate his
dissatisfaction with an external religion and with dogmatic theology. On
the other hand, his letters and his poems prove that he was strongly
grounded in the faith of the spirit. In that faith he lived and died; and,
if in later years he gave recognition to some of the higher claims of the
older types of Christianity, it was a generous concession to their rational
qualities and their practical results, and in no degree an acceptance of
their teachings. The definite form of Lowell's faith he expressed when he
wrote, "I will never enter a church from which a prayer goes up for the
prosperous only, or for the unfortunate among the oppressors, and not for
the oppressed and fallen; as if God had ordained our pride of caste and our
distinctions of color, and as if Christ had forgotten those that are in
bonds."[13]

Emerson left the pulpit, and he withdrew from outward conformity to the
church; but that there came a time when he no longer felt an interest in
religion or that he even ceased to be a Christian, after his own manner of
interpretation, there is no reason to assume. His radicalism was in the
direction of a deeper and truer religion, a religion of the spirit. He
rejected the faith that is founded on the letter, on historical evidences,
that is a body without a soul. He was not the less a Unitarian because he
ceased to be one outwardly, for he carried forward the Unitarian principles
to their legitimate conclusion. The newer Unitarianism owes to him more
than to any other man, and of him more than of any other man the older
Unitarianism can boast that he was its product.

Such a survey as this indicates how great has been the influence of
Unitarianism upon American literature. There can be no question that it has
been one of the greatest formative forces in its development. "Almost
everybody," says Professor Barrett Wendell, "who attained literary
distinction in New England during the nineteenth century was either a
Unitarian or closely associated with Unitarian influences,"[14] More even
than that may be said, for it is the Unitarian writers who have most truly
interpreted American institutions and American ideals.

[1] Boston Unitarianism, 168.

[2] George Ticknor, Life of William Hickling Prescott, 91, 164.

[3] George S. Hillard, Life, Letters, and Journals of George Ticknor,
    327.

[4] Phoebe Mitchell Kendall, Life, Letters, and Journals of Maria
    Mitchell, 239.

[5] Jules Marcou, Life of Agassiz, II. 220.

[6] Memoirs, I. 194.

[7] Memoirs, II. 91.

[8] John Bigelow, Life of Bryant, 274, 285.

[9] Samuel Longfellow, Life of H.W. Longfellow, I. 14

[10] Quarterly Journal, VI. 359, July, 1859.

[11] Biography of James Russell Lowell, by H.E. Scudder, I. 63.

[12] Ibid., 169.

[13] Biography of James Russell Lowell, by H.E. Scudder, I. 144, quoted
     from Conversations on Some of the Old Poets.

[14] A Literary History of America, 289.




XX.


THE FUTURE OF UNITARIANISM.

The early Unitarians in this country did not desire to form a new sect.
They wished to remain Congregationalists, and to continue unbroken the
fellowship that had existed from the beginning of New England. When they
were compelled to separate from the older churches, they refrained from
organizing a strictly defined religious body, and have called theirs a
"movement." The words "denomination" and "sect" have been repellent to
them; and they have attempted, not only to avoid their use, but to escape
from that which they represent. They have wished to establish a broad, free
fellowship, that would draw together all liberal thinkers and movements
into one wide and inclusive religious body.

The Unitarian body accepted in theory from the first the principles of
liberty, reason, and free inquiry. These were fully established, however,
only as the result of discussion, agitation, and much friction. Theodore
Parker was subjected to severe criticism, Emerson was regarded with
distrust, and the Free Religious Association was organized as a protest and
for the sake of a freer fellowship. In fact, however, Parker was never
disfellowshipped; and from the first many Unitarians regarded Emerson as
the teacher of a higher type of spiritual religion. Through this period of
controversy, when there was much of bitter feeling engendered, no one was
expelled from the Unitarian body for opinion's sake. All stayed in who did
not choose to go out, there being no trials for, heresy. The result of this
method has been that the Unitarian body is now one of the most united and
harmonious in Christendom. The free spirit has abundantly justified itself.
When it was found that every one could think for himself, express freely
his own beliefs, and live in accordance with his own convictions,
controversy came to an end. When heresy was no longer sought for, heresy
ceased to have an existence. The result has not been discord and distrust,
but peace, harmony, and a more perfect fellowship.

In the Unitarian body from the first there has been a free spirit of
inquiry. Criticism has had a free course. The Bible has been subjected to
the most searching investigation, as have all the foundations of religion.
As a result, no religious body shows, a more rational interest in the Bible
or a more confident trust in its great spiritual teachings.

The early Unitarians anticipated that Unitarianism would soon become the
popular form of religion accepted in this country. Thomas Jefferson thought
that all young men of his time would die Unitarians. Others were afraid
that Unitarianism would become sectarian in its methods as soon as it
became popular, which they anticipated would occur in a brief period.[1]
The cause of the slow growth of Unitarianism is to be found in the fact
that it has been too modern in its spirit, too removed from the currents of
popular belief, to find ready acceptance on the part of those who are
largely influenced by traditional beliefs. The religion of the great
majority of persons is determined by tradition or social heredity, by what
they are taught in childhood or hear commonly repeated around them. Only
persons who are naturally independent and self-reliant can overcome the
difficulties in the way of embracing a form of religion which carries them
outside of the established tradition. For these reasons it is not
surprising that as yet there has not been a rapid growth of organized
Unitarianism. In fact, Unitarianism has made little progress outside of New
England, and those regions to which New England traditions have been
carried by those who migrated westward.

The early promise for the growth of Unitarianism in the south, from 1825 to
1840, failed because there was no background of tradition for its
encouragement and support. Individuals could think their way into the
Unitarian faith, but their influence proved ineffective when all around
them the old tradition prevailed as stubborn conviction. Even the influence
of a literature pervaded with Unitarianism proved ineffective in securing
any rapid spread of the new faith, except as it has found its way into the
common Christian tradition by a process of spiritual infiltration. The
result has been that Unitarianism has grown slowly, because it has been
obliged to create new traditions, to form a new habit of thought, and to
make free inquiry a common motive and purpose.

In a word, Unitarianism has been a heresy; and therefore there has been no
open door for it. Most heretical sects have been narrow in spirit, bigoted
in temper, and intensely sectarian in method. Their isolation from the
great currents of the world's life acts on them intellectually and
spiritually as the process of in-and-in breeding does upon animals: it
intensifies their peculiarities and defects. A process of atrophy or
degeneration takes place; and they grow from generation to generation more
isolated, sectarian, and peculiar. Unitarianism has escaped this tendency
because it has accepted the modern spirit and because to a large degree its
adherents have been educated and progressive persons. Its principles of
liberty, reason, and free inquiry, have brought its followers into touch
with those forces that are making most rapidly for the development of
mankind. Unitarians have been conspicuously capable of individual
initiative; and yet their culture has been large enough to give them a
conservative loyalty to the past and to the profounder and more spiritual
phases of the Christian tradition. While strongly individualistic and
heretical they have been sturdily faithful to Christianity, seeking to
revive its earlier and more simple life.

A chief value of Unitarianism in the past has been that it has pioneered
the way for the development of the modern spirit within the limits of
Christianity. The churches from which it came out have followed it far on
the way it has travelled. Its most liberal advocates of the first
generation were more conservative than many of the leaders are to-day in
the older churches. Its period of criticism, controversy, and agitation is
being reproduced in many another religious body of the present time. The
debates about miracles, the theory of the supernatural, the authenticity of
Scripture, the nature of Christ, and other problems that are now agitating
most of the progressive Protestant denominations, are almost precisely
those that exercised Unitarians years ago. The only final solution of these
problems, that will give peace and harmony, is that of free inquiry and
rational interpretation, which Unitarians have finally accepted. If other
religious bodies would profit by this experience and by the Unitarian
method for the solution of these problems, it would be greatly to their
advantage.

The Unitarian churches have been few in number, and they have suffered from
isolation and provincialism. These defects of the earlier period have now
in part passed away, new traditions have been created, a cosmopolitan
spirit has been developed, and Unitarianism has become a world movement.
This was conspicuously indicated at the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
organization of the American Unitarian Association, and in the formation of
The International Council of Unitarian and Other Liberal Religious Thinkers
and Workers. It was then shown that Unitarianism has found expression in
many parts of the world, that it answers to an intellectual and spiritual
need of the time, and that it is capable of interpreting the religious
convictions of persons belonging to many phases of human development and
culture. A broader, more philosophical, and humaner tradition is being
formed, that will in time become a wide-reaching influence for the
development of a religious life that will be at once more scientific and
more spiritual in its nature than anything the past has produced.

The promise of Unitarianism for the future does not consist in its becoming
a sect and in its striving for the development of merely denominational
interests, but in its cultivation of the deeper spiritual life and in its
cosmopolitan sympathy with all phases of religious growth. Its mission is
one with philanthropy, charity, and altruism. Its attitude should be that
of free inquiry, loyalty to the spirit of philosophy and science, and
fidelity to the largest results of human progress. It should always
represent justice, righteousness, and personal integrity. That promise is
not to be found in the rapid multiplication of its churches or in its
devotion to propagandist aims, but in its loyalty to the free spirit and in
its exemplification of the worth and beauty of the religion of humanity. As
a sect, it will fail; but as a movement towards a larger faith, a purer
life, and a more inclusive fellowship, the future is on its side.

While recognizing the Unitarian as a great pioneer movement in religion, it
should be seen that its strong individualism has been a cause of its slow
growth. Until recently the Unitarian body has been less an organic phase of
the religious life of the time than a group of isolated churches held
together only by the spontaneous bonds of fellowship and good will. Such a
body can have little effective force in any effort at missionary
propagandism or in making its spirit dominant in the religious life of the
country. As heredity and variation are but two phases of organic growth, so
are tradition and individual initiative but two phases of social progress.
In both processes--organic growth and social progress--the primary force is
the conservative one, that maintains what the past has secured. If
individualism is necessary to healthy growth, associative action is
essential to any growth whatever of the social body. In so far as
individual perfection can be attained, it cannot be by seeking it as an end
in itself: it can be reached only by means of that which conduces to
general social progress.

It may be questioned whether there is any large future for Unitarianism
unless all excessive individualism is modified and controlled. Such
individualism is in opposition to the altruistic and associative spirit of
the present time. Liberty is not an end in itself, but its value is to be
found in the opportunity it gives for a natural and fitting association of
individuals with each other. Freedom of religious inquiry is but an
instrument for securing spiritual growth, not merely for the individual,
but for all mankind. So long as liberty of thought and spiritual freedom
remain the means of individual gratification, they are ineffective as
spiritual forces. They must be given a wider heritage in the life of
mankind before they can accomplish their legitimate results in securing for
men freedom from the external bonds of traditionalism. Even reason is but
an instrument for securing truth, and not truth itself.

Rightly understood, authority in the church is but the principle of social
action, respect for what mankind has gained of spiritual power through its
centuries of development. Authority is therefore as necessary as freedom,
and the two must be reconciled in order that progress may take place. When
so understood and so limited, authority becomes essential to all growth in
freedom and individuality. What above all else is needed in religion is
social action on the part of freedom-loving men and women, who, in the
strength of their individuality, co-operate for the attainment, not of
their own personal good, but the advancement of mankind. This is what
Unitarianism has striven for, and what it has gained in some measure. It
has sought to make philanthropy the test of piety, and to make liberty a
means of social fidelity.

Free inquiry cannot mean liberty to think as one pleases, but only to think
the truth, and to recognize with submissive spirit the absolute conditions
and the limitations of the truth. Though religion is life and not a creed,
it none the less compels the individual to loyalty of social action; and
that means nothing more and nothing less than faithfulness to what will
make for the common good, and not primarily what will minister to one's own
personal development, intellectually and spiritually.

The future of Unitarianism will depend on its ability further to reconcile,
individualism with associative action, the spirit of free inquiry with the
larger human tradition. Its advantage cannot be found in the abandonment of
Christianity, which has been the source and sustaining power of its life,
but in the development of the Christian tradition by the processes of
modern thought. The real promise of Unitarianism is in identifying itself
with the altruistic spirit of the age, and in becoming the spiritual
interpreter of the social aspirations of mankind. In order to this result
it must not only withdraw from its extreme individualism, but bring its
liberty into organic relations with its spirit of social fidelity. It will
then welcome the fact that freedom and authority are identical in their
deeper meanings. It will discover that service is more important than
culture, and that culture is of value to the end that service may become
more effective. Then it will cheerfully recognize the truth that the social
obligation is as important as the individual right, and that the two make
the rounded whole of human action.

[1] See pp. 131, 328.




APPENDIX.




A. FORMATION OF THE LOCAL CONFERENCES.


The local conferences came into existence in the following order: Wisconsin
and Minnesota Quarterly Conference, organized at Sheboygan, Wis., October
24, 1866; New York Central Conference of Liberal Christians, Rochester,
November 21, 1866; Conference of Unitarian and Other Christian Churches of
the Middle and Southern States, Wilmington, Del., November 22, 1866;
Norfolk Conference of Unitarian and Other Christian Churches, Dedham,
Mass., November 28, 1866; New York and Hudson River Local Conference, New
York, December 6, 1866; Essex Conference of Liberal Christian Churches,
Salem, Mass., December 11, 1866; Lake Erie Conference of Unitarian and
Other Christian Societies, Meadville, Penn., December 11, 1866; Worcester
County Conference of Congregational (Unitarian) and Other Christian
Societies, Worcester, Mass., December 12, 1866; South Middlesex Conference
of Congregational Unitarian and Other Christian Societies, Cambridgeport,
Mass., December 12, 1866; Suffolk Conference of Unitarian and Other
Christian Churches, Boston, December 17, 1866; North Middlesex Conference
of Unitarian Congregational and Other Christian Churches, Littleton, Mass.,
December 18, 1866.

The Champlain Liberal Christian Conference, Montpelier, Vt., January 9,
1867; the Connecticut Valley Conference of Congregational Unitarian and
Other Christian Churches, Greenfield, Mass., January 16, 1867; the Plymouth
and Bay Conference, Hingham, Mass., February 5, 1867; the Ohio Valley
Conference of Unitarian and Other Christian Churches, Louisville, Ky.,
February 22, 1867; the Channing Conference, Providence, R.I., April 17,
1867; Liberal Christian Conference of Western Maine, Brunswick, Me.,
October 22, 1867.

The Local Conference of Liberal Christians of the Missouri Valley, Weston,
Mo., March 18, 1868; the Chicago Conference of Unitarian Churches, Chicago,
December 2, 1868; Western Illinois and Iowa Conference of Unitarian and
Other Christian Churches, Sheffield, Ill., January 28, 1869; Cape Cod
Conference of Unitarian Congregational and Other Liberal Christian
Churches, Barnstable, Mass., November 30, 1870; Conference of Liberal
Christians of the Missouri Valley, Kansas City, Mo., May 3, 1871; Michigan
Conference of Unitarian and Other Christian Churches, Jackson, October 21,
1875; the Fraternity of Illinois Liberal Christian Societies, Bloomington,
November 11, 1875; Iowa Association of Unitarian and Other Independent
Churches, Burlington, June 1, 1877; Indiana Conference of Unitarian and
Independent Religious Societies, Hobart, October 1, 1878; Ohio State
Conference of Unitarian and Other Liberal Societies, Cincinnati, May, 1879.

Kansas Unitarian Conference, December 2, 1880; Nebraska Unitarian
Association, Omaha, November 9, 1882; the Southern Conference of Unitarian
and Other Christian Churches, Atlanta, Ga., April 24, 1884; the New York
Conference of Unitarian Churches superseded the New York and Hudson River
Conference at a session held in New York, April 29, 1885; Pacific Unitarian
Conference, San Francisco, November 2, 1885; the Illinois Conference of
Unitarian and Other Independent Societies superseded the Illinois
Fraternity in 1885; Minnesota Unitarian Conference, St. Paul, November 17,
1887; Hancock Conference of Unitarian and Other Christian Churches, Bar
Harbor, Me., August 8, 1889; Missouri Valley Unitarian Conference
superseded the Kansas Unitarian Conference, December 2, 1889.

Rocky Mountain Conference of Unitarian and Other Liberal Christian
Churches, Denver, Col., May 17, 1890; the Unitarian Conference of the
Middle States and Canada, Brooklyn, N.Y., November 19, 1890, superseded New
York State Conference; Central States Conference of Unitarian Churches,
Cincinnati, December 9, 1891, superseded the Ohio State Conference; Pacific
Northwest Conference of Unitarian, Liberal Christian, and Independent
Churches, Puyallup, Wash., August 1, 1892; Southern California Conference
of Unitarian and Other Liberal Christian Churches, Santa Ana, October 1892.

Four of the early conferences, the New York Central, Champlain, Western
Maine, and Missouri Valley, were not distinctly Unitarian. These were union
organizations, in which Universalists, and perhaps other denominations,
were associated with Unitarians. The New York Central Conference refused to
send delegates to the National Conference on account of its union
character. In other conferences, such as the Connecticut Valley and the
Norfolk, Universalists took part in their organization, and were for a
number of years connected with them.

Most of the conferences organized from 1875 to 1885 were within state
limits; but those organized subsequently to 1885 were more distinctly
district conferences, and included several states. Several of the
conferences have been reorganized in order to bring them into harmony with
the prevailing theory of state or district limits at the time when such
action took place. A few of the conferences had only a name to live, and
they soon passed out of existence.

In the local, as in the National Conference, two purposes contended for
expression, the one looking to the uniting of all liberal denominations in
one general organization, and the other to the promotion of distinctly
Unitarian interests. In the National Conference the denominational purpose
controlled the aims kept most clearly in view; but the other purpose found
expression in the addition of "Other Christian Churches" to the name,
though only in the most limited way did such churches connect themselves
with the conference. The local conferences made like provision for those
not wishing to call themselves distinctly Unitarian. Such desire for
co-operation, however, was in a large degree rendered ineffective by the
fact that the primary aim had in view in the creation of the local
conferences was the increase of the funds of the American Unitarian
Association.




B. UNITARIAN NEWSPAPERS AND MAGAZINES.


There was a very considerable activity from 1825 to 1850 in the publication
of Unitarian periodicals, and probably the energies of the denomination
found a larger expression in that direction than in any other.

In January, 1827, was begun in Boston The Liberal Preacher, a monthly
publication of sermons by living ministers, conducted by the Cheshire
Association of Ministers, with Rev. Thomas R. Sullivan, of Keene, N.H., as
the editor. It was continued for eight or ten years, and with considerable
success.

With November, 1827, Rev. William Ware began the publication in New York
City of The Unitarian, a quarterly magazine, of which the last number
appeared February 15, 1828.

The Unitarian Monitor was begun at Dover, N.H., October 1, 1831, and was
continued until October 10, 1833. It was a fortnightly of four three-column
pages, and was well conducted. It was under the editorial management of
Rev. Samuel K. Lothrop, then the minister in Dover.

The Unitarian Christian, edited by Rev. Stephen G. Bulfinch, was published
quarterly in Augusta, Ga., for a year or two.

In 1823 Rev. Samuel J. May published The Liberal Christian at Brooklyn,
Conn., as a fortnightly county paper of eight small quarto pages. He
followed it by The Christian Monitor and Common People's Adviser, which was
begun in April, 1832, its object being "to promote the free discussion of
all subjects connected with happiness and holiness."

The Unitarian, conducted by Rev. Bernard Whitman, then settled in Waltham,
Mass., was published in Cambridge and Boston during the year 1834, and came
to its end because of the death of Whitman in the last month of the year.
It was a monthly magazine of a distinctly missionary character.

Of a more permanent character was The Unitarian Advocate, the first number
of which was issued in Boston, January, 1828. It was a small 12mo of sixty
pages, monthly, the editor being Rev. Edmund Q. Sewall. He continued in
that capacity to the end of 1829, when it was "conducted by an association
of gentlemen." The purpose was to make a popular magazine at a moderate
price. It came to an end in December, 1832.

With January 1, 1835, was issued in Boston the first number of The Boston
Observer and Religious Intelligencer, a weekly of eight three-column pages,
edited by Rev. George Ripley. It was continued for only six months, when it
was joined to The Christian Register, which took its name as a sub-title
for a time. Its motto, "Liberty, Holiness, Love," was also borrowed by that
paper.

The Western Messenger was begun in Cincinnati, June, 1835, with Rev.
Ephraim Peabody as the editor. It was a monthly of ninety-six pages, and
was ably edited. Owing to the illness of Mr. Peabody, it was removed to
Louisville after the ninth number; and Rev. James Freeman Clarke became the
editor, with Rev. W.H. Channing and Rev. J.H. Perkins as assistants for a
time. It was published by the Western Unitarian Association, and was
discontinued with the number for May, 1841. Among the contributors were
Emerson, Margaret Fuller, William Henry Channing, Christopher P. Cranch,
William G. Eliot, who aided in giving it a high literary character. For a
number of years the American Unitarian Association made an annual
appropriation to aid in its publication.

The Monthly Miscellany of Religion and Letters was begun in Boston with
April, 1839. It was a 12mo of forty-eight pages, monthly. The editor was
Rev. Ezra S. Gannett, by whom it was "designed to furnish religious reading
for the people, treat Unitarian opinions in their practical bearings, and
show their power to produce holiness of life; and by weight of contents to
come between The Christian Register and The Christian Examiner." It was
continued until the end of 1843, when it was absorbed by the latter
periodical.

With the first of January, 1844, was begun The Monthly Religious Magazine,
to meet the needs of those who found The Christian Examiner too scholarly.
The first editor, was Rev. Frederic D. Huntington, who was succeeded by
Rev. Edmund H. Sears, Rev. James W. Thompson, Rev. Rufus Ellis, and Rev.
John H. Morison. The last issue was that of February, 1874.

A large weekly was begun in Boston, January 7, 1843, called The Christian
World, of which Rev. George G. Channing was the publisher and managing
editor. He was assisted by Rev. James Freeman Clarke and Hon. John A.
Andrew, afterward Governor of Massachusetts, as editors or editorial
contributors. The special aims of the paper were "to awaken a deeper
religious interest in all the great philanthropic and benevolent
enterprises of the day." It was continued until December 30, 1848. George
G. Channing was a brother of Dr. Channing, and was settled over two or
three parishes. The paper was ably conducted, and while Unitarian was not
distinctly denominational.

The Christian Inquirer was started in New York, October 17, 1846, and was a
weekly of four six-column pages. It was managed by the New York Unitarian
Association; and it was largely under the control of Rev. Henry W. Bellows,
who in 1850 was assisted by Rev. Samuel Osgood, Rev. James F. Clarke, and
Rev. Frederic H. Hedge.

In 1846 was begun the publication of the Unitarian Annual Register in
Boston by Crosby & Nichols, with Rev. Abiel A. Livermore, then settled in
Keene, N.H., as the editor. In 1851 the work came under the control of the
American Unitarian Association, and as the Year Book of the denomination it
was edited by the secretary or his assistant. From 1860 to 1869 the Year
Book was issued as a part of the December number of The Monthly Journal of
the American Unitarian Association.

The Bible Christian was begun in 1847 at Toronto by Rev. John Cordner, the
minister there, and was continued as a semi-monthly for a brief period.

The Unitarian and Foreign Religious Miscellany was published in Boston
during 1847, with Rev. George E. Ellis as the editor. It was a monthly
magazine devoted to the explanation and defence of Unitarian Christianity;
and its contents were mostly selected from the English Unitarian
periodicals, especially The Prospective Review, The Monthly Reformer, Bible
Christian, The Unitarian, and The Inquirer.

During this period The Christian Examiner had its largest influence upon
the denomination, and came to an end. Its scholarship and its liberality
made it of interest to only a limited constituency, and the publisher was
compelled to discontinue it at the end of 1869 from lack of adequate
support. It was edited from the beginning by the ablest men. Rev. James
Walker and Rev. Francis W.P. Greenwood became the editors in 1831, Rev.
William Ware taking the place of Dr. Walker in 1837. From 1844 to 1849 Rev.
Ezra S. Gannett and Rev. Alvan Lamson were the editors, and they were
succeeded by Rev. George Putnam and Rev. George E. Ellis. In July, 1857,
Rev. Frederic H. Hedge and Rev. Edward E. Hale became the editors, and
continued until 1861. Then the editorship was assumed by Rev. Thomas B.
Fox, who was for several years its owner and publisher; and he was assisted
as editor by Rev. Joseph H. Allen. The magazine was purchased by Mr. James
Miller in 1865, who removed it to New York. Dr. Henry W. Bellows became the
editor, and Mr. Allen continued as assistant, until it was discontinued
with the December number, 1869.

One of the purposes which found expression after the awakening of 1865 was
the establishment of a large popular weekly religious journal that should
reach all classes of liberals throughout the country. The Christian
Inquirer was changed into The Liberal Christian with the number for
December 22, 1866; and under this name it appeared in a larger and more
vigorous form. Dr. Bellows was the editor, and contributors were sought
from all classes of Liberal Christians. The effort made to establish an able
undenominational journal, of a broad and progressive but distinctly liberal
type, was energetic; but the time was not ready for it. With December 2,
1876, the paper became The Inquirer, which was continued to the close of
1877.

There was also planned in 1865 a monthly journal that should be everywhere
acceptable in the homes of liberals of every kind. In January, 1870,
appeared the Old and New, a large monthly magazine, combining popular and
scholarly features. The editors were Dr. Edward E. Hale and Mr. Frederic B.
Perkins. In its pages were first published Dr. Hale's Ten Times Ten, and
also many of the chapters of Dr. James Martineau's Seat of Authority in
Religion. It was discontinued with the number for December, 1875.

The Monthly Religious Magazine was discontinued with the February issue of
1874; and the next month appeared The Unitarian Review and Religious
Magazine, edited by Rev. Charles Lowe. When Lowe died, in June, 1874, he
was succeeded by Rev. Henry H. Barber and Rev. James De Normandie. In 1880
Dr. J.H. Allen became the editor,--a position he held until the magazine
was discontinued, in December, 1891.

In March, 1878, was begun in Chicago the publication of The Pamphlet
Mission, a semi-monthly issue of sermons for missionary circulation, with a
dozen pages of news added in a supplement. In September the name was
changed to Unity; and this publication grew into a small fortnightly
journal, representing the interests of the Western Unitarian Conference. A
few years later it became a weekly; and it has continued as the
representative of the more radical Unitarian opinions, though in 1894 it
became the special organ of The Liberal Congress. The chief editorial
management has been in the hands of Rev. Jenkin Ll. Jones.

The Unitarian was begun in Chicago by Rev. Brooke Herford and Rev. Jabez T.
Sunderland with January, 1886, as the organ of the more conservative
members of the Western Conference. In June, 1887, this monthly magazine was
removed to Ann Arbor, Mr. Sunderland becoming the managing editor; and in
1890 the office of publication was removed to Boston, and Rev. Frederic B.
Mott became the assistant editor. In 1897 the magazine was merged into The
Christian Register.

In 1880 The Rising Faith was published at Manchester, N.H., as a monthly,
and continued for two or three years.

In August, 1891, The Guidon appeared in San Francisco; and in November,
1893, it became The Pacific Unitarian, a monthly representing the interests
of the Unitarian churches on the Pacific coast. Mr. Charles A. Murdock has
been the editor.

The Southern Unitarian was begun at Atlanta, Ga., January, 1893; and it was
published for five years as a monthly by the Southern Conference.

In December, 1891, was begun at Davenport, Ia., with Rev. Arthur M. Judy as
editor, a monthly parish paper, called Old and New. Other parishes joined
in its publication, and in 1895 it became the organ of the Iowa Unitarian
Association. In 1896 it was published in Chicago, with Rev. A.W. Gould as
the editor, in behalf of the interests of the Western Conference. In
September, 1898, its publication was resumed in Davenport by Mr. Judy; and
a year later it became again the organ of the Iowa Association.

The New World, a Quarterly Review of Religion, Ethics, and Theology, was
begun in Boston, March, 1892, and was discontinued with the December number
for 1900. Its editors were Dr. C.C. Everett, Dr. C.H. Toy, Dr. Orello Cone,
with Rev. N.P. Gilman as managing editor.

The Church Exchange began in June, 1893, and was published as a monthly at
Portland, in the interest of the Maine Conference of Unitarian Churches,
with Rev. John C. Perkins as editor. In 1896-97 it was published at
Farmington, and in 1897-99 Mr. H.P. White was the editor. Since 1899 it has
been published in Portland, with Mr. Perkins as editor.

The above list of periodicals is not complete. More detailed information is
desirable, and that the list may be made, full and accurate to date.




INDEX.


_The foot-notes and appendix have been included in the index with
the text._

Abbot, Abiel (Beverly), 131, 133, 262, 350, 351.
Abbot, Abiel (Peterboro), 409.
Abbot, Ezra, 393, 394.
Abbot, Francis Ellingwood, 200-204, 207, 210, 211, 213, 415.
Abolitionists, 353.
Adam, 51, 63.
Adam, William, 296-298.
Adams, Hannah, 265, 423.
Adams, Herbert W., 114, 409.
Adams, John, 58, 136, 351. 377, 380, 382.
Adams, John Quincy, 366, 380.
Adams, Phineas, 95.
African Methodist Episcopal Church, 338, 339.
Agassiz, Louis, 408, 427, 428.
Albee, John, 415.
Alcott, Amos Bronson, 155, 202, 358, 369.
Alcott, Louisa M., 178, 368, 430.
Alger, William Rounseville, 146, 163, 164, 346, 422.
Allen, Joseph, 146, 264, 268, 360, 361, 414.
Allen, Joseph Henry, 165, 261, 361, 393, 414, 421, 450, 451.
Allison, William B., 380, 383.
Allston, Washington, 98, 430.
Allyn, John, 131, 133.
American literature, 412, 413, 415, 416, 435.
"American Unitarianism," 79, 82, 101-104.
Ames, Charles Gordon, 168, 214.
Ames, Fisher, 382.
Ames, Oliver, 382.
Amory, John C., 385.
Andover Theological School, 93.
Andrew, John Albion, 191, 192, 196, 324, 367, 382, 449.
Angell, George T., 336.
Animals, humane treatment of, 335, 336.
Anonymous Association, 127.
Anthology Club, 96.
Anthology, Monthly, 93, 95, 390.
Anthony, Henry B., 367, 380.
Anthony, Susan B., 368.
Antinomianism, 16.
Antioch College, 172, 193, 197, 401, 402.
Anti-slavery, 100, 159, 343, 353-367.
Appleton, Nathan, 386.
Arianism, 42, 43, 44, 56, 59, 65, 66, 70, 83.
Arminianism, 8, 9, 11, 28, 37-39, 42, 44, 48, 50, 59, 66, 67, 70, 75,
      84, 89.
Arminius, 8.
Artists, 430.
Association of Benevolent Societies, 255.
Association of Young Men, 248-251, 264.
Autumnal Conventions, 173-176, 187.
Auxiliaries of American Unitarian Association, 146.
Ayer, Adams, 216.

Ballou, Hosea, 93.
Baltimore, 111-113.
Bancroft, Aaron, 73, 74, 114, 130, 132, 135, 136, 142, 413.
Bancroft, George, 380, 413, 414, 424.
Baptists, 6, 7, 21, 87, 88.
Barnard, Charles F., 254, 256, 260, 332, 337, 361.
Barnard, Thomas, 70.
Barrett, Samuel, 127, 135, 137, 144, 264.
Barry, Joseph, 333.
Bartol, Cyrus Augustus, 148, 155, 202, 240, 241, 419.
Batchelor, George, 196, 226, 232.
Beecher, Henry Ward, 370.
Beecher, Lyman, 384.
Belknap, Jeremy, 83, 351, 423.
Bellamy, Joseph, 44, 52, 57, 73.
Bellows, Henry Whitney, 136, 146, 154, 175, 178-182, 187-189, 191, 196,
      198, 205, 206, 215, 217, 218, 220, 222, 223, 232, 233, 335, 363, 409,
      431, 449, 450.
Belsham, Thomas, 79, 102, 103.
Benevolent Fraternity of Churches, 197, 256, 257, 282.
Bentley, William, 71, 80, 90.
Bergh, Henry, 335.
Berry Street Conference, 106, 107, 133.
Bible, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 14, 20, 25, 27, 32, 40, 45, 48, 50, 53, 55, 60, 64,
      85, 86, 122, 156, 157, 171, 198, 199, 321, 389, 395, 437.
Bible Societies, 100, 147, 322.
Bigelow, Andrew, 258.
Birthright church, 240, 241.
Bixby, James T., 307, 320.
Blackwell, Antoinette Brown, 371.
Blackwell, Henry B., 368.
Blake, H.G.O., 415.
Bond, Edward P., 153.
Bond, George, 131, 133.
Bond, Henry F., 341, 342.
Book distribution, 148, 163, 166, 169, 338.
Boston, 16, 20, 61, 75, 77, 118, 141, 160, 213, 383-388, 413.
Boston Observer, The, 448.
Boston Provident Association, 334, 335.
Boutwell, George S., 367, 382.
Bowditch, Henry I., 367.
Bowditch, Nathaniel, 117, 381, 427.
Bowditch, William I., 367.
Bowdoin, James, 80, 385.
Bowles & Dearborn, 235.
Bowles, Leonard C., 235.
Brackett, J.Q.A., 382.
Bradford, Alden, 47, 65, 127, 128, 132, 133.
Bradford, George P., 415.
Bradlee, Caleb D., 336.
Bradley, Amy, 181, 338.
Brattle Street Church, 29, 35, 40, 52, 53, 77, 94, 143, 160, 385, 387.
Breck, Robert, 40.
Briant, Lemuel, 50, 58.
Bridgman, Laura, 326.
Briggs, Charles, 144, 151, 235, 361.
Briggs, George W., 270, 360, 361.
Brigham, Charles H., 189, 214, 215, 319, 361.
British and Foreign Unitarian Association, 295, 298, 303.
Brooks, Charles, 336, 400.
Brooks, Charles T., 146, 244, 298, 359, 420.
Brooks Fund, 166.
Brown, Howard N., 196, 243.
Bryant, William Cullen, 117, 191, 195, 243, 381, 431, 432.
Buckminster, J.S., 94, 98, 390, 391, 416.
Bulfinch, Charles, 430.
Bulfinch, Stephen G., 146, 165, 268, 270, 271, 361, 447.
Burleigh, Celia C., 369, 370.
Burleigh, William H., 369.
Burnap, George W., 114.
Burnside, Ambrose E., 383.
Burroughs, John, 428.
Burton, Warren, 139, 257, 361, 421.
Bushnell, Horace, 241.

Calcutta, 296, 297, 299, 300.
Calhoun, John C., 376, 380.
Calvinism, 9, 26, 28, 34, 37, 39, 44, 45, 46, 48, 62, 73, 75, 76, 84,
      87, 92.
Carpenter, Lant, 154.
Carpenter, Mary, 259.
Cary, George L., 318.
"Catholic Christians," 104, 106, 123.
Catholicism, 3, 5, 18, 53.
Chadwick, John White, 157, 216, 244, 275, 354, 370.
Chaney, George L., 337.
Channing, George G., 144, 449.
Channing, William Ellery, 70, 94, 99, 102, 103, 106, 114, 119, 123, 125,
      129, 130, 135, 142, 146, 148, 163, 164, 173, 174, 184, 199, 321, 324,
      328, 343-345, 349, 350, 365, 399, 402, 415, 432.
Channing, William Ellery, poet, 431.
Channing, William Henry, 155, 176, 200, 258, 359, 361, 365, 368, 369, 420,
      428, 448.
Chapin, Henry, 212.
Chapman, Maria W., 367, 368.
Charity work, 35, 252, 254-256, 322-325, 328.
Charleston, S.C., 118.
Chauncy, Charles, second president Harvard College, 24.
Chauncy, Charles, minister First Church in Boston, 45, 46, 48, 52, 53,
      66-69, 77, 85, 90.
Cheerful Letter Exchange, 288.
Cheney, Ednah D., 202, 279, 283, 368, 428.
Chicago, 167, 213.
Child, David Lee, 359.
Child, Lydia Maria, 367, 428, 430.
Children's Mission, 197, 331-334.
Chillingworth, William, 5, 10, 12, 14, 31, 45.
Choate, Joseph H., 381.
Christ, 6, 11, 14, 15, 24, 27, 40, 49, 50, 56, 62, 64, 67, 69, 70, 74, 75,
      83, 85, 86, 99, 138, 139, 157, 170, 171, 193, 198, 200, 206, 207,
      209, 210, 227, 378, 393, 429, 434.
Christian connection, 89, 140, 194, 314, 315, 316.
Christian Examiner, The, 101, 156, 236, 416, 449, 450.
Christian Inquirer, The, 449, 450.
Christian Monitor, The, 96.
Christian Register, The, 114-116, 127, 145, 147, 156, 173, 185, 207, 232,
      264, 296, 356, 448.
Christian Union, Boston, Young Men's, 214, 216, 336, 337.
Christian Unions, 216, 337.
Christian World, The, 145, 147, 449.
Christianity, 11-13, 45, 62, 63, 75, 85, 86, 123, 138, 156, 200, 201, 206,
      209-211, 222, 227, 241, 362.
Christians, 6, 9, 14, 51, 64, 170, 206, 209, 222, 224, 227.
Church, 5, 7, 10, 12, 14, 17, 20, 52, 106, 115.
Church and state, 7, 17, 20, 21, 23, 27-29, 52, 68, 85-87, 120-123.
Church Building Loan Fund, 234.
Church membership, 18-20, 27, 241, 242.
Church of the Disciples, 242, 327.
Civil service reform, 372-375.
Civil war, 171, 175-184, 187, 283.
Clark University, 399.
Clarke, James Freeman, 146, 155, 160, 161, 163, 164, 165, 175, 191, 192,
      194, 201, 204, 215, 242, 244, 273, 307, 312, 318, 327, 360, 361, 366,
      369, 370, 417, 418, 420, 448, 449.
Clarke, Samuel, 13, 44-46, 56, 67, 70.
Clarke, Sarah Freeman, 404.
Clifford, John H., 382.
Codding, Ichabod, 168, 365.
Codman, John, 102.
College town missions, 214, 215.
Collyer, Robert, 167, 171, 185, 194.
Colporters, 148, 169.
Commerce, 72.
Committee on fellowship, 220, 221.
Conant, Augustus H., 169, 172, 176, 361.
Conference, Berry Street, 106, 107, 133.
Confirmation, 241, 242.
Congregational independence, 34, 126.
Congregationalism, 74, 87, 89, 93, 117, 119, 194, 199, 241, 436.
Contributions to American Unitarian Association, 142, 153, 159, 162, 164,
      188, 190, 193, 197, 213, 234.
Convention, Autumnal, 173-176, 187.
Conversion, 18, 20, 21, 24, 27.
Conway, Moncure D., 365, 415.
Cooper Institute, 215, 408.
Cooper, Peter, 381, 408, 409.
Cordner, John, 146, 238.
Cornell University, 215.
Corporate idea of church, 5, 7, 17-19, 20.
Country Week, 337.
Covenants, Church, 26.
Cranch, Christopher, P., 415, 448.
Cranch, William, 377, 380.
Creeds, 26, 49, 62, 64, 66, 85, 206.
Crocker, Lucretia, 370, 403, 404.
Crosby, Nichols & Co., 236.
Crosby, William, 334.
Cudworth, Warren H., 271.
Curtis, Benjamin R., 382.
Curtis, George Ticknor, 381.
Curtis, George William, 196, 239, 347, 369, 373-375, 381.
Cutter, George W., 226.

Dall, Caroline Healey, 165, 202, 279, 368, 370, 371.
Dall, Charles, H.A., 259, 299-302, 361.
Dane, Nathan, 350, 351, 382.
Davis, John, 382.
Dedham, 29, 54, 87, 115, 218.
Deism, 42.
Democratic tendencies, 8, 33, 34, 37, 90, 121, 174.
Depositaries, 146, 149, 169.
Depravity of man, 51, 63, 66, 68, 69.
Devotional library, 164.
Dewey, Orville, 114, 143, 146, 165, 174, 191, 267, 354, 415, 431.
Dexter, Henry M., 22.
Dexter, Samuel, 351, 382.
Dickens, Charles, 324.
Dillingham, Pitt, 339.
Disciple, The Christian, 99-101.
Dix, Dorothea, 324, 327, 328-331.
Dole, Charles F., 274, 352.
Douthit, Jasper L., 214.
Doyle, J.A., 22.
Dunster, Henry, 24.
Dwight, Edmund, 399, 400.
Dwight, John S., 155, 369, 415, 428.

Eaton, Dorman B., 373, 381.
Education, 253, 323, 325, 337-342, 343, 384, 389, 395-408, 410, 411.
Education in south, 338-340, 410, 411.
Education of Indians, 340-342.
Edwards, Jonathan, 38-41, 44.
Effinger, J.R., 226.
Eliot, Charles W., 238, 305, 395, 397.
Eliot, Rev. Samuel A., 232, 245.
Eliot, Samuel A., 127, 335, 383, 414.
Eliot, Thomas D., 196, 212.
Eliot, William G., 144, 146, 169, 184, 311, 351, 364, 398, 448.
Ellis, George E., 146, 164, 267, 421, 450.
Ellis, Rufus, 270, 361, 448.
Ellis, Sallie, 289, 290.
Emerson, George B., 127, 164.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 151, 155, 202, 324, 369, 413, 415, 416, 428, 431,
      435, 436, 448.
Emerson, William, 95, 96, 413.
Emlyn, Thomas, 57, 58.
Emmons, Nathaniel, 55.
Equality, 33, 38.
Evangelical Missionary Society, 104, 105, 141.
Everett, Charles Carroll, 196, 275, 396, 417-419, 452.
Everett, Edward, 94, 98, 109, 114, 351, 380, 382, 391, 397, 399, 407,
      414, 416.
Everett, William, 414.
Exchange of pulpits, 101.

Farley, Frederic A., 146, 165, 361.
Fearing, Albert, 238, 324.
Federal (now Arlington) Street Church, 83, 94, 106, 129, 250, 256,
      257, 301.
Fellowship, Unitarian, 205, 209, 211, 219-221, 436, 437.
Fellowship with other religious bodies, 192-195, 296.
Felton, Cornelius C., 397.
Fields, James T., 369, 428.
Fillmore, Millard, 331, 380.
First Church of Boston, 53, 66.
Fiske, John, 22, 307, 424.
Flagg, J.F., 265, 350.
Flower Mission, 337.
Follen, Charles, 359, 431.
Follen, Eliza Lee, 266, 367.
Folsom, Nathaniel, 319, 361.
Forbes, John Murray, 386.
Forbush, T.B., 226.
Forman, J.G., 176, 178, 184.
Forster, Anthony, 118.
Fox, George W., 161, 162, 207-209.
Fox, Thomas B., 146, 268, 450.
Francis, Convers, 110, 155, 200, 360, 361.
Francke, Kuno, 17.
Franklin, Benjamin, 376, 377, 379.
Fraternity of Churches, Benevolent, 197, 256, 257, 282.
Freedman's Bureau, 184, 197.
Freedom of Thought, 1, 3, 5, 8, 32, 37, 59, 61-64, 70, 71, 80, 115, 125,
      205, 210, 212, 389.
Freeman, James, 76, 78, 80, 82, 98, 111, 114, 344.
Free Religion, 203, 210, 211.
Free Religious Association, 194, 202-204, 207, 225, 436.
French, Daniel C., 430.
Friend of Peace, 345.
Friends, 88.
Frothingham, Nathaniel L., 114, 124, 344, 413, 420.
Frothingham, Octavius B., 124, 165, 175, 200, 202, 207, 216, 322, 323, 366,
      369, 387, 392, 394, 413, 420, 424, 431.
Fuller, Margaret, 155, 368, 428, 429, 448.
Furness, William Henry, 114, 146, 244, 267, 361, 365, 394, 420.

Galvin, Edward I., 176, 337.
Gannett, Ezra Stiles, 114, 127, 128, 134-137, 139, 143, 146, 172, 191, 266,
      346, 350-351, 354, 355, 450.
Gannett, William C., 225-227, 241, 277, 290.
Garrison, William Lloyd, 353, 359, 367, 377.
Gay, Ebenezer, 58-60, 77.
General Repositary, The, 97, 390.
Giddings, Joshua R., 367.
Gierke, Otto, 4.
Giles, Henry, 361, 420.
Gilman, Samuel, 119, 146, 420.
God, 2, 4, 7, 9, 11, 13, 38, 41, 51, 53, 59, 60, 64, 68, 70, 73, 90, 157,
      198, 227, 228.
Goodell, William, 365.
Gore, Christopher, 382.
Gould, Allen W., 226, 277, 452.
Gould, Benjamin, 427.
Grant, Moses, 248, 264, 265, 344, 350.
Graves, Mary H., 371.
Gray, Frederic T., 167, 248, 254, 256, 265, 267, 270, 271, 334, 361.
Great Awakening, 46, 66, 210.
Greene, Benjamin H., 248, 333.
Greenhalge, Frederic T., 382.
Greenwood, Francis W.P., 101, 111, 114, 148, 421, 433, 450.
Greenwood, Grace (Mrs. Lippincott), 428, 430.

Hale, Edward Everett, 154, 175, 189, 191, 194, 195, 196, 205, 217, 218,
      269, 270, 318, 323, 342, 429, 430, 450.
Hale, George S., 231.
Hale, John P., 367, 380.
Hale, Lucretia P., 165, 279, 404.
Half-way Covenant, 22, 27, 28, 68.
Hall, Asaph, 427.
Hall, Edward Brooks, 127, 146, 160, 267, 361.
Hall, Nathaniel, 361, 366.
Hall, Nathaniel, the younger, 387.
Hamlin, Hannibal, 383.
Hampton Institute, 339, 340.
Hancock, John, 385.
Hancock Sunday-school, 247, 264, 265.
Harte, Bret, 430.
Harvard College, 35, 41, 44, 47, 92, 98, 384, 388, 390, 395-397, 412.
Harvard Divinity School, 108-110, 124, 193, 214, 391, 392, 394, 395, 396,
      414, 415.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 381, 430.
Haynes, George H., 29.
Hazlitt, Rev. William, 71, 77-79.
Hedge, Frederic H., 146, 155, 161, 165, 180, 239, 244, 346, 359, 360, 361,
      415, 417, 420, 449, 450.
Hemenway, Augustus, 385.
Hemenway, Mary, 405-407.
Hepworth, George H., 176, 205.
Herford, Brooke, 196, 225, 452.
Heywood, John H., 178, 180, 364.
Higginson, Stephen, 130, 133.
Higginson, Thomas Wentworth, 177, 202, 367, 368, 369, 415, 424, 429.
Higher criticism, 389-395.
Hildreth, Richard, 413, 424.
Hill, Thomas, 320, 361, 397, 420, 427.
Historians, 422-427.
Hoar, Ebenezer Rockwood, 191, 196, 367, 382.
Hoar, George Frisbie, 196, 367, 369, 380.
Holland, Frederick West, 144, 178, 361.
Hollis Professorship, 92, 108, 109.
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 431-433.
Hooker, Thomas, 16, 25.
Hopkins, Samuel, 73.
Horton, Edward A., 275.
Hosmer, Frederick L., 226, 244, 277.
Hosmer, George W., 311, 314, 316, 338, 361.
Hosmer, Harriet, 430.
Hosmer, James Kendall, 176, 338, 415.
Howard, Simeon, 66, 78.
Howard Sunday-school, 252, 265, 332.
Howe, Julia Ward, 328, 348, 349, 368, 370, 371, 428.
Howe, Samuel G., 180, 325-329, 367.
Howells, William D., 430.
Huidekoper, Frederic, 317, 319, 422.
Huidekoper, Harm Jan, 311-314.
Hunt, John, 11, 13.
Hunting, Sylvan S., 176, 214.
Huntington, Frederic D., 270, 361, 448.
Hymns of Unitarians, 244, 420.

Idealism, 45.
Independents, 7.
Index, The, 203, 207.
India, 72, 248, 296, 303.
Individualism, 1-4, 8, 17, 18, 27, 63, 90, 125, 205, 210, 211, 224, 343,
      349, 428, 441-443.
Insane, care of, 328-331.
International Council, 245, 440.
Intuition, 2, 4, 12.

Jackson, Charles, 130, 387.
Jackson, Helen Hunt, 430.
Jackson, James, 427.
Japan, 303-309.
Japanese Unitarian Association, 306-309.
Jefferson, Thomas, 136, 378-380, 437.
Jenckes, Thomas A., 372.
Johnson, Samuel, 201, 244, 366, 369, 419, 420.
Jones, Jenkin Lloyd, 214, 225, 276, 278, 451.
Judd, Sylvester, 217, 240, 241, 361, 366, 429.
Julian, George W., 367, 369.

Kanda, Saichiro, 305, 306.
Kendall, James, 84.
Kentucky, 119.
Khasi Hills, 302, 303.
Kidder, Henry P., 189, 212, 231, 238.
Kindergarten, 492, 493.
King's Chapel, 52, 76, 160, 313, 387, 421.
King, Starr, 165, 167, 182, 183, 420.
Kirkland, Caroline, 369, 428.
Kirkland, John T., 98, 109, 114, 323, 344, 350, 351, 397.
Knapp, Arthur M., 304.
Knapp, Frederick N., 181.
Kneeland, John, 273.

Ladies' Commission on Sunday-school Books, 279-281.
Lafargue, Paul, 2.
Lamson, Alvan, 165, 200, 422, 450.
Latitudinarianism, 9, 10.
Lawrence, Abbott, 385, 386.
Lawrence, Amos, 351, 385, 386.
Leland Stanford, Jr., University, 399.
Leonard, Levi W., 409.
Liberal Christian, The, 193.
Liberal Preacher, The, 447.
Liberalism, 24, 26, 29, 32, 34, 37, 46, 49-52, 54, 57, 59, 61, 70, 72, 75,
      85, 87, 88, 94, 104, 106, 111, 122.
Liberator, The, 359.
Liberty, 206, 342, 343, 349.
Libraries, 289, 409, 410.
Lincoln, Abraham, 376, 377.
Lincoln, Calvin, 127, 161.
Lincoln, Levi, 382.
Lindsey, Theophilus, 78, 102.
Little, Robert, 119.
Liturgy, 242, 343.
Livermore, Abiel Abbot, 148, 169, 317, 318, 361, 366.
Livermore, Leonard J., 272.
Livermore, Mary A., 368, 371.
Local Conferences, 216-219, 445, 446.
Locke, John, 5, 6, 12, 43, 56.
Long, John D., 231, 382.
Longfellow, Henry W., 431, 432.
Longfellow, Samuel, 175, 200, 242, 244, 366, 369, 419.
Longfellow, Stephen, 134, 432.
Lord's Supper, 27, 240.
Loring, Charles G., 127.
Loring, Ellis Gray, 359, 369.
Lothrop, Samuel K., 143, 144, 160, 163, 236, 350, 447.
Lovering, Joseph, 427.
Low, A.A., 189.
Lowe, Charles, 172, 177, 196, 197, 205, 209, 212, 216, 218, 237, 279,
      370, 451.
Lowell, Charles, 94, 99, 109, 114, 263, 344, 350, 351, 366, 413.
Lowell, Francis Cabot, 385, 386.
Lowell Institute, 407, 408.
Lowell, James Russell, 413, 431, 434, 435.
Lowell, John, 382, 385.
Lowell, John Amory, 385, 407.
Lunt, William Parsons, 420.

MacCauley, Clay, 304, 305.
McCrary, George W., 326, 383.
Maine Conference of Unitarian Churches, 218.
Mann, Horace. 166, 327, 329, 351, 399-402.
Mann, Mrs. Horace, 324, 403.
Marshall, John, 376, 380.
Marshall, J.B.F., 339, 340.
Martineau, James, 165, 450..
Mason, L.B., 112, 176.
Massachusetts Congregational Charitable Society, 119.
Massachusetts Convention of Congregational Ministers, 120.
May, Abby Williams, 283, 403, 404.
May, Col. Joseph, 132, 133, 344.
May, Rev. Joseph, 216.
May, Samuel, 359-361, 366.
May, Samuel J., 127, 146, 194, 346, 351, 356, 358, 360, 361, 366, 369, 399,
      401, 447.
Mayhew, Experience, 49, 60.
Mayhew, Jonathan, 45, 47, 48, 53, 58, 60-66, 85, 90, 199.
Mayo, Amory D., 320, 368, 410, 411.
Mead, Edwin D., 406.
Mead, Larkin G., 430.
Meadville Theological School, 161, 193, 215, 310-320.
Methodism, 89, 194.
Miles, Henry A., 161, 164, 360, 361.
Miller, Samuel F., 196, 380.
Milton, John, 5, 6, 10, 12, 31, 45, 56.
Ministry at Large, 247-261.
Miracles, 156, 157, 198, 200, 211.
Missions, domestic, 104, 140, 144, 149-153, 167, 171, 172, 212-214, 218.
Mitchell, Maria, 427.
Montana Industrial School, 341, 342, 405.
Monthly Journal of American Unitarian Association, 162, 184, 237.
Monthly Miscellany, The, 448.
Monthly Religious Magazine, 448.
Morehouse, Daniel W., 196.
Morison, John H., 165, 270, 355, 356, 448.
Morrill, Justin S., 380.
Morse, Jedediah, 93, 102, 423.
Motley, John Lothrop, 424.
Mott, Lucretia, 202, 369.
Mumford, Thomas J., 207, 271, 366, 369.
Munroe, James, & Co., 235.
Muzzey, Artemas M., 165, 178, 359, 360, 361, 422.

National Conference: origin, 190-195;
  Syracuse session, 201;
  change in constitution, 204;
  Hepworth's amendment, 207;
  protests against dropping names from Year Book, 209;
  formation of local conferences, 218-221;
  revision of constitution, in 1892, 229;
  adjustment of Conference and Association, 233;
  temperance resolutions, 352;
  women represented, 369;
  organ proposed, 446.
New Divinity, 73.
New Hampshire Unitarian Association, 217.
New York, 119, 213, 381, 429.
New York Convention, 190-195.
Newell, Frederick R., 172, 176, 184.
Newell, William, 361, 414, 420.
Newell, William Wells, 414, 415.
Nichols, Ichabod, 140, 142, 165.
Nitti, F.S., 3.
North American Review, 116, 416.
Northampton, 27, 38, 41, 381.
Norton, Andrews, 98, 109-111, 114, 122, 126, 130, 132, 135, 139, 164, 243,
      391, 392, 414, 420.
Norton, Charles, Eliot, 175, 185, 414, 428.
Novelists, 429, 430.
Noyes, George Rapall, 110, 114, 146, 164, 200, 392, 393.
Nute, Ephraim, 167, 176.

Old and New, 450.
Old South historical work, 405-407.
Oriental religions, 72.
Orton, Edward, 338.
Osgood, Samuel, 154, 215, 361, 431, 449.
"Other Christian Churches," 201, 219, 446.
Otis, Harrison Gray, 382, 385.
Oxnard, Thomas, 80.

Palfrey, Cazneau, 173, 361.
Palfrey, John G., 95, 101, 109, 110, 114, 117, 126, 127, 146, 154, 157,
      191, 212, 249, 329, 350, 366, 385, 391, 415, 424.
Panoplist, The, 93, 102.
Parish, 29, 115.
Parker, Isaac, 351, 382.
Parker, Theodore, 155-157, 165, 267, 327, 328, 343, 361, 365, 369, 394,
      399, 415, 417, 420, 436.
Parkman, Francis, historian, 413.
Parkman, John, 154, 361.
Parkman, Rev. Francis, 74, 95, 99, 109, 173, 344, 413, 424.
Parsons, Theophilus, 86, 117, 351, 377, 382.
Parton, James, 424.
Peabody, Andrew P., 117, 146, 148, 173, 239, 260, 313, 323, 360, 361.
Peabody, Elizabeth P., 155, 368, 402, 403.
Peabody, Ephraim, 270, 313, 334, 335, 433, 448.
Peabody, Francis G., 331.
Peabody, W.B.O., 361, 420.
Peace movement, 343-349.
Peace societies, 322, 344.
Peirce, Benjamin, 427.
Perkins Institute for the Blind, 323, 325, 326.
Perkins, Thomas H., 325, 386, 387.
Phillips, Jonathan, 109, 351, 385.
Phillips, Stephen C., 385.
Pickering, Edward C., 427.
Pickering, John, 381.
Pickering, Timothy, 377, 381.
Pierce, Cyrus, 361, 400, 401.
Pierce, John, 114, 131, 133, 344, 350.
Pierpont, John, 114, 127, 132, 176, 243, 350, 351, 361, 365, 420.
Pillsbury, Parker, 368, 369.
Piper, George F., 273.
Pitts Street Chapel, 257, 258, 332.
Plymouth, 16, 83, 118.
Poets, 431-435.
Poor, care of, 250, 255, 321, 322, 334, 335.
Porter, Eliphalet, 76.
Portland, 80, 118.
Post-office Mission, 289, 290.
Potter, William J., 170, 200, 203, 208, 209, 211.
Pratt, Enoch, 189, 409, 410.
Pray, Lewis G., 270.
Prescott, William Hickling, 117, 381, 424, 425.
Priestley, Joseph, 71, 78, 80, 81, 83, 118.
Primitive Christianity, 48, 67, 112, 122.
Prince, John, 71, 76, 381.
Prison reform, 327, 328, 329, 343.
Protestantism, 1, 3, 4, 7, 14, 17, 18, 156.
Publishing Fund Society, 107, 108, 141.
Publishing interests, 113, 128, 145, 162, 164, 165, 184.
Puritanism, 10, 19, 20, 21, 37, 53.
Puritans, 19, 22.
Putnam, Alfred P., 216, 420.
Putnam, George, 146, 185, 450.
Pynchon, William, 23, 24.

Quarterly Journal of American Unitarian Association, 162.
Quincy, Edmund, 359.
Quincy, Josiah, 35, 42, 128, 344, 366, 382, 397, 399.

Radical, The, 203.
Radicalism, 155, 156, 158, 199, 203, 204, 210, 222.
Rammohun Roy, 296.
Rantoul, Robert, 127, 351, 399.
Rationalism, 5, 6, 12, 31, 44, 45, 55, 62, 69, 90, 156.
Reason, 2, 3, 9-11, 13, 31, 37, 90.
Reed, David, 114, 127, 129, 145, 234, 269.
Reforms, 343, 356.
Revelation, 12, 13, 20, 46, 66, 69, 73, 88.
Reynolds, Grindall, 232, 238, 239.
Ripley, Ezra, 74, 263, 344.
Ripley, George, 146, 415, 420, 428, 448.
Ripley, Samuel. 360, 361.
Robbins, Chandler, 83, 361, 420.
Roberts, William, 297, 298.
Robinson, George D., 382.
Robinson, John, 25, 84.
Roman Catholic Church, 2, 3, 17.

Saco, 81.
Safford, Mary A., 371.
St. Louis, 141, 184, 225, 259, 398.
Salem, 16, 29, 54, 70, 76, 80, 118, 218, 381, 413.
Saltonstall, Leverett, 127, 133, 140, 381.
Saltonstall, Sir Richard, 16, 23.
San Francisco, 153, 167, 182.
Sanborn, Frank B., 202, 369.
Sanitary Commission, 176, 178-184, 188, 338.
Sargent, John T., 361, 369, 370.
Savage, Minot J., 196, 274.
Scandlin, William G., 176, 177, 182.
Scientists, 427, 428.
Scudder, Eliza, 244.
Sears, Edmund H., 165, 217, 395, 420, 448.
Sectarianism, 125, 131, 149, 150, 201, 266, 356, 436.
Sedgwick, Catherine M., 369, 381, 429.
Sewall, Edmund Q., 361.
Sewall, Samuel E., 358, 359, 369.
Shaw, Lemuel, 382, 387.
Shaw, Robert Gould, 386.
Sherman, John, 92, 98.
Shippen, Rush R., 213, 237, 238.
Shute, Daniel, 58, 85, 87.
Sill, Edward Rowland, 415, 431.
Sin, original, 50.
Singh, Hajom Kissor, 302, 303.
Sloan, W.M., 2.
Smith, Gerrit, 367, 376, 420.
Smith, Mary P. Wells, 285, 290.
Socialism in the church, 3, 4, 17, 20, 27, 33.
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, Piety, and Charity, 96,
      141, 148.
Society for Promoting Theological Education, 109, 110.
Society for Propagating the Gospel, 120.
Society to Encourage Home Studies, 404, 405.
Socinianism, 42, 75, 80.
Solemn Review of Custom of War, 344, 346.
Sparks, Jared, 111, 114, 117, 119, 126, 132, 135, 397, 399, 415, 421, 424.
Spaulding, Henry G., 274.
Spirit of the Pilgrims, The, 93.
Spofford Harriet Prescott, 430.
Sprague, Charles, 351, 431.
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 368.
Staples, Carlton A., 176, 214, 259, 364.
Staples, Nahor A., 167, 176, 366.
Stearns, Oliver, 317, 360, 361.
Stebbins, Horatio, 239.
Stebbins, Rufus, P., 161, 188, 189, 196, 315, 316, 351, 361, 397.
Stedman, Edmund C., 431.
Stetson, Caleb, 360, 361, 365.
Stevenson, Hannah E., 202, 279.
Stoddard, Richard Henry, 431.
Stoddard, Solomon, 27, 39, 44, 68, 241.
Stone, Lucy, 367-369.
Stone, Thomas T., 164, 366, 369.
Story, Joseph, 114, 117, 133, 134, 140, 143, 260, 377, 380, 381, 387.
Story, William Wetmore, 430.
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 384.
Strong, Caleb, 385.
Sullivan, James, 385.
Sullivan, Richard, 128, 129.
Sullivan, Thomas E., 127, 447.
Sumner, Charles, 347, 348, 364, 367, 372, 380.
Sunday-school papers, 266, 269-271, 273, 274.
Sunday-schools, 247, 254, 262-281;
  origin of, 262;
  Boston society, 265;
  growth of, 267;
  first publications, 268;
  local societies, 269;
  paper, 269;
  national society, 270;
  awakening interest, 272;
  George F. Piper as secretary, 273;
  Henry G. Spaulding, 274;
  Edward A. Horton, 275;
  western society, 276;
  unity clubs, 278;
  Religious Union, 278;
  Ladies' Commission, 279, 332.
Sunderland, Jabez T., 225, 301-303, 451.

Talbot, Thomas, 382.
Tappan, Lewis, 134, 137, 139.
Taylor, Bayard, 430, 431.
Taylor, Edward T., "Father Taylor," 324, 327.
Taylor, Jeremy, 5, 12, 14, 31, 66.
Taylor, John, of Norwich, 39.
Temperance reform, 100, 322, 327, 349-353.
Thacher, Samuel C., 94, 96, 99, 103, 344.
Thayer, Nathaniel, 134.
Theatre preaching, 215, 216.
Theological library, 164.
Thomas, Moses G., 140.
Thompson, James W., 360, 361, 448.
Thoreau, Henry D., 415, 428.
Ticknor, Anna E., 404, 405.
Ticknor, George, 98, 390, 410, 424, 525, 526.
Tilden, William P., 361.
Tileston, Thomas, 385.
Tillotson, John, 11, 44, 45, 67.
Toleration, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 21, 37, 43, 61, 67, 85, 89, 103, 107, 121.
Toy, Crawford H., 274, 452.
Tracts, 145-147, 163, 248, 300, 307.
Tracts, distribution of, 147, 163, 184, 290.
Transcendentalism, 155, 199, 200, 222, 417, 431.
Trinity, 13, 14, 42, 45, 55, 58, 63, 65, 66, 69, 71, 79, 83.
Trowbridge, John T., 430.
Tucker, John, 75.
Tuckerman, Henry T., 261, 428.
Tuckerman, Joseph, 96, 99, 146, 247, 250-257, 260, 264, 265, 270, 282, 297,
      298, 322, 323, 331, 334, 344.
Tudor, William, 116.
Tullock, John, 5.
Tuskegee Institute, 339.

Unitarian Advocate, 447.
Unitarian Association, American, 117;
  discussion in anonymous association, 129;
  meeting at house of Josiah Quincy, 128;
  Gannett's statement of purpose, 128;
  printed report of committee, 128;
  meeting in Federal Street Church, 129;
  discussion as to advisability of organizing, 129;
  announcement at Berry Street Conference, 133;
  organization, 134;
  officers, 135;
  name selected, 138;
  work of first year, 139;
  first annual meeting, 140;
  missionary tour of Moses G. Thomas, 140;
  effort to absorb other societies, 141;
  report of directors, 141;
  attitude of churches, 142;
  receipts, 142;
  presidents, 142;
  secretaries, 143;
  missionary agents, 144;
  incorporation, 145;
  tracts, 145;
  depositaries, 146;
  Book and Pamphlet Society, 147;
  distribution of books, 148;
  colporters, 148;
  missionary work in New England, 149;
  work in South and West, 151;
  tour of secretary, 152;
  contributions for domestic missions, 153;
  work of first quarter-century, 154;
  influence of radicalism, 155;
  indifference of churches, 160;
  officers, 160;
  Quarterly and Monthly Journal, 162;
  tracts and books, 163;
  theological library, 164;
  devotional library, 164;
  publishing firm, 165;
  missionary activities, 167;
  Association and Western Conference, 172;
  work during civil war, 177;
  results of fifteen years, 184;
  meeting to consider interests of Association, 187;
  vote to raise $100,000, 189;
  success, 190;
  convention in New; York, 190;
  organization of National Conference, 192;
  work planned, 193;
  new life in Association, 196;
  contributions, 197;
  new theological position, 197;
  organization of Free Religious Association, 202;
  attempts at reconciliation, 204;
  demand for creed, 205;
  Year Book controversy, 207;
  attitude of Unitarians, 209;
  missionary work, 212;
  Charles Lowe as secretary, 212;
  fires in Chicago and Boston, 213;
  work in west, 214;
  college town missions, 214;
  theatre preaching, 215;
  organization of local conferences, 217;
  fellowship and fraternity, 219;
  results of denominational awakening, 221;
  western issue, 225;
  constitution of 1892, 229;
  fellowship with Universalists, 230;
  officers, 231;
  adoption of representation, 232;
  co-operation of Association and National Conference, 233;
  building loan fund, 234;
  Unitarian building, 237;
  seventy-fifth anniversary, 244;
  ministry at large, 247;
  aid to Sunday School Society, 266;
  fellowship with foreign Unitarians, 295;
  relations with British Association, 295;
  Dall in India, 299;
  work in Japan, 303;
  educational work in South, 338, 410;
  educational work for Indians, 340;
  attitude towards slavery, 363;
  formation of International Council, 440.
Unitarian Association, British and Foreign, 295, 298, 303.
Unitarian beliefs, 157, 158, 168, 170, 171, 193, 201, 203, 205-207, 209,
      211, 212, 225-227, 229, 362, 376, 378, 381, 382, 409, 425, 429, 431,
      433, 434.
Unitarian Book and Pamphlet Society, 147, 148.
Unitarian Church Association of Maine, 217, 240.
Unitarian hymnology, 244, 420.
Unitarian Miscellany, The, 111-114.
Unitarian Monitor, The, 447.
Unitarian name, 103, 104, 123, 125, 138, 192, 266.
Unitarian Review, 451.
Unitarian Temperance Society, 278, 351, 352.
Unitarian, The (1834), 447.
Unitarian, The (1886), 225, 451.
Unitarianism, American, 9, 14, 16, 36, 57-59, 63, 67, 72, 78, 79, 82, 102,
      104, 111, 115, 118, 122, 124-126, 128, 132, 138, 149, 169, 185,
      222-224, 378, 379, 384, 387, 389, 436-443.
Unity, 225, 451.
Unity clubs, 277-278.
Unity of God, 63, 65.
Universalism, 67-69, 71, 75, 88, 90, 93, 193, 194, 230.
Universality of religion, 203, 210.

Vane, Sir Henry, 16, 24.
Very, Jones, 155, 244, 381, 431.

Walcutt, Robert F., 359, 366.
Walker, James, 95 101, 114, 126, 127, 129, 133-135, 138, 139, 146, 200,
      267, 351, 397, 450.
Walker, James P., 165, 188, 236, 272, 280.
Walker, Williston, 18, 22.
Walter, Cornelia W., 404.
War, 343, 346-348.
Ware, Dr. Henry, 60, 92, 108, 135, 146.
Ware, Henry, the younger, 100, 110, 114, 128, 129, 132, 133, 135, 138, 143,
      145, 148, 163, 184, 243, 249, 267, 268, 295, 297, 310, 344, 345, 350,
      351, 359, 420.
Ware, Dr. John, 350.
Ware, John F. W, 177, 185, 361.
Ware, William, 287, 360, 361, 415, 429, 447, 450.
Warren Street Chapel, 257, 332, 337.
Washington, 119, 213, 376, 380.
Washington, George, 377, 379.
Washington University, 397, 398.
Wasson, David A., 201, 202, 211, 419, 420.
Waterston, Robert C., 332, 361.
Webster, Daniel, 356, 380, 385, 387.
Webster, Samuel, 50.
Weeden, William B., 383.
Weiss, John, 200, 202, 360, 361, 419.
Weld, Angelina Grimké, 367, 369.
Weld, Theodore D., 365, 367.
Wells, John, 212, 382.
Wendell, Barrett, 410, 435.
Wendte, Charles W., 246, 276, 289, 337.
West, Samuel, 69, 85, 87.
West, Unitarianism in the, 151-153, 224.
Western Conference, 168-172, 197, 209, 214, 224-229, 284, 285, 364.
"Western issue," 225-228.
Western Messenger, The, 366, 448.
Western ministers, 149, 152.
Western Unitarian Association, 226.
Wheaton, Henry, 134, 381.
Whipple, Edwin P., 428.
White, Andrew D., 376.
Whitefield, George, 41, 44, 46.
Whitman, Bernard, 269, 447.
Whitman, Jason, 144, 148, 361.
Whitman, Walter, 431.
Whitney, Leonard, 172, 176.
Whittier, John G., 376, 431.
Wigglesworth, Dr., 44.
Wigglesworth, Thomas, 385.
Wilkes, Eliza Tupper, 371.
Willard, Samuel, 26, 35.
Williams, John E., 332.
Williams, Roger, 16, 24, 121.
Willson, Edmund B., 176, 269, 361.
Winkley, Samuel H., 185.
Wise, John, 30-34.
Wolcott, J.H., 385.
Wolcott, Roger, 382.
Women, 30, 191, 250, 282-294, 343, 348, 349, 368-372, 402-407, 428, 429.
Women's Alliance, 287-294.
Women's Auxiliary, 286.
Women's Western Unitarian Conference, 284, 285.
Woodbury, Augustus, 146.
Worcester, 73, 173, 218.
Worcester Association of Ministers, 173, 269.
Worcester, Noah, 93, 98-100, 114, 148, 344, 345, 350, 365, 389.
Wright, Carroll D., 196, 231.
Wyman, Jeffries, 180, 427.

Yale College, 43.
Year Book of American Unitarian Association, 207, 449.
Young, Alexander, 114, 127, 143, 267, 424.
Young People's Religious Union, 278.