We add the verses that he composed on this occasion.

THE JUDGMENT OF THE POETS.

    Two nymphs,[588] both nearly of an age,
      Of numerous charms possess'd,
    A warm dispute once chanc'd to wage,
      Whose temper was the best.

    The worth of each had been complete,
      Had both alike been mild;
    But one, although her smile was sweet,
      Frown'd oft'ner than she smil'd.

    And in her humour, when she frown'd,
      Would raise her voice and roar;
    And shake with fury to the ground,
      The garland that she wore.

    The other was of gentler cast,
      From all such frenzy clear;
    Her frowns were never known to last,
      And never prov'd severe.

    To poets of renown in song,
      The nymphs referr'd the cause,
    Who, strange to tell! all judg'd it wrong
      And gave misplac'd applause.

    They gentle call'd, and kind, and soft,
      The flippant and the scold;
    And, though she chang'd her mood so oft,
      That failing left untold.

    No judges sure were e'er so mad,
      Or so resolv'd to err;
    In short, the charms her sister had,
      They lavish'd all on her.

    Then thus the god, whom fondly they
      Their great inspirer call,
    Was heard one genial summer's day,
      To reprimand them all:

    "Since thus ye have combin'd," he said,
      "My fav'rite nymph to slight,
    Adorning May, that peevish maid!
      With June's undoubted right;

    "The minx shall, for your folly's sake,
      Still prove herself a shrew;
    Shall make your scribbling fingers ache,
      And pinch your noses blue."

  [588] May and June.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  The Lodge, May 27, 1791.

My dearest Coz,--I, who am neither dead, nor sick, nor idle, should
have no excuse, were I as tardy in answering as you in writing. I
live indeed where leisure abounds, and you where leisure is not; a
difference that accounts sufficiently both for your silence and my
loquacity.

When you told Mrs. ---- that my Homer would come forth in May,
you told her what you believed, and therefore no falsehood. But
you told her at the same time what will not happen, and therefore
not a truth. There is a medium between truth and falsehood; and I
believe the word mistake expresses it exactly. I will therefore say
that you were mistaken. If instead of May you had mentioned June, I
flatter myself that you would have hit the mark. For in June there
is every probability that we shall publish. You will say, "Hang the
printer!--for it is his fault!" But stay, my dear, hang him not just
now! For to execute him and find another will cost us time, and
so much too, that I question if, in that case, we should publish
sooner than in August. To say truth, I am not perfectly sure that
there will be any necessity to hang him at all; though that is a
matter which I desire to leave entirely at your discretion, alleging
only, in the meantime, that the man does not appear to me during
the last half-year to have been at all in fault. His remittance of
sheets in all that time has been punctual, save and except while
the Easter holidays lasted, when I suppose he found it impossible
to keep his devils to their business. I shall however receive the
last sheet of the Odyssey to-morrow, and have already sent up the
Preface, together with all the needful. You see, therefore, that the
publication of this famous work cannot be delayed much longer.

As for politics, I reck not, having no room in my head for any thing
but the Slave bill. That is lost; and all the rest is a trifle. I
have not seen Paine's book,[589] but refused to see it, when it
was offered to me. No man shall convince me that I am improperly
governed while I feel the contrary.

  Adieu,
  W. C.

  [589] The "Rights of Man," a book which created a great ferment
  in the country, by its revolutionary character and statements.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, June 1, 1791.

My dearest Johnny,--Now you may rest. Now I can give you joy of the
period, of which I gave you hope in my last; the period of all your
labours in my service.[590] But this I can foretell you also, that,
if you persevere in serving your friends at this rate, your life is
likely to be a life of labour. Yet persevere! Your rest will be the
sweeter hereafter! In the meantime I wish you, if at any time you
should find occasion for him, just such a friend as you have proved
to me!

  W. C.

  [590] As a transcriber.




PART THE THIRD.


Having now arrived at that period in the history of Cowper, when
he had brought to a close his great and laborious undertaking,
his version of Homer, we suspend for a moment the progress of the
correspondence, to afford room for a few observations.

We have seen in many of the preceding letters, with what ardour
of application and liveliness of hope he devoted himself to this
favourite project of enriching the literature of his country with
an English Homer, that might justly be esteemed a faithful yet free
translation; a genuine and graceful representative of the justly
admired original.

After five years of intense labour, from which nothing could
withhold him, except the pressure of that unhappy malady which
retarded his exertions for several months, he published his complete
version in two quarto volumes, on the first of July, 1791, having
inscribed the Iliad to his young noble kinsman, Earl Cowper, and
the Odyssey to the dowager Countess Spencer--a lady for whose
virtues he had long entertained a most cordial and affectionate
veneration.

He had exerted no common powers of genius and of industry in this
great enterprise, yet, we lament to say, he failed in satisfying
the expectations of the public. Hayley assigns a reason for this
failure, which we give in his own words. "Homer," he observes, "is
so exquisitely beautiful in his own language, and he has been so
long an idol in every literary mind, that any copy of him, which
the best of modern poets can execute, must probably resemble in its
effect the portrait of a graceful woman, painted by an excellent
artist for her lover: the lover indeed will acknowledge great merit
in the work, and think himself much indebted to the skill of such an
artist, but he will never admit, as in truth he never can feel, that
the best of resemblances exhibits all the grace that he discerns in
the beloved original."

This illustration is ingenious and amusing, but we doubt its
justness; because the painter may produce a correct and even a
flattering likeness of the lover's mistress, though it is true that
the lover himself will think otherwise. But where is the translator
that can do justice to the merits of Homer? Who can exhibit his
majestic simplicity, his sententious force, the lofty grandeur of
his conceptions, and the sweet charm of his imagery, embellished
with all the graces of a language never surpassed either in harmony
or richness? The two competitors, who are alone entitled to be
contrasted with each other, are Pope and Cowper. We pass over
Ogilby, Chapman, and others. It is Hector alone that is worthy to
contend with Achilles. To the version of Pope must be allowed the
praise of melody of numbers, richness of poetic diction, splendour
of imagery, and brilliancy of effect; but these merits are acquired
at the expense of fidelity and justness of interpretation. The
simplicity of the heroic ages is exchanged for the refinement of
modern taste, and Homer sinks under the weight of ornaments not
his own. Where Pope fails, Cowper succeeds; but, on the other
hand, where Pope succeeds, Cowper seems to fail. Cowper is more
faithful, but less rich and spirited. He is singularly exempt from
the defects attributable to Pope. There is nothing extraneous,
no meretricious ornament, no laboured elegance, nothing added,
nothing omitted. The integrity of the text is happily preserved. But
though it is in the page of Cowper that we must seek for the true
interpretation of Homer's meaning--though there are many passages
distinguished by much grace and beauty--yet, on the whole, the lofty
spirit, the bright glow of feeling, the "thoughts that breathe,
the words that burn," are not sufficiently sustained. Each of these
distinguished writers, to a certain extent, has failed, not from
any want of genius, but because complete success is difficult,
if not unattainable. Two causes may perhaps be assigned for this
failure; first, no copy can equal the original, if the original be
the production of a master artist. The poet who seeks to transfuse
into his own page the meaning and spirit of an author, endowed with
extraordinary powers, resembles the chemist in his laboratory, who,
in endeavouring to condense the properties of different substances,
and to extract their essence, has the misfortune to see a great
portion of the volatile qualities evaporate in the process, and
elude all the efforts of his philosophic art. Secondly, Homer
still remains untranslated, because of all poets he is the most
untranslateable. He seems to claim the lofty prerogative of standing
alone, and of enjoying the solitary grandeur of his own unrivalled
genius; allowing neither to rival nor to friend, to imitator nor
to translator, the honours of participation; but exercising the
exclusive right of interpreting the majestic simplicity of his own
conceptions, in all the fervour of his own poetic fancy, and in the
sweet melody of his own graceful and flowing numbers. He who wishes
to understand and to appreciate Homer, must seek him in the charm
and beauty of his own inimitable language.

As Cowper's versions of the Iliad and Odyssey have formed so
prominent a feature in his correspondence, for five successive
years, we think it may be interesting to subjoin a few specimens
from each translator, restricting our quotations to the Iliad, as
being the most familiar to the reader.

We extract passages, where poetic skill was most likely to be
exerted.

    Like leaves on trees, the race of man is found,
    Now green in youth, now with'ring on the ground;
    Another race the following spring supplies;
    They fall successive, and successive rise:
    So generations in their course decay;
    So flourish these, when those are past away.

  _Pope's Version_, book vi. line 181.

  For as the leaves, so springs the race of man.
  Chill blasts shake down the leaves, and warm'd anew
  By vernal airs the grove puts forth again:
  Age after age, so man is born and dies.

  _Cowper's Version_, book vi. line 164.

The interview between Hector and Andromache--

    Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates;
    (How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!)
    The day when Thou, imperial Troy, must bend,
    And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
    And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
    My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
    Not Priam's hoary hairs defil'd with gore,
    Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
    As thine, Andromache! thy griefs I dread.
    I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
    In Argive looms our battles to design
    And woes, of which so large a part was thine!
    To bear the victor's hard commands, or bring
    The weight of waters from Hyperia's spring.
    There, while you groan beneath the load of life,
    They cry, Behold the mighty Hector's wife!
    Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
    Embitters all thy woes, by naming me.
    The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
    A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!
    May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
    Press'd with a load of monumental clay!
    Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,
    Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep,

  _Pope's Version_, book vi. line 570.

    For my prophetic soul foresees a day
    When Ilium, Ilium's people, and, himself,
    Her warlike king, shall perish. But no grief
    For Ilium, for her people, for the king
    My warlike sire; nor even for the queen;
    Nor for the num'rous and the valiant band,
    My brothers, destin'd all to bite the ground,
    So moves me as my grief for thee alone,
    Doom'd then to follow some imperious Greek,
    A weeping captive, to the distant shores
    Of Argos; there to labour at the loom
    For a task-mistress, and with many a sigh
    But heav'd in vain, to bear the pond'rous urn
    From Hypereia's, or Messeïs' fount.
    Fast flow thy tears the while, and as he eyes
    That silent shower, some passing Greek shall say--
    "This was the wife of Hector, who excell'd
    All Troy in fight, when Ilium was besieg'd."
    While thus he speaks thy tears shall flow afresh;
    The guardian of thy freedom while he liv'd
    For ever lost; but be my bones inhum'd,
    A senseless store, or e'er thy parting cries
    Shall pierce mine ear, and thou be dragg'd away.

  _Cowper's Version_, book vi. line 501.

We add one more specimen, where the beauty of the imagery demands
the exercise of poetic talent.

    As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,
    O'er heaven's clear azure sheds her sacred light,
    When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
    And not a cloud o'ercasts the solemn scene;
    Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
    And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole;
    O'er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
    And tip with silver ev'ry mountain's head,
    Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,
    A flood of glory bursts from all the skies.[591]

  Book viii. line 687.

    As when around the clear bright moon, the stars
    Shine in full splendour, and the winds are hush'd,
    The groves, the mountain-tops, the headland heights,
    Stand all apparent, not a vapour streaks
    The boundless blue, but ether open'd wide
    All glitters, and the shepherd's heart is cheer'd.

  Book viii. line 637.

  We leave the reader to form his own decision as to the relative
  merits of the two translations. Pope evidently produces effect
  by expanding the sentiments and imagery of his author; Cowper
  invariably adheres to the original text. That full justice may be
  rendered to him, it is necessary not merely to compare him with
  Pope but with his great original.

  After these remarks we once more return to the correspondence of
  Cowper.

  [591] There is a similar passage, in Mickle's "Lusiad," so full
  of beauty, that we cannot refrain from inserting it:--

    The moon, full orb'd, forsakes her watery cave,
    And lifts her lovely head above the wave;
    The snowy splendours of her modest ray
    Stream o'er the liquid wave, and glittering play;
    The masts' tall shadows tremble in the deep;
    The peaceful winds a holy silence keep;
    The watchman's carol, echoed from the prows,
    Alone, at times, disturbs the calm repose


  TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, June 13, 1791.

  My dear Sir,--I ought to have thanked you for your agreeable and
  entertaining letter much sooner, but I have many correspondents
  who will not be said nay; and have been obliged of late to give
  my last attentions to Homer. The very last indeed, for yesterday
  I despatched to town, after revising them carefully, the proof
  sheets of subscribers' names, among which I took special notice
  of yours, and am much obliged to you for it. We have contrived,
  or rather my bookseller and printer have contrived (for they
  have never waited a moment for me) to publish as critically at
  the wrong time, as if my whole interest and success had depended
  upon it. March, April, and May, said Johnson to me in a letter
  that I received from him in February, are the best months for
  publication. _Therefore_ now it is determined that Homer shall
  come out on the first of July; that is to say, exactly at the
  moment when, except a few lawyers, not a creature will be left in
  town who will ever care one farthing about him. To which of these
  two friends of mine I am indebted for this management, I know
  not. It does not please, but I would be a philosopher as well as
  a poet, and therefore make no complaint, or grumble at all about
  it. You, I presume, have had dealings with them both--how did
  they manage for you? And, if as they have for me, how did you
  behave under it? Some who love me complain that I am too passive;
  and I should be glad of an opportunity to justify myself by your
  example. The fact is, should I thunder ever so loud, no efforts
  of that sort will avail me now; therefore, like a good economist
  of my bolts, I choose to reserve them for more profitable
  occasions.

  I am glad to find that your amusements have been so similar to
  mine; for in this instance too I seemed in need of somebody to
  keep me in countenance, especially in my attention and attachment
  to animals. All the notice that we lords of the creation
  vouchsafe to bestow on the creatures is generally to abuse them;
  it is well, therefore, that here and there a man should be found
  a little womanish, or perhaps a little childish, in this matter,
  who will make some amends, by kissing and coaxing and laying them
  in one's bosom. You remember the little ewe lamb, mentioned by
  the prophet Nathan; the prophet perhaps invented the tale for
  the sake of its application to David's conscience; but it is
  more probable that God inspired him with it for that purpose.
  If he did, it amounts to a proof, that he does not overlook,
  but, on the contrary, much notices such little partialities and
  kindnesses to his _dumb_ creatures, as we, because we articulate,
  are pleased to call them.

  Your sisters are fitter to judge than I, whether assembly-rooms
  are the places, of all others, in which the ladies may be studied
  to most advantage. I am an old fellow, but I had once my dancing
  days, as you have now, yet I could never find that I learned
  half so much of a woman's real character by dancing with her
  as by conversing with her at home, where I could observe her
  behaviour at the table, at the fire-side, and in all the trying
  circumstances of domestic life. We are all good when we are
  pleased, but she is the good woman who wants not a fiddle to
  sweeten her. If I am wrong, the young ladies will set me right;
  in the meantime I will not tease you with graver arguments on the
  subject, especially as I have a hope, that years, and the study
  of the Scripture, and His Spirit whose word it is, will, in due
  time, bring you to my way of thinking. I am not one of those
  sages who require that young men should be as old as themselves
  before they have time to be so.

  With my love to your fair sisters, I remain,

  Dear Sir, most truly yours,
  W. C.


  TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  The Lodge, June 15, 1791.

  My dear Friend,--If it will afford you any comfort that you have
  a share in my affections, of that comfort you may avail yourself
  at all times. You have acquired it by means which, unless I
  should have become worthless myself to an uncommon degree, will
  always secure you from the loss of it. You are learning what all
  learn, though few at so early an age, that man is an ungrateful
  animal; and that benefits, too often, instead of securing a due
  return, operate rather as provocations to ill-treatment. This I
  take to be the _summum malum_ of the human heart. Towards God we
  are all guilty of it more or less; but between man and man, we
  may thank God for it, there are some exceptions. He leaves this
  peccant principle to operate, in some degree against himself, in
  all, for our humiliation, I suppose; and because the pernicious
  effects of it in reality cannot injure him, he cannot suffer by
  them; but he knows that, unless he should restrain its influence
  on the dealings of mankind with each other, the bonds of society
  would be dissolved, and all charitable intercourse at an end
  amongst us. It was said of Archbishop Cranmer, "Do him an ill
  turn, and you make him your _friend_ for ever;" of others it may
  be said, "Do them a good one, and they will be for ever your
  _enemies_." It is the grace of God only that makes the difference.

  The absence of Homer (for we have now shaken hands and parted) is
  well supplied by three relations of mine from Norfolk--my cousin
  Johnson, an aunt of his,[592] and his sister.[593] I love them
  all dearly, and am well content to resign to them the place in my
  attentions so lately occupied by the chiefs of Greece and Troy.
  His aunt and I have spent many a merry day together, when we were
  some forty years younger; and we make shift to be merry together
  still. His sister is a sweet young woman, graceful, good-natured,
  and gentle, just what I had imagined her to be before I had seen
  her.[594]

  Farewell,
  W. C.

  [592] Mrs. Bodham.

  [593] Mrs. Hewitt.

  [594] Mrs. Hewitt fully merited this description. She departed a
  few years before her brother, the late Dr. Johnson. Their remains
  lie in the same vault, at Yaxham, near Dereham, Norfolk.


TO DR. JAMES COGSWELL, NEW YORK.

  Weston-Underwood, near Olney, Bucks,
  June 15, 1791.

Dear Sir,--Your letter and obliging present from so great a distance
deserved a speedier acknowledgment, and should not have wanted one
so long, had not circumstances so fallen out since I received them
as to make it impossible for me to write sooner. It is indeed within
this day or two that I have heard how, by the help of my bookseller,
I may transmit an answer to you.

My title-page, as it well might, misled you. It speaks me of the
Inner Temple; and so I am, but a member of that society only, not
as an inhabitant. I live here almost at the distance of sixty miles
from London, which I have not visited these eight-and-twenty
years, and probably never shall again. Thus it fell out that Mr.
Morewood had sailed again for America before your parcel reached
me, nor should I (it is likely) have received it at all, had not a
cousin of mine, who lives in the Temple, by good fortune received
it first, and opened your letter; finding for whom it was intended,
he transmitted to me both that and the parcel. Your testimony of
approbation of what I have published, coming from another quarter
of the globe, could not but be extremely flattering, as was your
obliging notice that "The Task" had been reprinted in your city.
Both volumes, I hope, have a tendency to discountenance vice, and
promote the best interests of mankind. But how far they shall be
effectual to these invaluable purposes depends altogether on His
blessing, whose truths I have endeavoured to inculcate. In the
meantime I have sufficient proof, that readers may be pleased, may
approve, and yet lay down the book unedified.

During the last five years I have been occupied with a work of a
very different nature, a translation of the Iliad and Odyssey into
blank verse, and the work is now ready for publication. I undertook
it, partly because Pope's is too lax a version, which has lately
occasioned the learned of this country to call aloud for a new one;
and partly because I could fall on no better expedient to amuse a
mind too much addicted to melancholy.

I send you, in return for the volumes with which you favoured
me, three on religious subjects, popular productions that have
not been long published, and that may not therefore yet have
reached your country: "The Christian Officer's Panoply, by a
marine officer"--"The Importance of the Manners of the Great," and
"An Estimate of the Religion of the Fashionable World." The two
last are said to be written by a lady, Miss Hannah More, and are
universally read by people of that rank to which she addresses
them. Your manners, I suppose, may be more pure than ours, yet it
is not unlikely that even among you may be found some to whom her
strictures are applicable. I return you my thanks, sir, for the
volumes you sent me, two of which I have read with pleasure, Mr.
Edwards's[595] book, and the Conquest of Canaan. The rest I have
not had time to read, except Dr. Dwight's Sermon, which pleased me
almost more than any that I have either seen or heard.

  [595] The celebrated American Edwards, well known for his two
  great works on "The Freedom of the Human Will," and on "Religious
  Affections." Dr. Dwight's Sermons are a body of sound and
  excellent theology.

I shall account a correspondence with you an honour, and remain,
dear sir,

  Your obliged and obedient servant,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[596]

  [596] Private correspondence.

  Weston, June 24, 1791.

My dear Friend,--Considering the multiplicity of your engagements,
and the importance, no doubt, of most of them, I am bound to set the
higher value on your letters, and, instead of grumbling that they
come seldom, to be thankful to you that they come at all. You are
now going into the country, where, I presume, you will have less
to do, and I am rid of Homer. Let us try, therefore, if, in the
interval between the present hour and the next busy season (for I,
too, if I live, shall probably be occupied again), we can continue
to exchange letters more frequently than for some time past.

You do justice to me and Mrs. Unwin, when you assure yourself that
to hear of your health will give us pleasure: I know not, in truth,
whose health and well-being could give us more. The years that we
have seen together will never be out of our remembrance; and, so
long as we remember them, we must remember you with affection.
In the pulpit, and out of the pulpit, you have laboured in every
possible way to serve us; and we must have a short memory indeed for
the kindness of a friend, could we by any means become forgetful of
yours. It would grieve me more than it does to hear you complain of
the effects of time, were not I also myself the subject of them.
While he is wearing out you and other dear friends of mine he spares
not me; for which I ought to account myself obliged to him, since
I should otherwise be in danger of surviving all that I have ever
loved--the most melancholy lot that can befall a mortal. God knows
what will be my doom hereafter; but precious as life necessarily
seems to a mind doubtful of its future happiness, I love not the
world, I trust, so much as to wish a place in it when all my beloved
shall have left it.

You speak of your late loss in a manner that affected me much; and
when I read that part of your letter, I mourned with you and for
you. But surely, I said to myself, no man had ever less reason to
charge his conduct to a wife with any thing blameworthy. Thoughts
of that complexion, however, are no doubt extremely natural on
the occasion of such a loss; and a man seems not to have valued
sufficiently, when he possesses it no longer, what, while he
possessed it, he valued more than life. I am mistaken, too, or
you can recollect a time when you had fears, and such as became a
Christian, of loving too much; and it is likely that you have even
prayed to be preserved from doing so. I suggest this to you as a
plea against those self-accusations, which I am satisfied that you
do not deserve, and as an effectual answer to them all. You may do
well too to consider, that had the deceased been the survivor she
would have charged herself in the same manner, and, I am sure you
will acknowledge, without any sufficient reason. The truth is, that
you both loved at least as much as you ought, and, I dare say, had
not a friend in the world who did not frequently observe it. To love
just enough, and not a bit too much, is not for creatures who can
do nothing well. If we fail in duties less arduous, how should we
succeed in this, the most arduous of all?

I am glad to learn from yourself that you are about to quit a scene
that probably keeps your tender recollections too much alive.
Another place and other company may have their uses: and, while your
church is undergoing repair, its minister may be repaired also.

As to Homer, I am sensible that, except as an amusement, he was
never worth my meddling with; but, as an amusement, he was to me
invaluable. As such he served me more than five years; and, in that
respect, I know not where I shall find his equal. You oblige me by
saying, that you will read him for my sake. I verily think that
any person of a spiritual turn may read him to some advantage. He
may suggest reflections that may not be unserviceable even in a
sermon; for I know not where we can find more striking exemplars
of the pride, the arrogance, and the insignificance of man; at the
same time that, by ascribing all events to a divine interposition,
he inculcates constantly the belief of a providence; insists much
on the duty of charity towards the poor and the stranger; on the
respect that is due to superiors, and to our seniors in particular;
and on the expedience and necessity of prayer and piety toward the
gods, a piety mistaken, indeed, in its object, but exemplary for
the punctuality of its performance. Thousands, who will not learn
from scripture to ask a blessing either on their actions or on their
food, may learn it, if they please, from Homer.

My Norfolk cousins are now with us. We are both as well as usual;
and with our affectionate remembrances to Miss Catlett,

  I remain sincerely yours,
  W. C.



We are indebted to the kindness of a friend for the following
letter:--


TO MRS. BODHAM, SOUTH GREEN, MATTISHALL, NORFOLK.

  Weston-Underwood, July 7, 1791.

My dearest Cousin,--Most true it is, however strange, that on the
25th of last month I wrote you a long letter, and verily thought
I had sent it: but, opening my desk the day before yesterday,
there I found it. Such a memory have I--a good one never, but at
present worse than usual, my head being filled with the cares
of publication,[597] and the bargain that I am making with my
bookseller.

  [597] The publication of the translation of Homer.

I am sorry that through this forgetfulness of mine you were
disappointed, otherwise should not at all regret that my letter
never reached you; for it consisted principally of such reasons
as I could muster to induce you to consent to a favourite measure
to which you have consented without them. Your kindness and
self-denying disinterestedness on this occasion have endeared you
to us all, if possible, still the more, and are truly worthy of the
Rose[598] that used to sit smiling on my knee, I will not say how
many years ago.

  [598] The name he gave to Mrs. Bodham when a child.

Make no apologies, my dear, that thou dost not write more
frequently;--write when thou canst, and I shall be satisfied. I
am sensible, as I believe I have already told you, that there is
an awkwardness in writing to those with whom we have hardly ever
conversed; in consideration of which, I feel myself not at all
inclined either to wonder at or to blame your silence. At the same
time, be it known to you, that you must not take encouragement from
this my great moderation, lest, disuse increasing the labour, you
should at last write not at all.

That I should visit Norfolk at present is not possible. I
have heretofore pleaded my engagement to Homer as the reason,
and a reason it was, while it subsisted, that was absolutely
insurmountable. But there are still other impediments, which it
would neither be pleasant to me to relate, nor to you to know, and
which could not well be comprised in a letter. Let it suffice for me
to say that, could they be imparted, you would admit the force of
them. It shall be our mutual consolation, that, if we cannot meet at
Mattishall, at least we may meet at Weston, and that we shall meet
here with double satisfaction, being now so numerous.

Your sister is well; Kitty,[599] I think, better than when she
came; and Johnny[600] ails nothing, except that if he eat a little
more supper than usual, he is apt to be riotous in his sleep. We
have an excellent physician at Northampton, whom our dear Catherine
wishes to consult, and I have recommended it to Johnny to consult
him at the same time. His nocturnal ailment is, I dare say, within
the reach of medical advice; and, because it may happen some time
or other to be very hurtful to him, I heartily wish him cured
of it. Light suppers and early rising perhaps might alone be
effectual--but the latter is a difficulty that threatens not to be
easily surmounted.

  [599] Miss Johnson, afterwards Mrs. Hewitt.

  [600] Mr. Johnson.

We are all of one mind respecting you; therefore I send the love
of all, though I shall see none of the party till breakfast calls
us together. Great preparation is making in the empty house. The
spiders have no rest, and hardly a web is to be seen where lately
there were thousands.

I am, my dearest cousin, with best respects to Mr. Bodham, most
affectionately yours,

  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[601]

  [601] Private correspondence.

  Weston, July 22, 1791.

My dear Friend,--I did not foresee, when I challenged you to a
brisker correspondence, that a new engagement of all my leisure was
at hand: a new and yet an old one. An interleaved copy of my Homer
arrived soon after from Johnson, in which he recommended it to me
to make any alterations that might yet be expedient, with a view to
another impression. The alterations that I make are indeed but few,
and they are also short; not more, perhaps, than half a line in two
thousand. But the lines are, I suppose, nearly forty thousand in
all, and to revise them critically must consequently be a work of
labour. I suspend it, however, for your sake, till the present sheet
be filled, and that I may not seem to shrink from my own offer.

Mr. Bean has told me that he saw you at Bedford, and gave us your
reasons for not coming our way. It is well, so far as your own
comfortable lodging and our gratification were concerned, that you
did not; for our house is brimful, as it has been all the summer,
with my relations from Norfolk. We should all have been mortified,
both you and we, had you been obliged, as you must have been, to
seek a residence elsewhere.

I am sorry that Mr. Venn's[602] labours below are so near to a
conclusion. I have seen few men whom I could have loved more, had
opportunity been given me to know him better. So, at least, I have
thought as often as I have seen him. But when I saw him last, which
is some years since, he appeared then so much broken that I could
not have imagined that he would last so long. Were I capable of
envying, in the strict sense of the word, a good man, I should envy
him, and Mr. Berridge,[603] and yourself, who have spent, and while
they last, will continue to spend, your lives in the service of the
only Master worth serving; labouring always for the souls of men,
and not to tickle their ears, as I do. But this I can say--God knows
how much rather I would be the obscure tenant of a lath-and-plaster
cottage, with a lively sense of my interest in a Redeemer, than the
most admired object of public notice without it. Alas! what is a
whole poem, even one of Homer's, compared with a single aspiration
that finds its way immediately to God, though clothed in ordinary
language, or perhaps not articulated at all! These are my sentiments
as much as ever they were, though my days are all running to waste
among Greeks and Trojans. The night cometh when no man can work;
and, if I am ordained to work to better purpose, that desirable
period cannot be very distant. My day is beginning to shut in, as
every man's must who is on the verge of sixty.

  [602] The Rev. Henry Venn, successively vicar of Huddersfield,
  Yorkshire, and rector of Yelling, Huntingdonshire, eminent for
  his piety and usefulness. He was the author of "The Complete Duty
  of Man," the design of which was to correct the deficiencies
  so justly imputable to "The Whole Duty of Man," by laying the
  foundation of moral duties in the principles inculcated by the
  gospel. There is an interesting and valuable memoir of this
  excellent man, edited by the Rev. Henry Venn, B.D., his grandson,
  which we recommend to the notice of the reader.

  [603] Mr. Berridge was vicar of Everton, Beds; a most zealous and
  pious minister.

All the leisure that I have had of late for thinking, has been given
to the riots at Birmingham. What a horrid zeal for the church, and
what a horrid loyalty to government, have manifested themselves
there! How little do they dream that they could not have dishonoured
their idol, the Establishment, more, and that the great Bishop of
souls himself with abhorrence rejects their service! But I have not
time to enlarge; breakfast calls me; and all my post-breakfast time
must be given to poetry. Adieu!

  Most truly yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston, August 2, 1791.

My dear Friend,--I was much obliged, and still feel myself much
obliged, to Lady Bagot for the visit with which she favoured me.
Had it been possible that I could have seen Lord Bagot too, I
should have been completely happy. For, as it happened, I was that
morning in better spirits than usual, and, though I arrived late,
and after a long walk, and extremely hot, which is a circumstance
very apt to disconcert me, yet I was not disconcerted half so much
as I generally am at the sight of a stranger, especially of a
stranger lady, and more especially at the sight of a stranger lady
of quality. When the servant told me that Lady Bagot was in the
parlour, I felt my spirits sink ten degrees; but, the moment I saw
her, at least, when I had been a minute in her company, I felt them
rise again, and they soon rose even above their former pitch. I know
two ladies of fashion now whose manners have this effect upon me,
the lady in question and the Lady Spencer. I am a shy animal, and
want much kindness to make me easy. Such I shall be to my dying day.

Here sit _I_, calling myself _shy_, yet have just published by the
_bye_, two great volumes of poe_try_.

This reminds me of Ranger's observation in the "Suspicious
Husband," who says to somebody, I forget whom, "_There is a degree
of assurance in you modest men that we impudent fellows can never
arrive at_."--Assurance, indeed! Have you seen 'em? What do you
think they are? Nothing less, I can tell you, than a translation of
Homer, of the sublimest poet in the world. That's all. Can I ever
have the impudence to call myself shy again?

You live, I think, in the neighbourhood of Birmingham. What must
you not have felt on the late alarming occasion! You, I suppose,
could see the fires from your windows. We, who only heard the news
of them, have trembled. Never sure was religious zeal more terribly
manifested or more to the prejudice of its own cause.[604]

  [604] The riots at Birmingham originated in the imprudent zeal of
  Dr. Priestley, and his adherents, the Unitarian dissenters, who
  assembled together at a public dinner, to commemorate the events
  of the French revolution. Toasts were given of an inflammatory
  tendency, and handbills were previously circulated of a similar
  character. The town of Birmingham, being distinguished for its
  loyalty, became deeply excited by these acts. The mob collected
  in great multitudes, and proceeded to the house of Dr. Priestley,
  which they destroyed with fire. All his valuable philosophical
  apparatus and manuscripts perished on this occasion. We concur
  with Cowper in lamenting such outrages.

Adieu, my dear friend. I am, with Mrs. Unwin's best compliments,

  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO MRS. KING.[605]

  [605] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Aug. 4, 1791.

My dear Madam,--Your last letter, which gave us so unfavourable
an account of your health, and which did not speak much more
comfortably of Mr. King's, affected us with much concern. Of Dr.
Raitt we may say, in the words of Milton,

    "His long experience did attain
    To something like prophetic strain;"

for as he foretold to you, so he foretold to Mrs. Unwin, that,
though her disorders might not much threaten life, they would yet
cleave to her to the last; and she and perfect health must ever be
strangers to each other. Such was his prediction, and it has been
hitherto accomplished. Either head-ache or pain in the side has been
her constant companion ever since we had the pleasure of seeing you.
As for myself, I cannot properly say that I _enjoy_ a good state of
health, though in general I have it, because I have it accompanied
with frequent fits of dejection, to which less health and better
spirits would, perhaps, be infinitely preferable. But it pleased God
that I should be born in a country where melancholy is the national
characteristic. To say the truth, I have often wished myself a
Frenchman.

N. B. I write this in very good spirits.

You gave us so little hope in your last, that we should have your
company this summer at Weston, that to repeat our invitation seems
almost like teasing you. I will only say, therefore, that, my
Norfolk friends having left us, of whose expected arrival here I
believe I told you in a former letter, we should be happy could
you succeed them. We now, indeed, expect Lady Hesketh, but not
immediately; she seldom sees Weston till all its summer beauties
are fled, and red, brown, and yellow, have supplanted the universal
verdure.

My Homer is gone forth, and I can devoutly say, "Joy go with it!"
What place it holds in the estimation of the generality I cannot
tell, having heard no more about it since its publication than if
no such work existed. I must except, however, an anonymous eulogium
from some man of letters, which I received about a week ago. It was
kind in a perfect stranger, as he avows himself to be, to relieve
me, at so early a day, from much of the anxiety that I could not but
feel on such an occasion. I should be glad to know who he is, only
that I might thank him.

Mrs. Unwin, who is at this moment come down to breakfast, joins me
in affectionate compliments to yourself and Mr. King; and I am, my
dear madam,

  Most sincerely yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, August 9, 1791.

My dear Sir,--I never make a correspondent wait for an answer
through idleness, or want of proper respect for him; but if I am
silent it is because I am busy, or not well, or because I stay till
something occur that may make my letter at least a little better
than mere blank paper. I therefore write speedily in reply to yours,
being at present neither much occupied, nor at all indisposed, nor
forbidden by a dearth of materials.

I wish always, when I have a new piece in hand, to be as secret as
you, and there was a time when I could be so. Then I lived the life
of a solitary, was not visited by a single neighbour, because I had
none with whom I could associate; nor ever had an inmate. This was
when I dwelt at Olney; but since I have removed to Weston the case
is different. Here I am visited by all around me, and study in a
room exposed to all manner of inroads. It is on the ground floor,
the room in which we dine, and in which I am sure to be found by all
who seek me. They find me generally at my desk, and with my work,
whatever it be, before me, unless perhaps I have conjured it into
its hiding-place before they have had time to enter. This, however,
is not always the case; and, consequently, sooner or later, I cannot
fail to be detected. Possibly you, who I suppose have a snug study,
would find it impracticable to attend to any thing closely in an
apartment exposed as mine, but use has made it familiar to me, and
so familiar, that neither servants going and coming disconcert me;
nor even if a lady, with an oblique glance of her eye, catches two
or three lines of my MSS., do I feel myself inclined to blush,
though naturally the shyest of mankind.

You did well, I believe, to cashier the subject of which you gave me
a recital. It certainly wants those _agrémens_ which are necessary
to the success of any subject in verse. It is a curious story, and
so far as the poor young lady was concerned a very affecting one;
but there is a coarseness in the character of the hero that would
have spoiled all. In fact, I find it myself a much easier matter to
write, than to get a convenient theme to write on.

I am obliged to you for comparing me as you go both with Pope and
with Homer. It is impossible in any other way of management to know
whether the translation be well executed or not, and if well, in
what degree. It was in the course of such a process that I first
became dissatisfied with Pope. More than thirty years since, and
when I was a young Templar, I accompanied him with his original,
line by line, through both poems. A fellow student of mine, a person
of fine classical taste, joined himself with me in the labour. We
were neither of us, as you may imagine, very diligent in our proper
business.

I shall be glad if my reviewers, whosoever they may be, will be
at the pains to read me as you do. I want no praise that I am not
entitled to, but of that to which I am entitled I should be loath to
lose a tittle, having worked hard to earn it.

I would heartily second the Bishop of Salisbury[606] in recommending
to you a close pursuit of your Hebrew studies, were it not that I
wish you to publish what I may understand. Do both, and I shall be
satisfied.

  [606] Dr. Douglas.

Your remarks, if I may but receive them soon enough to serve me in
case of a new edition, will be extremely welcome.

  W. C.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, Aug. 9, 1791.

My dearest Johnny,--The little that I have heard about Homer myself
has been equally or more flattering than Dr. ----'s intelligence,
so that I have good reason to hope that I have not studied the
old Grecian, and how to dress him, so long and so intensely, to
no purpose. At present I am idle, both on account of my eyes and
because I know not to what to attach myself in particular. Many
different plans and projects are recommended to me. Some call aloud
for original verse, others for more translation, and others for
other things. Providence, I hope, will direct me in my choice, for
other guide I have none, nor wish for another.

  God bless you, my dearest Johnny,
  W. C.



The active mind of Cowper, and the necessity of mental exertion,
in order to arrest the terrible incursions of his depressing
malady, soon led him to contract a new literary engagement. A
splendid edition of Milton was at that time contemplated, intended
to rival the celebrated Shakspeare of Boydell; and to combine all
the adventitious aid that editorial talent, the professional skill
of a most distinguished artist, and the utmost embellishment of
type could command, to ensure success. Johnson, the bookseller,
invited the co-operation of Cowper, in the responsible office of
Editor. For such an undertaking he was unquestionably qualified,
by his refined critical taste and discernment, and by his profound
veneration for this first of modern epic poets. Cowper readily
entered into this project, and by his admirable translations of the
Latin and Italian poems of Milton, justly added to the fame which
he had already acquired. But to those who know how to appreciate
his poetic powers, and his noble ardour in proclaiming the most
important truths, it must ever be a source of unfeigned regret that
the hours given to translation, and especially to Homer, were not
dedicated to the composition of some original work. Who would not
have hailed with delight another poem, rivalling all the beauties
and moral excellences of "The Task," and endearing to the mind, with
still higher claims, the sweet poet of nature, and the graceful yet
sublime teacher of heavenly truth and wisdom?

    The grief is this--that, sunk in Homer's mine,
      I lose my precious years, now soon to fail,
    Handling his gold, which, howsoe'er it shine,
      Proves dross when balanced in the Christian scale.[607]

  [607] See verses addressed to John Johnson, Esq.

It was this literary engagement that first laid the foundation of
that intercourse, which commenced at this time between Cowper and
Hayley; an intercourse which seems to have ripened into subsequent
habits of friendship. As their names have been so much associated
together, and Hayley eventually became the poet's biographer, we
shall record the circumstances of the origin of their intimacy in
Hayley's own words.

"As it is to Milton that I am in a great measure indebted for what
I must ever regard as a signal blessing, the friendship of Cowper,
the reader will pardon me for dwelling a little on the circumstances
that produced it; circumstances which often lead me to repeat those
sweet verses of my friend, on the casual origin of our most valuable
attachments:

    'Mysterious are his ways, whose power
    Brings forth that unexpected hour,
    When minds that never met before,
    Shall meet, unite, and part no more:
    It is th' allotment of the skies,
    The hand of the Supremely Wise,
    That guides and governs our affections,
    And plans and orders our connexions.'

These charming verses strike with peculiar force on my heart, when
I recollect, that it was an idle endeavour to make us enemies
which gave rise to our intimacy, and that I was providentially
conducted to Weston at a season when my presence there afforded
peculiar comfort to my affectionate friend under the pressure of a
domestic affliction, which threatened to overwhelm his very tender
spirits.[608]

  [608] An alarming attack with which Mrs. Unwin was visited.

"The entreaty of many persons, whom I wished to oblige, had engaged
me to write a Life of Milton, before I had the slightest suspicion
that my work could interfere with the projects of any man; but I was
soon surprised and concerned in hearing that I was represented in a
newspaper as an antagonist of Cowper.

"I immediately wrote to him on the subject, and our correspondence
soon endeared us to each other in no common degree."

We give credit to Hayley for the kind and amiable spirit which he
manifested on this delicate occasion; and for the address with which
he converted an apparent collision of interests into a magnanimous
triumph of literary and courteous feeling.



The succeeding letters will be found to contain frequent allusions
both to his past and newly contracted engagement.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  The Lodge, Sept. 14, 1791.

My dear Friend,--Whoever reviews me will in fact have a laborious
task of it, in the performance of which he ought to move leisurely,
and to exercise much critical discernment. In the meantime, my
courage is kept up by the arrival of such testimonies in my favour
as give me the greatest pleasure; coming from quarters the most
respectable. I have reason, therefore, to hope that our periodical
judges will not be very averse to me, and that perhaps they may even
favour me. If one man of taste and letters is pleased, another man
so qualified can hardly be displeased; and if critics of a different
description grumble, they will not however materially hurt me.

You, who know how necessary it is to me to be employed, will be
glad to hear that I have been called to a new literary engagement,
and that I have not refused it. A Milton, that is to rival, and,
if possible, to exceed in splendour, Boydell's Shakspeare, is in
contemplation, and I am in the editor's office. Fuseli is the
painter. My business will be to select notes from others, and to
write original notes; to translate the Latin and Italian poems, and
to give a correct text. I shall have years allowed me to do it in.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston, Sept. 21, 1791.

My dear Friend,--Of all the testimonies in favour of my Homer that
I have received, none has given me so sincere a pleasure as that
of Lord Bagot. It is an unmixed pleasure, and without a drawback;
because I know him to be perfectly, and in all respects, whether
erudition or a fine taste be in question, so well qualified to judge
me, that I can neither expect nor wish a sentence more valuable than
his--

... εισοκ αυτμη Εν στηθεσσι μενει, και μοι φιλα γουνατ ορωρει.

I hope by this time you have received your volumes, and are prepared
to second the applauses of your brother--else, woe be to you! I
wrote to Johnson immediately on the receipt of your last, giving him
a strict injunction to despatch them to you without delay. He had
sold some time since a hundred of the unsubscribed-for copies.

I have not a history in the world except Baker's Chronicle, and that
I borrowed three years ago from Mr. Throckmorton. Now the case is
this: I am translating Milton's third Elegy--his Elegy on the death
of the Bishop of Winchester.[609] He begins it with saying, that,
while he was sitting alone, dejected, and musing on many melancholy
themes, first, the idea of the Plague presented itself to his mind,
and of the havoc made by it among the great. Then he proceeds thus:

    Tum memini clarique ducis, fratrisque verendi
      Intempestivis ossa cremata rogis:
    Et memini Heroum quos vidit ad æthera raptos;
      Flevit et amissos Belgia tota duces.

I cannot learn from my only oracle, Baker, who this famous leader,
and his reverend brother were. Neither does he at all ascertain for
me the event alluded to in the second of these couplets. I am not
yet possessed of Warton, who probably explains it, nor can be for
a month to come. Consult him for me if you have him, or, if you
have him not, consult some other. Or you may find the intelligence
perhaps in your own budget; no matter how you come by it, only send
it to me if you can, and as soon as you can, for I hate to leave
unsolved difficulties behind me.[610] In the first year of Charles
the First, Milton was seventeen years of age, and then wrote this
elegy. The period therefore to which I would refer you, is the two
or three last years of James the First.

  Ever yours,
  W. C.

  [609]

    Moestus eram, et tacitus nullo comitante sedebam,
    Hærebantque animo tristia plura mee: &c. &c.

  [610] Warton informs us that the distinguished brothers alluded
  to in Milton's elegy are the Duke of Brunswick and Count
  Mansfelt, who fell in the war of the Palatinate, that fruitful
  scene of warlike operations. The two latter are the Earls of
  Oxford and Southampton, who died at the siege of Breda, in the
  year 1625.


TO THE REV. MR. KING.[611]

  [611] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Sept. 23, 1791.

Dear Sir,--We are truly concerned at your account of Mrs. King's
severe indisposition; and, though you had no better news to tell us,
are much obliged to you for writing to inform us of it, and to Mrs.
King for desiring you to do it. We take a lively interest in what
concerns her. I should never have ascribed her silence to neglect,
had she neither written to me herself nor commissioned you to write
for her. I had, indeed, for some time expected a letter from her
by every post, but accounted for my continual disappointment by
supposing her at Edgeware, to which place she intended a visit, as
she told me long since, and hoped that she would write immediately
on her return.

Her sufferings will be felt here till we learn that they are
removed; for which reason we shall be much obliged by the earliest
notice of her recovery, which we most sincerely wish, if it please
God, and which will not fail to be a constant subject of prayer at
Weston.

I beg you, sir, to present Mrs. Unwin's and my affectionate
remembrances to Mrs. King, in which you are equally a partaker, and
to believe me, with true esteem and much sincerity,

  Yours,
  W. C.


TO MRS. KING.[612]

  [612] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Oct. 21, 1791.

My dear Friend,--You could not have sent me more agreeable news than
that of your better health, and I am greatly obliged to you for
making me the first of your correspondents to whom you have given
that welcome intelligence. This is a favour which I should have
acknowledged much sooner, had not a disorder in my eyes, to which I
have always been extremely subject, required that I should make as
little use of my pen as possible. I felt much for you, when I read
that part of your letter in which you mention your visitors, and
the fatigue which, indisposed as you have been, they could not fail
to occasion you. Agreeable as you would have found them at another
time, and happy as you would have been in their company, you could
not but feel the addition they necessarily made to your domestic
attentions as a considerable inconvenience. But I have always said,
and shall never say otherwise, that if patience under adversity, and
submission to the afflicting hand of God, be true fortitude--which
no reasonable person can deny--then your sex have ten times more
true fortitude to boast than ours; and I have not the least doubt
that you carried yourself with infinitely more equanimity on that
occasion than I should have done, or any he of my acquaintance.
Why is it, since the first offender on earth was a woman, that the
women are nevertheless, in all the most important points, superior
to the men? That they are so I will not allow to be disputed, having
observed it ever since I was capable of making the observation. I
believe, on recollection, that, when I had the happiness to see you
here, we agitated this question a little; but I do not remember
that we arrived at any decision of it. The Scripture calls you the
_weaker vessels_; and perhaps the best solution of the difficulty,
therefore, may be found in those other words of Scripture--_My
strength is perfected in weakness_. Unless you can furnish me with
a better key than this, I shall be much inclined to believe that I
have found the true one.

I am deep in a new literary engagement, being retained by my
bookseller as editor of an intended most magnificent publication of
Milton's Poetical Works. This will occupy me as much as Homer did
for a year or two to come; and when I have finished it, I shall have
run through all the degrees of my profession, as author, translator,
and editor. I know not that a fourth could be found; but if a fourth
can be found, I dare say I shall find it.

I remain, my dear madam, your affectionate friend and humble servant,

  W. C.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston, Oct. 25, 1791.

My dear Friend,--Your unexpected and transient visit, like every
thing else that is past, has now the appearance of a dream, but it
was a pleasant one, and I heartily wish that such dreams could recur
more frequently. Your brother Chester repeated his visit yesterday,
and I never saw him in better spirits. At such times he has, now
and then, the very look that he had when he was a boy, and when I
see it I seem to be a boy myself, and entirely forget for a short
moment the years that have intervened since I was one. The look that
I mean is one that you, I dare say, have observed.--Then we are at
Westminster again. He left with me that poem of your brother Lord
Bagot's which was mentioned when you were here. It was a treat to
me, and I read it to my cousin Lady Hesketh and to Mrs. Unwin, to
whom it was a treat also. It has great sweetness of numbers and
much elegance of expression, and is just such a poem as I should be
happy to have composed myself about a year ago, when I was loudly
called upon by a certain nobleman[613] to celebrate the beauties
of his villa. But I had two insurmountable difficulties to contend
with. One was that I had never seen his villa, and the other, that
I had no eyes at that time for anything but Homer. Should I at any
time hereafter undertake the task, I shall now at least know how to
go about it, which, till I had seen Lord Bagot's poem, I verily did
not. I was particularly charmed with the parody of those beautiful
lines of Milton:

    "The song was partial, but the harmony----
    (What could it less, when spirits immortal sing?)
    Suspended hell, and took with ravishment
    The thronging audience."

There's a parenthesis for you! The parenthesis it seems is out of
fashion, and perhaps the moderns are in the right to proscribe what
they cannot attain to. I will answer for it that had we the art at
this day of insinuating a sentiment in this graceful manner, no
reader of taste would quarrel with the practice. Lord Bagot showed
his by selecting the passage for his imitation.

  [613] Lord Bagot.

I would beat Warton, if he were living, for supposing that Milton
ever repented of his compliment to the memory of Bishop Andrews. I
neither do, nor can, nor will believe it. Milton's mind could not
be narrowed by anything, and, though he quarrelled with episcopacy
in the church of England idea of it, I am persuaded that a good
bishop, as well as any other good man, of whatsoever rank or order,
had always a share of his veneration.[614]

  Yours, my dear friend,
  Very affectionately,
  W. C.

  [614] How much more charitable is Cowper's comment, than the
  injurious surmise of Warton!


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 31, 1791.

My dear Johnny,--Your kind and affectionate letter well deserves my
thanks, and should have had them long ago, had I not been obliged
lately to give my attention to a mountain of unanswered letters,
which I have just now reduced to a mole-hill; yours lay at the
bottom, and I have at last worked my way down to it.

It gives me great pleasure that you have found a house to your
minds. May you all three be happier in it than the happiest that
ever occupied it before you! But my chief delight of all is to
learn that you and Kitty are so completely cured of your long and
threatening maladies. I always thought highly of Dr. Kerr, but his
extraordinary success in your two instances has even inspired me
with an affection for him.

My eyes are much better than when I wrote last, though seldom
perfectly well many days together. At this season of the year I
catch perpetual colds, and shall continue to do so till I have got
the better of that tenderness of habit with which the summer never
fails to affect me.

I am glad that you have heard well of my work in your country.
Sufficient proofs have reached me from various quarters that I have
not ploughed the field of Troy in vain.

Were you here, I would gratify you with an enumeration of
particulars, but since you are not it must content you to be told
that I have every reason to be satisfied.

Mrs. Unwin, I think, in her letter to Cousin Balls, made mention of
my new engagement. I have just entered on it, and therefore can at
present say little about it. It is a very creditable one in itself,
and may I but acquit myself of it with sufficiency it will do me
honour. The commentator's part however is a new one to me, and one
that I little thought to appear in. Remember your promise that I
shall see you in the spring.

The Hall has been full of company ever since you went, and at
present my Catharina[615] is there, singing and playing like an
angel.

  W. C.

  [615] The present Dowager Lady Throckmorton.


TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.

  Weston, Nov. 14, 1791.

My dear Friend,--I have waited and wished for your opinion with the
feelings that belong to the value that I have for it, and am very
happy to find it so favourable. In my table-drawer I treasure up a
bundle of suffrages sent me by those of whose approbation I was most
ambitious, and shall presently insert yours among them.

I know not why we should quarrel with compound epithets; it is
certain, at least, they are as agreeable to the genius of our
language as to that of the Greek, which is sufficiently proved
by their being admitted into our common and colloquial dialect.
Black-eyed, nut-brown, crook-shanked, hump-backed, are all
compound epithets, and, together with a thousand other such,
are used continually, even by those who profess a dislike to
such combinations in poetry. Why then do they treat with so much
familiarity a thing that they say disgusts them? I doubt if they
could give this question a reasonable answer, unless they should
answer it by confessing themselves unreasonable.

I have made a considerable progress in the translation of Milton's
Latin poems. I give them, as opportunity offers, all the variety of
measure that I can. Some I render in heroic rhyme, some in stanzas,
some in seven and some in eight syllable measure, and some in blank
verse. They will altogether, I hope, make an agreeable miscellany
for the English reader. They are certainly good in themselves, and
cannot fail to please but by the fault of their translator.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[616]

  [616] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Nov. 16, 1791.

My dear Friend,--I am weary of making you wait for an answer, and
therefore resolve to send you one, though without the lines you
ask for. Such as they are, they have been long ready; and could I
have found a conveyance for them, should have been with you weeks
ago. Mr. Bean's last journey to town might have afforded me an
opportunity to send them, but he gave me not sufficient notice. They
must, therefore, be still delayed till either he shall go to London
again or somebody else shall offer. I thank you for yours, which are
as much better than mine as gold is better than feathers.

It seemed necessary that I should account for my apparent tardiness
to comply with the obliging request of a lady, and of a lady who
employed you as her intermedium. None was wanted, as you well
assured her. But had there been occasion for one, she could not
possibly have found a better.

I was much pleased with your account of your visit to Cowslip
Green,[617] both for the sake of what you saw there, and because I
am sure you must have been as happy in such company as any situation
in this world can make you. Miss More has been always employed,
since I first heard of her doings, as becomes a Christian. So
she was while endeavouring to reform the unreformable great; and
so she is, while framing means and opportunities to instruct the
more tractable little. Horace's _Virginibus, puerisque_, may be
her motto, but in a sense much nobler than he has annexed to it.
I cannot, however, be entirely reconciled to the thought of her
being henceforth silent, though even for the sake of her present
labours.[618] A pen useful as hers ought not, perhaps, to be laid
aside; neither, perhaps, will she altogether renounce it, but,
when she has established her schools, and habituated them to the
discipline she intends, will find it desirable to resume it. I
rejoice that she has a sister like herself, capable of bidding
defiance to fatigue and hardship, to dirty roads and wet raiment, in
so excellent a cause.[619]

  [617] The residence of the late Mrs. Hannah More, near Bristol.

  [618] The establishment of her schools, comprising the children
  of several parishes, then in a most neglected and uncivilized
  state. See the interesting account of the origin and progress of
  these schools in the Memoir of Mrs. More.

  [619] Mrs. Martha More.

I beg that when you write next to either of those ladies, you will
present my best compliments to Miss Martha, and tell her that I can
never feel myself flattered more than I was by her application. God
knows how unworthy I judge myself, at the same time, to be admitted
into a collection[620] of which you are a member. Were there not a
crowned head or two to keep me in countenance, I should even blush
to think of it.

  [620] Of autographs.

I would that I could see some of the mountains which you have seen;
especially, because Dr. Johnson has pronounced that no man is
qualified to be a poet who has never seen a mountain. But mountains
I shall never see, unless perhaps in a dream, or unless there are
such in heaven. Nor those, unless I receive twice as much mercy as
ever yet was shown to any man.

I am now deep in Milton, translating his Latin poems for a pompous
edition, of which you have undoubtedly heard. This amuses me for the
present, and will for a year or two. So long, I presume, I shall
be occupied in the several functions that belong to my present
engagement.

Mrs. Unwin and I are about as well as usual; always mindful of you,
and always affectionately so. Our united love attends yourself and
Miss Catlett.

  Believe me, most truly yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston-Underwood, Dec. 5, 1791.

My dear Friend,--Your last brought me two cordials; for what can
better deserve that name than the cordial approbation of two such
readers as your brother, the bishop, and your good friend and
neighbour, the clergyman? The former I have ever esteemed and
honoured with the justest cause, and am as ready to honour and
esteem the latter as you can wish me to be, and as his wishes and
talents deserve. Do I hate a parson? Heaven forbid! I love you all
when you are good for any thing, and, as to the rest, I would mend
them if I could, and that is the worst of my intentions towards them.

I heard above a month since that this first edition of my work was
at that time nearly sold. It will not therefore, I presume, be long
before I must go to press again. This I mention merely from an
earnest desire to avail myself of all other strictures that either
your good neighbour, Lord Bagot, the bishop, or yourself,

  παντων εκπαγλοτατ' ανδρων,

may happen to have made, and will be so good as to favour me
with. Those of the good Evander contained in your last have
served me well, and I have already, in the three different places
referred to, accommodated the text to them. And this I have done
in one instance even a little against the bias of my own opinion.

  ... εγω δε κεν αυτος ἑλωμαι 'Ελθων συν πλεομεσσι.

The sense I had given of these words is the sense in which an old
scholiast has understood them, as appears in Clarke's note _in
loco_. Clarke indeed prefers the other, but it does not appear
plain to me that he does it with good reason against the judgment
of a very ancient commentator and a Grecian. And I am the rather
inclined to this persuasion, because Achilles himself seems to
have apprehended that Agamemnon would not content himself with
Briseis only, when he says,

  But I have OTHER precious things on board,
  Of THESE take NONE away without my leave, &c.

It is certain that the words are ambiguous, and that the sense of
them depends altogether on the punctuation. But I am always under
the correction of so able a critic as your neighbour, and have
altered, as I say, my version accordingly.

As to Milton, the die is cast. I am engaged, have bargained with
Johnson, and cannot recede. I should otherwise have been glad
to do as you advise, to make the translation of his Latin and
Italian part of another volume; for, with such an addition, I
have nearly as much verse in my budget as would be required for
the purpose. This squabble, in the meantime, between Fuseli and
Boydell[621] does not interest me at all; let it terminate as it
may, I have only to perform my job, and leave the event to be
decided by the combatants.

  [621] Fuseli was associated with Cowper's Milton, and Boydell
  interested in Hayley's, which produced a collision of feeling
  between them.

    Suave mari magno turbantibus æquora ventis
    E terrâ ingentem alterius spectare laborem.

Adieu, my dear friend, I am most sincerely yours,

  W. C.

Why should you suppose that I did not admire the poem you showed me?
I did admire it, and told you so, but you carried it off in your
pocket, and so doing left me to forget it, and without the means of
inquiry.

I am thus nimble in answering, merely with a view to ensure myself
the receipt of other remarks in time for a new impression.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, Dec. 10, 1791.

Dear Sir,--I am much obliged to you for wishing that I were employed
in some original work rather than in translation. To tell the truth,
I am of your mind; and, unless I could find another Homer, I shall
promise (I believe) and vow, when I have done with Milton, never
to translate again. But my veneration for our great countryman is
equal to what I feel for the Grecian; and consequently I am happy,
and feel myself honourably employed whatever I do for Milton. I am
now translating his _Epitaphium Damonis_, a pastoral in my judgment
equal to any of Virgil's Bucolics, but of which Dr. Johnson (so it
pleased him) speaks, as I remember, contemptuously. But he who never
saw any beauty in a rural scene was not likely to have much taste
for a pastoral. _In pace quiescat!_

I was charmed with your friendly offer to be my advocate with the
public; should I want one, I know not where I could find a better.
The reviewer in the Gentleman's Magazine grows more and more civil.
Should he continue to sweeten at this rate, as he proceeds, I know
not what will become of all the little modesty I have left. I have
availed myself of some of his strictures, for I wish to learn from
every body.

  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  The Lodge, Dec. 21, 1791.

My dear Friend,--It grieves me, after having indulged a little hope
that I might see you in the holidays, to be obliged to disappoint
myself. The occasion too is such as will ensure me your sympathy.

On Saturday last, while I was at my desk near the window, and Mrs.
Unwin at the fireside opposite to it, I heard her suddenly exclaim,
"Oh! Mr. Cowper, don't let me fall!" I turned and saw her actually
falling, together with her chair, and started to her side just in
time to prevent her. She was seized with a violent giddiness, which
lasted, though with some abatement, the whole day, and was attended
too with some other very, very alarming symptoms. At present,
however, she is relieved from the vertigo, and seems in all respects
better.

She has been my faithful and affectionate nurse for many years, and
consequently has a claim on all my attentions. She has them, and
will have them as long as she wants them; which will probably be, at
the best, a considerable time to come. I feel the shock, as you may
suppose, in every nerve. God grant that there may be no repetition
of it. Another such a stroke upon her would, I think, overset me
completely; but at present I hold up bravely.

  W. C.



Few events could have afflicted the tender and affectionate mind
of Cowper more acutely than the distressing incident recorded in
the preceding letter. Mrs. Unwin had for some time past experienced
frequent returns of headache, sensations of bodily pain, and
an increasing incapacity even for the common routine of daily
duties. By an intelligent observer these symptoms might have been
interpreted as the precursors of some impending dispensation, in
the same manner as the gathering clouds and the solemn stillness of
nature announce the approaching storm and tempest. But the stroke
is not the less felt because it is anticipated. Among the sorrows
which inflict a wound on the feeling heart, to see a beloved object,
identified in character, in sentiment, and pursuit, endeared to us
by the memory of the past, and by the fears and anxieties of the
present, sinking under the slow yet consuming incursions of disease;
and to be assured, as we contemplate the fading form, that the
moment of separation is drawing nigh; this is indeed a trial, where
the mind feels its own bitterness, and is awakened to the strongest
emotions of tenderness and love.

The cheering prospect of a happy change, founded on an interest
in the promises of the gospel, can alone mitigate the mournful
anticipation. It is a subject for deep thankfulness when we can
cherish the persuasion for ourselves, or, like Cowper, feel its
consoling support for others; and when we are enabled to exclaim
with the poet,

    The soul's dark cottage, batter'd and decay'd,
    Lets in new light thro' chinks that time has made;
    Stronger by weakness, wiser men become,
    As they draw near to their eternal home.
    Leaving the old, both worlds at once they view,
    That stand upon the threshold of the new.

  _Waller's Divine Poesie._



The following letter communicates some further details of Mrs.
Unwin's severe attack, and of Cowper's feelings on this distressing
occasion.


TO MRS. KING.[622]

  [622] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Jan. 26, 1792.

My dear Madam,--Silent as I have long been, I have had but too good
a reason for being so. About six weeks since, Mrs. Unwin was seized
with a sudden and most alarming disorder, a vertigo, which would
have thrown her out of her chair to the ground, had I not been
quick enough to catch her while she was falling. For some moments
her knees and ancles were so entirely disabled that she had no
use of them; and it was with the exertion of all my strength that
I replaced her in her seat. Many days she kept her bed, and for
some weeks her chamber; but, at length, she has joined me again in
the study. Her recovery has been extremely slow, and she is still
feeble; but, I thank God, not so feeble but that I hope for her
perfect restoration as the spring advances. I am persuaded, that
with your feelings for your friends, you will know how to imagine
what I must have suffered on an occasion so distressing, and to
pardon a silence owing to such a cause.

The account you give me of the patience with which a lady of your
acquaintance has lately endured a terrible operation, is a strong
proof that your sex surpasses ours in heroic fortitude. I call it by
that name, because I verily believe, that in God's account, there is
more true heroism in suffering his will with meek submission than in
doing our own, or that of our fellow mortals who may have a right
to command us, with the utmost valour that was ever exhibited in a
field of battle. Renown and glory are, in general, the incitements
to such exertions; but no laurels are to be won by sitting patiently
under the knife of a surgeon. The virtue is, therefore, of a less
suspicious character; the principle of it more simple, and the
practice more difficult;--considerations that seem sufficiently to
warrant my opinion, that the infallible Judge of human conduct may
possibly behold with more complacency a suffering than an active
courage.

I forget if I told you that I am engaged for a new edition of
Milton's Poems. In fact, I have still other engagements, and so
various, that I hardly know to which of them all to give my first
attentions. I have only time, therefore, to condole with you on the
double loss you have lately sustained, and to congratulate you on
being female; because, as such, you will, I trust, acquit yourself
well under so severe a trial.

  I remain, my dear madam,
  Most sincerely yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston-Underwood, Feb. 14, 1792.

My dear Friend,--It is the only advantage I believe, that they who
love each other derive from living at a distance, that the news of
such ills as may happen to either seldom reaches the other till the
cause of complaint is over. Had I been your next neighbour, I should
have suffered with you during the whole indisposition of your two
children and your own. As it is, I have nothing to do but to rejoice
in your own recovery and theirs, which I do sincerely, and wish only
to learn from yourself that it is complete.

I thank you for suggesting the omission of the line due to the
helmet of Achilles. How the omission happened I know not, whether
by my fault or the printer's; it is certain, however, that I had
translated it, and I have now given it its proper place.

I purpose to keep back a second edition till I have had opportunity
to avail myself of the remarks of both friends and strangers. The
ordeal of criticism still awaits me in the reviews, and probably
they will all in their turn mark many things that may be mended.
By the Gentleman's Magazine I have already profited in several
instances. My reviewer there, though favourable in the main, is a
pretty close observer, and, though not always right, is often so.

In the affair of Milton I will have no _horrida bella_ if I can
help it.[623] It is at least my present purpose to avoid them, if
possible. For which reason, unless I should soon see occasion to
alter my plan, I shall confine myself merely to the business of
an annotator, which is my proper province, and shall sift out of
Warton's notes every tittle that relates to the private character,
political or religious principles, of my author. These are properly
subjects for a biographer's handling, but by no means, as it seems
to me, for a commentator's.

  [623] He alludes to the dispute between Boydell and Fuseli the
  painter.

In answer to your question, if I have had a correspondence with the
Chancellor, I reply--yes. We exchanged three or four letters on the
subject of Homer, or rather on the subject of my Preface. He was
doubtful whether or not my preference of blank verse, as affording
opportunity for a closer version, was well founded. On this subject
he wished to be convinced; defended rhyme with much learning,
and much shrewd reasoning; but at last allowed me the honour of
the victory, expressing himself in these words:--"_I am clearly
convinced that Homer may be best rendered in blank verse, and you
have succeeded in the passages that I have looked into_."

Thus it is when a wise man differs in opinion. Such a man will be
candid; and conviction, not triumph, will be his object.

Adieu!----The hard name I gave you I take to myself, and am your

  εκπαγλοτατος,
  W. C.



We are indebted to a friend for the opportunity of inserting nine
additional letters, addressed by Cowper to Thomas Park, Esq., known
as the author of "Sonnets and Miscellaneous Poems," and subsequently
as the editor of that splendid work, "Walpole's Royal and Noble
Authors."


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  Weston-Underwood, Feb. 19, 1792.

Dear Sir,--Yesterday evening your parcel came safe to hand, containing
the "Cursory Remarks," "Fletcher's Faithful Shepherdesse," and your
kind letter, for all which I am much obliged to you.

Everything that relates to Milton must be welcome to an editor of
him; and I am so unconnected with the learned world that, unless
assistance seeks _me_, I am not very likely to find it. Fletcher's
work was not in my possession; nor, indeed, was I possessed of any
other, when I engaged in this undertaking, that could serve me much
in the performance of it. The various untoward incidents of a very
singular life have deprived me of a valuable collection, partly
inherited from my father, partly from my brother,[624] and partly
made by myself; so that I have at present fewer books than any man
ought to have who writes for the public, especially who assumes
the character of an editor. At the present moment, however, I find
myself tolerably well provided for this occasion by the kindness of
a few friends, who have not been backward to pick from their shelves
everything that they thought might be useful to me. I am happy to be
able to number you among these friendly contributors.

  [624] The Rev. John Cowper, Fellow of Bennet College, Cambridge.

                    "I had a brother once,
    Peace to the memory of a man of worth," &c. &c.

You will add a considerable obligation to those you have already
conferred, if you will be so good as to furnish me with such
notices of your own as you offer. Parallel passages, or, at
least, a striking similarity of expression, is always worthy of
remark; and I shall reprint, I believe, all Mr. Warton's notes of
that kind, except such as are rather trivial, and some, perhaps,
that are a little whimsical, and except that I shall diminish the
number of his references, which are not seldom redundant. Where a
word only is in question, and that, perhaps, not an uncommon one
in the days of Milton, his use of it proves little or nothing;
for it is possible that authors writing on similar subjects may
use the same words by mere accident. Borrowing seems to imply
poverty, and of poverty I can rather suspect any man than Milton.
But I have as yet determined nothing absolutely concerning the
mode of my commentary, having hitherto been altogether busied
in the translation of his Latin poems. These I have finished,
and shall immediately proceed to a version of the Italian. They,
being few, will not detain me long; and, when they are done, will
leave me at full liberty to deliberate on the main business, and
to plan and methodise my operations.

I shall be always happy in, and account myself honoured by, your
communications, and hope that our correspondence thus begun will
not terminate _in limine primo_.

I am, my dear sir, with much respect,

Your most obliged and humble servant,
W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[625]

  [625] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Feb. 20, 1792.

My dear Friend,--When I wrote the lines in question, I was, as I
almost always am, so pressed for time, that I was obliged to put
them down in a great hurry.[626] Perhaps I printed them wrong. If a
full stop be made at the end of the second line, the appearance of
inconsistency, perhaps, will vanish; but should you still think them
liable to that objection, they may be altered thus:--

    In vain to live from age to age
      We modern bards endeavour;
    But write in Patty's book one page,[627]
      You gain your point for ever.

  [626] Mrs. Martha More had requested Cowper to furnish a
  contribution to her collection of autographs. The result appears
  in the sequel of this letter.

  [627] In the present edition of the Poems the lines stand thus,
  on a farther suggestion of Lady Hesketh's:--

    In vain to live from age to age,
      While modern bards endeavour,

    _I_ write my name in Patty's page,
      And gain my point for ever.

  W COWPER.
  March 6, 1792.

Trifling enough I readily confess they are: but I have always
allowed myself to trifle occasionally; and on this occasion had
not, nor have at present, time to do more. By the way, should
you think this amended copy worthy to displace the former, I
must wait for some future opportunity to send you them properly
transcribed for the purpose.

Your demand of more original composition from me will, if I
live, and it please God to afford me health, in all probability
be sooner or later gratified. In the mean time, you need not,
and, if you turn the matter in your thoughts a little, you will
perceive that you need not, think me unworthily employed in
preparing a new edition of Milton. His two principal poems are
of a kind that call for an editor who believes the gospel and is
well grounded in all evangelical doctrine. Such an editor they
have never had yet, though only such a one can be qualified for
the office.

We mourn for the mismanagement at Botany Bay, and foresee the
issue. The Romans were, in their origin, banditti; and if they
became in time masters of the world, it was not by drinking
grog, and allowing themselves in all sorts of licentiousness.
The African colonization, and the manner of conducting it, has
long been matter to us of pleasing speculation. God has highly
honoured Mr. Thornton; and I doubt not that the subsequent
history of the two settlements will strikingly evince the
superior wisdom of his proceedings.[628]

Yours,
W. C.

  [628] This alludes to the new colony for liberated Africans,
  at Sierra Leone; in the origin of which Mr. Henry Thornton and
  Mr. Zachary Macauley were mainly instrumental. For interesting
  accounts of this colony, see the "Missionary Register of the
  Church Missionary Society," _passim_.

P.S. Lady Hesketh made the same objection to my verses as you;
but, she being a lady-critic, I did not heed her. As they stand at
present, however, they are hers; and I believe you will think them
much improved.

My heart bears me witness how glad I shall be to see you at the time
you mention; and Mrs. Unwin says the same.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, Feb. 21, 1792.

My dear Sir,--My obligations to you on the score of your kind
and friendly remarks demanded from me a much more expeditious
acknowledgment of the numerous packets that contained them; but I
have been hindered by many causes, each of which you would admit
as a sufficient apology, but none of which I will mention, lest I
should give too much of my paper to the subject. My acknowledgments
are likewise due to your fair sister, who has transcribed so many
sheets in a neat hand, and with so much accuracy.

At present I have no leisure for Homer, but shall certainly find
leisure to examine him with reference to your strictures, before
I send him a second time to the printer. This I am at present
unwilling to do, choosing rather to wait, if that may be, till I
shall have undergone the discipline of all the reviewers; none of
which have yet taken me in hand, the Gentleman's Magazine excepted.
By several of his remarks I have benefited, and shall no doubt be
benefited by the remarks of all.

Milton at present engrosses me altogether. His Latin pieces I
have translated, and have begun with the Italian. These are few,
and will not detain me long. I shall then proceed immediately to
deliberate upon and to settle the plan of my commentary, which I
have hitherto had but little time to consider. I look forward to
it, for this reason, with some anxiety. I trust at least that this
anxiety will cease when I have once satisfied myself about the best
manner of conducting it. But, after all, I seem to fear more about
the labour to which it calls me than any great difficulty with which
it is likely to be attended. To the labours of versifying I have no
objection, but to the labours of criticism I am new, and apprehend
that I shall find them wearisome. Should that be the case, I shall
be dull, and must be contented to share the censure of being so with
almost all the commentators that have ever existed.

I have expected, but not wondered that I have not received, Sir
Thomas More and the other MSS. you promised me; because my silence
has been such, considering how loudly I was called upon to write,
that you must have concluded me either dead or dying, and did not
choose perhaps to trust them to executors.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, March 2, 1792.

My dear Sir,--I have this moment finished a comparison of your
remarks with my text, and feel so sensibly my obligations to your
great accuracy and kindness, that I cannot deny myself the pleasure
of expressing them immediately. I only wish that instead of revising
the two first books of the Iliad, you could have found leisure to
revise the whole two poems, sensible how much my work would have
benefited.

I have not always adopted your lines, though often, perhaps,
at least as good as my own; because there will and must be
dissimilarity of manner between two so accustomed to the pen as we
are. But I have let few passages go unamended which you seemed to
think exceptionable; and this not at all from complaisance: for in
such a cause I would not sacrifice an iota on that principle, but on
clear conviction.

I have as yet heard nothing from Johnson about the two MSS. you
announce, but feel ashamed that I should want your letter to remind
me of your obliging offer to inscribe Sir Thomas More to me, should
you resolve to publish him. Of my consent to such a measure you need
not doubt. I am covetous of respect and honour from all such as you.

Tame hare, at present, I have none. But, to make amends, I have a
beautiful little spaniel, called Beau, to whom I will give the kiss
your sister Sally intended for the former, unless she should command
me to bestow it elsewhere; it shall attend on her directions.

I am going to take a last dinner with a most agreeable family, who
have been my only neighbours ever since I have lived at Weston.
On Monday they go to London, and in the summer to an estate in
Oxfordshire, which is to be their home in future. The occasion is
not at all a pleasant one to me, nor does it leave me spirits to add
more, than that I am, dear sir,

  Most truly yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[629]

  [629] Private correspondence.

  Weston, March 4, 1792.

My dear Friend,--All our little world is going to London, the gulf
that swallows most of our good things, and, like a bad stomach, too
often assimilates them to itself. Our neighbours at the Hall go
thither to-morrow. Mr. and Mrs. Throckmorton, as we lately called
them, but now Sir John and my Lady, are no longer inhabitants here,
but henceforth of Bucklands, in Berkshire. I feel the loss of
them, and shall feel it, since kinder or more friendly treatment I
never can receive at any hands than I have always found at theirs.
But it has long been a foreseen change, and was, indeed, almost
daily expected long before it happened. The desertion of the Hall,
however, will not be total. The second brother, George, now Mr.
Courtenay,[630] intends to reside there; and, with him, as with his
elder brother, I have always been on terms the most agreeable.

  [630] Afterwards Sir George Throckmorton.

Such is this variable scene: so variable that, had the reflections
I sometimes make upon it a permanent influence, I should tremble
at the thought of a new connexion, and, to be out of the reach of
its mutability, lead almost the life of a hermit. It is well with
those who, like you, have God for their companion. Death cannot
deprive them of Him, and he changes not the place of his abode.
Other changes, therefore, to them are all supportable; and what you
say of your own experience is the strongest possible proof of it.
Had you lived without God, you could not have endured the loss you
mention. May He preserve me from a similar one; at least, till he
shall be pleased to draw me to himself again! Then, if ever that day
come, it will make me equal to any burden; but at present I can bear
nothing well.

  I am sincerely yours,
  W.C.


TO MRS KING.[631]

  [631] Private correspondence.

  Weston, March 8, 1792.

My dear Madam,--Having just finished all my Miltonic translations,
and not yet begun my comments, I find an interval that cannot
be better employed than in discharging arrears due to my
correspondents, of whom I begin first a letter to you, though your
claim be of less ancient standing than those of all the rest.

I am extremely sorry that you have been so much indisposed, and
especially that your indisposition has been attended with such
excessive pain. But may I be permitted to observe, that your going
to church on Christmas-day, immediately after such a sharp fit of
rheumatism, was not according to the wisdom with which I believe
you to be endued, nor was it acting so charitably toward yourself
as I am persuaded you would have acted toward another. To another
you would, I doubt not, have suggested that text--"I will have
mercy and not sacrifice," as implying a gracious dispensation,
in circumstances like yours, from the practice of so severe and
dangerous a service.

Mrs. Unwin, I thank God, is better, but still wants much of complete
restoration. We have reached a time of life when heavy blows, if not
fatal, are at least long felt.

I have received many testimonies concerning my Homer, which do me
much honour, and afford me great satisfaction; but none from which I
derive, or have reason to derive, more than that of Mr. Martyn. It
is of great use to me, when I write, to suppose some such person at
my elbow, witnessing what I do; and I ask myself frequently--Would
this please him? If I think it would, it stands: if otherwise, I
alter it. My work is thus finished, as it were, under the eye of
some of the best judges, and has the better chance to win their
approbation when they actually see it.

  I am, my dear madam,
  Affectionately yours,
  W. C.


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  Weston-Underwood, March 10, 1792.

Dear Sir,--You will have more candour, as I hope and believe, than
to impute my delay to answer your kind and friendly letter to
inattention or want of a cordial respect for the writer of it. To
suppose any such cause of my silence were injustice both to yourself
and me. The truth is, I am a very busy man, and cannot gratify
myself with writing to my friends so punctually as I wish.

You have not in the least fallen in my esteem on account of your
employment,[632] as you seemed to apprehend that you might. It is
an elegant one, and, when you speak modestly, as you do, of your
proficiency in it, I am far from giving you entire credit for the
whole assertion. I had indeed supposed you a person of independent
fortune, who had nothing to do but to gratify himself; and whose
mind, being happily addicted to literature, was at full leisure to
enjoy its innocent amusement. But it seems I was mistaken, and your
time is principally due to an art which has a right pretty much
to engross your attention, and which gives rather the air of an
intrigue to your intercourse and familiarity with the muses than a
lawful connexion. No matter: I am not prudish in this respect, but
honour you the more for a passion, virtuous and laudable in itself;
and which you indulge not, I dare say, without benefit to yourself
and your acquaintance. I, for one, am likely to reap the fruit of
your amours, and ought, therefore, to be one of the last to quarrel
with them.

  [632] Mezzotinto engraving. Mr. Park, in early youth, fluctuated
  in the choice between the sister arts of poetry, music, and
  painting, and composed the following lines to record the result.

    By fancy warm'd, I seiz'd the quill,
      And poetry the strain inspir'd;
    Music improv'd it by her skill,
      Till I with both their charms was fir'd.

    Won by the graces each display'd,
      Their younger sister I forgot;
    Though first to her my vows were paid,--
      By fate or choice it matters not.

    She, jealous of their rival powers,
      And to repay the injury done,
    Condemn'd me through life's future hours,
      _All_ to admire, but wed with none.

  T. P.

You are in danger, I perceive, of thinking of me more highly than
you ought to think. I am not one of the _literati_, among whom
you seem disposed to place me. Far from it. I told you in my last
how heinously I am unprovided with the means of being so, having
long since sent all my books to market. My learning accordingly
lies in a very narrow compass. It is school-boy learning somewhat
improved, and very little more. From the age of twenty to
twenty-three, I was occupied, or ought to have been, in the study
of the law. From thirty-three to sixty I have spent my time
in the country, where my reading has been only an apology for
idleness, and where, when I had not either a magazine or a review
in my hand, I was sometimes a carpenter, at others a bird-cage
maker, or a gardener, or a drawer of landscapes. At fifty years
of age I commenced an author. It is a whim that has served me
longest and best, and which will probably be my last.

Thus you see I have had very little opportunity to become what
is properly called--_learned_. In truth, having given myself so
entirely of late to poetry, I am not sorry for this deficiency,
since great learning, I have been sometimes inclined to suspect,
is rather a hindrance to the fancy than a furtherance.

You will do me a favour by sending me a copy of Thomson's
monumental inscription. He was a poet, for whose memory, as you
justly suppose, I have great respect; in common, indeed, with all
who have ever read him with taste and attention.

Wishing you heartily success in your present literary undertaking
and in all professional ones, I remain,

Dear sir, with great esteem,
Sincerely yours,
W. C.

P. S. After what I have said, I will not blush to confess,
that I am at present perfectly unacquainted with the merits of
Drummond,[633] but shall be happy to see him in due time, as I
should be to see any author edited by _you_.

  [633] Drummond, an elegant Scottish poet, born in 1585. His
  works, though not free from the conceits of the Italian School,
  are characterised by much delicacy of taste and feeling. There
  is a peculiar melody and sweetness in his verse, and his sonnets
  particularly have procured for him a fame, which has survived to
  the present time. An edition of his Poems was published in 1791,
  by Cowper's correspondent, Mr. Park.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, March 11, 1792.

My dear Johnny,--You talk of primroses that you pulled on
Candlemas-day; but what think you of me that heard a nightingale on
new-year's day? Perhaps I am the only man in England who can boast
of such good fortune; good indeed, for if it was at all an omen
it could not be an unfavourable one. The winter, however, is now
making himself amends, and seems the more peevish for having been
encroached on at so undue a season. Nothing less than a large slice
out of the spring will satisfy him.

Lady Hesketh left us yesterday. She intended to have left us four
days sooner; but in the evening before the day fixed for her
departure, snow enough fell to occasion just so much delay of it.

We have faint hopes that in the month of May we shall see her again.
I know that you have had a letter from her, and you will no doubt
have the grace not to make her wait long for an answer.

We expect Mr. Rose on Tuesday; but he stays with us only till the
Saturday following. With him I shall have some conferences on the
subject of Homer, respecting a new edition I mean, and some perhaps
on the subject of Milton; on him I have not yet begun to comment, or
even fix the time when I shall.

  Forget not your promised visit!
  W. C.



We add the verses composed by Cowper on the extraordinary incident
mentioned at the beginning of the preceding letter.

TO THE NIGHTINGALE, WHICH THE AUTHOR HEARD ON NEW-YEAR'S DAY, 1792.

    Whence is it, that amaz'd I hear,
      From yonder wither'd spray,
    This foremost morn of all the year,
      The melody of May?

    And why, since thousands would be proud
      Of such a favour shown,
    Am I selected from the crowd,
      To witness it alone?

    Sing'st thou, sweet Philomel, to me,
      For that I also long
    Have practis'd in the groves like thee,
      Though not like thee, in song?

    Or sing'st thou rather under force
      Of some divine command,
    Commission'd to presage a course
      Of happier days at hand?

    Thrice welcome then! for many a long
      And joyless year have I,
    As thou to-day, put forth my song
      Beneath a wintry sky.

    But thee no wintry skies can harm,
      Who only need'st to sing,
    To make e'en January charm,
      And ev'ry season spring.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[634]

  [634] Private correspondence.

  Weston, March 18, 1792.

My dear Friend,--We are now once more reduced to our dual state,
having lost our neighbours at the Hall and our inmate Lady
Hesketh. Mr. Rose, indeed, has spent two or three days here,
and is still with us, but he leaves us in the afternoon. There
are those in the world whom we love, and whom we are happy
to see; but we are happy likewise in each other, and so far
independent of our fellow mortals as to be able to pass our time
comfortably without them:--as comfortably, at least, as Mrs.
Unwin's frequent indispositions, and my no less frequent troubles
of mind, will permit. When I am much distressed, any company
but hers distresses me more, and makes me doubly sensible of my
sufferings, though sometimes, I confess, it falls out otherwise;
and, by the help of more general conversation, I recover that
elasticity of mind which is able to resist the pressure. On the
whole, I believe I am situated exactly as I should wish to be,
were my situation to be determined by my own election; and am
denied no comfort that is compatible with the total absence of
the chief of all.

  Adieu, my dear friend.

  I remain, affectionately yours,
  W. C.


THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, March 23, 1792.

My dear Sir,--I have read your play carefully, and with great
pleasure; it seems now to be a performance that cannot fail to
do you much credit. Yet, unless my memory deceives me, the scene
between Cecilia and Heron in the garden has lost something that
pleased me much when I saw it first; and I am not sure that
you have not likewise obliterated an account of Sir Thomas's
execution, that I found very pathetic. It would be strange if, in
these two particulars, I should seem to miss what never existed;
you will presently know whether I am as good at remembering what
I never saw as I am at forgetting what I have seen. But, if I am
right, I cannot help recommending the omitted passages to your
re-consideration. If the play were designed for representation,
I should be apt to think Cecilia's first speech rather too
long, and should prefer to have it broken into dialogue, by an
interposition now and then from one of her sisters. But, since it
is designed, as I understand, for the closet only, that objection
seems of no importance; at no rate, however, would I expunge it,
because it is both prettily imagined and elegantly written.

I have read your _cursory remarks_, and am much pleased, both
with the style and the argument. Whether the latter be new or
not I am not competent to judge; if it be, you are entitled to
much praise for the invention of it. Where other data are wanting
to ascertain the time when an author of many pieces wrote each
in particular, there can be no better criterion by which to
determine the point than the more or less proficiency manifested
in the composition. Of this proficiency, where it appears, and of
those plays in which it appears not, you seem to have judged well
and truly, and, consequently, I approve of your arrangement.

I attended, as you desired me, in reading the character of
Cecilia, to the hint you gave me concerning your sister Sally,
and give you joy of such a sister. This, however, not exclusively
of the rest, for, though they may not all be Cecilias, I have a
strong persuasion that they are all very amiable.

  W. C.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  The Lodge, March 25, 1792.

My dearest Coz,--Mr. Rose's longer stay than he at first intended
was the occasion of the longer delay of my answer to your note,
as you may both have perceived by the date thereof, and learned
from his information. It was a daily trouble to me to see it
lying in the window-seat, while I knew you were in expectation
of its arrival. By this time I presume you have seen him, and
have seen likewise Mr. Hayley's friendly letter and complimentary
sonnet, as well as the letter of the honest Quaker; all of
which, at least the two former, I shall be glad to receive again
at a fair opportunity. Mr. Hayley's letter slept six weeks in
Johnson's custody.[635] It was necessary I should answer it
without delay, and accordingly I answered it the very evening
on which I received it, giving him to understand, among other
things, how much vexation the bookseller's folly had cost me, who
had detained it so long: especially on account of the distress
that I knew it must have occasioned to him also. From his reply,
which the return of the post brought me, I learn that in the long
interval of my non-correspondence, he had suffered anxiety and
mortification enough; so much, that I dare say he made twenty
vows never to hazard again either letter or compliment to an
unknown author. What, indeed, could he imagine less than that
I meant by such an obstinate silence to tell him that I valued
neither him nor his praises, nor his proffered friendship; in
short that I considered him as a rival, and therefore, like
a true author, hated and despised him? He is now, however,
convinced that I love him, as indeed I do, and I account him the
chief acquisition that my own verse has ever procured me. Brute
should I be if I did not, for he promises me every assistance in
his power.

  [635] We have already stated that Hayley was engaged in a life
  of Milton, when Cowper was announced as editor of Johnson's
  projected work. With a generosity that reflects the highest
  credit on his feelings, he addressed a letter on this occasion to
  Cowper, accompanied by a complimentary sonnet, and offering his
  kind aid in anyway that might prove most acceptable. The letter
  was entrusted to the bookseller, who delayed transmitting it six
  weeks, and thereby created great anxiety in Hayley's mind.

I have likewise a very pleasing letter from Mr. Park, which I wish
you were here to read; and a very pleasing poem that came enclosed
in it for my revisal, written when he was only twenty years of age,
yet wonderfully well written, though wanting some correction.

To Mr. Hurdis I return Sir Thomas More to-morrow, having revised it
a second time. He is now a very respectable figure, and will do my
friend, who gives him to the public this spring, considerable credit.

  W. C.


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  Weston-Underwood, March 30, 1792.

My dear Sir,--If you have indeed so favourable an opinion of my
judgment as you profess, which I shall not allow myself to question,
you will think highly and honourably of your poem,[636] for so
I think of it. The view you give of the place that you describe
is clear and distinct, the sentiments are just, the reflections
touching, and the numbers uncommonly harmonious. I give you joy of
having been able to produce, at twenty years of age, what would not
have disgraced you at a much later period; and, if you choose to
print it, have no doubt that it will do you great credit.

  [636] A juvenile offering of gratitude to the place where the
  writer had received his education.

You will perceive, however, when you receive your copy again, that
I have used all the liberty you gave me. I have proposed many
alterations; but you will consider them as only proposed. My lines
are by no means obtruded on you, but are ready to give place to any
that you shall choose to substitute of your own composing. They will
serve at least to mark the passages which seem to me susceptible of
improvement, and the manner in which I think the change may be made.
I have not always, seldom indeed, given my reasons; but without a
reason I have altered nothing, and the decision, as I say, is left
with you in the last instance. Time failed me to be particular and
explicit always, in accounting for my strictures, and I assured
myself that you would impute none of them to an arbitrary humour,
but all to their true cause--a desire to discharge faithfully the
trust committed to me.

I cannot but add, I think it a pity that you, who have evidently
such talents for poetry, should be so loudly called another way,
and want leisure to cultivate them; for if such was the bud, what
might we not have expected to see in the full-blown flower? Perhaps,
however, I am not quite prudent in saying all this to you, whose
proper function is not that of a poet, but I say it, trusting to
_your_ prudence, that you will not suffer it to seduce you.

I have not the edition of Milton's juvenile poems which you
mention, but shall be truly glad to see it, and thank you for the
offer.

No possible way occurs to me of returning your MS. but by the
Wellingborough coach; by that conveyance, therefore, I shall send it
on Monday, and my remarks, rough as I made them, shall accompany it.

Believe me, with much sincerity,

  Yours,
  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  The Lodge, March 30, 1792.

My dear Friend,--My mornings, ever since you went, have been given
to my correspondents; this morning I have already written a long
letter to Mr. Park, giving my opinion of his poem, which is a
favourable one. I forget whether I showed it to you when you were
here, and even whether I had then received it. He has genius and
delicate taste; and, if he were not an engraver, might be one of our
first hands in poetry.

  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  The Lodge, April 5, 1792.

You talk, my dear friend, as John Bunyan says, "like one that has
the egg-shell still upon his head." You talk of the mighty favours
that you have received from me, and forget entirely those for which
I am indebted to you; but though you forget them, I shall not, nor
ever think that I have requited you so long as any opportunity
presents itself of rendering you the smallest service: small indeed
is all that I can ever hope to render.

You now perceive, and sensibly, that not without reason I
complained, as I use to do, of those tiresome rogues, the
printers. Bless yourself that you have not two thick quartos to
bring forth, as I had. My vexation was always much increased by
this reflection--they are every day, and all day long, employed
in printing for somebody, and why not for me? This was adding
mortification to disappointment, so that I often lost all patience.

The suffrage of Dr. Robertson makes more than amends for the scurvy
jest passed upon me by the wag unknown. I regard him not; nor,
except for about two moments after I first heard of his doings, have
I ever regarded him. I have somewhere a secret enemy; I know not for
what cause he should be so, but he, I imagine, supposes that he has
a cause: it is well, however, to have but one; and I will take all
the care I can not to increase the number.

I have begun my notes, and am playing the commentator manfully. The
worst of it is that I am anticipated in almost all my opportunities
to shine by those who have gone before me.

  W. C.



The following letter is the commencement of Cowper's correspondence
with Hayley, originating in the circumstances already detailed to
the reader.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, April 6, 1792.

My dear Friend,--God grant that this friendship of ours may be
a comfort to us all the rest of our days, in a world where true
friendships are rarities, and, especially where suddenly formed,
they are apt soon to terminate! But, as I said before, I feel a
disposition of heart toward you that I never felt for one whom I had
never seen; and that shall prove itself, I trust, in the event, a
propitious omen.



Horace says somewhere, though I may quote it amiss, perhaps, for I
have a terrible memory,

    "Utrumque nostrum incredibili modo
    Consentit astrum."

... Our _stars consent_, at least have had an influence somewhat
similar, in another and more important article....

It gives me the sincerest pleasure that I may hope to see you at
Weston; for, as to any migrations of mine, they must, I fear,
notwithstanding the joy I should feel in being a guest of yours, be
still considered in the light of impossibilities. Come, then, my
friend, and be as welcome (as the country people say here) as the
flowers in May! I am happy, as I say, in expectation; but the fear,
or rather the consciousness, that I shall not answer on a nearer
view, makes it a trembling kind of happiness and a doubtful.

After the privacy, which I have mentioned above, I went to
Huntingdon; soon after my arrival there, I took up my quarters at
the house of the Rev. Mr. Unwin; I lived with him while he lived,
and ever since his death have lived with his widow. Her, therefore,
you will find mistress of the house; and I judge of you amiss, or
you will find her just such as you would wish. To me she has been
often a nurse, and invariably the kindest friend, through a thousand
adversities that I have had to grapple with in the course of almost
thirty years. I thought it better to introduce her to you thus, than
to present her to you at your coming, quite a stranger.

Bring with you any books that you think may be useful to my
commentatorship, for, with you for an interpreter, I shall be afraid
of none of them. And, in truth, if you think that you shall want
them, you must bring books for your own use also, for they are an
article with which I am _heinously unprovided_: being much in the
condition of the man whose library Pope describes as

                    "No mighty store!
    His own works neatly bound, and little more!"

You shall know how this has come to pass hereafter.

Tell me, my friend, are your letters in your own hand-writing? If
so, I am in pain for your eyes, lest by such frequent demands upon
them I should hurt them. I had rather write you three letters for
one, much as I prize your letters, than _that_ should happen. And
now, for the present, adieu--I am going to accompany Milton into the
lake of fire and brimstone, having just begun my annotations.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, April 8, 1792.

My dear Sir,--Your entertaining and pleasant letter, resembling
in that respect all that I receive from you, deserved a more
expeditious answer, and should have had what it so well deserved,
had it not reached me at a time when, deeply in debt to all my
correspondents, I had letters to write without number. Like autumnal
leaves that strew the brooks in _Vallombrosa_, the unanswered
farrago lay before me. If I quote at all, you must expect me
henceforth to quote none but Milton, since for a long time to come I
shall be occupied with him only.

I was much pleased with the extract you gave me from your sister
Eliza's letter; she writes very elegantly, and (if I might say it
without seeming to flatter you) I should say much in the manner
of her brother. It is well for your sister Sally that gloomy Dis
is already a married man, else perhaps finding her, as he found
Proserpine, studying botany in the fields, he might transport her to
his own flowerless abode, where all her hopes of improvement in that
science would be at an end for ever.

What letter of the 10th of December is that which you say you have
not yet answered? Consider, it is April now, and I never remember
any thing that I write half so long. But perhaps it relates to
Calchas, for I do remember that you have not yet furnished me with
the secret history of him and his family, which I demanded from you.

  Adieu! Yours most sincerely,
  W. C.

I rejoice that you are so well with the learned Bishop of
Sarum,[637] and well remember how he ferreted the vermin
Lauder[638] out of all his hidings, when I was a boy at Westminster.

  [637] Dr. Douglas.

  [638] Lauder endeavoured to depreciate the fame of Milton by a
  charge of plagiarism. Dr. Douglas successfully vindicated the
  great poet from such an imputation, and proved that it was a
  gross fiction on the part of Lauder.

I have not yet studied with your last remarks before me, but hope
soon to find an opportunity.


TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.[639]

  [639] Private correspondence.

  Weston, April 15, 1792.

My dear Friend,--I thank you for your remittance; which, to use the
language of a song much in use when we were boys,

    "Adds fresh beauties to the spring,
    And makes all nature look more gay."

What the author of the song had particularly in view when he thus
sang, I know not; but probably it was not the sum of fifty pounds:
which, as probably, he never had the happiness to possess. It was,
most probably, some beautiful nymph,--beautiful in his eyes, at
least,--who has long since become an old woman.

I have heard about my wether mutton from various quarters. First,
from a sensible little man, curate of a neighbouring village;[640]
then from Walter Bagot; then from Henry Cowper; and now from you. It
was a blunder hardly pardonable in a man who has lived amid fields
and meadows, grazed by sheep, almost these thirty years. I have
accordingly satirized myself in two stanzas which I composed last
night, when I lay awake, tormented with pain, and well dosed with
laudanum. If you find them not very brilliant, therefore, you will
know how to account for it.

  [640] Rev. John Buchanan.

    Cowper had sinn'd with some excuse
      If, bound in rhyming tethers,
    He had committed this abuse
      Of changing ewes for wethers;

    But, male for female is a trope,
      Or rather bold misnomer,
    That would have startled even Pope
      When he translated Homer.

Having translated all the Latin and Italian Miltonics, I was
proceeding merrily with a Commentary on the Paradise Lost, when I
was seized, a week since, with a most tormenting disorder; which has
qualified me, however, to make some very feeling observations on
that passage, when I shall come to it:

  "Ill fare our ancestor impure!"

For this we may thank Adam;--and you may thank him, too, that I am
not able to fill my sheet, nor endure a writing posture any longer.
I conclude abruptly, therefore, but sincerely subscribing myself,
with my best compliments to Mrs. Hill,

  Your affectionate,
  W. C.


TO LADY THROCKMORTON.

  Weston, April 16, 1792.

My dear Lady Frog,--I thank you for your letter, as sweet as it was
short, and as sweet as good news could make it. You encourage a hope
that has made me happy ever since I have entertained it. And if my
wishes can hasten the event, it will not be long suspended.[641]
As to your jealousy, I mind it not, or only to be pleased with it;
I shall say no more on the subject at present than this, that of
all ladies living, a certain lady, whom I need not name, would be
the lady of my choice for a certain gentleman, were the whole sex
submitted to my election.

  [641] The prospect of a marriage between Miss Stapleton, the
  Catharina of Cowper, and Mr. Courtenay, Sir John Throckmorton's
  brother.

What a delightful anecdote is that which you tell me of a young lady
detected in the very act of stealing our Catharina's praises; is
it possible that she can survive the shame, the mortification, of
such a discovery? Can she ever see the same company again, or any
company that she can suppose, by the remotest possibility, may have
heard the tidings? If she can, she must have an assurance equal to
her vanity. A lady in London stole my song on the broken Rose, or
rather would have stolen and have passed it for her own. But she too
was unfortunate in her attempt; for there happened to be a female
cousin of mine in company, who knew that I had written it. It is
very flattering to a poet's pride that the ladies should thus hazard
everything for the sake of appropriating his verses. I may say with
Milton, that I am fallen _on evil tongues, and evil days_, being
not only plundered of that which belongs to me, but being charged
with that which does not. Thus it seems (and I have learned it from
more quarters than one) that a report is, and has been some time,
current in this and the neighbouring counties, that, though I have
given myself the air of declaiming against the Slave Trade in "The
Task," I am in reality a friend to it; and last night I received a
letter from Joe Rye, to inform me that I have been much traduced
and calumniated on this account. Not knowing how I could better or
more effectually refute the scandal, I have this morning sent a
copy to the Northampton paper, prefaced by a short letter to the
printer, specifying the occasion. The verses are in honour of Mr.
Wilberforce, and sufficiently expressive of my present sentiments on
the subject. You are a wicked fair one for disappointing us of our
expected visit, and therefore, out of mere spite, I will not insert
them. I have been very ill these ten days, and for the same spite's
sake will not tell you what has ailed me. But, lest you should die
of a fright, I will have the mercy to tell you that I am recovering.

Mrs. Gifford and her little ones are gone, but your brother is
still here. He told me that he had some expectations of Sir John at
Weston; if he come, I shall most heartily rejoice once more to see
him at a table so many years his own.

  W. C.


We subjoin the verses addressed to Mr. Wilberforce, intended to
vindicate Cowper from the charge of lukewarmness in such a cause.

SONNET.

TO WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, ESQ.

    Thy country, Wilberforce, with just disdain,
    Hears thee, by cruel men and impious, call'd
    Fanatic, for thy zeal to loose th' enthrall'd
    From exile, public sale, and slav'ry's chain.
    Friend of the poor, the wrong'd, the fetter-gall'd,
    Fear not lest labour such as thine be vain!
    Thou hast achiev'd a part, hast gain'd the ear
    Of Britain's senate to thy glorious cause:
    Hope smiles, joy springs, and tho' cold caution pause
    And weave delay, the better hour is near,
    That shall remunerate thy toils severe
    By peace for Afric, fenc'd with British laws.
    Enjoy what thou hast won, esteem and love
    From all the just on earth and all the blest above!

In detailing the incidents that occur in the life of Cowper, we have
just recorded a malevolent report, highly injurious to his integrity
and honour. In order to recall the fact to the memory of the reader,
we insert the statement itself, in the words of Cowper: "A report
is, and has been some time current, in this and the neighbouring
counties, that, though I have given myself the air of declaiming
against the slave trade, in 'The Task,' I am in reality a friend to
it; and last night I received a letter from Joe Rye, to inform me,
that I have been much traduced and calumniated on this account."

That the author of "The Task," a poem distinguished by its tone
of pure and elevated morality, and breathing a spirit of most
uncompromising hostility against the slave trade--that such a man,
at that time in the very zenith of his fame, should be publicly
accused of favouring the very cause which he had so eloquently
denounced, is one of those circumstances which, for the honour of
human nature, we could wish not to have been compelled to record.

With this painful fact before us, we would ask, what is popularity,
and what wise man would attach value to so fleeting a possession? It
is a gleam of sunshine, which embellishes for a moment the object
on which it falls, and then vanishes away. In the course of a life
not passed without observation, we have had occasion to remark, in
the political, the literary, and even in the religious world, the
evanescent character of popular favour. We have seen men alternately
caressed and deserted, praised and censured, and made to feel the
vanity of human applause and admiration. The idol of to-day is
dethroned by the idol of to-morrow, which in its turn yields to the
dominion of some more favoured rival.

The wisdom of God evidently designs, by these events, to check
the thirst for human praise and distinction, by showing us the
precarious tenure by which they are held. We are thus admonished
to examine our motives, and to be assured of the integrity of our
intentions; neither to despise public favour, nor yet to overvalue
it; but to preserve that calm and equable temper of mind, and that
full consciousness of the rectitude of our principles, that we may
learn to enjoy it without triumph, or to lose it without dejection.

                    "Henceforth
    Thy patron He whose diadem has dropp'd
    Yon gems of heaven; eternity thy prize;
    And leave the racers of this world their own."

The reader will be amused in finding the origin of the injurious
report above mentioned disclosed in the following letter. Mr.
Rye was unjustly supposed to have aided in propagating this
misconception; but Cowper fully vindicates him from such a charge.


TO THE REV. J. JEKYLL RYE.[642]

  [642] Vicar of Dalington, near Northampton.

  Weston, April 16, 1792.

My dear Sir,--I am truly sorry that you should have suffered
any apprehensions, such as your letter indicates, to molest you
for a moment. I believe you to be as honest a man as lives, and
consequently do not believe it possible that you could in your
letter to Mr. Pitts, or any otherwise, wilfully misrepresent me. In
fact you did not; my opinions on the subject in question were, when
I had the pleasure of seeing you, such as in that letter you stated
them to be, and such they still continue.

If any man concludes, because I allow myself the use of sugar and
rum, that therefore I am a friend to the _slave trade_, he concludes
rashly, and does me great wrong; for the man lives not who abhors
it more than I do. My reasons for my own practice are satisfactory
to myself, and they whose practice is contrary, are, I suppose,
satisfied with theirs. So far is good. Let every man act according
to his own judgment and conscience; but if we condemn another for
not seeing with our eyes, we are unreasonable; and if we reproach
him on that account, we are uncharitable, which is a still greater
evil.

I had heard, before I received the favour of yours, that such a
report of me as you mention had spread about the country. But my
information told me that it was founded thus--The people of Olney
petitioned parliament for the abolition--My name was sought among
the subscribers, but was not found. A question was asked, how that
happened? Answer was made, that I had once indeed been an enemy
to the slave trade, but had changed my mind, for that, having
lately read a history, or an account of Africa, I had seen it there
asserted, that till the commencement of that traffic, the negroes,
multiplying at a prodigious rate, were necessitated to devour each
other; for which reason I had judged it better that the trade should
continue, than that they should be again reduced to so horrid a
custom.

Now all this is a fable. I have read no such history; I never in my
life read any such assertion; nor, had such an assertion presented
itself to me, should I have drawn any such conclusion from it.
On the contrary, bad as it were, I think it would be better the
negroes should even eat one another, than that we should carry them
to market. The single reason why I did not sign the petition was,
because I was never asked to do it; and the reason why I was never
asked was, because I am not a parishioner of Olney.

Thus stands the matter. You will do me the justice, I dare say,
to speak of me as of a man who abhors the commerce, which is now,
I hope, in a fair way to be abolished, as often as you shall find
occasion. And I beg you henceforth to do yourself the justice to
believe it impossible that I should, for a moment, suspect you of
duplicity or misrepresentation. I have been grossly slandered, but
neither by you, nor in consequence of any thing that you have either
said or written. I remain therefore, still, as heretofore, with
great respect, _much and truly_ yours,

  W. C.

Mrs. Unwin's compliments attend you.



Cowper, on this occasion, addressed the following letter to the
editors of the _Northampton Mercury_, enclosing the verses on Mr.
Wilberforce which have just been inserted.


TO THE PRINTERS OF THE NORTHAMPTON MERCURY.

  Weston-Underwood, April 16, 1792.

Sirs,--Having lately learned that it is pretty generally reported,
both in your county and in this, that my present opinion, concerning
the slave trade, differs totally from that which I have heretofore
given to the public, and that I am no longer an enemy but a friend
to that horrid traffic; I entreat you to take an early opportunity
to insert in your paper the following lines,[643] written no longer
since than this very morning, expressly for the two purposes
of doing just honour to the gentleman with whose name they are
inscribed, and of vindicating myself from an aspersion so injurious.

  I am, &c.
  W. COWPER.

  [643] See page 377.



The last two lines in the sonnet, addressed to Mr. Wilberforce, were
originally thus expressed:--

    Then let them scoff--two prizes thou hast won;
    Freedom for captives, and thy God's "Well done."

These were subsequently altered as follow:

    Enjoy what thou hast won, esteem and love
    From all the just on earth and all the blest above.

Cowper's version of Homer, which has formed so frequent a subject
in the preceding pages, led to a public discussion, in which the
interests of literature and the success of his own undertaking were
deeply concerned. The question agitated was the relative merits of
rhyme and blank verse, in undertaking a translation of that great
poet. Johnson, the great dictator in the republic of letters, in
his predilection for rhyme, had almost proscribed the use of blank
verse in poetical composition. "Poetry," he observes, in his life
of Milton, "may subsist without rhyme; but English poetry will not
please, nor can rhyme ever be safely spared, but where the subject
is able to support itself. Blank verse makes some approach to that
which is called the _lapidary style_; has neither the easiness
of prose, nor the melody of numbers; and therefore tires by long
continuance. Of the Italian writers without rhyme, whom Milton
alleges as precedents, not one is popular. What reason could urge in
its defence, has been confuted by the ear."

Johnson, however, makes an exception, in the instance of Milton.

"But, whatever be the advantages of rhyme," he adds, "I cannot
prevail on myself to wish that Milton had been a rhymer; for I
cannot wish his work to be other than it is; yet, like other heroes,
he is to be admired rather than imitated. He that thinks himself
capable of astonishing, may write blank verse; but those that hope
only to please must condescend to rhyme."

In his critique on the "Night Thoughts," he makes a similar
concession. "This is one of the few poems in which blank verse could
not be changed for rhyme but with disadvantage. The wild diffusion
of the sentiments, and the digressive sallies of imagination, would
have been compressed and constrained by confinement to rhyme."[644]

  [644] Young's testimony in favour of blank verse is thus
  forcibly, though rather pompously expressed:--

  "Blank verse is verse unfallen, uncursed; verse reclaimed,
  re-enthroned in the true language of the gods."

  See _Conjectures on Original Composition_.

Cowper, it will be remembered, questions the correctness of
Johnson's taste on this subject, and vindicates the force and
majesty of blank verse with much weight of argument. With
respect, however, to the important question, how a translation
of Homer might be best executed, his sentiments are delivered
so much at large in the admirable preface to his version of the
Iliad, that we shall lay a few extracts from it before the reader.

"Whether a translation of Homer," he remarks, "may be best
executed in blank verse or in rhyme, is a question in the
decision of which no man can find difficulty, who has ever
duly considered what translation ought to be, or who is in any
degree practically acquainted with those very different kinds of
versification. I will venture to assert, that a just translation
of any ancient poet in rhyme is impossible. No human ingenuity
can be equal to the task of closing every couplet with sounds
homotonous, expressing at the same time the full sense, and only
the full sense, of his original. The translator's ingenuity,
indeed, in this case becomes itself a snare; and the readier
he is at invention and expedient, the more likely he is to be
betrayed into the widest departures from the guide whom he
professes to follow."

It was this acknowledged defect in Pope, that led Cowper to
engage in his laborious undertaking of producing a new version.

We admire the candour with which he appreciates the merits
of Pope's translation, and yet we cannot refuse to admit the
justness of his strictures.

"I have no contest," he observes, "with my predecessor. None
is supposable between performers on different instruments. Mr.
Pope has surmounted all difficulties in his version of Homer
that it was possible to surmount in rhyme. But he was fettered,
and his fetters were his choice." "He has given us the _Tale
of Troy divine_ in smooth verse, generally in correct and
elegant language, and in diction often highly poetical. But his
deviations are so many, occasioned chiefly by the cause already
mentioned, that, much as he has done, and valuable as his work
is on some accounts, it was yet in the humble province of a
translator, that I thought it possible even for me to follow him
with some advantage."

What the reader may expect to discover in the two respective
versions is thus described:--"The matter found in me, whether he
like it or not, is found also in Homer; and the matter not found
in me, how much soever he may admire it, is only found in Mr.
Pope. I have omitted nothing; I have invented nothing." "Fidelity
is indeed the very essence of translation, and the term itself
implies it. For which reason, if we suppress the sense of our
original, and force into its place our own, we may call our work
an _imitation_, if we please, or perhaps a _paraphrase_, but
it is no longer the same author only in a different dress, and
therefore it is not a translation."

After dwelling upon the merits and defects of the free and the
close translation, and observing that the former can hardly be
true to the original author's style and manner, and that the
latter is apt to be servile, he thus declares his view of the
subject:--"On the whole, the translation which partakes equally
of fidelity and liberality, that is close, but not so close as to
be servile; free, but not so free as to be licentious, promises
fairest; and my ambition will be sufficiently gratified, if such
of my readers as are able and will take the pains to compare
me in this respect with Homer, shall judge that I have in any
measure attained a point so difficult."

He concludes his excellent preface with these interesting words:--

"And now I have only to regret that my pleasant work is ended. To
the illustrious Greek I owe the smooth and easy flight of many
thousand hours. He has been my companion at home and abroad, in
the study, in the garden, and in the field; and no measure of
success, let my labours succeed as they may, will ever compensate
to me the loss of the innocent luxury that I have enjoyed as a
translator of Homer."

Having thus endeavoured to do justice to the excellent preface
of Cowper, we have reserved an interesting correspondence, which
passed between Lord Thurlow and Cowper on this subject, and now
introduce it to the notice of the reader. It is without date.


TO THE LORD THURLOW.

My Lord,--A letter reached me yesterday from Henry Cowper,
enclosing another from your lordship to himself; of which a
passage in my work formed the subject. It gave me the greatest
pleasure: your strictures are perfectly just, and here follows
the speech of Achilles accommodated to them....



I did not expect to find your lordship on the side of rhyme,
remembering well with how much energy and interest I have heard
you repeat passages from the "Paradise Lost," which you could not
have recited as you did, unless you had been perfectly sensible
of their music. It comforts me, therefore, to know that if you
have an ear for rhyme, you have an ear for blank verse also.

It seems to me that I may justly complain of rhyme as an
inconvenience in translation, even though I assert in the sequel
that to me it has been easier to rhyme than to write without,
because I always suppose a rhyming translator to ramble, and
always obliged to do so. Yet I allow your lordship's version
of this speech of Achilles to be very close, and closer much
than mine. But I believe that, should either your lordship or I
give them burnish or elevation, your lines would be found, in
measure as they acquired stateliness, to have lost the merit of
fidelity--in which case nothing more would be done than Pope has
done already.

I cannot ask your lordship to proceed in your strictures, though
I should be happy to receive more of them. Perhaps it is possible
that when you retire into the country, you may now and then amuse
yourself with my translation. Should your remarks reach me, I
promise faithfully that they shall be all most welcome, not only
as yours, but because I am sure my work will be the better for
them.

With sincere and fervent wishes for your lordship's health and
happiness, I remain, my lord, &c.,

W. C.



The following is Lord Thurlow's reply:--


TO WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.

Dear Cowper,--On coming to town this morning, I was surprised
particularly at receiving from you an answer to a scrawl I sent
Harry, which I have forgot too much to resume now. But I think
I could not mean to patronize rhyme. I have fancied that it was
introduced to mark the measure in modern languages, because they
are less numerous and metrical than the ancient, and the name
seems to import as much. Perhaps there was melody in ancient
song without straining it to musical notes, as the common Greek
pronunciation is said to have had the compass of five parts of
an octave. But surely that word is only figuratively applied to
modern poetry. Euphony seems to be the highest term it will bear.
I have fancied also, that euphony is an impression derived a good
deal from habit, rather than suggested by nature; therefore in
some degree accidental, and consequently conventional. Else, why
can't we bear a drama with rhyme, or the French, one without it?
Suppose the "Rape of the Lock," "Windsor Forest," "L'Allegro,"
"Il Penseroso," and many other little poems which please,
stripped of the rhyme, which might easily be done, would they
please us as well? It would be unfair to treat rondeaus, ballads,
and odes in the same manner, because rhyme makes in some sort a
part of the conceit. It was this way of thinking which made me
suppose that habitual prejudice would miss the rhyme; and that
neither Dryden nor Pope would have dared to give their great
authors in blank verse.

I wondered to hear you say you thought rhyme easier in original
compositions; but you explained it, that you could go further
a-field if you were pushed for want of a rhyme. An expression
preferred for the sake of the rhyme looks as if it were worth
more than you allow. But, to be sure, in translation, the
necessity of rhyme imposes very heavy fetters upon those who mean
translation, not paraphrase. Our common heroic metre is enough;
the pure iambic bearing only a sparing introduction of spondees,
trochees, &c. to vary the measure.

Mere translation I take to be impossible, if no metre were
required. But the difference of the iambic and heroic measure
destroys that at once. It is also impossible to obtain the same
sense from a dead language and an ancient author, which those of
his own time and country conceived; words and phrases contract,
from time and use, such strong shades of difference from their
original import. In a living language, with the familiarity of a
whole life, it is not easy to conceive truly the actual sense of
current expressions, much less of older authors. No two languages
furnish _equipollent_ words,--their phrases differ, their
syntax and their idioms still more widely. But a translation,
strictly so called, requires an exact conformity in all those
particulars, and also in numbers; therefore it is impossible. I
really think at present, notwithstanding the opinion expressed
in your preface, that a translator asks himself a good question,
How would my author have expressed the sentence I am turning,
in English, as literally and fully as the genius, and use, and
character of the language will admit of?

In the passage before us, αττα was the fondling expression of
childhood to its parent; and to those who first translated
the lines, conveyed feelingly that amiable sentiment. Γεραιε
expressed the reverence which naturally accrues to age. Διοτρεφης
implies an history. Hospitality was an article of religion;
strangers were supposed to be sent by God, and honoured
accordingly. Jove's altar was placed in ξενοδοχειον. Phoenix had
been describing that as his situation in the court of Peleus;
and his Διοτρεφες refers to it. But you must not translate that
literally--

Old daddy Phoenix, a God-send for us to maintain.

"Precious limbs," was at first an expression of great feeling,
till vagabonds, draymen, &c., brought upon it the character of
coarseness and ridicule.

It would run to great length, if I were to go through this
one speech thus--this is enough for an example of my idea,
and to prove the necessity of farther deviation; which still
is departing from the author, and justifiable only by strong
necessity, such as should not be admitted, till the sense of
the original had been laboured to the utmost and been found
irreducible.

I will end this by giving you the strictest translation I can
invent, leaving you the double task of bringing it closer, and of
polishing it into the style of poetry.

  Ah Phoenix, aged father, guest of Jove!
  I relish no such honours; for my hope
  Is to be honour'd by Jove's fated will,
  Which keeps me close beside these sable ships,
  Long as the breath shall in my bosom stay,
  Or as my precious knees retain their spring.
  Further, I say--and cast it in your mind!--
  Melt not my spirit down by weeping thus,
  And wailing only for that great man's sake,
  Atrides: neither ought you love that man;
  Lest I should hate the friend I love so well.
  With me united, 'tis your nobler part
  To gall his spirit who has galled mine.
  With me reign equal, half my honours share.
  These will report; stay you here, and repose
  On a soft bed; and with the beaming morn
  Consult we, whether to go home, or stay.

_Iliad, Book_ ix.

I have thought that _hero_ has contracted a different sense than
it had in Homer's time, and is better rendered _great man_: but
I am aware that the enclitics and other little words, falsely
called expletives, are not introduced even so much as the genius
of our language would admit. The euphony I leave entirely to you.
Adieu!


TO THE LORD THURLOW.

My Lord,--We are of one mind as to the agreeable effect of rhyme,
or euphony, in the lighter kinds of poetry. The pieces which your
lordship mentions would certainly be spoiled by the loss of it,
and so would all such. The "Alma" would lose all its neatness
and smartness, and "Hudibras" all its humour. But in grave poems
of extreme length, I apprehend that the case is different. Long
before I thought of commencing poet myself, I have complained,
and heard others complain, of the wearisomeness of such poems.
Not that I suppose that tedium the effect of rhyme itself, but
rather of the perpetual recurrence of the same pause and cadence,
unavoidable in the English couplet. I hope, I may say truly, it
was not in a spirit of presumption that I undertook to do what,
in your lordship's opinion, neither Dryden nor Pope would have
dared to do. On the contrary, I see not how I could have escaped
that imputation, had I followed Pope in his own way. A closer
translation was called for. I verily believed that rhyme had
betrayed Pope into _his_ deviations. For me, therefore, to have
used his mode of versifying, would have been to expose myself to
the same miscarriage, at the same time that I had not his talents
to atone for it.

I agree with your lordship that a translation perfectly close is
impossible, because time has sunk the original strict import of
a thousand phrases, and we have no means of recovering it. But
if we cannot be unimpeachably faithful, that is no reason why we
should not be as faithful as we can; and if blank verse affords
the fairest chance, then it claims the preference.

Your lordship, I will venture to say, can command me nothing in
which I will not obey with the greatest alacrity.

Ει δυναμαι τελεσαι γε, και ει τετειεσμενον εστι.

But when, having made as close a translation as even you can
invent, you enjoin me to make it still closer, and in rhyme too,
I can only reply, as Horace to Augustus,

  "---- cupidum, pater optime, vires
  Deficiunt ----"

I have not treacherously departed from my pattern that I might
seem to give some proof of the justness of my own opinion, but
have fairly and honestly adhered as closely to it as I could.
Yet your lordship will not have to compliment me on my success,
either in respect of the poetical merit of my lines, or of their
fidelity. They have just enough of each to make them deficient in
the other.

  Oh Phoenix, father, friend, guest sent from Jove!
  Me no such honours as they yield can move,
  For I expect my honours from above.
  Here Jove has fix'd me; and while breath and sense
  Have place within me, I will never hence.
  Hear, too, and mark me well--haunt not mine ears
  With sighs, nor seek to melt me with thy tears
  For yonder chief, lest, urging such a plea
  Through love of him, thou hateful prove to me.
  Thy friendship for thy friend shall brighter shine--
  Wounding his spirit, who has wounded mine.
  Divide with me the honours of my throne--
  These shall return, and make their tidings known,
  But go not thou--thy couch shall here be dress'd
  With softest fleeces for thy easy rest,
  And with the earliest blush of op'ning day
  We will consult to seek our home, or stay.

Since I wrote these I have looked at Pope's. I am certainly
somewhat closer to the original than he, but farther I say not. I
shall wait with impatience for your lordship's conclusions from
these premises, and remain, in the meantime, with great truth, my
lord, &c.

W. C.


TO WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.

Dear Cowper,--I have received your letter on my journey through
London, and as the chaise waits I shall be short. I did not mean
it as a sign of any presumption that you have attempted what
neither Dryden nor Pope would have dared; but merely as a proof
of their addiction to rhyme; for I am clearly convinced that
Homer may be better translated than into rhyme, and that you have
succeeded in the places I have looked into. But I have fancied
that it might have been still more literal, preserving the ease
of genuine English and melody, and some degree of that elevation
which Homer derives from simplicity. But I could not do it, or
even near enough to form a judgment, or more than a fancy about
it. Nor do I fancy it could be done "stans pede in uno." But when
the mind has been fully impregnated with the original passage,
often revolving it, and waiting for a happy moment, may still be
necessary to the best trained mind. Adieu.

THURLOW.


TO THE LORD THURLOW.

My Lord,--I haunt you with letters, but will trouble you now
with a short line, only to tell your lordship how happy I am
that any part of my work has pleased you. I have a comfortable
consciousness that the whole has been executed with equal
industry and attention; and am, my lord, with many thanks to you
for snatching such a hasty moment to write to me, your lordship's
obliged and affectionate humble servant,

W. COWPER.



These letters cannot fail to be read with great interest.



Having in a former part of this work contrasted the two versions
of Cowper and Pope, we shall now close the subject, by quoting
Cowper's translation of some well-known and admired passages in
the original poem. The classical reader will thus be enabled to
determine how far the poet has succeeded in the application of
his own principle, and retained the bold and lofty spirit of
Homer, while he aims at transfusing his noble simplicity, and
adhering strictly to his genuine meaning. We have selected the
following specimens.



Hector extending his arms to caress his son Astyanax, in his
interview with Andromache:

    The hero ended, and his hands put forth
    To reach his boy; but with a scream the child
    Still closer to his nurse's bosom clung,
    Shunning his touch; for dreadful in his eyes
    The brazen armour shone, and dreadful more
    The shaggy crest, that swept his father's brow.
    Both parents smil'd, delighted; and the chief
    Set down the crested terror on the ground,
    Then kiss'd him, play'd away his infant fears,
    And thus to Jove, and all the Pow'rs above:
    Grant, O ye gods! such eminent renown
    And might in arms, as ye have giv'n to me,
    To this my son, with strength to govern Troy.
    From fight return'd, be this his welcome home--
    "He far excels his sire"--and may he rear
    The crimson trophy, to his mother's joy![645]
      He spake, and to his lovely spouse consign'd
    The darling boy; with mingled smiles and tears
    She wrapp'd him in her bosom's fragrant folds,
    And Hector, pang'd with pity that she wept,
    Her dewy cheek strok'd softly, and began.
    Weep not for me, my love! no mortal arm
    Shall send me prematurely to the shades,
    Since, whether brave or dastard, at his birth
    The fates ordain to each his hour to die.
    Hence, then, to our abode; there weave or spin,
    And task thy maidens. War to men belongs;
    To all of Troy; and most of all to me.

  Book vi. line 524.

  [645] For two other versions of this passage, see Letters, dated
  Dec. 17, 1793, and Jan 5, 1794.

The fatal conflict between Hector and Achilles:

    So saying, his keen falchion from his side
    He drew, well temper'd, ponderous, and rush'd
    At once to combat. As the eagle darts
    Right downward through a sullen cloud to seize
    Weak lamb or tim'rous hare, so he to fight
    Impetuous sprang, and shook his glitt'ring blade.
    Achilles opposite, with fellest ire
    Full-fraught came on; his shield with various art
    Divine portray'd, o'erspread his ample chest;
    And on his radiant casque terrific wav'd,
    By Vulcan spun, his crest of bushy gold,
    Bright as, among the stars, the star of all
    Most splendid, Hesperus, at midnight moves;
    So in the right hand of Achilles beam'd
    His brandish'd spear, while, meditating woe
    To Hector, he explored his noble form,
    Seeking where he was vulnerable most.
    But ev'ry part, his dazzling armour, torn
    From brave Patroclus' body, well secur'd,
    Save where the circling key-bone from the neck
    Disjoins the shoulder; there his throat appear'd,
    Whence injur'd life with swiftest flight escapes.
    Achilles, plunging in that part his spear,
    Impell'd it through the yielding flesh beyond.
    The ashen beam his pow'r of utt'rance left
    Still unimpair'd, but in the dust he fell.

Hector's prayer to Achilles:

    By thy own life, by theirs who gave thee birth,
    And by thy knees, oh let not Grecian dogs
    Rend and devour me, but in gold accept
    And brass a ransom at my father's hands,
    And at my mother's, an illustrious price;
    Send home my body, grant me burial rites
    Among the daughters and the sons of Troy.

  Book xxii. line 354.

The indignant answer of Achilles to the prayer of Hector:

    Dog! neither knees nor parents name to me.
    I would my fierceness of revenge were such,
    That I could carve and eat thee, to whose arms
    Such griefs I owe; so true it is and sure,
    That none shall save thy carcass from the dogs.
    No. Would they bring ten ransoms by the scale,
    Or twice ten ransoms, and still promise more;
    Would Priam buy thee with thy weight in gold,
    Not even then should she who bare thee weep
    Upon thy bier; for dogs and rav'ning fowls
    Shall rend thy flesh, till ev'ry bone be bare.

Hector's last dying words:

    I knew thee; knew that I should sue in vain,
    For in thy breast of steel no pity dwells.
    But oh, be cautious now, lest Heav'n perchance
    Requite thee on that day, when, pierc'd thyself
    By Paris and Apollo, thou shalt fall,
    Brave as thou art, within the Scæan gate.
    He ceas'd, and death involv'd him dark around.
    His spirit, from his limbs dismiss'd, the house
    Of Hades sought, deploring as she went
    Youth's prime and vigour lost, disastrous doom!
    But him, though dead, Achilles thus bespake:
    Die thou. My death shall find me at what hour
    Jove gives commandment, and the gods above.

  _Ibid._ line 396.

The interview between Achilles and Priam, who comes to ransom the
body of Hector:

                                  ... One I had,
    One, more than all my sons the strength of Troy,
    Whom standing for his country thou hast slain--
    Hector--His body to redeem I come,
    In Achaia's fleet, and bring, myself,
    Ransom inestimable to thy tent.
    O, fear the gods! and for remembrance' sake
    Of thy own sire, Achilles! pity me,
    More hapless still; who bear what, save myself,
    None ever bore, thus lifting to my lips
    Hands dyed so deep with slaughter of my sons.
    So saying, he waken'd in his soul regret
    Of his own sire; softly he plac'd his hand
    On Priam's hand, and push'd him gently away.
    Remembrance melted both. Stretch'd prone before
    Achilles' feet, the king his son bewail'd,
    Wide-slaughtering Hector; and Achilles wept
    By turns his father, and by turns his friend,
    Patroclus; sounds of sorrow fill'd the tent.

  Book xxiv. line 622.

Without entering upon any minute analysis of the above passages,
we consider them as exhibiting a happy specimen of poetic talent;
and that Cowper has been successful in exemplifying the rules and
principles which, in his preface, he declares to be indispensable in
a version of Homer.

It may be interesting to literary curiosity to be presented with a
summary of facts respecting Cowper's two versions of Homer.

This important undertaking commenced Nov. 21st, 1784, and was
completed August 25th, 1790. During eight months of this intervening
time, he was hindered by indisposition, so that he was occupied in
the work, on the whole, five years and one month. On the 8th of
September, 1790, his kinsman, the Rev. John Johnson, conveyed the
translation to Johnson, the bookseller in St. Paul's Churchyard,
with a view to its consignment to the press. During this period
Cowper gave the work a second revisal, which he concluded March 4th,
1791. On July 1st of the same year the publication issued from the
press. In 1793 there was a further revision, with the addition of
explanatory notes, a second edition having been called for. In 1796
he engaged in a revisal of the whole work, which, owing to his state
of mind and declining health, was not finished till March 8th, 1799.
In January, 1800, he new-modelled a passage in his translation of
the Iliad, where mention is made of the very ancient sculpture, in
which Dædalus had represented the Cretan dance for Ariadne. This
proved to be the last effort of his pen.[646]

  [646] See Dr. Johnson's sketch of the Life of Cowper.

We have thought it due to Cowper's version to enter thus largely
into an examination of its merits, from a persuasion that an
undertaking of this magnitude, executed by the author of "The Task,"
claims to be considered as a part of our national literature. It
remains only to be observed that the foreigner whom he mentions with
so much estimation, as having aided him with his critical taste and
erudition, was Fuseli the painter. He gratefully acknowledges his
obligations in the following letters to Johnson the bookseller.


  Weston, Feb. 11, 1790.

Dear Sir,--I am very sensibly obliged by the remarks of Mr. Fuseli,
and beg that you will tell him so; they afford me opportunities
of improvement which I shall not neglect. When he shall see the
press-copy, he will be convinced of this, and will be convinced
likewise, that, smart as he sometimes is, he spares me often, when I
have no mercy on myself. He will see almost a new translation.... I
assure you faithfully, that whatever my faults may be, to be easily
or hastily satisfied with what I have written is not one of them.


  Sept. 7, 1790.

It grieves me that, after all, I am obliged to go into public
without the whole advantage of Mr. Fuseli's judicious strictures.
The only consolation is, that I have not forfeited them by my
own impatience. Five years are no small portion of a man's life,
especially at the latter end of it, and in those five years, being
a man of almost no engagements, I have done more in the way of hard
work, than most could have done in twice the number. I beg you to
present my compliments to Mr. Fuseli, with many and sincere thanks
for the services that his own more important occupations would allow
him to render me.

We add one more letter in this place, addressed to his bookseller,
to show with what becoming resolution he could defend his poetical
opinions when he considered them to be just.

Some accidental reviser of the manuscript had taken the liberty to
alter a line in a poem of Cowper's:--this liberty drew from the
offended poet the following very just and animated remonstrance,
which we are anxious to preserve, because it elucidates with great
felicity of expression his deliberate ideas on English versification.



"I did not write the line that has been tampered with, hastily, or
without due attention to the construction of it; and what appeared
to me its only merit is, in its present state, entirely annihilated.

"I know that ears of modern verse-writers are delicate to an excess,
and their readers are troubled with the same squeamishness as
themselves. So that if a line do not run as smooth as quicksilver,
they are offended. A critic of the present day serves a poem as a
cook serves a dead turkey, when she fastens the legs of it to a
post, and draws out all the sinews. For this we may thank Pope; but
unless we could imitate him in the closeness and compactness of his
expression, as well as in the smoothness of his numbers, we had
better drop the imitation, which serves no other purpose than to
emasculate and weaken all we write. Give me a manly rough line, with
a deal of meaning in it, rather than a whole poem full of musical
periods, that have nothing but their oily smoothness to recommend
them!

"I have said thus much, as I hinted in the beginning, because I have
just finished a much longer poem than the last, which our common
friend will receive by the same messenger that has the charge of
this letter. In that poem there are many lines which an ear so nice
as the gentleman's who made the above-mentioned alteration would
undoubtedly condemn, and yet (if I may be permitted to say it) they
cannot be made smoother without being the worse for it. There is a
roughness on a plum, which nobody that understands fruit would rub
off, though the plum would be much more polished without it. But,
lest I tire you, I will only add, that I wish you to guard me from
all such meddling, assuring you, that I always write as smoothly as
I can, but that I never did, never will, sacrifice the spirit or
sense of a passage to the sound of it."

Cowper was much affected at this time by a severe indisposition, to
which he alludes in the following letter.


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  Weston Underwood, April 27, 1792.

Dear Sir,--I write now merely to prevent any suspicion in your
mind that I neglect you. I have been very ill, and for more than a
fortnight unable to use the pen, or you should have heard long ere
now of the safe arrival of your packet. I have revised the Elegy on
Seduction,[647] but have not as yet been able to proceed farther.
The best way of returning these which I have now in hand, will be to
return them with those which you propose to send hereafter. I will
make no more apologies for any liberties that it may seem necessary
to me to take with your copies. Why do you send them, but that I
may exercise that freedom, of which the very act of sending them
implies your permission? I will only say, therefore, that you must
neither be impatient nor even allow yourself to think me tardy,
since assuredly I will not be more so than I needs must be. My hands
are pretty full. Milton must be forwarded, and is at present hardly
begun; and I have beside a numerous correspondence, which engrosses
more of my time than I can at present well afford to it. I cannot
decide with myself whether the lines in which the reviewers are
so smartly noticed had better be expunged or not. Those lines are
gracefully introduced and well written; for which reasons I should
be loath to part with them. On the other hand, how far it may be
prudent to irritate a body of critics, who certainly much influence
the public opinion, may deserve consideration. It may be added too,
that they are not all equally worthy of the lash: there are among
them men of real learning, judgment, and candour. I must leave it,
therefore, to your own determination.

  [647] This Elegy is inserted in Mr. Park's volume of sonnets and
  miscellaneous poems.

I thank you for Thomson's Epitaph, on which I have only to remark
(and I am sure that I do it not in a captious spirit) that, since
the poet is himself the speaker, I cannot but question a little
the propriety of the quotation subjoined. It is a prayer, and when
the man is buried, the time of prayer is over. I know it may be
answered, that it is placed there merely for the benefit of the
reader; but all readers of tombstones are not wise enough to be
trusted for such an interpretation.

I was well pleased with your poem on * * and equally well pleased
with your intention not to publish it. It proves two points of
consequence to an author:--both that you have an exuberant fancy,
and discretion enough to know how to deal with it. The man is
formidable for his ludicrous talent, as he has made himself
contemptible by his use of it. To despise him therefore is natural,
but it is wise to do it in secret.

Since the juvenile poems of Milton were edited by Warton, you need
not trouble yourself to send them. I have them of his edition
already.

  I am, dear sir,
  Affectionately yours,
  W. C.



The marriage of Miss Stapleton, the Catharina of Cowper, to Sir John
Throckmorton's brother (now Mr. Courtenay,) was one of those events
which the muse of Cowper had ventured to anticipate; and he had
now the happiness of finding his cherished wish fulfilled, and of
thereby securing them as neighbours at the Hall.[648]

  [648] This wish is expressed in the following lines:--

    "With her book, and her voice, and her lyre,
    To wing all her moments at home,
    And with scenes that new rapture inspire,
    As oft as it suits her to roam;
    She will have just the life she prefers,
    With little to hope or to fear,
    _And ours would be pleasant as hers,
    Might we view her enjoying it here_."

  See _Verses addressed to Miss Stapleton_, p. 343.

TO LADY HESKETH

  Weston, May 20, 1792.

My dearest Coz,--I rejoice as thou reasonably supposest of me
to do, in the matrimonial news communicated in your last. Not
that it was altogether news for me, for twice I had received
broad hints of it from Lady Frog, by letter, and several times
_vivâ voce_ while she was here, But she enjoined _me_ secrecy as
well as _you_, and you know that all secrets are safe with me;
safer far than the winds in the bags of Æolus. I know not, in
fact, the lady whom it would give me more pleasure to call Mrs.
Courtenay, than the lady in question; partly because I know her,
but especially because I know her to be all that I can wish in a
neighbour.

I have observed that there is a regular alternation of good and
evil in the lot of men, so that a favourable incident may be
considered as the harbinger of an unfavourable one, and _vice
versâ_. Dr. Madan's experience witnesses to the truth of this
observation. One day he gets a broken head, and the next a mitre
to heal it. I rejoice that he has met with so effectual a cure,
though my joy is not unmingled with concern; for till now I had
some hope of seeing him, but since I live in the north, and
his episcopal call is in the west, that is a gratification, I
suppose, which I must no longer look for.

My sonnet, which I sent you, was printed in the Northampton
paper, last week, and this week it produced me a complimentary
one in the same paper, which served to convince me, at least by
the matter of it, that my own was not published without occasion,
and that it had answered its purpose.[649]

  [649] We have succeeded in obtaining these verses, and think them
  worthy of insertion:

  TO WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.

  ON READING HIS SONNET OF THE SIXTEENTH INSTANT ADDRESSED TO MR.
  WILBERFORCE.

    Desert the cause of liberty!--the cause
    Of human nature!--sacred flame that burn'd
    So late, so bright within thee!--thence descend
    The monster Slavery's unnatural friend!
    'Twere vile aspersion! justly, while it draws
    Thy virtuous indignation, greatly spurn'd.

    As soon the foes of Afric might expect
    The altar's blaze, forgetful of the law
    Of its aspiring nature, should direct
    To hell its point inverted; as to draw
    Virtue like thine, and genius, grovelling base,
    To sanction wrong, and dignify disgrace.

    Welcome _detection!_ grateful to the _Cause_,
    As to its Patron, Cowper's just applause!

  S. M'CLELLAN.
  _April 25, 1792._

My correspondence with Hayley proceeds briskly, and is very
affectionate on both sides. I expect him here in about a
fortnight, and wish heartily, with Mrs. Unwin, that you would
give him a meeting. I have promised him, indeed, that he shall
find us alone, but you are one of the family.

I wish much to print the following lines in one of the daily
papers. Lord S.'s vindication of the poor culprit[650] in the
affair of Cheit Sing, has confirmed me in the belief that he has
been injuriously treated, and I think it an act merely of justice
to take a little notice of him.

  [650] Warren Hastings, at that time under impeachment, as
  Governor-general of India.


TO WARREN HASTINGS, ESQ.

BY AN OLD SCHOOL-FELLOW OF HIS AT WESTMINSTER.

    Hastings! I knew thee young, and of a mind
    While young, humane, conversable, and kind;
    Nor can I well believe thee, gentle THEN,
    Now grown a villain, and the WORST of men:
    But rather some suspect, who have oppress'd
    And worried thee, as not themselves the BEST.

If thou wilt take the pains to send them to thy news-monger, I hope
thou wilt do well.

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, May 20, 1792.

My dearest of all Johnnies,--I am not sorry that your ordination
is postponed. A year's learning and wisdom, added to your present
stock, will not be more than enough to satisfy the demands of your
function. Neither am I sorry that you find it difficult to fix your
thoughts to the serious point at all times. It proves, at least,
that you attempt, and wish to do it, and these are good symptoms.
Woe to those who enter on the ministry of the gospel without having
previously asked, at least from God, a mind and spirit suited to
their occupation, and whose experience never differs from itself,
because they are always alike vain, light, and inconsiderate. It is,
therefore, matter of great joy to me to hear you complain of levity,
and such it is to Mrs. Unwin. She is, I thank God, tolerably well,
and loves you. As to the time of your journey hither, the sooner
after June the better; till then we shall have company.

I forget not my debts to your dear sister, and your aunt Balls.
Greet them both with a brother's kiss, and place it to my account.
I will write to them when Milton, and a thousand other engagements
will give me leave. Mr. Hayley is here on a visit. We have formed
a friendship that I trust will last for life, and render us an
edifying example to all future poets.

Adieu! Lose no time in coming after the time mentioned.

  W. C.



The reader is informed, by the close of the last letter, that Hayley
was at this time the guest of Cowper. The meeting, so singularly
produced, was a source of reciprocal delight; and each looked
cheerfully forward to the unclouded enjoyment of many social and
literary hours.

Hayley's account of this visit is too interesting, not to be
recorded in his own words.

"My host, though now in his sixty-first year, appeared as happily
exempt from all the infirmities of advanced life, as friendship
could wish him to be; and his more elderly companion, not materially
oppressed by age, discovered a benevolent alertness of character
that seemed to promise a continuance of their domestic comfort.
Their reception of me was kindness itself:--I was enchanted to find
that the manners and conversation of Cowper resembled his poetry,
charming by unaffected elegance, and the graces of a benevolent
spirit. I looked with affectionate veneration and pleasure on the
lady, who, having devoted her life and fortune to the service of
this tender and sublime genius, in watching over him with maternal
vigilance through many years of the darkest calamity, appeared to
be now enjoying a reward justly due to the noblest exertions of
friendship, in contemplating the health and the renown of the poet,
whom she had the happiness to preserve.

"It seemed hardly possible to survey human nature in a more touching
and a more satisfactory point of view. Their tender attention to
each other, their simple, devout gratitude for the mercies which
they had experienced together, and their constant, but unaffected
propensity to impress on the mind and heart of a new friend, the
deep sense which they incessantly felt, of their mutual obligations
to each other, afforded me a very singular gratification; which my
reader will conceive the more forcibly, when he has perused the
following exquisite sonnet, addressed by Cowper to Mrs. Unwin.

"SONNET.

    "Mary! I want a lyre with other strings;
    Such aid from Heaven, as some have feign'd they drew!
    An eloquence scarce given to mortals, new,
    And undebas'd by praise of meaner things!
    That ere through age or woe I shed my wings
    I may record thy worth, with honour due,
    In verse as musical as thou art true,--
    Verse that immortalizes whom it sings!
      But thou hast little need: There is a book,
    By seraphs writ, with beams of heavenly light,
    On which the eyes of God not rarely look;
    A chronicle of actions, just and bright!

    There all thy deeds, my faithful Mary, shine,
    And since thou own'st that praise, I spare thee mine.

"The delight that I derived from a perfect view of the virtues, the
talents, and the present domestic enjoyments of Cowper, was suddenly
overcast by the darkest and most painful anxiety.

"After passing our mornings in social study, we usually walked
out together at noon. In returning from one of our rambles around
the pleasant village of Weston, we were met by Mr. Greatheed, an
accomplished minister of the gospel, who resides at Newport-Pagnel,
and whom Cowper described to me in terms of cordial esteem.

"He came forth to meet us as we drew near the house, and it was
soon visible, from his countenance and manner, that he had ill news
to impart. After the most tender preparation that humanity could
devise, he acquainted Cowper that Mrs. Unwin was under the immediate
pressure of a paralytic attack.

"My agitated friend rushed to the sight of the sufferer;--he
returned to me in a state that alarmed me in the highest degree for
his faculties;--his first speech to me was wild in the extreme;--my
answer would appear little less so; but it was addressed to the
predominant fancy of my unhappy friend, and, with the blessing of
Heaven, it produced an instantaneous calm in his troubled mind.

"From that moment he rested on my friendship, with such mild and
cheerful confidence, that his affectionate spirit regarded me as
sent providentially to support him in a season of the severest
affliction."

The kindness of Hayley, at this critical moment, reflects the
highest credit on his humanity and presence of mind. By means of
an electrical machine, which the village of Weston fortunately
supplied, he succeeded in relieving his suffering patient with the
happiest effect. With this seasonable aid, seconded by a course of
medicine recommended by Dr. Austen, an eminent London physician,
and a friend of Hayley's, the violence of the attack was gradually
mitigated, and the agitated mind of Cowper greatly relieved.

The progress of her recovery, and its influence on the tender spirit
of Cowper, will sufficiently appear in the following letters.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  Weston, May 24, 1792.

I wish with all my heart, my dearest Coz, that I had not ill news
for the subject of the present letter. My friend, my Mary, has again
been attacked by the same disorder that threatened me last year with
the loss of her, and of which you were yourself a witness. Gregson
would not allow that first stroke to be paralytic, but this he
acknowledges to be so; and with respect to the former, I never had
myself any doubt that it was, but this has been much the severest.
Her speech has been almost unintelligible from the moment that she
was struck; it is with difficulty that she opens her eyes, and she
cannot keep them open; the muscles necessary to the purpose being
contracted; and as to self-moving powers, from place to place, and
the use of her right hand and arm, she has entirely lost them.

It has happened well, that of all men living, the man most qualified
to assist and comfort me is here; though till within these few days
I never saw him, and a few weeks since had no expectation that I
ever should. You have already guessed that I mean Hayley--Hayley,
who loves me as if he had known me from my cradle. When he returns
to town, as he must, alas! too soon, he will pay his respects to you.

I will not conclude without adding, that our poor patient is
beginning, I hope, to recover from this stroke also; but her
amendment is slow, as must be expected at her time of life and in
such a disorder. I am as well myself as you have ever known me in a
time of much trouble, and even better.

It was not possible to prevail on Mrs. Unwin to let me send for
Dr. Kerr, but Hayley has written to his friend, Dr. Austen, a
representation of her case, and we expect his opinion and advice
to-morrow. In the meantime, we have borrowed an electrical machine
from our neighbour Socket, the effect of which she tried yesterday
and the day before, and we think it has been of material service.

She was seized while Hayley and I were walking, and Mr. Greatheed,
who called while we were absent, was with her.

I forgot in my last to thank thee for the proposed amendments of thy
friend. Whoever he is, make my compliments to him, and thank him.
The passages to which he objects have been all altered, and when he
shall see them new dressed, I hope he will like them better.[651]

  W. C.

  [651] This friend was Mrs. Carter.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  The Lodge, May 26, 1792.

My dearest Cousin,--Knowing that you will be anxious to learn
how we go on, I write a few lines to inform you that Mrs. Unwin
daily recovers a little strength and a little power of utterance;
but she seems strongest, and her speech is more distinct, in a
morning. Hayley has been all in all to us on this very afflictive
occasion. Love him, I charge you, dearly, for my sake. Where could
I have found a man, except himself, who could have made himself so
necessary to me in so short a time, that I absolutely know not how
to live without him?

Adieu, my dear sweet coz. Mrs. Unwin, as plainly as her poor lips
can speak, sends her best love, and Hayley threatens in a few days
to lay close siege to your affections in person.

  W. C.

There is some hope, I find, that the chancellor may continue in
office, and I shall be glad if he does, because we have no single
man worthy to succeed him.

I open my letter again to thank you, my dearest coz, for yours just
received. Though happy, as you well know, to see _you_ at all times,
we have no need, and I trust shall have none, to trouble you with a
journey made on purpose; yet once again, I am willing and desirous
to believe, we shall be a happy trio at Weston; but unless necessity
dictates a journey of charity, I wish all yours hither to be made
for pleasure. Farewell! thou shalt know how we go on.

The tender and grateful mind of Cowper, sensible of the kind and
able services of Dr. Austen, led him to pour out the effusions of
his heart in the following verses


TO DR. AUSTEN,

OF CECIL STREET, LONDON.

    Austen! accept a grateful verse from me!
    The poet's treasure! no inglorious fee!
    Loved by the Muses, thy ingenuous mind
    Pleasing requital in a verse may find;
    Verse oft has dash'd the scythe of Time aside,
    Immortalizing names, which else had died:
    And, oh! could I command the glittering wealth
    With which sick kings are glad to purchase health:
    Yet, if extensive fame, and sure to live,
    Were in the power of verse like mine to give,--
    I would not recompense his art with less,
    Who, giving Mary health, heals my distress.

    Friend of my friend! I love thee, though unknown,
    And boldly call thee, being his, my own.


TO MRS. BODHAM.

  Weston, June 4, 1792.

My dearest Rose,--I am not such an ungrateful and insensible animal,
as to have neglected you thus long without a reason....

I cannot say that I am sorry that our dear Johnny finds the
pulpit-door shut against him at present.[652] He is young, and can
afford to wait another year; neither is it to be regretted that his
time of preparation for an office of so much importance as that of a
minister of God's word should have been a little protracted. It is
easier to direct the movements of a great army than to guide a few
souls to heaven; the way is narrow and full of snares, and the guide
himself has the most difficulties to encounter. But I trust he will
do well. He is single in his views, honest-hearted, and desirous,
by prayer and study of the scripture, to qualify himself for the
service of his great Master, who will suffer no such man to fail for
want of his aid and protection.

  W. C.

  [652] Some unexpected difficulties had occurred in obtaining a
  curacy, with a title for orders.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, June 4, 1792.
  ALL'S WELL.

Which words I place as conspicuously as possible, and prefix them
to my letter, to save you the pain, my friend and brother, of a
moment's anxious speculation. Poor Mary proceeds in her amendment
still, and improves, I think, even at a swifter rate than when you
left her. The stronger she grows the faster she gathers strength,
which is perhaps the natural course of recovery. She walked so well
this morning, that she told me at my first visit she had entirely
forgot her illness, and she spoke so distinctly, and had so much of
her usual countenance, that had it been possible she would have made
me forget it too.

Returned from my walk, blown to tatters--found two dear things in
the study, your letter and my Mary! She is bravely well, and your
beloved epistle does us both good. I found your kind pencil-note
in my song-book, as soon as I came down on the morning of your
departure, and Mary was vexed to the heart that the simpletons who
watched her supposed her asleep when she was not, for she learned,
soon after you were gone, that you would have peeped at her, had
you known her to have been awake: I perhaps might have had a peep
too, and was as vexed as she: but if it please God, we shall make
ourselves large amends for all lost peeps by-and-by at Eartham.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, June 5, 1792.

Yesterday was a noble day with us--speech almost perfect--eyes open
almost the whole day, without any effort to keep them so; and the
step wonderfully improved. But the night has been almost a sleepless
one, owing partly I believe to her having had as much sleep again as
usual the night before; for even when she is in tolerable health she
hardly ever sleeps well two nights together. I found her accordingly
a little out of spirits this morning, but still insisting on it that
she is better. Indeed she always tells me so, and will probably
die with those very words upon her lips. They will be true then at
least, for then she will be best of all. She is now (the clock has
just struck eleven) endeavouring, I believe, to get a little sleep,
for which reason I do not yet let her know that I have received your
letter.

Can I ever honour you enough for your zeal to serve me? Truly I
think not: I am however so sensible of the love I owe you on this
account, that I every day regret the acuteness of your feelings for
me, convinced that they expose you to much trouble, mortification,
and disappointment. I have in short a poor opinion of my destiny,
as I told you when you were here, and, though I believe that if any
man living can do me good you will, I cannot yet persuade myself,
that even you will be successful in attempting it. But it is no
matter; you are yourself a good, which I can never value enough,
and, whether rich or poor in other respects, I shall always account
myself better provided for than I deserve, with such a friend at
my back as you. Let it please God to continue to me my William and
Mary, and I will be more reasonable than to grumble.

I rose this morning wrapt round with a cloud of melancholy, and
with a heart full of fears, but if I see Mary's amendment a little
advanced when she rises, I shall be better.

I have just been with her again. Except that she is fatigued for
want of sleep, she seems as well as yesterday. The post brings me a
letter from Hurdis, who is broken-hearted for a dying sister. Had we
eyes sharp enough, we should see the arrows of death flying in all
directions, and account it a wonder that we and our friends escape
them but a single day.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, June 7, 1792.

Of what materials can you suppose me made, if after all the rapid
proofs that you have given me of your friendship, I do not love you
with all my heart, and regret your absence continually? But you
must permit me to be melancholy now and then; or if you will not,
I must be so without your permission; for that sable thread is so
intermixed with the very thread of my existence as to be inseparable
from it, at least while I exist in the body. Be content, therefore;
let me sigh and groan, but always be sure that I love you! You will
be well assured that I should not have indulged myself in this
rhapsody about myself and my melancholy, had my present mood been of
that complexion, or had not our poor Mary seemed still to advance in
her recovery. So in fact she does, and has performed several little
feats to-day; such as either she could not perform at all, or very
feebly, while you were with us.

I shall be glad if you have seen Johnny as I call him, my Norfolk
cousin; he is a sweet lad, but as shy as a bird. It costs him always
two or three days to open his mouth before a stranger; but when
he does, he is sure to please by the innocent cheerfulness of his
conversation. His sister too is one of my idols, for the resemblance
she bears to my mother.

Mary and you have all my thoughts; and how should it be otherwise?
She looks well, is better, and loves you dearly.

  Adieu!
  My dear brother,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, June 10, 1792.

I do indeed anxiously wish that every thing you do may prosper; and
should I at last prosper by your means, shall taste double sweetness
in prosperity for that reason.

I rose this morning, as I usually do, with a mind all in sables.
In this mood I presented myself to Mary's bedside, whom I found,
though after many hours lying awake, yet cheerful, and not to be
affected with my desponding humour. It is a great blessing to us
both, that, poor feeble thing as she is, she has a most invincible
courage, and a trust in God's goodness, that nothing shakes. She is
now in the study, and is certainly in some degree better than she
was yesterday, but how to measure that little I know not, except by
saying that it is just perceptible.

I am glad that you have seen my Johnny of Norfolk, because I know
it will be a comfort to you to have seen your successor. He arrived
to my great joy, yesterday; and, not having bound himself to any
particular time of going, will, I hope, stay long with us. You are
now once more snug in your retreat, and I give you joy of your
return to it, after the bustle in which you have lived since you
left Weston. Weston mourns your absence, and will mourn it till she
sees you again. What is to become of Milton I know not; I do nothing
but scribble to you, and seem to have no relish for any other
employment. I have, however, in pursuit of your idea to compliment
Darwin, put a few stanzas together, which I shall subjoin; you will
easily give them all that you find they want, and match the song
with another.

I am now going to walk with Johnny, much cheered since I began
writing to you, and by Mary's looks and good spirits.

  W. C.


TO DR. DARWIN,

AUTHOR OF THE BOTANIC GARDEN.

    Two poets (poets by report
        Not oft so well agree)
    Sweet harmonist of Flora's court!
        Conspire to honour thee.

    They best can judge a poet's worth,
        Who oft themselves have known
    The pangs of a poetic birth,
        By labours of their own.

    We, therefore, pleas'd, extol thy song,
        Though various, yet complete,
    Rich in embellishment as strong,
        And learn'd as it is sweet.

    No envy mingles with our praise;
        Though, could our hearts repine,
    At any poet's happier lays,
        They would, they must, at thine.

    But we, in mutual bondage knit
        Of friendship's closest tie,
    Can gaze on even Darwin's wit
        With an unjaundic'd eye:

    And deem the bard, whoe'er he be,
        And howsoever known,
    Who would not twine a wreath for thee,
        Unworthy of his own.[653]

  [653] The celebrated poem of "the Botanic Garden," originated
  in a copy of verses, addressed by Miss Seward to Dr. Darwin,
  complimenting him on his sequestered retreat near Lichfield. In
  this retreat there was a mossy fountain of the purest water;
  aquatic plants bordered its summit, and branched from the
  fissures of the rock. There was also a brook, which he widened
  into small lakes. The whole scene formed a little paradise, and
  was embellished with various classes of plants, uniting the
  Linnean science, with all the charm of landscape.

  When Miss Seward presented her verses to Dr. Darwin, he was
  highly gratified, she observes, and said, "I shall send this poem
  to the periodical publications; but it ought to form the exordium
  of a great work. The Linnean system is unexplored poetic ground,
  and a happy subject for the muse. It affords fine scope for
  poetic landscape; it suggests metamorphoses of the Ovidian kind,
  though reversed. Ovid made men and women into flowers, plants,
  and trees. You should make flowers, plants, and trees, into men
  and women. I," continued he, "will write the notes, which must be
  scientific, and you shall write the verse."

  Miss S. remarked, that besides her want of botanic knowledge, the
  undertaking was not strictly proper for a female pen; and that
  she felt how much more it was adapted to the ingenuity and vigour
  of his own fancy. After many objections urged on the part of Dr.
  Darwin, he at length acquiesced, and ultimately produced his
  "Loves of the Plants, or Botanic Garden."*

  Though this poem obtained much celebrity on its first appearance,
  it was nevertheless severely animadverted upon by some critics.
  A writer in the Anti-Jacobin Review, (known to be the late Mr.
  Canning) parodied the work, by producing "The Loves of the
  Triangles," in which triangles were made to fall in love with
  the same fervour of passion, as Dr. Darwin attributed to plants.
  The style, the imagery, and the entire composition of "The Loves
  of the Plants," were most successfully imitated. We quote the
  following.

    *See Life of Dr. Darwin, by Miss Seward.

    "In filmy, gauzy, gossamery lines,
    With lucid language, and most dark designs,
    In sweet tetrandryan monogynian strains,
    Pant for a pistil in botanic pains;
    Raise lust in pinks, and with unhallowed fire,
    Bid the soft virgin violet expire."

  We do not think that the Botanic Garden ever fully maintained
  its former estimation, after the keen Attic wit of Mr. Canning,
  though the concluding lines of Cowper seem to promise perpetuity
  to its fame.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  Weston, June 11, 1792.

My dearest Coz,--Thou art ever in my thoughts, whether I am writing
to thee or not, and my correspondence seems to grow upon me at
such a rate that I am not able to address thee so often as I
would. In fact, I live only to write letters, Hayley is as you see
added to the number, and to him I write almost as duly as I rise
in the morning; nor is he only added, but his friend Carwardine
also--Carwardine the generous, the disinterested, the friendly. I
seem, in short, to have stumbled suddenly on a race of heroes, men
who resolve to have no interests of their own till mine are served.

But I will proceed to other matters, and that concern me more
intimately, and more immediately, than all that can be done for me
either by the great or the small, or by both united. Since I wrote
last, Mrs. Unwin has been continually improving in strength, but at
so gradual a rate that I can only mark it by saying that she moves
about every day with less support than the former. Her recovery is
most of all retarded by want of sleep. On the whole, I believe she
goes on as well as could be expected, though not quite well enough
to satisfy me. And Dr. Austen, speaking from the reports I have made
of her, says he has no doubt of her restoration.

During the last two months I seem to myself to have been in a dream.
It has been a most eventful period, and fruitful to an uncommon
degree, both in good and evil. I have been very ill, and suffered
excruciating pain. I recovered, and became quite well again. I
received within my doors a man, but lately an entire stranger, and
who now loves me as a brother, and forgets himself to serve me. Mrs.
Unwin has been seized with an illness that for many days threatened
to deprive me of her, and to cast a gloom, an impenetrable one, on
all my future prospects. She is now granted to me again. A few days
since I should have thought the moon might have descended into my
purse as likely as any emolument, and now it seems not impossible.
All this has come to pass with such rapidity as events move with
in romance indeed, but not often in real life. Events of all sorts
creep or fly exactly as God pleases.

To the foregoing I have to add in conclusion, the arrival of my
Johnny, just when I wanted him most, and when only a few days before
I had no expectation of him. He came to dinner on Saturday, and I
hope I shall keep him long. What comes next I know not, but shall
endeavour, as you exhort me, to look for good, and I know I shall
have your prayer that I may not be disappointed.

Hayley tells me you begin to be jealous of him, lest I should love
him more than I love you, and bids me say, "that, should I do so,
you in revenge must love him more than I do." Him I know you will
love, and me, because you have such a habit of doing it that you
cannot help it.

Adieu! My knuckles ache with letter-writing. With my poor patient's
affectionate remembrances, and Johnny's,

  I am ever thine,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, June 19, 1792.

... Thus have I filled a whole page to my dear William of Eartham,
and have not said a syllable yet about my Mary. A sure sign that
she goes on well. Be it known to you that we have these four days
discarded our sedan with two elbows. Here is no more carrying, or
being carried, but she walks up stairs boldly, with one hand upon
the balustrade, and the other under my arm, and in like manner she
comes down in a morning. Still I confess she is feeble, and misses
much of her former strength. The weather too is sadly against her:
it deprives her of many a good turn in the orchard, and fifty
times have I wished this very day, that Dr. Darwin's scheme of
giving rudders and sails[654] to the ice islands that spoil all our
summers, were actually put into practice. So should we have gentle
airs instead of churlish blasts, and those everlasting sources of
bad weather being once navigated into the southern hemisphere,
my Mary would recover as fast again. We are both of your mind
respecting the journey to Eartham, and think that July, if by that
time she have strength for the journey, will be better than August.
We shall have more long days before us, and them we shall want as
much for our return as for our going forth. This, however, must be
left to the Giver of all good. If our visit to you be according to
his will, he will smooth our way before us, and appoint the time of
it; and I thus speak, not because I wish to seem a saint in your
eyes, but because my poor Mary actually is one, and would not set
her foot over the threshold, unless she had, or thought she had,
God's free permission. With that she would go through floods and
fire, though without it she would be afraid of everything--afraid
even to visit you, dearly as she loves, and much as she longs to see
you.

  W. C.

  [654] That a very perceptible change, generally speaking, has
  taken place in the climate of Great Britain, and that the same
  observation applies to other countries, has been a frequent
  subject of remark, both with the past and present generation.
  Various causes have been assigned for this peculiarity. It has
  been said that nature is growing old, and losing its elasticity
  and vigour. Others have attributed the change to the vast
  accumulation of ice in the Polar regions, and its consequent
  influence on the temperature of the air. Dr. Darwin humorously
  suggested the scheme of giving rudders and sails to the Ice
  Islands, that they might be wafted by northern gales, and thus
  be absorbed by the heat of a southern latitude. It is worthy of
  remark that in Milton's Latin Poems, there is a college thesis on
  this subject, viz. whether nature was becoming old and infirm.
  Milton took the negative of this proposition, and maintained,
  _naturam non pati senium_, that nature was not growing old.
  Cowper in his translation of this poem, thus renders some of the
  passages.

    How?--Shall the face of nature then be plough'd
    Into deep wrinkles, and shall years at last
    On the great Parent fix a sterile curse?
    Shall even she confess old age, and halt,
    And, palsy-smitten, shake her starry brows?--
    Shall Time's unsated maw crave and ingulph
    The very heav'ns, that regulate his flight?--
    No. The Almighty Father surer laid
    His deep foundations, and providing well
    For the event of all, the scales of Fate
    Suspended, in just equipoise, and bade
    His universal works, from age to age,
    One tenour hold, perpetual, undisturb'd.--
    Not tardier now is Saturn than of old,
    Nor radiant less the burning casque of Mars.
    Phoebus, his vigour unimpair'd, still shows
    Th' effulgence of his youth, nor needs the god
    A downward course, that he may warm the vales;
    But, ever rich in influence, runs his road,
    Sign after sign, through all the heavenly zone.
    Beautiful as at first, ascends the star
    From odorif'rous Ind, whose office is
    To gather home betimes th' ethereal flock,
    To pour them o'er the skies again at eve,
    And to discriminate the night and day.
    Still Cynthia's changeful horn waxes and wanes
    Alternate, and with arms extended still,
    She welcomes to her breast her brother's beams.
    Nor have the elements deserted yet
    Their functions.--
      Thus, in unbroken series, all proceeds;
    And shall, till, wide involving either pole
    And the immensity of yonder heav'n,
    The final flames of destiny absorb
    The world, consum'd in one enormous pyre!


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, June 27, 1792.

Well then--let us talk about this journey to Eartham. You wish
me to settle the time of it, and I wish with all my heart to be
able to do so, living in hopes meanwhile that I shall be able
to do it soon. But some little time must necessarily intervene.
Our Mary must be able to walk alone, to cut her own food, feed
herself, and to wear her own shoes, for at present she wears
mine. All things considered, my friend and brother, you will see
the expediency of waiting a little before we set off to Eartham.
We mean indeed before that day arrives to make a trial of the
strength of her head, how far it may be able to bear the motion
of a carriage--a motion that it has not felt these seven years. I
grieve that we are thus circumstanced, and that we cannot gratify
ourselves in a delightful and innocent project without all these
precautions; but when we have leaf-gold to handle we must do it
tenderly.

I thank you, my brother, both for presenting my authorship[655]
to your friend Guy, and for the excellent verses with which you
have inscribed your present. There are none neater or better
turned--with what shall I requite you? I have nothing to send you
but a gimcrack, which I have prepared for my bride and bridegroom
neighbours, who are expected to-morrow! You saw in my book a poem
entitled Catharina, which concluded with a wish that we had her
for a neighbour:[656] this therefore is called

 C A T H A R I N A:

(_The Second Part._)

ON HER MARRIAGE TO GEORGE COURTENAY, ESQ.

  Believe it or not, as you choose,
    The doctrine is certainly true,
  That the future is known to the muse,
    And poets are oracles too.

  I did but express a desire
    To see Catharina at home,
  At the side of my friend George's fire,
    And lo! she is actually come.

  And such prophecy some may despise,
    But the wish of a poet and friend
  Perhaps is approv'd in the skies,
    And therefore attains to its end.

  'Twas a wish that flew ardently forth,
    From a bosom effectually warm'd
  With the talents, the graces, and worth,
    Of the person for whom it was form'd.

  Maria would leave us, I knew,
    To the grief and regret of us all;
  But less to our grief could we view
    Catharina the queen of the Hall.

  And therefore I wish'd as I did,
    And therefore this union of hands,
  Not a whisper was heard to forbid,
    But all cry amen to the bands.

  Since therefore I seem to incur
    No danger of wishing in vain,
  When making good wishes for her,
    I will e'en to my wishes again.

  With one I have made her a wife,
    And now I will try with another,
  Which I cannot suppress for my life,
    How soon I can make her a mother.

  [655] Verses on Dr. Darwin.

  [656] See p. 343.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, July 4, 1792.

I know not how you proceed in your life of Milton, but I suppose not
very rapidly, for while you were here, and since you left us, you
have had no other theme but me. As for myself, except my letters to
you, and the nuptial song I inserted in my last, I have literally
done nothing since I saw you. Nothing, I mean, in the writing way,
though a great deal in another; that is to say, in attending my poor
Mary, and endeavouring to nurse her up for a journey to Eartham. In
this I have hitherto succeeded tolerably well, and had rather carry
this point completely than be the most famous editor of Milton that
the world has ever seen or shall see.

Your humorous descant upon my art of wishing made us merry, and
consequently did good to us both. I sent my wish to the Hall
yesterday. They are excellent neighbours, and so friendly to me that
I wished to gratify them. When I went to pay my first visit, George
flew into the court to meet me, and when I entered the parlour
Catharina sprang into my arms.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, July 15, 1792.

The progress of the old nurse in Terence is very much like the
progress of my poor patient in the road of recovery. I cannot,
indeed, say that she moves but advances not, for advances are
certainly made, but the progress of a week is hardly perceptible.
I know not therefore, at present, what to say about this
long-postponed journey. The utmost that it is safe for me to say at
this moment is this--You know that you are dear to us both: true
it is that you are so, and equally true that the very instant we
feel ourselves at liberty, we will fly to Eartham. I have been but
once within the Hall door since the Courtenays came home, much as I
have been pressed to dine there, and have hardly escaped giving a
little offence by declining it: but, though I should offend all the
world by my obstinacy in this instance, I would not leave my poor
Mary alone. Johnny serves me as a representative, and him I send
without scruple. As to the affair of Milton, I know not what will
become of it. I wrote to Johnson a week since to tell him that, the
interruption of Mrs. Unwin's illness still continuing, and being
likely to continue, I knew not when I should be able to proceed. The
translations (I said) were finished, except the revisal of a part.

God bless your dear little boy and poet! I thank him for exercising
his dawning genius upon me, and shall be still happier to thank him
in person.

    Abbot is painting me so true,
      That (trust me) you would stare
    And hardly know, at the first view,
      If I were here or there.[657]

  [657] This portrait was taken at the instance of Dr. Johnson, and
  is thought most to resemble Cowper. It is now in the possession
  of Dr. Johnson's family, and represents the poet in a sitting
  posture, in an evening dress.

I have sat twice; and the few who have seen his copy of me are
much struck with the resemblance. He is a sober, quiet man, which,
considering that I must have him at least a week longer for an
inmate, is a great comfort to me.

My Mary sends you her best love. She can walk now, leaning on my
arm only, and her speech is certainly much improved. I long to see
you. Why cannot you and dear Tom spend the remainder of the summer
with us? We might then all set off for Eartham merrily together. But
I retract this, conscious that I am unreasonable. It is a wretched
world, and what we would is almost always what we cannot.

Adieu! Love me, and be sure of a return.

  W. C.


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  Weston Underwood, July 20, 1792.

Dear Sir,--I have been long silent, and must now be short. My time
since I wrote last has been almost wholly occupied in suffering.
Either indisposition of my own, or of the dearest friend I
have,[658] has so entirely engaged my attention, that, except the
revision of the two elegies you sent me long since, I have done
nothing; nor do I at present foresee the day when I shall be able
to do anything. Should Mrs. Unwin recover sufficiently to undertake
a journey, I have promised Mr. Hayley to close the summer with a
visit to him at Eartham. At the best, therefore, I cannot expect to
proceed in my main business, till the approach of winter. I am thus
thrown so much into arrear respecting Milton, that I already despair
of being ready at the time appointed, and so I have told my employer.

  [658] Mrs. Unwin.

I need not say that the drift of this melancholy preface is to
apprize you that you must not expect despatch from me. Such
expedition as I can use I will, but I believe you must be very
patient.

It was only one year that I gave to drawing, for I found it an
employment hurtful to my eyes, which have always been weak and
subject to inflammation. I finished my attempt in this way with
three small landscapes, which I presented to a lady. These may,
perhaps, exist, but I have now no correspondence with the fair
proprietor. Except these, there is nothing remaining to show that I
ever aspired to such an accomplishment.

The hymns in the Olney collection marked (C,) are all of my
composition, except one, which bears that initial by a mistake of
the printer. Not having the book at hand, I cannot now say which it
is.

Wishing you a pleasant time at Margate, and assuring you, that I
shall receive, with great pleasure, any drawing of yours with which
you may favour me, and give it a distinguished place in my very
small collection,

  I remain, dear sir,
  Much and sincerely yours,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, July 22, 1792.

This important affair, my dear brother, is at last decided, and
we are coming. Wednesday se'nnight, if nothing occur to make a
later day necessary, is the day fixed for our journey. Our rate of
travelling must depend on Mary's ability to bear it. Our mode of
travelling will occupy three days unavoidably, for we shall come
in a coach. Abbot finishes my picture to-morrow; on Wednesday he
returns to town, and is commissioned to order one down for us, with
four steeds to draw it;

    "Hollow pamper'd jades of Asia,
    That cannot go but forty miles a day."

Send us our route, for I am as ignorant of it almost as if I were
in a strange country. We shall reach St. Alban's, I suppose, the
first day; say where we must finish our second day's journey, and at
what inn we may best repose? As to the end of the third day, we know
where that will find us, viz. in the arms, and under the roof, of
our beloved Hayley.

General Cowper, having heard a rumour of this intended migration,
desires to meet me on the road, that we may once more see each
other. He lives at Ham, near Kingston. Shall we go through Kingston
or near it? For I would give him as little trouble as possible,
though he offers very kindly to come as far as Barnet for that
purpose. Nor must I forget Carwardine, who so kindly desired to
be informed what way we should go. On what point of the road will
it be easiest for him to find us? On all these points you must
be my oracle. My friend and brother, we shall overwhelm you with
our numbers; this is all the trouble that I have left. My Johnny
of Norfolk, happy in the thought of accompanying us, would be
broken-hearted to be left behind.

In the midst of all these solicitudes, I laugh to think what they
are made of, and what an important thing it is for me to travel.
Other men steal away from their homes silently, and make no
disturbance, but when I move, houses are turned upside down, maids
are turned out of their beds, all the counties through which I pass
appear to be in an uproar--Surrey greets me by the mouth of the
General, and Essex by that of Carwardine. How strange does all this
seem to a man who has seen no bustle, and made none, for twenty
years together!

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO THE REV. WILLIAM BULL.[659]

  [659] Private correspondence.

  July 25, 1792.

My dear Mr. Bull,--Engaged as I have been ever since I saw you, it
was not possible that I should write sooner; and, busy as I am at
present, it is not without difficulty that I can write even now:
but I promised you a letter, and must endeavour, at least to be as
good as my word. How do you imagine I have been occupied these last
ten days? In sitting, not on cockatrice' eggs, nor yet to gratify a
mere idle humour, nor because I was too sick to move; but because my
cousin Johnson has an aunt who has a longing desire of my picture,
and because he would, therefore, bring a painter from London to
draw it. For this purpose I have been sitting, as I say, these ten
days; and am heartily glad that my sitting time is over. You have
now, I know, a burning curiosity to learn two things, which I may
choose whether I will tell you or not; First, who was the painter;
and secondly, how he has succeeded. The painter's name is Abbot.
You never heard of him, you say. It is very likely; but there is,
nevertheless, such a painter, and an excellent one he is. _Multa
sunt quæ bonus Bernardus nec vidit, nec audivit._ To your second
inquiry I answer, that he has succeeded to admiration. The likeness
is so strong, that when my friends enter the room where the picture
is, they start, astonished to see me where they know I am not.
Miserable man that you are, to be at Brighton instead of being here,
to contemplate this prodigy of art, which, therefore, you can never
see; for it goes to London next Monday, to be suspended awhile at
Abbot's; and then proceeds into Norfolk, where it will be suspended
for ever.

But the picture is not the only prodigy I have to tell you of. A
greater belongs to me; and one that you will hardly credit, even on
my own testimony. We are on the eve of a journey, and a long one.
On this very day se'nnight we set out for Eartham, the seat of my
brother bard, Mr. Hayley, on the other side of London, nobody knows
where, a hundred and twenty miles off. Pray for us, my friend, that
we may have a safe going and return. It is a tremendous exploit, and
I feel a thousand anxieties when I think of it. But a promise, made
to him when he was here, that we would go if we could, and a sort of
persuasion that we can if we will, oblige us to it. The journey, and
the change of air, together with the novelty to us of the scene to
which we are going, may, I hope, be useful to us both; especially to
Mrs. Unwin, who has most need of restoratives. She sends her love to
you and to Thomas, in which she is sincerely joined by

  Your affectionate
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, July 29, 1792.

    Through floods and flames to your retreat
      I win my desp'rate way,
    And when we meet, if e'er we meet,
      Will echo your huzza.

You will wonder at the word _desp'rate_ in the second line, and at
the _if_ in the third; but could you have any conception of the
fears I have had to bustle with, of the dejection of spirits that I
have suffered concerning this journey, you would wonder much more
that I still courageously persevere in my resolution to undertake
it. Fortunately for my intentions, it happens, that as the day
approaches my terrors abate; for had they continued to be what they
were a week since, I must, after all, have disappointed you; and was
actually once on the verge of doing it. I have told you something of
my nocturnal experiences, and assure you now, that they were hardly
ever more terrific than on this occasion. Prayer has however opened
my passage at last, and obtained for me a degree of confidence that
I trust will prove a comfortable viaticum to me all the way. On
Wednesday therefore we set forth.

The terrors that I have spoken of would appear ridiculous to most,
but to you they will not, for you are a reasonable creature,
and know well that, to whatever cause it be owing (whether to
constitution, or to God's express appointment) I am hunted by
spiritual hounds in the night season. I cannot help it. You will
pity me, and wish it were otherwise; and, though you may think there
is much of the imaginary in it, will not deem it for that reason an
evil less to be lamented--so much for fears and distresses. Soon I
hope they shall all have a joyful termination, and I, my Mary, my
Johnny, and my dog, be skipping with delight at Eartham!

Well! this picture is at last finished, and well finished, I can
assure you. Every creature that has seen it has been astonished
at the resemblance. Sam's boy bowed to it, and Beau walked up to
it, wagging his tail as he went, and evidently showing that he
acknowledged its likeness to his master. It is a half-length, as it
is technically but absurdly called; that is to say, it gives all but
the foot and ankle. To-morrow it goes to town, and will hang some
months at Abbot's, when it will be sent to its due destination in
Norfolk.[660]

  [660] To Mrs. Bodham's.

I hope, or rather wish, that at Eartham I may recover that habit
of study which, inveterate as it once seemed, I now seem to have
lost--lost to such a degree, that it is even painful to me to think
of what it will cost me to acquire it again.

Adieu! my dear, dear Hayley; God give us a happy meeting. Mary sends
her love--she is in pretty good plight this morning, having slept
well, and for her part, has no fears at all about the journey.

  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[661]

  [661] Private correspondence.

  July 30, 1792.

My dear Friend,--Like you, I am obliged to snatch short
opportunities of corresponding with my friends; and to write what I
can, not what I would. Your kindness in giving me the first letter
after your return claims my thanks; and my tardiness to answer it
would demand an apology, if, having been here, and witnessed how
much my time is occupied in attendance on my poor patient, you
could possibly want one. She proceeds, I trust, in her recovery;
but at so slow a rate, that the difference made in a week is hardly
perceptible to me, who am always with her. This last night has
been the worst she has known since her illness--entirely sleepless
till seven in the morning. Such ill rest seems but an indifferent
preparation for a long journey, which we purpose to undertake on
Wednesday, when we set out for Eartham, on a visit to Mr. Hayley.
The journey itself will, I hope, be useful to her; and the air of
the sea, blowing over the South Downs, together with the novelty of
the scene to us, will, I hope, be serviceable to us both. You may
imagine that we, who have been resident on one spot so many years,
do not engage in such an enterprise without some anxiety. Persons
accustomed to travel would make themselves merry with mine; it
seems so disproportioned to the occasion. Once I have been on the
point of determining not to go, and even since we fixed the day; my
troubles have been so insupportable. But it has been made a matter
of much prayer, and at last it has pleased God to satisfy me, in
some measure, that his will corresponds with our purpose, and that
He will afford us his protection. You, I know, will not be unmindful
of us during our absence from home; but will obtain for us, if your
prayers can do it, all that we would ask for ourselves--the presence
and favour of God, a salutary effect of our journey, and a safe
return.

I rejoiced, and had reason to do so, in your coming to Weston, for I
think the Lord came with you. Not, indeed, to abide with me; not to
restore me to that intercourse with Him which I enjoyed twenty years
ago; but to awaken in me, however, more spiritual feeling than I
have experienced, except in two instances, during all that time. The
comforts that I had received under your ministry, in better days,
all rushed upon my recollection; and, during two or three transient
moments, seemed to be in a degree renewed. You will tell me that,
transient as they were, they were yet evidences of a love that is
not so; and I am desirous to believe it.

With Mrs. Unwin's warm remembrances, and my cousin Johnson's best
compliments, I am

  Sincerely yours,
  W. C.

P.S.--If I hear from you while I am abroad, your letter will find me
at William Hayley's, Esq. Eartham, near Chichester. We propose to
return in about a month.



Cowper records the particulars of this visit in the following
letters.


TO THE REV. MR. GREATHEED.

  Eartham, Aug. 6, 1792.

My dear Sir,--Having first thanked you for your affectionate and
acceptable letter, I will proceed, as well as I can, to answer your
equally affectionate request, that I would send you early news of
our arrival at Eartham. Here we are in the most elegant mansion
that I have ever inhabited, and surrounded by the most delightful
pleasure-grounds that I have ever seen; but which, dissipated as my
powers of thought are at present, I will not undertake to describe.
It shall suffice me to say, that they occupy three sides of a hill,
which in Buckinghamshire might well pass for a mountain, and from
the summit of which is beheld a most magnificent landscape bounded
by the sea, and in one part by the Isle of Wight, which may also be
seen plainly from the window of the library, in which I am writing.

It pleased God to carry us both through the journey with far less
difficulty and inconvenience than I expected. I began it indeed with
a thousand fears, and when we arrived the first evening at Barnet,
found myself oppressed in spirit to a degree that could hardly be
exceeded. I saw Mrs. Unwin weary, as she might well be, and heard
such noises, both within the house and without, that I concluded she
would get no rest. But I was mercifully disappointed. She rested,
though not well, yet sufficiently; and when we finished our next
day's journey at Ripley, we were both in better condition, both
of body and mind, than on the day preceding. At Ripley we found a
quiet inn, that housed, as it happened, that night, no company but
ourselves. There we slept well, and rose perfectly refreshed; and,
except some terrors that I felt at passing over the Sussex hills by
moonlight, met with little to complain of, till we arrived about
ten o'clock at Eartham. Here we are as happy as it is in the power
of terrestrial good to make us. It is almost a paradise in which we
dwell; and our reception has been the kindest that it was possible
for friendship and hospitality to contrive. Our host mentions you
with great respect, and bids me tell you that he esteems you highly.
Mrs. Unwin, who is, I think, in some points, already the better
for her excursion, unites with mine her best compliments both to
yourself and Mrs. Greatheed. I have much to see and enjoy before I
can be perfectly apprized of all the delights of Eartham, and will
therefore now subscribe myself

  Yours, my dear sir,
  With great sincerity,
  W. C.


TO MRS. COURTENAY.

  Eartham, August 12, 1792.

My dearest Catharina,--Though I have travelled far, nothing did
I see in my travels that surprised me half so agreeably as your
kind letter; for high as my opinion of your good-nature is, I had
no hopes of hearing from you till I should have written first; a
pleasure which I intended to allow myself the first opportunity.

After three days' confinement in a coach, and suffering as we went
all that could be suffered from excessive heat and dust, we found
ourselves late in the evening at the door of our friend Hayley.
In every other respect the journey was extremely pleasant. At the
Mitre, in Barnet, where we lodged the first evening, we found our
friend Rose, who had walked thither from his house in Chancery-lane
to meet us; and at Kingston, where we dined the second day, I found
my old and much-valued friend, General Cowper, whom I had not
seen in thirty years, and but for this journey should never have
seen again. Mrs. Unwin, on whose account I had a thousand fears,
before we set out, suffered as little from fatigue as myself, and
begins, I hope, already to feel some beneficial effects from the
air of Eartham, and the exercise that she takes in one of the most
delightful pleasure-grounds in the world. They occupy three sides of
a hill, lofty enough to command a view of the sea, which skirts the
horizon to a length of many miles, with the Isle of Wight at the end
of it. The inland scene is equally beautiful, consisting of a large
and deep valley well cultivated, and enclosed by magnificent hills,
all crowned with wood. I had, for my part, no conception that a poet
could be the owner of such a paradise; and his house is as elegant
as his scenes are charming.[662]

  [662] This residence afterwards became the property of the late
  William Huskisson, Esq.

But think not, my dear Catharina, that amidst all these beauties
I shall lose the remembrance of the peaceful, but less splendid,
Weston. Your precincts will be as dear to me as ever, when I
return; though when that day will arrive I know not, our host being
determined, as I plainly see, to keep us as long as possible.
Give my best love to your husband. Thank him most kindly for his
attention to the old bard of Greece, and pardon me that I do not
now send you an epitaph for Fop. I am not sufficiently recollected
to compose even a bagatelle at present; but in due time you shall
receive it.

Hayley, who will some time or other I hope see you at Weston, is
already prepared to love you both, and, being passionately fond of
music, longs much to hear you.

  Adieu.
  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Eartham, Aug. 14, 1792.

My dear Friend,--Romney is here: it would add much to my happiness
if you were of the party; I have prepared Hayley to think highly,
that is justly, of you, and the time, I hope, will come when you
will supersede all need of my recommendation.

Mrs. Unwin gathers strength. I have indeed great hopes, from the
air and exercise which this fine season affords her opportunity to
use, that ere we return she will be herself again.

  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Eartham, Aug. 18, 1792.

Wishes in this world are generally vain, and in the next we shall
make none. Every day I wish you were of the party, knowing how
happy you would be in a place where we have nothing to do but enjoy
beautiful scenery and converse agreeably.

Mrs. Unwin's health continues to improve; and even I, who was well
when I came, find myself still better.

  Yours,
  W. C.


TO MRS. COURTENAY.

  Eartham, Aug. 25, 1792.

Without waiting for an answer to my last, I send my dear Catharina
the epitaph she desired, composed as well as I could compose it in
a place where every object, being still new to me, distracts my
attention, and makes me as awkward at verse as if I had never dealt
in it. Here it is.

EPITAPH ON FOP;

A DOG, BELONGING TO LADY THROCKMORTON.

    Though once a puppy, and though Fop by name,
    Here moulders one, whose bones some honour claim;
    No sycophant, although of spaniel race!
    And though no hound, a martyr to the chace!
    Ye squirrels, rabbits, leverets rejoice!
    Your haunts no longer echo to his voice.
    This record of his fate exulting view,
    He died worn out with vain pursuit of you!

      "Yes!" the indignant shade of Fop replies,
    "And worn with vain pursuit, man also dies!"

I am here, as I told you in my last, delightfully situated, and
in the enjoyment of all that the most friendly hospitality can
impart; yet do I neither forget Weston, nor my friends at Weston:
on the contrary, I have at length, though much and kindly pressed
to make a longer stay, determined on the day of our departure--on
the seventeenth of September we shall leave Eartham; four days will
be necessary to bring us home again, for I am under a promise to
General Cowper to dine with him on the way, which cannot be done
comfortably, either to him or to ourselves, unless we sleep that
night at Kingston.

The air of this place has been, I believe, beneficial to us both. I
indeed was in tolerable health before I set out, but have acquired
since I came, both a better appetite and a knack of sleeping
almost as much in a single night as formerly in two. Whether double
quantities of that article will be favourable to me as a poet, time
must show. About myself, however, I care little, being made of
materials so tough, as not to threaten me even now, at the end of
so many _lustrums_, with any thing like a speedy dissolution. My
chief concern has been about Mrs. Unwin, and my chief comfort at
this moment is, that she likewise has received, I hope, considerable
benefit by the journey.

Tell my dear George that I begin to long to behold him again, and,
did it not savour of ingratitude to the friend under whose roof I am
so happy at present, should be impatient to find myself once more
under yours.

Adieu! my dear Catharina. I have nothing to add in the way of news,
except that Romney has drawn me in crayons, by the suffrage of all
here, extremely like.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.[663]

  [663] This amiable and much esteemed character, and endeared
  as one of the friends of Cowper, was born at Bishopstone in
  Sussex, in 1763. He was elected Professor of Poetry at Oxford
  in 1793, and died at a premature age, in 1801. His claims as an
  author principally rest on his once popular poem of the "Village
  Curate." He also wrote "A Vindication of the University of Oxford
  from the Aspersions of Mr. Gibbon." His works are published in 3
  vols.

  Eartham, Aug. 26, 1792.

My dear Sir,--Your kind but very affecting letter found me not at
Weston, to which place it was directed, but in a bower of my friend
Hayley's garden at Eartham, where I was sitting with Mrs. Unwin. We
both knew the moment we saw it from whom it came, and, observing a
red seal, both comforted ourselves that all was well at Burwash:
but we soon felt that we were not called to rejoice, but to mourn
with you;[664] we do indeed sincerely mourn with you, and, if it
will afford you any consolation to know it, you may be assured
that every eye here has testified what our hearts have suffered
for you. Your loss is great, and your disposition I perceive such
as exposes you to feel the whole weight of it: I will not add to
your sorrow by a vain attempt to assuage it; your own good sense,
and the piety of your principles, will, of course, suggest to you
the most powerful motives of acquiescence in the will of God. You
will be sure to recollect that the stroke, severe as it is, is not
the stroke of an enemy, but of a father; and will find I trust,
hereafter, that like a father he has done you good by it. Thousands
have been able to say, and myself as loud as any of them, it has
been good for me that I was afflicted; but time is necessary to
work us to this persuasion, and in due time it shall be yours. Mr.
Hayley, who tenderly sympathizes with you, has enjoined me to send
you as pressing an invitation as I can frame, to join me at this
place. I have every motive to wish your consent; both your benefit
and my own, which, I believe, would be abundantly answered by your
coming, ought to make me eloquent in such a cause. Here you will
find silence and retirement in perfection, when you would seek
them; and here such company as I have no doubt would suit you, all
cheerful, but not noisy; and all alike disposed to love you: you and
I seem to have here a fair opportunity of meeting. It were a pity we
should be in the same county and not come together. I am here till
the seventeenth of September, an interval that will afford you time
to make the necessary arrangements, and to gratify me at last with
an interview, which I have long desired. Let me hear from you soon,
that I may have double pleasure, the pleasure of expecting as well
as that of seeing you.

  [664] Mr. Hurdis had just lost a favourite sister.

Mrs. Unwin, I thank God, though still a sufferer by her last
illness, is much better, and has received considerable benefit by
the air of Eartham. She adds to mine her affectionate compliments,
and joins me and Hayley in this invitation.

Mr. Romney is here, and a young man a cousin of mine. I tell you who
we are, that you may not be afraid of us.

Adieu! May the Comforter of all the afflicted, who seek him, be
yours! God bless you!

  W. C.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  Eartham, Aug. 26, 1792.

I know not how it is, my dearest coz, but, in a new scene and
surrounded with strange objects, I find my powers of thinking
dissipated to a degree, that makes it difficult to me even to write
a letter, and even a letter to you; but such a letter as I can, I
will, and have the fairest chance to succeed this morning, Hayley,
Romney, Hayley's son, and Beau, being all gone together to the sea
for bathing. The sea, you must know, is nine miles off, so that,
unless stupidity prevent, I shall have opportunity to write not
only to you, but to poor Hurdis also, who is broken-hearted for the
loss of his favourite sister, lately dead; and whose letter, giving
an account of it, which I received yesterday, drew tears from the
eyes of all our party. My only comfort respecting even yourself is,
that you write in good spirits, and assure me that you are in a
state of recovery; otherwise I should mourn not only for Hurdis, but
for myself, lest a certain event should reduce me, and in a short
time too, to a situation as distressing as his; for though nature
designed you only for my cousin, you have had a sister's place in my
affections ever since I knew you. The reason is, I suppose, that,
having no sister, the daughter of my own mother, I thought it proper
to have one, the daughter of yours. Certain it is, that I can by no
means afford to lose you, and that, unless you will be upon honour
with me to give me always a true account of yourself, at least when
we are not together, I shall always be unhappy, because always
suspicious that you deceive me.

Now for ourselves. I am, without the least dissimulation, in good
health; my spirits are about as good as you have ever seen them;
and if increase of appetite, and a double portion of sleep, be
advantageous, such are the advantages that I have received from this
migration. As to that gloominess of mind, which I have had these
twenty years, it cleaves to me even here, and, could I be translated
to Paradise, unless I left my body behind me, would cleave to me
even there also. It is my companion for life, and nothing will
ever divorce us. So much for myself. Mrs. Unwin is evidently the
better for her jaunt, though by no means as she was before this
last attack; still wanting help when she would rise from her seat,
and a support in walking; but she is able to use more exercise than
she could at home, and moves with rather a less tottering step. God
knows what he designs for me, but when I see those who are dearer
to me than myself distempered and enfeebled, and myself as strong
as in the days of my youth, I tremble for the solitude in which a
few years may place me. I wish her and you to die before me, but not
till I am more likely to follow immediately. Enough of this!

Romney has drawn me in crayons, and, in the opinion of all
here, with his best hand, and with the most exact resemblance
possible.[665]

  [665] This portrait is now in the possession of Dr. Johnson's
  family.

The seventeenth of September is the day on which I intend to leave
Eartham. We shall then have been six weeks resident here; a holiday
time long enough for a man who has much to do. And now, farewell!

  W. C.

P.S. Hayley, whose love for me seems to be truly that of a brother,
has given me his picture, drawn by Romney, about fifteen years ago;
an admirable likeness.


TO MRS. CHARLOTTE SMITH.[666]

  [666] Private correspondence.

  Eartham, Sept. 1792.

Dear Madam,--Your two counsellors are of one mind. We both are of
opinion that you will do well to make your second volume a suitable
companion to the first, by embellishing it in the same manner; and
have no doubt, considering the well-deserved popularity of your
verse, that the expense will be amply refunded by the public.

I would give you, madam, not my counsel only, but consolation also,
were I not disqualified for that delightful service by a great
dearth of it in my own experience. I too often seek but cannot
find it. Of this, however, I can assure you, if that may at all
comfort you, that both my friend Hayley and myself most truly
sympathize with you under all your sufferings. Neither have you, I
am persuaded, in any degree lost the interest you always had in him,
or your claim to any service that it may be in his power to render
you. Had you no other title to his esteem, his respect for your
talents, and his feelings for your misfortunes, must ensure to you
the friendship of such a man for ever. I know, however, there are
seasons when, look which way we will, we see the same dismal gloom
enveloping all objects. This is itself an affliction; and the worse,
because it makes us think ourselves more unhappy than we are: and at
such a season it is, I doubt not, that you suspect a diminution of
our friend's zeal to serve you.

I was much struck by an expression in your letter to Hayley, where
you say that you "will endeavour to take an interest in green
leaves again." This seems the sound of my own voice reflected to me
from a distance; I have so often had the same thought and desire.
A day scarcely passes, at this season of the year, when I do not
contemplate the trees so soon to be stript, and say, "Perhaps I
shall never see you clothed again." Every year, as it passes, makes
this expectation more reasonable; and the year with me cannot be
very distant, when the event will verify it. Well, may God grant us
a good hope of arriving in due time where the leaves never fall, and
all will be right!

Mrs. Unwin, I think, is a little better than when you saw her; but
still so feeble as to keep me in a state of continual apprehension.
I live under the point of a sword suspended by a hair. Adieu, my
dear madam; and believe me to remain your sincere and affectionate
humble servant,

  W. C.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  Eartham, Sept. 9, 1792.

My dearest Cousin,--I determine, if possible, to send you one
more letter, or at least, if possible, once more to send you
something like one, before we leave Eartham. But I am in truth
so unaccountably local in the use of my pen, that, like the man
in the fable, who could leap well no where but at Rhodes, I seem
incapable of writing at all, except at Weston. This is, as I have
already told you, a delightful place; more beautiful scenery I have
never beheld, nor expect to behold; but the charms of it, uncommon
as they are, have not in the least alienated my affections from
Weston. The genius of that place suits me better, it has an air of
snug concealment, in which a disposition like mine feels peculiarly
gratified; whereas here I see from every window woods like forests,
and hills like mountains, a wildness, in short, that rather
increases my natural melancholy, and which, were it not for the
agreeables I find within, would soon convince me that mere change of
place can avail me little. Accordingly, I have not looked out for a
house in Sussex, nor shall.

The intended day of our departure continues to be the seventeenth.
I hope to re-conduct Mrs. Unwin to the Lodge with her health
considerably mended; but it is in the article of speech chiefly, and
in her powers of walking, that she is sensible of much improvement.
Her sight and her hand still fail her, so that she can neither
read nor work; both mortifying circumstances to her, who is never
willingly idle.

On the eighteenth I purpose to dine with the General, and to rest
that night at Kingston, but the pleasure I shall have in the
interview will hardly be greater than the pain I shall feel at the
end of it, for we shall part, probably to meet no more.

Johnny, I know, has told you that Mr. Hurdis is here. Distressed by
the loss of his sister, he has renounced the place where she died
for ever, and is about to enter on a new course of life at Oxford.
You would admire him much, he is gentle in his manners, and delicate
in his person, resembling our poor friend, Unwin, both in face and
figure, more than any one I have seen. But he has not, at least he
has not at present, his vivacity.

I have corresponded since I came here with Mrs. Courtenay, and had
yesterday a very kind letter from her.

Adieu, my dear; may God bless you. Write to me as soon as you can
after the twentieth. I shall then be at Weston, and indulging myself
in the hope that I shall ere long see you there also.

  W. C.



Hayley, speaking of the manner in which they employed their time
at Eartham, observes, "Homer was not the immediate object of our
attention. The morning hours that we could bestow upon books were
chiefly devoted to a complete revisal and correction of all the
translations, which my friend had finished, from the Latin and
Italian poetry of Milton: and we generally amused ourselves after
dinner in forming together a rapid metrical version of Andreini's
Adamo."[667] He also mentions the interest excited in Cowper's mind
by his son, a fine boy of eleven years, whose uncommon talents and
engaging qualities endeared him so much to the poet, that he allowed
and invited him to criticise his Homer. A specimen of this juvenile
criticism will appear in the future correspondence. This interesting
boy, with a young companion, employed themselves regularly twice a
day in drawing Mrs. Unwin in a commodious garden-chair, round the
airy hill at Eartham. "To Cowper and to me," he adds, "it was a very
pleasing spectacle to see the benevolent vivacity of blooming youth
thus continually labouring for the ease, health, and amusement of
disabled age."

  [667] This is one of those scarce and curious books which
  is not to be procured without difficulty. It is a dramatic
  representation of the Fall, remarkable, not so much for any
  peculiar vigour, either in the conception or execution of the
  plan, as for exhibiting that mode of celebrating sacred subjects,
  formerly known under the appellation of mysteries. A further
  interest is also attached to it from the popular persuasion that
  this work first suggested to Milton the design of his Paradise
  Lost. There is the same allegorical imagery, and sufficient to
  form the frame-work of that immortal poem. Johnson, in his Life
  of Milton, alludes to the report, without arriving at any decided
  conclusion on the subject, but states, that Milton's original
  intention was to have formed, not a narrative, but a dramatic
  work, and that he subsequently began to reduce it to its present
  form, about the year 1655. Some sketches of this plan are to be
  seen in the library of Trinity College, Cambridge. Dr. Joseph
  Warton and Hayley both incline to the opinion that the Adamo of
  Andreini first suggested the hint of the Paradise Lost.

  That the Italians claim this honour for their countryman is
  evident from the following passage from Tiraboschi, which, to
  those of our readers who are conversant with that language,
  will be an interesting quotation. "Certo benche L'Adamo dell
  Andreini sia in confronto dell Paradiso Perduto ciò che è il
  Poema di Ennio in confronto a quel di Virgilio, nondimeno non può
  negarsi che le idee gigantesche, delle quali l'autore Inglese
  ha abbellito il suo Poema, di Satana, che entra nel Paradiso
  terrestre, e arde d'invidia al vedere la felicita dell' Uomo,
  del congresso de Demonj, della battaglia degli Angioli contra
  Lucifero, e più altre sommiglianti immagini veggonsi nell'
  _Adamo_ adombrate per modo, che a me sembra molto credibile, che
  anche il Milton dalle immondezze, se cosi è lecito dire, dell'
  Andreini raccogliesse l'oro, di cui adorno il suo Poema. Per
  altro _L'Adamo_ dell' Andreini, benche abbia alcuni tratti di
  pessimo gusto, ne hà altri ancora, che si posson proporre come
  modello di excellente poesia."

  It is no disparagement to Milton to have been indebted to the
  conceptions of another for the origin of his great undertaking.
  If Milton borrowed, it was to repay with largeness of interest.
  The only use that he made of the suggestion was, to stamp upon
  it the immortality of his own creative genius, and to produce a
  work which is destined to survive to the latest period of British
  literature.

  For further information on this subject, we refer the reader
  to the "Inquiry into the Origin of Paradise Lost," in Todd's
  excellent edition of Milton; and in Hayley's Life of Milton will
  be found Cowper's and Hayley's joint version of the first three
  acts of the Adamo above mentioned.

  In addition to the Adamo of Andreini, Milton is said to have
  been indebted to the Du Bartas of Sylvester, and to the Adamus
  Exul of Grotius. Hayley, in his Life of Milton, enumerates
  also a brief list of Italian writers, who may have possibly
  have thrown some suggestions into the mind of the poet. But
  the boldest act of imposition ever recorded in the annals of
  literature, is the charge preferred against Milton by Lauder,
  who endeavoured to prove that he was "the worst and greatest
  of all plagiaries." He asserted that "Milton had borrowed the
  substance of whole books together, and that there was scarcely a
  single thought or sentiment in his poem which he had not stolen
  from some author or other, notwithstanding his vain pretence to
  _things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme_." In support of this
  charge, he was base enough to corrupt the text of those poets,
  whom he produced as evidences against the originality of Milton,
  by interpolating several verses either of his own fabrication,
  or from the Latin translation of _Paradise Lost_, by William
  Hog. This gross libel he entitled an "Essay on Milton's Use and
  Imitation of the Moderns;" and so far imposed on Dr. Johnson, by
  his representations, as to prevail upon him to furnish a preface
  to his work. The public are indebted to Dr. Douglas, the Bishop
  of Salisbury, for first detecting this imposture, in a pamphlet
  entitled "Milton vindicated from the charge of Plagiarism brought
  against him by Mr. Lauder." Thus exposed to infamy and contempt,
  he made a public recantation of his error, and soon after quitted
  England for the West Indies, where he died in 1771.

The reader will perceive from the last letter, that Cowper, amused
as he was with the scenery of Sussex, began to feel the powerful
attraction of home.


TO MRS. COURTENAY,[668] WESTON-UNDERWOOD.[669]

  [668] Now Dowager Lady Throckmorton.

  [669] Private correspondence.


  Eartham, Sept. 10, 1792.

My dear Catharina,--I am not so uncourteous a knight as to leave
your last kind letter, and the last I hope that I shall receive for
a long time to come, without an attempt, at least, to acknowledge
and to send you something in the shape of an answer to it; but,
having been obliged to dose myself last night with laudanum, on
account of a little nervous fever, to which I am always subject,
and for which I find it the best remedy, I feel myself this
morning particularly under the influence of Lethean vapours, and,
consequently, in danger of being uncommonly stupid!

You could hardly have sent me intelligence that would have
gratified me more than that of my two dear friends, Sir John and
Lady Throckmorton, having departed from Paris two days before the
terrible 10th of August. I have had many anxious thoughts on their
account; and am truly happy to learn that they have sought a more
peaceful region, while it was yet permitted them to do so. They will
not, I trust, revisit those scenes of tumult and horror while they
shall continue to merit that description. We are here all of one
mind respecting the cause in which the Parisians are engaged; wish
them a free people, and as happy as they can wish themselves. But
their conduct has not always pleased us: we are shocked at their
sanguinary proceedings, and begin to fear, myself in particular,
that they will prove themselves unworthy, because incapable of
enjoying it, of the inestimable blessing of liberty. My daily toast
is, Sobriety and freedom to the French; for they seem as destitute
of the former as they are eager to secure the latter.

We still hold our purpose of leaving Eartham on the seventeenth;
and again my fears on Mrs. Unwin's account begin to trouble me; but
they are now not quite so reasonable as in the first instance. If
she could bear the fatigue of travelling then, she is more equal
to it at present; and, supposing that nothing happens to alarm her,
which is very probable, may be expected to reach Weston in much
better condition than when she left it. Her improvement, however, is
chiefly in her looks, and in the articles of speaking and walking;
for she can neither rise from her chair without help, nor walk
without a support, nor read, nor use her needle. Give my love to the
good doctor, and make him acquainted with the state of his patient,
since he, of all men, seems to have the best right to know it.

I am proud that you are pleased with the Epitaph[670] I sent you,
and shall be still prouder to see it perpetuated by the chisel.
It is all that I have done since here I came, and all that I have
been able to do. I wished, indeed, to have requited Romney, for his
well-drawn copy of me, in rhyme; and have more than once or twice
attempted it: but I find, like the man in the fable, who could
leap only at Rhodes, that verse is almost impossible to me, except
at Weston.--Tell my friend George that I am every day mindful of
him, and always love him; and bid him by no means to vex himself
about the tardiness of Andrews.[671] Remember me affectionately to
William, and to Pitcairn, whom I shall hope to find with you at my
return; and, should you see Mr. Buchanan, to him also. I have now
charged you with commissions enow, and having added Mrs. Unwin's
best compliments, and told you that I long to see you again, will
conclude myself,

  My dear Catharina,
  Most truly yours,
  W. C.

  [670] On Fop, Lady Throckmorton's dog.

  [671] A stone-mason, who was making a pedestal for an antique
  bust of Homer.



Their departure from Eartham was a scene of affecting interest,
and a perfect contrast to the gaiety of their arrival. Anxious to
relieve the mind of Hayley from any apprehension for their safety,
Cowper addressed to him the following letter from Kingston.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  The Sun, at Kingston, Sept. 18, 1792.

My dear Brother,--With no sinister accident to retard or terrify us,
we find ourselves at a quarter before one, arrived safe at Kingston.
I left you with a heavy heart, and with a heavy heart took leave of
our dear Tom,[672] at the bottom of the chalk-hill. But, soon after
this last separation, my troubles gushed from my eyes, and then I
was better.

  [672] Hayley's son.

We must now prepare for our visit to the General. I add no more,
therefore, than our dearest remembrances and prayers that God may
bless you and yours, and reward you an hundred-fold for all your
kindness. Tell Tom I shall always hold him dear for his affectionate
attentions to Mrs. Unwin. From her heart the memory of him can never
be erased. Johnny loves you all, and has his share in all these
acknowledgements.

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Sept. 21, 1792.

My dear Hayley,--Chaos himself, even the chaos of Milton, is not
surrounded with more confusion, nor has a mind more completely in
a hubbub, than I experience at the present moment. At our first
arrival, after long absence, we find a hundred orders to servants
necessary, a thousand things to be restored to their proper places,
and an endless variety of minutiæ to be adjusted; which, though
individually of little importance, are momentous in the aggregate.
In these circumstances I find myself so indisposed to writing, that,
save to yourself, I would on no account attempt it; but to you I
will give such a recital as I can of all that has passed since I
sent you that short note from Kingston, knowing that, if it be a
perplexed recital, you will consider the cause and pardon it. I will
begin with a remark in which I am inclined to think you will agree
with me, that there is sometimes more true heroism passing in a
corner, and on occasions that make no noise in the world, than has
often been exercised by those whom that world esteems her greatest
heroes, and on occasions the most illustrious. I hope so at least;
for all the heroism I have to boast, and all the opportunities I
have of displaying any, are of a private nature. After writing the
note, I immediately began to prepare for my appointed visit to Ham;
but the struggles that I had with my own spirit, labouring as I did
under the most dreadful dejection, are never to be told. I would
have given the world to have been excused. I went, however, and
carried my point against myself, with a heart riven asunder--I have
reasons for all this anxiety, which I cannot relate now. The visit,
however, passed off well, and we returned in the dark to Kingston;
I, with a lighter heart than I had known since my departure from
Eartham, and Mary too, for she had suffered hardly less than myself,
and chiefly on my account. That night we rested well in our inn,
and at twenty minutes after eight next morning set off for London;
exactly at ten we reached Mr. Rose's door; we drank a dish of
chocolate with him, and proceeded, Mr. Rose riding with us as far as
St. Albans. From this time we met with no impediment. In the dark,
and in a storm, at eight at night, we found ourselves at our own
back-door. Mrs. Unwin was very near slipping out of the chair in
which she was taken from the chaise, but at last was landed safe. We
all have had a good night, and are all well this morning.

God bless you, my dearest brother.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 2, 1792.

My dear Hayley,--A bad night, succeeded by an east wind, and a sky
all in sables, have such an effect on my spirits, that, if I did
not consult my own comfort more than yours, I should not write
to-day, for I shall not entertain you much: yet your letter, though
containing no very pleasant tidings, has afforded me some relief. It
tells me, indeed, that you have been dispirited yourself, and that
poor little Tom, the faithful 'squire of my Mary, has been seriously
indisposed. All this grieves me: but then there is a warmth of heart
and a kindness in it that do me good. I will endeavour not to repay
you in notes of sorrow and despondence, though all my sprightly
chords seem broken. In truth, one day excepted, I have not seen the
day when I have been cheerful since I left you. My spirits, I think,
are almost constantly lower than they were; the approach of winter
is perhaps the cause, and if it is, I have nothing better to expect
for a long time to come.

Yesterday was a day of assignation with myself, the day of which
I said some days before it came, when that day comes I will begin
my dissertations. Accordingly, when it came, I prepared to do so;
filled a letter-case with fresh paper, furnished myself with a
pretty good pen, and replenished my ink-bottle; but, partly from
one cause, and partly from another, chiefly, however, from distress
and dejection, after writing and obliterating about six lines, in
the composition of which I spent near an hour, I was obliged to
relinquish the attempt. An attempt so unsuccessful could have no
other effect than to dishearten me, and it has had that effect to
such a degree, that I know not when I shall find courage to make
another. At present I shall certainly abstain, since at present
I cannot well afford to expose myself to the danger of a fresh
mortification.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 13, 1792.

I began a letter to you yesterday, my dearest brother, and proceeded
through two sides of the sheet, but so much of my nervous fever
found its way into it, that, looking over it this morning, I
determined not to send it.

I have risen, though not in good spirits, yet in better than I
generally do of late, and therefore will not address you in the
melancholy tone that belongs to my worst feelings.

I began to be restless about your portrait, and to say, how long
shall I have to wait for it? I wished it here for many reasons: the
sight of it will be a comfort to me, for I not only love but am
proud of you, as of a conquest made in my old age. Johnny goes to
town on Monday, on purpose to call on Romney, to whom he shall give
all proper information concerning its conveyance hither. The name
of a man whom I esteem as I do Romney, ought not to be unmusical in
my ears; but his name will be so till I shall have paid him a debt
justly due to him, by doing such poetical honours to it as I intend.
Heaven knows when that intention will be executed, for the muse is
still as obdurate and as coy as ever.

Your kind postscript is just arrived, and gives me great pleasure.
When I cannot see you myself, it seems some comfort, however, that
you have been seen by another known to me; and who will tell me in a
few days that he has seen you. Your wishes to disperse my melancholy
would, I am sure, prevail, did that event depend on the warmth and
sincerity with which you frame them; but it has baffled both wishes
and prayers, and those the most fervent that could be made, so many
years, that the case seems hopeless. But no more of this at present.

Your verses to Austen are as sweet as the honey that they accompany:
kind, friendly, witty, and elegant! When shall I be able to do
the like? Perhaps when my Mary, like your Tom, shall cease to be
an invalid, I may recover a power, at least, to do something. I
sincerely rejoice in the dear little man's restoration. My Mary
continues, I hope, to mend a little.

  W. C.


TO MRS. KING.[673]

  [673] Private correspondence.

  Oct. 14, 1792.

My dear Madam,--Your kind inquiries after mine and Mrs. Unwin's
health will not permit me to be silent; though I am and have long
been so indisposed to writing, that even a letter has almost
overtasked me.

Your last but one found me on the point of setting out for Sussex,
whither I went with Mrs. Unwin, on a visit to my friend, Mr. Hayley.
We spent six weeks at Eartham, and returned on the nineteenth of
September. I had hopes that change of air and change of scene
might be serviceable both to my poor invalid and me. She, I hope,
has received some benefit; and I am not the worse for it myself;
but, at the same time, must acknowledge that I cannot boast of
much amendment. The time we spent there could not fail to pass as
agreeably as her weakness, and my spirits, at a low ebb, would
permit. Hayley is one of the most agreeable men, as well as one
of the most cordial friends. His house is elegant; his library
large, and well chosen; and he is surrounded by the most delightful
scenery. But I have made the experiment only to prove, what indeed
I knew before, that creatures are physicians of little value, and
that health and cure are from God only. Henceforth, therefore, I
shall wait for those blessings from Him, and expect them at no other
hand. In the meantime, I have the comfort to be able to tell you
that Mrs. Unwin, on the whole, is restored beyond the most sanguine
expectations I had when I wrote last; and that, as to myself, it
is not much otherwise with me than it has been these twenty years;
except that this season of the year is always unfavourable to my
spirits.

I rejoice that you have had the pleasure of another interview with
Mr. Martyn; and am glad that the trifles I have sent you afforded
him any amusement. This letter has already given you to understand
that I am at present no artificer of verse; and that, consequently,
I have nothing new to communicate. When I have, I shall do it to
none more readily than to yourself.

  My dear madam,
  Very affectionately yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[674]

  [674] Private correspondence.

  Oct. 18, 1792.

My dear Friend,--I thought that the wonder had been all on my side,
having been employed in wondering at your silence, as long as you at
mine. Soon after our arrival at Eartham, I received a letter from
you, which I answered, if not by the return of the post, at least
in a day or two. Not that I should have insisted on the ceremonial
of letter for letter, during so long a period, could I have found
leisure to double your debt; but while there, I had no opportunity
for writing, except now and then a short one; for we breakfasted
early, studied Milton as soon as breakfast was over, and continued
in that employment till Mrs. Unwin came forth from her chamber, to
whom all the rest of my time was necessarily devoted. Our return
to Weston was on the nineteenth of last month, according to your
information. You will naturally think that, in the interval, I must
have had sufficient leisure to give you notice of our safe arrival.
But the fact has been otherwise. I have neither been well myself,
nor is Mrs. Unwin, though better, so much improved in her health
as not still to require my continual assistance. My disorder has
been the old one, to which I have been subject so many years, and
especially about this season--a nervous fever; not, indeed, so
oppressive as it has sometimes proved, but sufficiently alarming
both to Mrs. Unwin and myself, and such as made it neither easy nor
proper for me to make much use of my pen while it continued. At
present I am tolerably free from it; a blessing for which I believe
myself partly indebted to the use of James's powder, in small
quantities; and partly to a small quantity of laudanum, taken every
night; but chiefly to a manifestation of God's presence vouchsafed
to me a few days since; transient, indeed, and dimly seen through a
mist of many fears and troubles, but sufficient to convince me, at
least while the Enemy's power is a little restrained, that He has
not cast me off for ever.

Our visit was a pleasant one; as pleasant as Mrs. Unwin's weakness
and the state of my spirits, never very good, would allow. As to my
own health, I never expected that it would be much improved by the
journey; nor have I found it so. Some benefit, indeed, I hoped; and,
perhaps, a little more than I found. But the season was, after the
first fortnight, extremely unfavourable, stormy, and wet; and the
prospects, though grand and magnificent, yet rather of a melancholy
cast, and consequently not very propitious to me. The cultivated
appearance of Weston suits my frame of mind far better than wild
hills that aspire to be mountains, covered with vast unfrequented
woods, and here and there affording a peep between their summits at
the distant ocean. Within doors all was hospitality and kindness,
but the scenery _would_ have its effect; and, though delightful in
the extreme to those who had spirits to bear it, was too gloomy for
me.

  Yours, my dear friend,
  Most sincerely,
  W. C.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 19, 1792.

My dearest Johnny,--You are too useful when you are here not to be
missed on a hundred occasions daily; and too much domesticated with
us not to be regretted always. I hope, therefore, that your month or
six weeks will not be like many that I have known, capable of being
drawn out into any length whatever, and productive of nothing but
disappointment.

I have done nothing since you went, except that I have composed the
better half of a sonnet to Romney; yet even this ought to bear an
earlier date, for I began to be haunted with a desire to do it long
before we came out of Sussex, and have daily attempted it ever since.

It would be well for the reading part of the world, if the writing
part were, many of them, as dull as I am. Yet even this small
produce, which my sterile intellect has hardly yielded at last, may
serve to convince you that in point of spirits I am not worse.

In fact, I am a little better. The powders and the laudanum together
have, for the present at least, abated the fever that consumes them;
and in measure as the fever abates, I acquire a less discouraging
view of things, and with it a little power to exert myself.

In the evenings I read Baker's Chronicle to Mrs. Unwin, having no
other history, and hope in time to be as well versed in it, as his
admirer Sir Roger de Coverley.

  W. C.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 22, 1792.

My dear Johnny,--Here am I, with I know not how many letters to
answer, and no time to do it in. I exhort you, therefore, to set a
proper value on this, as proving your priority in my attentions,
though in other respects likely to be of little value.

You do well to sit for your picture, and give very sufficient
reasons for doing it; you will also, I doubt not, take care that,
when future generations shall look at it, some spectator or other
shall say, this is the picture of a good man and a useful one.

And now God bless you, my dear Johnny. I proceed much after the
old rate; rising cheerless and distressed in the morning, and
brightening a little as the day goes on.

  Adieu,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 28, 1792.

Nothing done, my dearest brother, nor likely to be done at present;
yet I purpose in a day or two to make another attempt, to which,
however, I shall address myself with fear and trembling, like
a man who, having sprained his wrist, dreads to use it. I have
not, indeed, like such a man, injured myself by any extraordinary
exertion, but seem as much enfeebled as if I had. The consciousness
that there is so much to do, and nothing done, is a burden I am not
able to bear. Milton especially is my grievance, and I might almost
as well be haunted by his ghost as goaded with continual reproaches
for neglecting him. I will therefore begin; I will do my best;
and if, after all, that best prove good for nothing, I will even
send the notes, worthless as they are, that I have made already;
a measure very disagreeable to myself, and to which nothing but
necessity shall compel me. I shall rejoice to see those new samples
of your biography,[675] which you give me to expect.

  [675] Hayley's Life of Milton.

Allons! Courage!--Here comes something however; produced after
a gestation as long as that of a pregnant woman. It is the debt
long unpaid, the compliment due to Romney; and if it has your
approbation, I will send it, or you may send it for me. I must
premise, however, that I intended nothing less than a sonnet when
I began. I know not why, but I said to myself, it shall not be a
sonnet; accordingly I attempted it in one sort of measure, then in a
second, then in a third, till I had made the trial in half a dozen
different kinds of shorter verse, and behold it is a sonnet at last.
The fates would have it so.


TO GEORGE ROMNEY, ESQ.

    Romney! expert infallibly to trace,
    On chart or canvas, not the form alone,
    And semblance, but, however faintly shown,
    The mind's impression too on every face,
    With strokes, that time ought never to erase:
    Thou hast so pencill'd mine, that though I own
    The subject worthless, I have never known
    The artist shining with superior grace.

    But this I mark, that symptoms none of woe
    In thy incomparable work appear:
    Well! I am satisfied, it should be so,
    Since, on maturer thought, the cause is clear;

For in my looks what sorrow coulds't thou see, While I was Hayley's
guest, and sat to thee?

  W. C.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.[676]

  [676] Private correspondence.

  Nov. 5, 1792.

My dearest Johnny,--I have done nothing since you went, except that
I have finished the Sonnet which I told you I had begun, and sent
it to Hayley, who is well pleased _therewith_, and has by this time
transmitted it to whom it most concerns.

I would not give the algebraist sixpence for his encomiums on
my Task, if he condemns my Homer, which, I know, in point of
language, is equal to it, and in variety of numbers superior. But
the character of the former having been some years established, he
follows the general cry; and should Homer establish himself as well,
and I trust he will hereafter, I shall have his warm suffrage for
that also. But if not--it is no matter. Swift says somewhere,--There
are a few good judges of poetry in the world, who lend their taste
to those who have none: and your man of figures is probably one of
the borrowers.

Adieu--in great haste. Our united love attends yourself and yours,
whose I am most truly and affectionately.

  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Weston, Nov. 9, 1792.

My dear Friend,--I wish that I were as industrious and as much
occupied as you, though in a different way; but it is not so with
me. Mrs. Unwin's great debility (who is not yet able to move without
assistance) is of itself a hindrance such as would effectually
disable me. Till she can work, and read, and fill up her time as
usual (all which is at present entirely out of her power) I may now
and then find time to write a letter, but I shall write nothing
more. I cannot sit with my pen in my hand and my books before me,
while she is in effect in solitude, silent, and looking at the
fire. To this hindrance that other has been added, of which you are
already aware, a want of spirits, such as I have never known, when
I was not absolutely laid by, since I commenced an author. How long
I shall be continued in these uncomfortable circumstances is known
only to Him who, as he will, disposes of us all. I may be yet able,
perhaps, to prepare the first book of the Paradise Lost for the
press, before it will be wanted; and Johnson himself seems to think
there will be no haste for the second. But poetry is my favourite
employment, and all my poetical operations are in the meantime
suspended; for, while a work to which I have bound myself remains
unaccomplished, I can do nothing else.

Johnson's plan of prefixing my phiz to the new edition of my poems
is by no means a pleasant one to me, and so I told him in a letter
I sent him from Eartham, in which I assured him that my objections
to it would not be easily surmounted. But if you judge that it may
really have an effect in advancing the sale, I would not be so
squeamish as to suffer the spirit of prudery to prevail in me to his
disadvantage. Somebody told an author, I forget whom, that there was
more vanity in refusing his picture than in granting it, on which
he instantly complied. I do not perfectly feel all the force of the
argument, but it shall content me that he did.

I do most sincerely rejoice in the success of your publication,[677]
and have no doubt that my prophecy concerning your success in
greater matters will be fulfilled. We are naturally pleased when our
friends approve what we approve ourselves; how much then must I be
pleased, when you speak so kindly of Johnny! I know him to be all
that you think him, and love him entirely.

  [677] Decisions of the English Courts.

Adieu! We expect you at Christmas, and shall therefore rejoice when
Christmas comes. Let nothing interfere.

  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[678]

  [678] Private correspondence.

  Nov. 11, 1792.

My dear Friend,--I am not so insensible of your kindness in making
me an exception from the number of your correspondents, to whom
you forbid the hope of hearing from you till your present labours
are ended, as to make you wait longer for an answer to your last;
which, indeed, would have had its answer before this time, had it
been possible for me to write. But so many have demands upon me
of a similar kind, and, while Mrs. Unwin continues an invalid, my
opportunities of writing are so few, that I am constrained to incur
a long arrear to some, with whom I would wish to be punctual. She
can at present neither work nor read; and, till she can do both,
and amuse herself as usual, my own amusements of the pen must be
suspended.

I, like you, have a work before me, and a work to which I should
be glad to address myself in earnest, but cannot do it at present.
When the opportunity comes, I shall, like you, be under a necessity
of interdicting some of my usual correspondents, and of shortening
my letters to the excepted few. Many letters and much company are
incompatible with authorship, and the one as much as the other. It
will be long, I hope, before the world is put in possession of a
publication, which you design should be posthumous.

Oh for the day when your expectations of my complete deliverance
shall be verified! At present it seems very remote: so distant,
indeed, that hardly the faintest streak of it is visible in my
horizon. The glimpse, with which I was favoured about a month since,
has never been repeated; and the depression of my spirits has. The
future appears gloomy as ever; and I seem to myself to be scrambling
always in the dark, among rocks and precipices, without a guide, but
with an enemy ever at my heels, prepared to push me headlong. Thus
I have spent twenty years, but thus I shall not spend twenty years
more. Long ere that period arrives, the grand question concerning my
everlasting weal or woe will be decided.

Adieu, my dear friend. I have exhausted my time, though not filled
my paper.

  Truly yours,
  W. C.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, Nov. 20, 1792.

My dearest Johnny,--I give you many thanks for your rhymes, and
your verses without rhyme; for your poetical dialogue between wood
and stone: between Homer's head, and the head of Samuel; kindly
intended, I know very well, for my amusement, and that amused me
much.

The successor of the clerk defunct, for whom I used to write,
arrived here this morning, with a recommendatory letter from Joe
Rye, and an humble petition of his own, entreating me to assist him
as I had assisted his predecessor. I have undertaken the service,
although with no little reluctance, being involved in many arrears
on other subjects, and having very little dependence at present
on my ability to write at all. I proceed exactly as when you were
here--a letter now and then before breakfast, and the rest of my
time all holiday; if holiday it may be called, that is spent chiefly
in moping and musing, and "_forecasting the fashion of uncertain
evils_."

The fever on my spirits has harassed me much, and I have never had
so good a night, nor so quiet a rising, since you went, as on this
very morning; a relief that I account particularly seasonable and
propitious, because I had, in my intentions, devoted this morning to
you, and could not have fulfilled those intentions, had I been as
spiritless as I generally am.

I am glad that Johnson is in no haste for Milton, for I seem myself
not likely to address myself presently to that concern, with any
prospect of success; yet something now and then, like a secret
whisper, assures and encourages me that it will yet be done.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Nov. 25, 1792.

How shall I thank you enough for the interest you take in my
future Miltonic labours, and the assistance you promise me in the
performance of them; I will some time or other, if I live, and live
a poet, acknowledge your friendship in some of my best verse; the
most suitable return one poet can make to another: in the meantime,
I love you, and am sensible of all your kindness. You wish me warm
in my work, and I ardently wish the same: but when I shall be so God
only knows. My melancholy, which seemed a little alleviated for a
few days, has gathered about me again with as black a cloud as ever;
the consequence is absolute incapacity to begin.

I was for some years dirge-writer to the town of Northampton, being
employed by the clerk of the principal parish there to furnish him
with an annual copy of verses proper to be printed at the foot of
his bill of mortality; but the clerk died, and, hearing nothing for
two years from his successor, I well hoped that I was out of my
office. The other morning however Sam announced the new clerk; he
came to solicit the same service as I had rendered his predecessor,
and I reluctantly complied; doubtful, indeed, whether I was capable.
I have however achieved that labour, and I have done nothing more.
I am just sent for up to Mary, dear Mary! Adieu! she is as well
as when I left you, I would I could say better. Remember us both
affectionately to your sweet boy, and trust me for being

  Most truly yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[679]

  [679] Private correspondence.

  Dec. 9, 1792.

My dear Friend,--You need not be uneasy on the subject of Milton. I
shall not find that labour too heavy for me, if I have health and
leisure. The season of the year is unfavourable to me respecting
the former; and Mrs. Unwin's present weakness allows me less of the
latter than the occasion seems to call for. But the business is in
no haste. The artists employed to furnish the embellishments are
not likely to be very expeditious; and a small portion only of the
work will be wanted from me at once; for the intention is to deal
it out to the public piece-meal. I am, therefore, under no great
anxiety on that account. It is not, indeed, an employment that I
should have chosen for myself; because poetry pleases and amuses me
more, and would cost me less labour, properly so called. All this I
felt before I engaged with Johnson; and did, in the first instance,
actually decline the service; but he was urgent; and, at last, I
suffered myself to be persuaded.

The season of the year, as I have already said, is particularly
adverse to me: yet not in itself, perhaps, more adverse than any
other; but the approach of it always reminds me of the same season
in the dreadful seventy-three, and in the more dreadful eighty-six.
I cannot help terrifying myself with doleful misgivings and
apprehensions; nor is the enemy negligent to seize all the advantage
that the occasion gives him. Thus, hearing much from him, and having
little or no sensible support from God, I suffer inexpressible
things till January is over. And even then, whether increasing years
have made me more liable to it, or despair, the longer it lasts,
grows naturally darker, I find myself more inclined to melancholy
than I was a few years since. God only knows where this will end;
but where it is likely to end, unless he interpose powerfully in my
favour, all may know.

  I remain, my dear friend, most sincerely yours,
  W. C.


TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.

  Weston, Dec. 16, 1792.

My dear Sir,--We differ so little, that it is pity we should not
agree. The possibility of restoring our diseased government is, I
think, the only point on which we are not of one mind. If you are
right, and it cannot be touched in the medical way, without danger
of absolute ruin to the constitution, keep the doctors at a distance
say I--and let us live as long as we can. But perhaps physicians
might be found of skill sufficient for the purpose, were they but
as willing as able. Who are they? Not those honest blunderers, the
mob, but our governors themselves. As it is in the power of any
individual to be honest if he will, any body of men are, as it
seems to me, equally possessed of the same option. For I can never
persuade myself to think the world so constituted by the Author of
it, and human society, which is his ordinance, so shabby a business,
that the buying and selling of votes and consciences should be
essential to its existence. As to multiplied representation I know
not that I foresee any great advantage likely to arise from that.
Provided there be but a reasonable number of reasonable heads laid
together for the good of the nation, the end may as well be answered
by five hundred as it would be by a thousand, and perhaps better.
But then they should be honest as well as wise, and, in order that
they may be so, they should put it out of their own power to be
otherwise. This they might certainly do if they would; and, would
they do it, I am not convinced that any great mischief would ensue.
You say, "somebody must have influence," but I see no necessity
for it. Let integrity of intention and a due share of ability be
supposed, and the influence will be in the right place; it will all
centre in the zeal and good of the nation. That will influence their
debates and decisions, and nothing else ought to do it. You will
say, perhaps, that wise men, and honest men, as they are supposed,
they are yet liable to be split into almost as many differences of
opinion as there are individuals; but I rather think not. It is
observed of Prince Eugene and the Duke of Marlborough, that each
always approved and seconded the plans and views of the other; and
the reason given for it is that they were men of equal ability. The
same cause that could make two unanimous would make twenty so, and
would at least secure a majority among as many hundreds.

As to the reformation of the church, I want none, unless by a better
provision for the inferior clergy; and, if that could be brought
about by emaciating a little some of our too corpulent dignitaries,
I should be well contented.

The dissenters, I think, Catholics and others, have all a right
to the privileges of all other Englishmen, because to deprive them
is persecution, and persecution on any account, but especially
on a religious one, is an abomination. But after all, _valeat
respublica_. I love my country, I love my king, and I wish peace and
prosperity to Old England.[680]

  Adieu,
  W. C.

  [680] The question of a Reform in Parliament was at this time
  beginning to engage the public attention, and Mr. Grey (now
  Earl Grey) had recently announced his intention in the House
  of Commons of bringing forward that important subject in the
  ensuing session of Parliament. It was accordingly submitted to
  the House, May 6th, 1793, when Mr. Grey delivered his sentiments
  at considerable length, embodying many of the topics now so
  familiar to the public, but by no means pursuing the principle to
  the extent since adopted. The debate lasted till two o'clock in
  the morning, when it was adjourned to the following day. After
  a renewed discussion, which continued till four in the morning,
  the House divided, when the numbers were as follow, viz. Ayes 40,
  Noes 282.

  It is interesting to mark this first commencement of the popular
  question of Reform (if we except Mr. Pitt's measure, in 1782)
  and to contrast its slow progress with the final issue, under
  the same leader, in the year 1832. The minority for several
  successive years seldom exceeded the amount above specified,
  though the measure was at length carried by so large a majority.


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  Weston-Underwood, Dec. 17, 1792.

My dear Sir,--You are very kind in thinking it worth while to
inquire after so irregular a correspondent. When I had read your
last, I persuaded myself that I had answered your obliging letter
received while I was at Eartham, and seemed clearly to remember it;
but upon better recollection, am inclined to think myself mistaken,
and that I have many pardons to ask for neglecting to do it so long.

While I was at Mr. Hayley's I could hardly find opportunity to
write to anybody. He is an early riser and breakfasts early, and
unless I could rise early enough myself to despatch a letter before
breakfast, I had no leisure to do it at all. For immediately after
breakfast we repaired to the library, where we studied in concert
till noon; and the rest of my time was so occupied by necessary
attention to my poor invalid, Mrs. Unwin, and by various other
engagements, that to write was impossible.

Since my return, I have been almost constantly afflicted with
weak and inflamed eyes, and indeed have wanted spirits as well
as leisure. If you can, therefore, you must pardon me; and you
will do it perhaps the rather, when I assure you that not you
alone, but every person and every thing that had demands upon me
has been equally neglected. A strange weariness that has long had
dominion over me has indisposed and indeed disqualified me for all
employment;[681] and my hindrances besides have been such that I am
sadly in arrear in all quarters. A thousand times I have been sorry
and ashamed that your MSS. are yet unrevised, and if you knew the
compunction that it has cost me, you would pity me: for I feel as if
I were guilty in that particular, though my conscience tells me that
it could not be otherwise.

  [681] This expression alludes to the nervous fever and great
  depression of spirits that Cowper laboured under, in the months
  of October and November, and which has been frequently mentioned
  in the preceding correspondence.

Before I received your letter written from Margate, I had formed
a resolution never to be engraven, and was confirmed in it by my
friend Hayley's example. But, learning since, though I have not
learned it from himself, that my bookseller has an intention to
prefix a copy of Abbot's picture of me[682] to the next edition of
my poems, at his own expense, if I can be prevailed upon to consent
to it; in consideration of the liberality of his behaviour, I have
felt my determination shaken. This intelligence, however, comes to
me from a third person, and till it reaches me in a direct line from
Johnson, I can say nothing to _him_ about it. When he shall open
to me his intentions himself, I will not be backward to mention to
him your obliging offer, and shall be particularly gratified, if I
must be engraved at last, to have that service performed for me by a
friend.

  [682] There were three portraits of Cowper, taken respectively
  by Sir Thomas Lawrence, Abbot, and Romney. The reader may be
  anxious to learn which is entitled to be considered the best
  resemblance. The editor is able to satisfy this inquiry, on the
  joint authority of the three most competent witnesses, the late
  Rev. Dr. Johnson, the present Dowager Lady Throckmorton, and John
  Higgins, Esq., formerly of Weston. They all agree in assigning
  the superiority to the portrait by Abbot; and in evidence of
  this, all have repeated the anecdote mentioned by Cowper, of his
  dog Beau going up to the picture, and shaking his tail, in token
  of recognition. It is an exact resemblance of his form, features,
  manner, and costume. That by Romney was said to resemble him _at
  the moment it was taken_, but it was his _then_ look, not his
  customary and more placid features. There is an air of wildness
  in it, expressive of a disordered mind, and which the shock,
  produced by the paralytic attack of Mrs. Unwin, was rapidly
  impressing on his countenance. This portrait has always been
  considered as awakening distressing emotions in the beholder. The
  portrait by Sir Thomas Lawrence is the most pleasing, but not so
  exact and faithful a resemblance. There is however a character of
  peculiar interest in it, and he is represented in the cap which
  he was accustomed to wear in a morning, presented to him by Lady
  Hesketh. It was on this picture that the following beautiful
  lines were composed by the late Rev. Dr. Randolph.


  ON SEEING A SKETCH OF COWPER BY LAWRENCE.

    Sweet bard! whose mind, thus pictured in thy face,
    O'er every feature spreads a nobler grace;
    Whose keen, but softened eye appears to dart
    A look of pity through the human heart;
    To search the secrets of man's inward frame,
    To weep with sorrow o'er his guilt and shame;
    Sweet bard! with whom, in sympathy of choice,
    I've ofttimes left the world at Nature's voice,
    To join the song that all her creatures raise,
    To carol forth their great Creator's praise;
    Or, 'rapt in visions of immortal day,
    Have gazed on Truth in Zion's heavenly way:
    Sweet Bard!--may this thine image, all I know,
    Or ever may, of Cowper's form below,
    Teach one who views it with a Christian's love,
    To seek and find thee, in the realms above.

I thank you for the anecdote,[683] which could not fail to
be very pleasant, and remain, my dear sir, with gratitude and
affection,

Yours,
W. C.

  [683] The Hon. Mrs. Boscawen had expressed her regret that Cowper
  should employ his time and talents in translation, instead of
  original composition; accompanied by a wish that he would produce
  another 'Task,' adverting to what Pope had made his friend
  exclaim,

  "Do write next winter more 'Essays on Man.'"



TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Dec. 26, 1792.

That I may not be silent, till my silence alarms you, I snatch
a moment to tell you, that although _toujours triste_ I am
not worse than usual, but my opportunities of writing are
_paucified_, as, perhaps, Dr. Johnson would have dared to say,
and the few that I have are shortened by company.

Give my love to dear Tom, and thank him for his very apposite
extract, which I should be happy indeed to turn to any account.
How often do I wish, in the course of every day, that I could
be employed once more in poetry, and how often, of course, that
this Miltonic trap had never caught me! The year ninety-two
shall stand chronicled in my remembrance as the most melancholy
that I have ever known, except the few weeks that I spent at
Eartham; and such it has been principally because, being engaged
to Milton, I felt myself no longer free for any other engagement.
That ill-fated work, impracticable in itself, has made every
thing else impracticable.

... I am very Pindaric, and obliged to be so by the hurry of the
hour. My friends are come down to breakfast.

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  Weston-Underwood, Jan. 3, 1793.

My dear Sir,--A few lines must serve to introduce to you
my much-valued friend Mr. Rose, and to thank you for your
very obliging attention in sending me so approved a remedy
for my disorder. It is no fault of yours, but it will be
a disappointment to you to know, that I have long been in
possession of that remedy, and have tried it without effect;
or, to speak more truly, with an unfavourable one. Judging by
the pain it causes, I conclude that it is of the caustic kind,
and may, therefore, be sovereign in cases where the eyelids are
ulcerated; but mine is a dry inflammation, which it has always
increased as often as I have used it. I used it again, after
having long since resolved to use it no more, that I might not
seem, even to myself, to slight your kindness, but with no better
effect than in every former instance.

You are very candid in crediting so readily the excuse I make
for not having yet revised your MSS., and as kind in allowing
me still longer time. I refer you for a more particular account
of the circumstances that make all literary pursuits at present
impracticable to me, to the young gentleman who delivers this
into your hands.[684] He is perfectly master of the subject,
having just left me after having spent a fortnight with us.

  [684] Mr. Rose.

You asked me a long time since a question concerning the Olney
Hymns, which I do not remember that I have ever answered. Those
marked C. are mine, one excepted, which, though it bears that mark,
was written by Mr. Newton. I have not the collection at present, and
therefore cannot tell you which it is.

You must extend your charity still a little farther, and excuse a
short answer to your two obliging letters. I do every thing with my
pen in a hurry, but will not conclude without entreating you to make
my thanks and best compliments to the lady,[685] who was so good as
to trouble herself for my sake to write a character of the medicine.

  I remain, my dear sir,
  Sincerely yours,
  W. C.

  [685] Mrs. Haden, formerly governess to the daughters of Lord
  Eardley.

Your request does me honour. Johnson will have orders in a few days
to send a copy of the edition just published.[686]

  [686] The fifth edition of Cowper's Poems.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Jan. 20, 1793.

My dear Brother,--Now I know that you are safe, I treat you, as
you see, with a philosophical indifference, not acknowledging your
kind and immediate answer to anxious inquiries, till it suits my
own convenience. I have learned, however, from my late solicitude,
that not only you, but yours, interest me to a degree, that, should
any thing happen to either of you, would be very inconsistent with
my peace. Sometimes I thought that you were extremely ill, and once
or twice that you were dead. As often some tragedy reached my ear
concerning little Tom. "Oh, _vanæ mentes hominum_!" How liable are
we to a thousand impositions, and how indebted to honest old Time,
who never fails to undeceive us! Whatever you had in prospect, you
acted kindly by me not to make me partaker of your expectations;
for I have a spirit, if not so sanguine as yours, yet that would
have waited for your coming with anxious impatience, and have been
dismally mortified by the disappointment. Had you come, and come
without notice too, you would not have surprised us more, than (as
the matter was managed) we were surprised at the arrival of your
picture. It reached us in the evening, after the shutters were
closed, at a time when a chaise might actually have brought you
without giving us the least previous intimation. Then it was, that
Samuel, with his cheerful countenance, appeared at the study door,
and with a voice as cheerful as his looks, exclaimed, "Mr. Hayley
is come, madam!" We both started, and in the same moment cried,
"Mr. Hayley come! And where is he?" The next moment corrected our
mistake, and, finding Mary's voice grow suddenly tremulous, I turned
and saw her weeping.

I do nothing, notwithstanding all your exhortations: my idleness
is proof against them all, or to speak more truly, my difficulties
are so. Something indeed I do. I play at pushpin with Homer every
morning before breakfast, fingering and polishing, as Paris did his
armour. I have lately had a letter from Dublin on that subject,
which has pleased me.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Jan. 29, 1793.

My dearest Hayley,--I truly sympathize with you under your weight
of sorrow for the loss of our good Samaritan.[687] But be not
broken-hearted, my friend! Remember the loss of those we love is the
condition on which we live ourselves; and that he who chooses his
friends wisely from among the excellent of the earth, has a sure
ground to hope concerning them when they die, that a merciful God
has made them far happier than they could be here, and that we shall
join them soon again. This is solid comfort, could we but avail
ourselves of it; but I confess the difficulty of doing so. Sorrow is
like the deaf adder, "that hears not the voice of the charmer, charm
he never so wisely;" and I feel so much myself for the death of
Austen, that my own chief consolation is, that I had never seen him.
Live yourself, I beseech you, for I have seen so much of you that
I can by no means spare you, and I will live as long as it shall
please God to permit. I know you set some value on me, therefore
let that promise comfort you, and give us not reason to say, like
David's servant--"We know that it would have pleased thee more if
all we had died, than this one, for whom thou art inconsolable." You
have still Romney, and Carwardine, and Guy, and me, my poor Mary,
and I know not how many beside; as many, I suppose, as ever had an
opportunity of spending a day with you. He who has the most friends
must necessarily lose the most, and he whose friends are numerous
as yours may the better spare a part of them. It is a changing,
transient scene: yet a little while, and this poor dream of life
will be over with all of us. The living, and they who live unhappy,
they are indeed subjects of sorrow.

  Adieu! my beloved friend.
  Ever yours,
  W. C.

  [687] Dr. Austen, who is here alluded to, was not less
  distinguished for his humane and benevolent qualities, than for
  his professional skill and eminence.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.[688]

  [688] Private correspondence.

  Jan. 31, 1793.
  _Io Pæan!_

My dearest Johnny,--Even as you foretold, so it came to pass. On
Tuesday I received your letter, and on Tuesday came the pheasants;
for which I am indebted in many thanks, as well as Mrs. Unwin, both
to your kindness and to your kind friend Mr. Copeman.

    In Copeman's ear this truth let Echo tell,--
    "Immortal bards like mortal pheasants well:"
    And when his clerkship's out, I wish him herds
    Of golden clients for his golden birds.

Our friends the Courtenays have never dined with us since their
marriage, _because_ we have never asked them; and we have never
asked them, _because_ poor Mrs. Unwin is not so equal to the task of
providing for and entertaining company as before this last illness.
But this is no objection to the arrival here of a bustard; rather
it is a cause for which we shall be particularly glad to see the
monster. It will be a handsome present to _them_. So let the bustard
come, as the Lord Mayor of London said of the hare, when he was
hunting--let her come, a' God's name: I am not afraid of her.

Adieu, my dear cousin and caterer. My eyes are terribly bad; else, I
had much more to say to you.

  Ever affectionately yours,
  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Weston, Feb. 5, 1793.

In this last revisal of my work (the Homer) I have made a number
of small improvements, and am now more convinced than ever, having
exercised a cooler judgment upon it than before I could, that
the translation will make its way. There must be time for the
conquest of vehement and long-rooted prejudice; but, without much
self-partiality, I believe, that the conquest will be made; and am
certain that I should be of the same opinion, were the work another
man's. I shall soon have finished the Odyssey, and when I have, will
send the corrected copy of both to Johnson.

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  Weston, Feb. 10, 1793.

    My pens are all split, and my ink-glass is dry;
    Neither wit, common-sense, nor ideas have I.

In vain has it been, that I have made several attempts to write,
since I came from Sussex; unless more comfortable days arrive than
I have confidence to look for, there is an end of all writing with
me. I have no spirits:--when Rose came, I was obliged to prepare for
his coming by a nightly dose of laudanum--twelve drops suffice; but
without them, I am devoured by melancholy.

A-propos of the Rose! His wife in her political notions is the exact
counterpart of yourself--loyal in the extreme. Therefore, if you
find her thus inclined, when you become acquainted with her, you
must not place her resemblance of yourself to the account of her
admiration of you, for she is your likeness ready made. In fact, we
are all of one mind about government matters, and notwithstanding
your opinion, the Rose is himself a Whig, and I am a Whig, and you,
my dear, are a Tory, and all the Tories now-a-days call all the
Whigs republicans. How the deuce you came to be a Tory is best known
to yourself: you have to answer for this novelty to the shades of
your ancestors, who were always Whigs ever since we had any.

  Adieu.
  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Weston, Feb. 17, 1793.

My dear Friend,--I have read the critique of my work in the
_Analytical Review_, and am happy to have fallen into the hands
of a critic, rigorous enough indeed, but a scholar, and a man of
sense, and who does not deliberately intend me mischief. I am
better pleased indeed that he censures some things than I should
have been with unmixed commendation, for his censure (to use the
new diplomatic term) will accredit his praises. In his particular
remarks he is for the most part right, and I shall be the better
for them; but in his general ones I think he asserts too largely,
and more than he could prove. With respect to inversions in
particular, I know that they do not abound. Once they did, and I
had Milton's example for it, not disapproved by Addison. But on
----'s remonstrance against them, I expunged the most, and in my
new edition shall have fewer still. I know that they give dignity,
and am sorry to part with them; but, to parody an old proverb,
he who lives in the year ninety-three, must do as in the year
ninety-three is done by others. The same remark I have to make on
his censure of inharmonious lines. I know them to be much fewer than
he asserts, and not more in number than I accounted indispensably
necessary to a due variation of cadence. I have, however, now, in
conformity with modern taste, (over much delicate in my mind,) given
to a far greater number of them a flow as smooth as oil. A few I
retain, and will, in compliment to my own judgment. He thinks me too
faithful to compound epithets in the introductory lines, and I know
his reason. He fears lest the English reader should blame Homer,
whom he idolizes, though hardly more than I, for such constant
repetition. But them I shall not alter. They are necessary to a
just representation of the original. In the affair of Outis,[689] I
shall throw him flat on his back by an unanswerable argument, which
I shall give in a note, and with which I am furnished by Mrs. Unwin.
So much for hypercriticism, which has run away with all my paper.
This critic, by the way, is ----;[690] I know him by infallible
indications.

  W. C.

  [689] A name given to Ulysses.

  [690] Maty.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, Feb. 22, 1793.

My dear Sir,--My eyes, which have long been inflamed, will hardly
serve for Homer, and oblige me to make all my letters short. You
have obliged me much, by sending me so speedily the remainder of
your notes. I have begun with them again, and find them, as before,
very much to the purpose. More to the purpose they could not have
been, had you been poetry professor already. I rejoice sincerely
in the prospect you have of that office, which, whatever may be
your own thoughts of the matter, I am sure you will fill with great
sufficiency. Would that my interest and power to serve you were
greater! One string to my bow I have, and one only, which shall not
be idle for want of my exertions. I thank you likewise for your very
entertaining notices and remarks in the natural way. The hurry in
which I write would not suffer me to send you many in return, had I
many to send, but only two or three present themselves.

Frogs will feed on worms. I saw a frog gathering into his gullet an
earth-worm as long as himself; it cost him time and labour, but at
last he succeeded.

Mrs. Unwin and I, crossing a brook, saw from the foot-bridge
somewhat at the bottom of the water which had the appearance of a
flower. Observing it attentively, we found that it consisted of a
circular assemblage of minnows; their heads all met in a centre,
and their tails, diverging at equal distances, and being elevated
above their heads, gave them the appearance of a flower half blown.
One was longer than the rest, and as often as a straggler came in
sight, he quitted his place to pursue him, and having driven him
away, he returned to it again, and no other minnow offering to take
it in his absence. This we saw him do several times. The object that
had attached them all was a dead minnow, which they seemed to be
devouring.

After a very rainy day, I saw on one of the flower borders what
seemed a long hair, but it had a waving, twining motion. Considering
more nearly, I found it alive, and endued with spontaneity, but
could not discover at the ends of it either head or tail, or any
distinction of parts. I carried it into the house, when the air of a
warm room dried and killed it presently.

  W.C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Feb. 24, 1793.

Your letter (so full of kindness and so exactly in unison with my
own feelings for you) should have had, as it deserved to have, an
earlier answer, had I not been perpetually tortured with inflamed
eyes, which are a sad hindrance to me in everything. But, to make
amends, if I do not send you an early answer, I send you at least a
speedy one, being obliged to write as fast as my pen can trot, that
I may shorten the time of poring upon paper as much as possible.
Homer too has been another hindrance, for always when I can see,
which is only about two hours every morning, and not at all by
candle-light, I devote myself to him, being in haste to send him
a second time to the press, that nothing may stand in the way of
Milton. By the way, where are my dear Tom's remarks, which I long to
have, and must have soon, or they will come too late?

Oh, you rogue! what would you give to have such a dream about Milton
as I had about a week since? I dreamed that, being in a house in
the city, and with much company, looking towards the lower end
of the room from the upper end of it, I descried a figure which
I immediately knew to be Milton's. He was very gravely but very
neatly attired in the fashion of his day, and had a countenance
which filled me with those feelings that an affectionate child has
for a beloved father,--such, for instance, as Tom has for you. My
first thought was wonder, where he could have been concealed so
many years; my second, a transport of joy to find him still alive;
my third, another transport to find myself in his company; and my
fourth, a resolution to accost him. I did so, and he received me
with a complacence in which I saw equal sweetness and dignity. I
spoke of his Paradise Lost as every man must who is worthy to speak
of it at all, and told him a long story of the manner in which
it affected me when I first discovered it, being at that time a
school-boy. He answered me by a smile, and a gentle inclination of
his head. He then grasped my hand affectionately, and with a smile
that charmed me, said, "Well, you for your part will do well also;"
at last, recollecting his great age (for I understood him to be
two hundred years old) I feared that I might fatigue him by much
talking, I took my leave, and he took his with an air of the most
perfect good-breeding. His person, his features, his manner, were
all so perfectly characteristic, that I am persuaded an apparition
of him could not represent him more completely. This may be said to
have been one of the dreams of Pindus, may it not?[691]

  [691] Whether this is a poetical or real dream of Cowper's,
  we presume not to decide. It bears so strong a resemblance to
  Milton's vision of the Bishop of Winchester, (the celebrated
  Dr. Andrews,) as to suggest the probability of having been
  borrowed from that source. The passage is to be found in Milton's
  beautiful Latin elegy on the death of that prelate, and is thus
  translated by Cowper:

    "While I that splendour, and the mingled shade
    Of fruitful vines with wonder fixt survey'd,
    At once, with looks, that beam'd celestial grace,
    The seer of Winton stood before my face.
    His snowy vesture's hem descending low
    His golden sandals swept, and pure as snow
    New-fallen shone the mitre on his brow.
    Where'er he trod a tremulous sweet sound
    Of gladness shook the flow'ry scene around:
    Attendant angels clap their starry wings,
    The trumpet shakes the sky, all æther rings,
    Each chaunts his welcome, ...
    Then night retired, and, chas'd by dawning day,
    The visionary bliss pass'd all away:
    I mourn'd my banish'd sleep with fond concern,
    Frequent to me may dreams like this return."

How truly I rejoice that you have recovered Guy! That man won my
heart the moment I saw him: give my love to him, and tell him I
am truly glad he is alive again.

There is much sweetness in those lines from the sonneteer of
Avon, and not a little in dear Tom's: an earnest, I trust, of
good things to come!

With Mary's kind love, I must now conclude myself, My dear
brother, ever yours,

LIPPUS.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston, March 4, 1793.

My dear Friend,--Since I received your last I have been much
indisposed, very blind, and very busy. But I have not suffered
all these evils at one and the same time. While the winter lasted
I was miserable with a fever on my spirits; when the spring began
to approach I was seized with an inflammation in my eyes, and
ever since I have been able to use them, have been employed in
giving more last touches to Homer, who is on the point of going
to the press again.

Though you are Tory, I believe, and I am Whig, our sentiments
concerning the madcaps of France are much the same. They are
a terrible race, and I have a horror both of them and their
principles.[692] Tacitus is certainly living now, and the
quotations you sent me can be nothing but extracts from some
letters of his to yourself.

Yours, most sincerely,
W. C.

  [692] Louis XVI. the unhappy King of France, had recently
  perished on the scaffold, Jan. 21, 1793.



We have already mentioned the interest excited in Cowper's mind by
a son of Hayley's, a youth of not more than twelve years of age,
and of most promising talents. At Cowper's request he addressed to
him the subjoined letter, containing criticisms on his Homer, which
do honour to his taste and acuteness. The poet's reply may also be
regarded as a proof of his kind condescension and amiable sweetness
of temper.


TO WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.

  Eartham, March 4, 1793.

Honoured King of Bards,--Since you deign to demand the observations
of an humble and inexperienced servant of yours, on a work of one
who is so much his superior (as he is ever ready to serve you with
all his might), behold what you demand! But let me desire you not to
censure me for my unskilful and perhaps (as they will undoubtedly
appear to you) ridiculous observations; but be so kind as to receive
them as a mark of respectful affection from

  Your obedient servant,
  THOMAS HAYLEY.

  Book.   Line.

   I.      184  I cannot reconcile myself to these
           195    expressions, "Ah cloth'd with
                  impudence," &c., and "Shameless
           196    wolf," and "Face of flint."
   I.      508  "Dishonoured foul," is, in my opinion,
                  an uncleanly expression.
   I.      651  "Reel'd," I think makes it appear
                  as if Olympus was drunk.
   I.      749  "Kindler of the fires of Heaven,"
                  I think makes Jupiter appear
                  too much like a lamp-lighter.
  II.      317  These lines are, in my opinion, below
        to 319    the elevated genius of Mr.
                  Cowper.
  XVIII.   300  This appears to me to be rather
                  Irish, since in line 300 you say,
                  "No one sat," and in line 304,
                  "Polydamas rose."


TO MR. THOMAS HAYLEY.

  Weston, March 14, 1793.

My dear little Critic,--I thank you heartily for your observations,
on which I set a higher value, because they have instructed me as
much, and have entertained me more, than all the other strictures
of our public judges in these matters. Perhaps I am not much more
pleased with _shameless wolf_, &c., than you. But what is to be
done, my little man? Coarse as the expressions are, they are no more
than equivalent to those of Homer. The invective of the ancients was
never tempered with good manners, as your papa can tell you; and my
business, you know, is not to be more polite than my author, but to
represent him as closely as I can.

_Dishonour'd foul_ I have wiped away, for the reason you give, which
is a very just one, and the present reading is this,

    Who had dared dishonour thus
    The life itself, &c.

Your objection to _kindler of the fires of heaven_ I had the good
fortune to anticipate, and expunged the dirty ambiguity some time
since, wondering not a little that I had ever admitted it.

The fault you find with the two first verses of Nestor's speech
discovers such a degree of just discernment that, but for your
papa's assurance to the contrary, I must have suspected _him_ as the
author of that remark: much as I should have respected it, if it had
been so, I value it, I assure you, my little friend, still more as
yours. In the new edition the passage will be found thus altered:

    Alas! great sorrow falls on Greece to-day!
    Priam, and Priam's sons, with all in Troy--
    Oh! how will they exult, and in their hearts
    Triumph, once hearing of this broil between
    The prime of Greece, in council and in arms!

Where the word _reel_ suggests to you the idea of a drunken
mountain, it performs the service to which I destined it. It is a
bold metaphor; but justified by one of the sublimest passages in
scripture, compared with the sublimity of which even that of Homer
suffers humiliation.

It is God himself who, speaking, I think, by the prophet Isaiah,
says,

    "The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard."[693]

  [693] Isaiah xxiv. 20.

With equal boldness in the same scripture, the poetry of which
was never equalled, mountains are said to skip, to break out into
singing, and the fields to clap their hands. I intend, therefore,
that my Olympus shall be still tipsy.

The accuracy of your last remark, in which you convicted me of a
bull, delights me. A fig for all critics but you! The blockheads
could not find it. It shall stand thus:--

  First spake Polydamus----

Homer was more upon his guard than to commit such a blunder, for he
says,

  ηρχ' αγορευειν.

And now, my dear little censor, once more accept my thanks. I only
regret that your strictures are so few, being just and sensible as
they are.

Tell your papa that he shall hear from me soon. Accept mine and my
dear invalid's affectionate remembrances.

  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, March 19, 1793.

My dear Hayley,--I am so busy every morning before breakfast (my
only opportunity), strutting and stalking in Homeric stilts, that
you ought to account it an instance of marvellous grace and favour,
that I condescend to write even to you. Sometimes I am seriously
almost crazed with the multiplicity of the matters before me, and
the little or no time that I have for them; and sometimes I repose
myself, after the fatigue of that distraction, on the pillow of
despair: a pillow which has often served me in the time of need,
and is become, by frequent use, if not very comfortable, at least
convenient. So reposed, I laugh at the world, and say, "Yes, you may
gape and expect both Homer and Milton from me, but I'll be hanged if
ever you get them."

In Homer you must know I am advanced as far as the fifteenth book of
the Iliad, leaving nothing behind me that can reasonably offend the
most fastidious: and I design him for public appearance in his new
dress as soon as possible, for a reason which any poet may guess, if
he will but thrust his hand into his pocket.

You forbid me to tantalize you with an invitation to Weston, and
yet you invite me to Eartham! No! no! there is no such happiness in
store for me at present. Had I rambled at all, I was under promise
to all my dear mother's kindred to go to Norfolk, and they are dying
to see me; but I have told them that die they must, for I cannot go;
and ergo, as you will perceive, can go nowhere else.

Thanks for Mazarin's epitaph![694] It is full of witty paradox, and
is written with a force and severity which sufficiently bespeak the
author. I account it an inestimable curiosity, and shall be happy
when time shall serve, with your aid, to make a good translation of
it. But that will be a stubborn business. Adieu! The clock striks
eight: and now for Homer.

  W. C.

  [694] We have not been able to discover this epitaph, nor does it
  appear that it was ever translated by Cowper.

  Cardinal Mazarin was minister of state to Louis XIII. and
  during the minority of Louis XIV. The last moments of this
  great statesman are too edifying not to be recorded. To the
  ecclesiastic (Joly) who attended him, he said, "I am not
  satisfied with my state; I wish to feel a more profound sorrow
  for my sins. I am a great sinner. I have no hope but in the mercy
  of God." (Je suis un grand criminel, je n'ai d'esperance qu'en la
  misericorde divine.) At another time he besought his confessor to
  treat him like the lowest subject in the realm, being convinced,
  he said, that there was but one gospel for the great, as well
  as for the little. (Qu'il n'y avait qu'un Evangile pour les
  grands, et pour les petits.) His sufferings were very acute. "You
  see," he observed to those around him, "what infirmities and
  wretchedness the fortunes and dignities of this world come to."
  He repeated many times the Miserere, (Ps. li.) stretching forth
  his hands, then clasping them, and lifting up his eyes to heaven,
  with all the marks of the most sincere devotion.

  At midnight he exclaimed, "I am dying--my mind grows indistinct.
  I trust in Jesus Christ." (Je vais bientôt mourir, mon jugement
  se trouble, j'espère en Jésus Christ.) Afterwards, frequently
  repeating the sacred name of Jesus, he expired. (Se mettant en
  devoir de répéter aussi fréquemment le très-saint nom de Jésus,
  il expira.)

  _Histoire du Card. Mazarin, par M. Aubery._



The two following letters bear an honourable testimony to his
bookseller, Johnson, whom he had commissioned his friend, Mr.
Rose, to consult respecting a second and revised edition of his
Homeric version.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Weston, March 27, 1793.

My dear Friend,--I must send you a line of congratulation on
the event of your transaction with Johnson, since you, I know,
partake with me in the pleasure I receive from it. Few of my
concerns have been so happily concluded. I am now satisfied with
my bookseller, as I have substantial cause to be, and account
myself in good hands; a circumstance as pleasant to me as any
other part of my business; for I love dearly to be able to
confide, with all my heart, in those with whom I am connected, of
what kind soever the connexion may be.

The question of printing or not printing the alterations seems
difficult to decide. If they are not printed, I shall perhaps
disoblige some purchasers of the first edition, and if they are,
many others of them, perhaps a great majority will never care
about them. As far as I have gone, I have made a fair copy;
and when I have finished the whole, will send them to Johnson,
together with the interleaved volumes. He will see in a few
minutes what it will be best to do, and by his judgment I shall
be determined. The opinion to which I most incline is, that they
ought to be printed separately, for they are many of them rather
long, here and there a whole speech, or a whole simile, and the
verbal and lineal variations are so numerous, that altogether,
I apprehend, they will give a new air to the work, and I hope a
much improved one.

I forgot to say in the proper place, that some notes, although
but very few, I have added already; and may perhaps see here and
there opportunity for a few more. But, notes being little wanted,
especially by people at all conversant with classical literature,
as most readers of Homer are, I am persuaded that were they
numerous, they would be deemed an incumbrance. I shall write to
Johnson soon, perhaps to-morrow, and then shall say the same
thing to him.

In point of health, we continue much the same. Our united love,
and many thanks for your prosperous negotiations, attend yourself
and whole family, and especially my little namesake. Adieu!

W. C.


TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.[695]

  [695] Private correspondence.

  Weston, March 29, 1793.

My dear Friend,--Your tidings concerning the slender pittance yet to
come are, as you observe, of the melancholy cast. Not being gifted
by nature with the means of acquiring much, it is well, however,
that she has given me a disposition to be contented with little.
I have now been so many years habituated to small matters, that I
should probably find myself incommoded by greater; and may I but be
enabled to shift, as I have been hitherto, unsatisfied wishes will
never trouble me much. My pen has helped me somewhat; and, after
some years' toil, I begin to reap the benefit. Had I begun sooner,
perhaps I should have known fewer pecuniary distresses; or, who
can say?--it is possible that I might not have succeeded so well.
Fruit ripens only a short time before it rots; and man, in general,
arrives not at maturity of mental powers at a much earlier period.
I am now busied in preparing Homer for his second appearance. An
author should consider himself as bound not to please himself, but
the public; and as far as the good pleasure of the public may be
learned from the critics, I design to accommodate myself to it.
The Latinisms, though employed by Milton, and numbered by Addison
among the arts and expedients by which he has given dignity to his
style, I shall render into plain English; the rougher lines, though
my reason for using them has never been proved a bad one, so far
as I know, I shall make perfectly smooth; and shall give body and
substance to all that is in any degree feeble and flimsy. And when I
have done all this, and more, if the critics still grumble, I shall
say the very deuce is in them. Yet, that they will grumble, I make
no doubt; for, unreasonable as it is to do so, they all require
something better than Homer, and that something they will certainly
never get from me.

As to the canal that is to be my neighbour, I hear little about it.
The Courtenays of Weston have nothing to do with it, and I have
no intercourse with Tyringham. When it is finished, the people of
these parts will have to carry their coals seven miles only, which
now they bring from Northampton or Bedford, both at the distance of
fifteen. But, as Balaam says, who shall live when these things are
done? It is not for me, a sexagenarian already, to expect that I
shall. The chief objection to canals in general seems to be, that,
multiplying as they do, they are likely to swallow the coasting
trade.

I cannot tell you the joy I feel at the disappointment of the
French: pitiful mimics of Spartan and Roman virtue, without a grain
of it in their whole character.

  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

  Weston, April 11, 1793.

My dearest Johnny,--The long muster-roll of my great and small
ancestors I signed and dated, and sent up to Mr. Blue-mantle, on
Monday, according to your desire. Such a pompous affair, drawn
out for my sake, reminds me of the old fable of the mountain in
parturition, and a mouse the produce. Rest undisturbed, say I, their
lordly, ducal, and royal dust! Had they left me something handsome,
I should have respected them more. But perhaps they did not know
that such a one as I should have the honour to be numbered among
their descendants.[696] Well! I have a little bookseller that makes
me some amends for their deficiency. He has made me a present; an
act of liberality which I take every opportunity to blazon, as it
well deserves. But you, I suppose, have learned it already from Mr.
Rose.

  [696] Cowper, according to his kinsman, was descended, by the
  maternal line, through the families of Hippesley of Throughley,
  in Sussex, and Pellet, of Bolney, in the same county, from the
  several noble houses of West, Knollys, Carey, Bullen, Howard, and
  Mowbray; and so by four different lines from Henry the Third,
  king of England. He justly adds, "Distinction of this nature can
  shed no additional lustre on the memory of Cowper; but genius,
  however exalted, disdains not, while it boasts not, the splendour
  of ancestry; and royalty itself may be flattered, and perhaps
  benefited, by discovering its kindred to such piety, such purity,
  such talents as his."--_See Sketch of the Life of Cowper, by Dr.
  Johnson._

Fear not, my man. You will acquit yourself very well, I dare say,
both in standing for your degree, and when you have gained it. A
little tremor and a little shame-facedness in a stripling like you,
are recommendations rather than otherwise; and so they ought to be,
being symptoms of an ingenuous mind, rather unfrequent in this age
of brass.

What you say of your determined purpose, with God's help, to take up
the cross and despise the shame, gives us both real pleasure. In
our pedigree is found one, at least, who did it before you.[697]
Do you the like; and you will meet him in heaven, as sure as the
scripture is the word of God.[698]

  [697] Dr. Donne, formerly Dean of St. Paul's.

  [698]

    "Be wiser thou--like our forefather Donne,
    Seek heavenly wealth, and work for God alone."

The quarrel that the world has with evangelic men and doctrines,
they would have with a host of angels in the human form. For it
is the quarrel of owls with sunshine; of ignorance with divine
illumination.

Adieu, my dear Johnny! We shall expect you with earnest desire of
your coming, and receive you with much delight.

W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Western, April 23, 1793.

My dear Friend and Brother,--Better late than never, and better
a little than none at all! Had I been at liberty to consult
my inclinations, I would have answered your truly kind and
affectionate letter immediately. But I am the busiest man alive,
and, when this epistle is despatched, you will be the only one
of my correspondents to whom I shall not be indebted. While I
write this, my poor Mary sits mute; which I cannot well bear,
and which, together with want of time to write much, will have a
curtailing effect on my epistle.

My only studying time is still given to Homer, not to correction
and amendment of him (for that is all over) but to writing
notes. Johnson has expressed a wish for some, that the unlearned
may be a little illuminated concerning classical story and the
mythology of the ancients; and his behaviour to me has been so
liberal, that I can refuse him nothing. Poking into the old Greek
commentators blinds me. But it is no matter. I am the more like
Homer.

Ever yours, my dearest Hayley,
W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[699]

  [699] Private correspondence.

  April 25, 1793.

My dear Friend,--Had it not been stipulated between us that, being
both at present pretty much engrossed by business, we should write
when opportunity offers, I should be frighted at the date of your
last: but you will not judge me, I know, by the unfrequency of
my letters; nor suppose that my thoughts about you are equally
unfrequent. In truth, they are not. No day passes in which you are
excluded from them. I am so busy that I do not expect even now to
fill my paper. While I write, my poor invalid, who is still unable
to amuse herself either with book or needle, sits silent at my side;
which makes me, in all my letters, hasten to a conclusion. My only
time for study is now before breakfast; and I lengthen it as much
as I can, by rising early.

I know not that, with respect to our health, we are either better or
worse than when you saw us. Mrs. Unwin, perhaps, has gained a little
strength; and the advancing spring, I hope, will add to it. As to
myself, I am, in body, soul, and spirit, _semper idem_. Prayer, I
know, is made for me, and sometimes with great enlargement of heart,
by those who offer it: and in this circumstance consists the only
evidence I can find, that God is still favourably mindful of me, and
has not cast me off for ever.

A long time since, I received a parcel from Dr. Cogshall, of New
York; and, looking on the reverse of the packing-paper, saw there
an address to you. I conclude, therefore, that you received it
first, and at his desire transmitted it to me; consequently you are
acquainted with him, and, probably, apprised of the nature of our
correspondence. About three years ago I had his first letter to me,
which came accompanied by half a dozen American publications. He
proposed an exchange of books on religious subjects, as likely to be
useful on both sides of the water. Most of those he sent, however,
I had seen before. I sent him, in return, such as I could get; but
felt myself indifferently qualified for such a negotiation. I am now
called upon to contribute my quota again; and shall be obliged to
you if, in your next, you will mention the titles of half a dozen
that may be procured at little cost, that are likely to be new in
that country, and useful.

About two months since, I had a letter from Mr. Jeremiah Waring, of
Alton in Hampshire. Do you know such a man? I think I have seen his
name in advertisements of mathematical works. He is, however, or
seems to be, a very pious man.

I was a little surprised lately, seeing in the last Gentleman's
Magazine a letter from somebody at Winchester, in which is a copy
of the epitaph of our poor friend Unwin: an English, not a Latin
one. It has been pleasant to me sometimes to think, that his dust
lay under an inscription of my writing; which I had no reason to
doubt, because the Latin one, which I composed at the request of the
executors, was, as I understood from Mr. H. Thornton, accepted by
them and approved. If they thought, after all, that an English one,
as more intelligible, would therefore be preferable, I believe they
judged wisely; but, having never heard that they had changed their
mind about it, I was at a loss to account for the alteration.

So now, my dear friend, adieu!--When I have thanked you for a barrel
of oysters, and added our united kind remembrances to yourself and
Miss Catlett, I shall have exhausted the last moment that I can
spare at present.

  I remain sincerely yours,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston, May 4, 1793.

My dear Friend,--While your sorrow for our common loss was fresh
in your mind, I would not write, lest a letter on so distressing a
subject should be too painful both to you and me; and now that I
seem to have reached a proper time for doing it, the multiplicity
of my literary business will hardly afford me leisure. Both you and
I have this comfort when deprived of those we love--at our time of
life we have every reason to believe that the deprivation cannot be
long. Our sun is setting too, and when the hour of rest arrives we
shall rejoin your brother, and many whom we have tenderly loved, our
forerunners into a better country.

I will say no more on a theme which it will be better perhaps to
treat with brevity; and because the introduction of any other might
seem a transition too violent, I will only add that Mrs. Unwin and I
are about as well as we at any time have been within the last year.

  Truly yours,
  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  May 5, 1793.

My dear Friend,--My delay to answer your last kind letter, to
which likewise you desired a speedy reply, must have seemed rather
difficult to explain on any other supposition than that of illness;
but illness has not been the cause, although, to say the truth,
I cannot boast of having been lately very well. Yet has not this
been the cause of my silence, but your own advice, very proper
and earnestly given to me, to proceed in the revisal of Homer. To
this it is owing, that, instead of giving an hour or two before
breakfast to my correspondents, I allot that time entirely to my
studies. I have nearly given the last touches to the poetry, and
am now busied far more laboriously in writing notes at the request
of my honest bookseller, transmitted to me in the first instance
by you, and afterward repeated by himself. I am, therefore, deep
in the old Scholia, and have advanced to the latter part of Iliad
nine, explaining, as I go, such passages as may be difficult to
unlearned readers, and such only; for notes of that kind are the
notes that Johnson desired. I find it a more laborious task than the
translation was, and shall be heartily glad when it is over. In the
meantime, all the letters I receive remain unanswered, or, if they
receive an answer, it is always a short one. Such this must be.
Johnny is here, having flown over London.

Homer, I believe, will make a much more respectable appearance than
before. Johnson now thinks it will be right to make a separate
impression of the amendments.

  W. C.

I breakfast every morning on seven or eight pages of the Greek
commentators. For so much I am obliged to read in order to select
perhaps three or four short notes for the readers of my translation.

Homer is indeed a tie upon me, that must not on any account be
broken, till all his demands are satisfied; though I have fancied,
while the revisal of the Odyssey was at a distance, that it would
ask less labour in the finishing, it is not unlikely, that, when I
take it actually in hand, I may find myself mistaken. Of this at
least I am sure, that uneven verse abounds much more in it than it
once did in the Iliad; yet to the latter the critics objected on
that account, though to the former never; perhaps because they had
not read it. Hereafter they shall not quarrel with me on that score.
The Iliad is now all smooth turnpike, and I will take equal care,
that there shall be no jolts in the Odyssey.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  The Lodge, May 7, 1793.

My dearest Coz,--You have thought me long silent, and so have many
others. In fact I have not for many months written punctually to any
but yourself and Hayley. My time, the little I have, is so engrossed
by Homer, that I have at this moment a bundle of unanswered letters
by me, and letters likely to be so. Thou knowest, I dare say, what
it is to have a head weary with thinking. Mine is so fatigued by
breakfast time, three days out of four, I am utterly incapable of
sitting down to my desk again for any purpose whatever.

I am glad I have convinced thee at last that thou art a Tory.
Your friend's definition of Whig and Tory must be just, for aught
I know, as far as the latter are concerned; but respecting the
former, I think him mistaken. There is no TRUE Whig who wishes all
power in the hands of his own party. The division of it which the
lawyers call tripartite is exactly what he desires; and he would
have neither king, lords, nor commons unequally trusted, or in the
smallest degree predominant. Such a Whig am I, and such Whigs are
the true friends of the constitution.

Adieu! my dear; I am dead with weariness.

  W. C.


TO THOMAS PARK ESQ.

  May 17, 1793.

Dear Sir,--It has not been without frequent self-reproach that I
have so long omitted to answer your last very kind and most obliging
letter. I am by habit and inclination extremely punctual in the
discharge of such arrears, and it is only through necessity, and
under constraint of various indispensable engagements of a different
kind, that I am become of late much otherwise.

I have never seen Chapman's translation of Homer, and will not
refuse your offer of it, unless, by accepting it, I shall deprive
you of a curiosity that you cannot easily replace.[700] The line
or two which you quote from him, except that the expression "a
well-written soul" has the quaintness of his times in it, do him
credit. He cannot surely be the same Chapman who wrote a poem, I
think, on the battle of Hochstadt, in which, when I was a very young
man, I remember to have seen the following lines:

    "Think of two thousand gentlemen at least,
    And each man mounted on his capering beast.
    Into the Danube they were push'd by shoals," &c.

  [700] Chapman claims the honour of being the first translator of
  the whole of the works of Homer. He was born in 1557, and was
  the contemporary of Shakspeare, Spenser, Jonson, &c. His version
  of the Iliad was dedicated to Henry, Prince of Wales. He also
  translated Musæus and Hesiod, and was the author of many other
  works. He died in 1634, aged seventy-seven. His version of Homer
  is now obsolete, and rendered tedious by the protracted measure
  of fourteen syllables; though occasionally it exhibits much
  spirit. Waller, according to Dryden, could never read his version
  without emotion, and Pope found it worthy of his particular
  attention.

These are lines that could not fail to impress the memory, though
not altogether in the Homerican style of battle.

I am, as you say, a hermit, and probably an irreclaimable one,
having a horror of London that I cannot express, nor indeed very
easily account for. Neither am I much less disinclined to migration
in general. I did no little violence to my love of home last summer,
when I paid Mr. Hayley a visit, and in truth was principally induced
to the journey by a hope that it might be useful to Mrs. Unwin;
who, however, derived so little benefit from it, that I purpose for
the future to avail myself of the privilege my years may reasonably
claim, by compelling my younger friends to visit _me_. But even this
is a point which I cannot well compass at present, both because I
am too busy, and because poor Mrs. Unwin is not able to bear the
fatigue of company. Should better days arrive, days of more leisure
to me, and of some health to her, I shall not fail to give you
notice of the change, and shall then hope for the pleasure of seeing
you at Weston.

The epitaph you saw is on the tomb of the same Mr. Unwin to whom
the "Tirocinium" is inscribed; the son of the lady above mentioned.
By the desire of his executors I wrote a Latin one, which they
approved, but it was not approved by a relation of the deceased,
and therefore was not used. He objected to the mention I had made
in it of his mother having devoted him to the service of God in his
infancy. She did it, however, and not in vain, as I wrote in my
epitaph. Who wrote the English one I know not.

The poem called the "Slave" is not mine, nor have I ever seen it. I
wrote two on the subject--one entitled "The Negro's Complaint," and
the other "The Morning Dream." With thanks for all your kindness,
and the patience you have with me,

  I remain, dear sir,
  Sincerely yours,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, May 21, 1793.

My dear Brother,--You must either think me extremely idle, or
extremely busy, that I have made your last very kind letter wait so
very long for an answer. The truth however is, that I am neither;
but have had time enough to have scribbled to you, had I been able
to scribble at all. To explain this riddle I must give you a short
account of my proceedings.

I rise at six every morning and fag till near eleven, when I
breakfast. The consequence is, that I am so exhausted as not to be
able to write, when the opportunity offers. You will say--"Breakfast
before you work, and then your work will not fatigue you." I
answer--"Perhaps I might, and your counsel would probably prove
beneficial; but I cannot spare a moment for eating in the early part
of the morning, having no other time for study." This uneasiness of
which I complain is a proof that I am somewhat stricken in years;
and there is no other cause by which I can account for it, since I
go early to bed, always between ten and eleven, and seldom fail to
sleep well. Certain it is, ten years ago I could have done as much,
and sixteen years ago did actually much more, without suffering
fatigue or any inconvenience from my labours. How insensibly old age
steals on, and how often is it actually arrived before we suspect
it! Accident alone, some occurrence that suggests a comparison of
our former with our present selves, affords the discovery. Well! it
is always good to be undeceived, especially on an article of such
importance.

There has been a book lately published, entitled, "Man as he is."
I have heard a high character of it, as admirably written, and am
informed, that for that reason, and because it inculcates Whig
principles, it is by many imputed to you. I contradict this report,
assuring my informant, that had it been yours, I must have known it,
for that you have bound yourself to make me your father-confessor on
all such wicked occasions, and not to conceal from me even a murder,
should you happen to commit one.[701]

  [701] The real author was Robert Bage.

I will not trouble you, at present, to send me any more books with
a view to my notes on Homer. I am not without hopes that Sir John
Throckmorton, who is expected here from Venice in a short time, may
bring me Villoison's edition of the Odyssey. He certainly will, if
he found it published, and that alone will be _instar omnium_.

Adieu, my dearest brother! Give my love to Tom, and thank him for
his book, of which I believe I need not have deprived him, intending
that my readers shall detect the occult instruction contained in
Homer's stories for themselves.

  W. C.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  Weston, June 1, 1793.

My dearest Cousin,--You will not (you say) come to us now; and you
tell us not when you will. These assignations, _sine die_, are such
shadowy things that I can neither grasp nor get any comfort from
them. Know you not that hope is the next best thing to enjoyment?
Give us then a hope, and a determinate time for that hope to fix on,
and we will endeavour to be satisfied.

Johnny is gone to Cambridge, called thither to take his degree,
and is much missed by me. He is such an active little fellow in my
service, that he cannot be otherwise. In three weeks, however, I
shall hope to have him again for a fortnight. I have had a letter
from him, containing an incident which has given birth to the
following.

TO A YOUNG FRIEND,[702]

ON HIS ARRIVAL AT CAMBRIDGE WET, WHEN NO RAIN HAD FALLEN THERE.

  [702] The Poet's kinsman.

    If Gideon's fleece, which drench'd with dew he found,
    While moisture none refreshed the herbs around,
    Might fitly represent the Church, endow'd
    With heavenly gifts, to heathens not allow'd;
    In pledge, perhaps, of favours from on high,
    Thy locks were wet, when other locks were dry.
    Heav'n grant us half the omen! may we see,
    Not drought on others, but much dew on thee!

These are spick and span. Johnny himself has not yet seen them. By
the way, he has filled your book completely; and I will give thee
a guinea if thou wilt search thy old book for a couple of songs and
two or three other pieces, of which I know thou madest copies at the
vicarage, and which I have lost. The songs I know are pretty good,
and I would fain recover them.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, June 6, 1793.

My dear Sir,--I seize a passing moment merely to say that I feel
for your distresses, and sincerely pity you, and I shall be
happy to learn from your next, that your sister's amendment has
superseded the necessity you feared of a journey to London. Your
candid account of the effect that your afflictions have both on
your spirits and temper I can perfectly understand, having laboured
much in that fire myself, and perhaps more than any man. It is in
such a school, however, that we must learn, if we ever truly learn
it, the natural depravity of the human heart, and of our own in
particular; together with the consequence that necessarily follows
such wretched premises; our indispensable need of the atonement, and
our inexpressible obligations to Him who made it. This reflection
cannot escape a thinking mind, looking back on those ebullitions of
fretfulness and impatience to which it has yielded in a season of
great affliction.

Having lately had company, who left us only on the 4th, I have
done nothing--nothing indeed, since my return from Sussex, except
a trifle or two, which it was incumbent upon me to write. Milton
hangs in doubt: neither spirits nor opportunity suffice me for
that labour. I regret continually that I ever suffered myself to
be persuaded to undertake it. The most that I hope to effect is
a complete revisal of my own Homer. Johnson told my friend, who
has just left me, that it will begin to be reviewed in the next
_Analytical_, and he _hoped_ the review of it would not offend me.
By this I understand, that if I am not offended it will be owing
more to my own equanimity than to the mildness of the critic. So be
it! He will put an opportunity of victory over myself into my hands,
and I will endeavour not to lose it.

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[703]

  [703] Private correspondence.

  June 12, 1793.

My dear Friend,--You promise to be contented with a short line, and
a short one you must have, hurried over in the little interval I
have happened to find between the conclusion of my morning task
and breakfast. Study has this good effect, at least; it makes me
an early riser, who might otherwise, perhaps, be as much given to
dozing as my readers.

The scanty opportunity I have, I shall employ in telling you what
you principally wish to be told--the present state of mine and Mrs.
Unwin's health. In her I cannot perceive any alteration for the
better; and must be satisfied, I believe, as indeed I have great
reason to be, if she does not alter for the worse. She uses the
orchard-walk daily, but always supported between two, and is still
unable to employ herself as formerly. But she is cheerful, seldom
in much pain, and has always strong confidence in the mercy and
faithfulness of God.

As to myself, I have always the same song to sing--Well in body but
sick in spirit: sick, nigh unto death.

    Seasons return, but not to me returns
    God, or the sweet approach of heavenly day,
    Or sight of cheering truth, or pardon seal'd,
    Or joy, or hope, or Jesus' face divine;
    But cloud, &c.

I could easily set my complaint to Milton's tone, and accompany him
through the whole passage,[704] on the subject of a blindness more
deplorable than his; but time fails me.

  [704] Paradise Lost, Book iii.

I feel great desire to see your intended publication; a desire which
the manner in which Mr. Bull speaks of it, who called here lately,
has no tendency to allay. I believe I forgot to thank you for your
last poetical present: not because I was not much pleased with it,
but I write always in a hurry, and in a hurry must now conclude
myself, with our united love,

  Yours, my dear friend,
  Most sincerely,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, June 29, 1793.

    Dear architect of fine CHATEAUX in air
      Worthier to stand for ever if they could,
      Than any built of stone, or yet of wood,
    For back of royal elephant to bear!

    Oh for permission from the skies to share,
      Much to my own, though little to thy good,
      With thee (not subject to the jealous mood!)
    A partnership of literary ware.

    But I am bankrupt now; and doom'd henceforth
      To drudge, in descant dry,[705] on others' lays;
    Bards, I acknowledge, of unequall'd worth!
      But what is commentator's happiest praise?

    That he has furnish'd lights for other eyes,
    Which they who need them use, and then despise.

  [705] He alludes to his notes on Homer.

What remains for me to say on this subject, my dear brother bard,
I will say in prose. There are other impediments which I could not
compromise within the bounds of a sonnet.

My poor Mary's infirm condition makes it impossible for me, at
present, to engage in a work such as you propose. My thoughts are
not sufficiently free, nor have I, or can I, by any means, find
opportunity; added to it comes a difficulty which, though you
are not at all aware of it, presents itself to me under a most
forbidding appearance. Can you guess it? No, not you; neither
perhaps will you be able to imagine that such a difficulty can
possibly subsist. If your hair begins to bristle, stroke it down
again, for there is no need why it should erect itself. It concerns
me, not you. I know myself too well not to know that I am nobody
in verse, unless in a corner, and alone, and unconnected in my
operations. This is not owing to want of love for you, my brother,
or the most consummate confidence in you; for I have both in a
degree that has not been exceeded in the experience of any friend
you have, or ever had. But I am so made up--I will not enter into
a metaphysical analysis of my strange composition, in order to
detect the true cause of this evil; but on a general view of the
matter, I suspect that it proceeds from that shyness which has been
my effectual and almost fatal hindrance on many other important
occasions, and which I should feel, I well know, on this, to a
degree that would perfectly cripple me. No! I shall neither do,
nor attempt any thing of consequence more, unless my poor Mary
get better; nor even then, unless it should please God to give me
another nature, in concert with any man--I could not, even with my
own father or brother, were they now alive. Small game must serve me
at present, and, till I have done with Homer and Milton, a sonnet,
or some such matter, must content me. The utmost that I aspire to,
and Heaven knows with how feeble a hope, is to write at some better
opportunity, and when my hands are free, "The Four Ages." Thus I
have opened my heart unto thee.[706]

  W. C.

  [706] What the proposed literary partnership was, which Hayley
  suggested, we know not; it is evident that it was not the poem of
  "The Four Ages," which forms the subject of the following letter,
  and in which Cowper acquiesced.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, July 7, 1793.

My dearest Hayley,--If the excessive heat of this day, which forbids
me to do any thing else, will permit me to scribble to you, I shall
rejoice. To do this is a pleasure to me at all times, but to do it
now, a double one; because I am in haste to tell you how much I am
delighted with your projected quadruple alliance, and to assure
you, that if it please God to afford me health, spirits, ability,
and leisure, I will not fail to devote them all to the production of
my quota of "The Four Ages."[707]

  [707] Hayley made a second proposition to unite with Cowper in
  the projected poem of "The Four Ages," and to engage the aid of
  two distinguished artists, who were to embellish the work with
  appropriate designs. We believe that Lawrence and Flaxman were
  the persons to whom Hayley refers. We cannot sufficiently regret
  the failure of this plan, which would have enriched literature
  and art with so happy a specimen of poetical and professional
  talent. But the period was unhappily approaching which was to
  suspend the fine powers of Cowper's mind, and to shroud them in
  the veil of darkness.

You are very kind to humour me as you do, and had need be a little
touched yourself with all my oddities, that you may know how to
administer to mine. All whom I love do so, and I believe it to be
impossible to love heartily those who do not. People must not do
me good in _their_ way, but in my _own_, and then they do me good
indeed. My pride, my ambition, and my friendship for you, and the
interest I take in my own dear self, will all be consulted and
gratified by an arm-in-arm appearance with you in public; and I
shall work with more zeal and assiduity at Homer, and, when Homer is
finished, at Milton, with the prospect of such a coalition before
me. But what shall I do with a multitude of small pieces, from which
I intended to select the best, and adding them to "The Four Ages,"
to have made a volume? Will there be room for them upon your plan?
I have re-touched them, and will re-touch them again. Some of them
will suggest pretty devices to a designer; and in short, I have a
desire not to lose them.

I am at this moment, with all the imprudence natural to poets,
expending nobody knows what, in embellishing my premises, or rather
the premises of my neighbour Courtenay, which is more poetical
still. I have built one summer-house already, with the boards of my
old study, and am building another, spick and span, as they say.
I have also a stone-cutter now at work, setting a bust of my dear
old Grecian on a pedestal; and besides all this, I meditate still
more that is to be done in the autumn. Your project, therefore, is
most opportune, as any project must needs be that has so direct a
tendency to put money into the pocket of one so likely to want it.

    Ah brother poet! send me of your shade,
    And bid the zephyrs hasten to my aid!
    Or, like a worm unearth'd at noon, I go,
    Despatch'd by sunshine, to the shades below.

My poor Mary is as well as the heat will allow her to be; and
whether it be cold or sultry, is always affectionately mindful of
you and yours.

  W. C.



It is due to the memory of my revered friend and brother-in-law,
the Rev. Dr. Johnson, to state that Cowper was indebted to his
ever-watchful and affectionate kindness for what he here calls his
"dear old Grecian." With that amiable solicitude which formed so
prominent a feature in his character, and which was always seeking
how to please and to confer a favour, he had contrived to procure
an antique bust of Homer, to gratify Cowper's partiality for his
favourite bard. No present could possibly have been more acceptable
or appropriate. We cannot avoid remarking, on this occasion, that,
to anticipate a want and to supply it, to know how to minister to
the gratification of another, and to enhance the gift by the grace
of bestowing it, is one of the great arts of social and domestic
life. It is not the amount, nor the intrinsic value of the favour,
for the power of giving must in that case be restricted to the few.
To give royally requires not only an enlarged heart, but ample
and enlarged means. It is the appropriateness of the time and the
occasion, the grace of the manner, and the unobtrusiveness of its
character, that constitutes the value of the gift and endears the
giver.

Cowper recorded his gratitude by the following poetical tribute,
which has always been justly admired:--

    Kinsman belov'd, and as a son by me!
    When I behold this fruit of thy regard,
    The sculptur'd form of my old fav'rite bard!
    I rev'rence feel for him, and love for thee.
    Joy too, and grief! much joy that there should be
    Wise men, and learn'd, who grudge not to reward
    With some applause my bold attempt and hard,
    Which others scorn: critics by courtesy!

    The grief is this, that sunk in Homer's mine,
    I lose my precious years, now soon to fail!
    Handling his gold, which, howsoe'er it shine,
    Proves dross when balanc'd in the Christian scale!
    Be wiser thou!--like our forefather Donne,
    Seek heavenly wealth, and work for God alone!


TO THOMAS PARK, ESQ.

  W. U., July 15, 1793.

Dear Sir,--Within these few days I have received, by favour of Miss
Knapps, your acceptable present of Chapman's translation of the
Iliad. I know not whether the book be a rarity, but a curiosity it
certainly is. I have as yet seen but little of it; enough, however,
to make me wonder that any man, with so little taste for Homer, or
apprehension of his manner, should think it worth while to undertake
the laborious task of translating him: the hope of pecuniary
advantage may perhaps account for it.[708] His information, I fear,
was not much better than his verse, for I have consulted him in
one passage of some difficulty, and find him giving a sense of his
own, not at all warranted by the words of Homer. Pope sometimes does
this, and sometimes omits the difficult part entirely. I can boast
of having done neither, though it has cost me infinite pains to
exempt myself from the necessity.

  [708] Chapman's version is thus described by Warton: he
  "frequently retrenches or impoverishes what he could not feel and
  express," and yet is "not always without strength and spirit."
  By Anton, in his Philosophical Satires, published in 1616, he is
  characterised as

    "Greeke-thund'ring Chapman, beaten to the age,
    With a deepe furie and a sudden rage."

  The testimony of Bishop Percy is flattering. "Had Chapman," he
  observes, "translated the Iliad in blank verse, it had been one
  of our chief classic performances."

I have seen a translation by Hobbes, which I prefer for its greater
clumsiness. Many years have passed since I saw it, but it made me
laugh immoderately. Poetry that is not good can only make amends for
that deficiency by being ridiculous; and, because the translation of
Hobbes has at least this recommendation, I shall be obliged to you,
should it happen to fall in your way, if you would be so kind as to
procure it for me. The only edition of it I ever saw (and perhaps
there never was another[709]), was a very thick 12mo, both print and
paper bad; a sort of book that would be sought in vain, perhaps,
anywhere but on a stall.

  [709] Cowper is mistaken in this supposition. Wood, in his
  Athenæ, records an edition of the Iliad in 1675; and of the
  Odyssey in 1667, and there was a re-impression of both in 1686.

When you saw Lady Hesketh, you saw the relation of mine with whom I
have been more intimate, even from childhood, than any other. She
has seen much of the world, understands it well, and, having great
natural vivacity, is of course one of the most agreeable companions.

I have now arrived almost at a close of my labours on the Iliad,
and have left nothing behind me, I believe, which I shall wish to
alter on any future occasion. In about a fortnight or three weeks
I shall begin to do the same for the Odyssey, and hope to be able
to perform it while the Iliad is in printing. Then Milton will
demand all my attention, and when I shall find opportunity either to
revise your MSS., or to write a poem of my own,[710] which I have in
contemplation, I can hardly say. Certainly not till both these tasks
are accomplished.

  I remain, dear sir,
  With many thanks for your kind present,
  Sincerely yours,
  W. C.

  [710] The Four Ages.


TO MRS. CHARLOTTE SMITH.

  Weston, July 25, 1793.

My dear Madam,--Many reasons concurred to make me impatient for
the arrival of your most acceptable present,[711] and among them
was the fear lest you should perhaps suspect me of tardiness in
acknowledging so great a favour; a fear, that, as often as it
prevailed, distressed me exceedingly. At length I have received it,
and my little bookseller assures me, that he sent it the very day he
got it; by some mistake, however, the wagon brought it instead of
the coach, which occasioned the delay.

  [711] The poem of the Emigrants, which was dedicated to Cowper.

It came this morning, about an hour ago; consequently I have not had
time to peruse the poem, though you may be sure I have found enough
for the perusal of the dedication. I have, in fact, given it three
readings, and in each have found increasing pleasure.

I am a whimsical creature: when I write for the public, I write of
course with a desire to please; in other words, to acquire fame, and
I labour accordingly; but when I find that I have succeeded, feel
myself alarmed, and ready to shrink from the acquisition.

This I have felt more than once; and when I saw my name at the head
of your dedication, I felt it again; but the consummate delicacy of
your praise soon convinced me that I might spare my blushes, and
that the demand was less upon my modesty than my gratitude. Of that
be assured, dear madam, and of the truest esteem and respect of your
most obliged and affectionate humble servant,

  W. C.

P. S. I should have been much grieved to have let slip this
opportunity of thanking you for your charming sonnets, and my two
most agreeable old friends, Monimia and Orlando.[712]

  [712] Mrs. Charlotte Smith is well known as an authoress,
  and particularly for her beautiful sonnets. She was formerly
  a great eulogist of the French Revolution, but the horrors
  which distinguished that political era led to a change in her
  sentiments, which she publicly avowed in her "Banished Man."
  There is a great plaintiveness of feeling in all her writings,
  arising from the unfortunate incidents of her chequered life. We
  remember this lady, with her family, formerly resident at Oxford,
  where she excited much interest by her talents and misfortunes.


TO THE REV. MR. GREATHEED.

  Weston, July 27, 1793.

I was not without some expectation of a line from you, my dear sir,
though you did not promise me one at your departure, and am happy
not to have been disappointed; still happier to learn that you and
Mrs. Greatheed are well, and so delightfully situated. Your kind
offer to us of sharing with you the house which you at present
inhabit, added to the short, but lively, description of the scenery
that surrounds it, wants nothing to win our acceptance, should it
please God to give Mrs. Unwin a little more strength, and should I
ever be master of my time so as to be able to gratify myself with
what would please me most. But many have claims upon us, and some
who cannot absolutely be said to have any would yet complain and
think themselves slighted, should we prefer rocks and caves to
them. In short, we are called so many ways, that these numerous
demands are likely to operate as a _remora_, and to keep us fixed at
home. Here we can occasionally have the pleasure of yours and Mrs.
Greatheed's company, and to have it here must I believe, content us.
Hayley in his last letter gives me reason to expect the pleasure
of seeing him and his dear boy Tom, in the autumn. He will use all
his eloquence to draw us to Eartham again. My cousin Johnny, of
Norfolk, holds me under promise to make my first trip thither, and
the very same promise I have hastily made to visit Sir John and Lady
Throckmorton, at Bucklands. How to reconcile such clashing promises,
and give satisfaction to all, would puzzle me, had I nothing else
to do; and therefore, as I say, the result will probably be, that
we shall find ourselves obliged to go nowhere, since we cannot
everywhere.



Wishing you both safe at home again, and to see you as soon as may
be here,

  I remain,
  Affectionately yours,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, July 27, 1793.

I have been vexed with myself, my dearest brother, and with every
thing about me, not excepting even Homer himself, that I have been
obliged so long to delay an answer to your last kind letter. If I
listen any longer to calls another way, I shall hardly be able to
tell you how happy we are in the hope of seeing you in the autumn,
before the autumn will have arrived. Thrice welcome will you and
your dear boy be to us, and the longer you will afford us your
company, the more welcome. I have set up the head of Homer on a
famous fine pedestal, and a very majestic appearance he makes. I am
now puzzled about a motto, and wish you to decide for me between
two, one of which I have composed myself, a Greek one, as follows;

    Εικονατις ταυτην; κλυτον ανερος ουνομ' ολωλεν.
    Ουνομα δ'ουτος ανηρ αφθιτον αιεν εχει.

The other is my own translation of a passage in the Odyssey, the
original of which I have seen used as a motto to an engraved head of
Homer many a time.

The present edition of the lines stands thus,

                    Him partially the muse
    And dearly loved, yet gave him good and ill:
    She quenched his sight, but gave him strains divine

Tell me, by the way, (if you ever had any speculations on the
subject,) what is it you suppose Homer to have meant in particular,
when he ascribed his blindness to the muse, for that he speaks of
himself under the name of Demodocus, in the eighth book, I believe
is by all admitted. How could the old bard study himself blind, when
books were either so few or none at all? And did he write his poems?
If neither were the cause, as seems reasonable to imagine, how could
he incur his blindness by such means as could be justly imputable to
the muse? Would mere thinking blind him? I want to know:

  "Call up some spirit from the vasty deep!"

I said to my Sam[713] ----, "Sam, build me a shed in the garden,
with any thing that you can find, and make it rude and rough, like
one of those at Eartham."----"Yes, Sir," says Sam, and straightway
laying his own noddle, and the carpenter's noddle together, has
built me a thing fit for Stow Gardens. Is not this vexatious?----I
threaten to inscribe it thus:

    Beware of building? I intended
    Rough logs and thatch, and thus it ended.

  [713] Samuel Roberts, his faithful servant.

But my Mary says, I shall break Sam's heart and the carpenter's too,
and will not consent to it. Poor Mary sleeps but ill. How have you
lived who cannot bear a sun-beam?

  Adieu!
  My dearest Hayley,
  W. C.



The following seasonable and edifying letter, addressed by Cowper to
his beloved kinsman, on the occasion of his ordination, will be read
with interest.


TO THE REV. JOHN JOHNSON.[714]

  [714] Private correspondence.

  August 2, 1793.

My dearest Johnny,--The bishop of Norwich has won my heart by his
kind and liberal behaviour to you; and, if I knew him, I would tell
him so.

I am glad that your auditors find your voice strong and your
utterance distinct; glad, too, that your doctrine has hitherto made
you no enemies. You have a gracious Master, who, it seems, will
not suffer you to see war in the beginning. It will be a wonder,
however, if you do not, sooner or later, find out that sore place in
every heart which can ill endure the touch of apostolic doctrine.
Somebody will smart in his conscience, and you will hear of it. I
say not this, my dear Johnny, to terrify, but to prepare you for
that which is likely to happen, and which, troublesome as it may
prove, is yet devoutly to be wished; for, in general, there is
little good done by preachers till the world begins to abuse them.
But understand me aright. I do not mean that you should give them
unnecessary provocation, by scolding and railing at them, as some,
more zealous than wise, are apt to do. That were to deserve their
anger. No; there is no need of it. The self-abasing doctrines of the
gospel will, of themselves, create you enemies; but remember this,
for your comfort--they will also, in due time, transform them into
friends, and make them love you, as if they were your own children.
God give you many such; as, if you are faithful to his cause, I
trust he will!

Sir John and Lady Throckmorton have lately arrived in England,
and are now at the Hall. They have brought me from Rome a set of
engravings on Odyssey subjects, by Flaxman, whom you have heard
Hayley celebrate. They are very fine, very much in the antique
style, and a present from the Dowager Lady Spencer.

  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  Weston, Aug. 11, 1793.

My dearest Cousin,--I am glad that my poor and hasty attempts
to express some little civility to Miss Fanshaw and the amiable
Count,[715] have your and her approbation. The lines addressed to
her were not what I would have made them, but lack of time, a lack
which always presses me, would not suffer me to improve them. Many
thanks for her letter, which, were my merits less the subject of
it, I should without scruple say is an excellent one. She writes
with the force and accuracy of a person skilled in more languages
than are spoken in the present day, as I doubt not that she is. I
perfectly approve the theme she recommends to me, but am at present
so totally absorbed in Homer, that all I do beside is ill done,
being hurried over; and I would not execute ill a subject of her
recommending.

  [715] Count Gravina, the Spanish Admiral.

I shall watch the walnuts with more attention than they who eat
them, which I do in some hope, though you do not expressly say so,
that when their threshing time arrives, we shall see you here. I am
now going to paper my new study, and in a short time it will be fit
to inhabit.

Lady Spencer has sent me a present from Rome, by the hands of Sir
John Throckmorton, engravings of Odyssey subjects, after figures by
Flaxman,[716] a statuary at present resident there, of high repute,
and much a friend of Hayley's.

  [716] These illustrations are executed in outline, and form one
  of the most beautiful and elegant specimens of professional art.

Thou livest, my dear, I acknowledge, in a very fine country, but
they have spoiled it by building London in it.

  Adieu,
  W. C.



That the allusion in the former part of the letter may be
understood, it is necessary to state, that Lady Hesketh had lent
a manuscript poem of Cowper's to her friend Miss Fanshaw, with an
injunction that she should neither show it nor take a copy. This
promise was violated, and the reason assigned is expressed by the
young lady in the following verses.

    What wonder! if my wavering hand
      Had dared to disobey,
    When Hesketh gave a harsh command,
      And Cowper led astray?

    Then take this tempting gift of thine,
      By pen uncopied yet;
    But, canst thou memory confine,
      Or teach me to forget?

    More lasting than the touch of art
      The characters remain,
    When written by a feeling heart
      On tablets of the brain.

COWPER'S REPLY.

    To be remembered thus is fame,
      And in the first degree;
    And did the few like her the same,
      The press might rest for me.

    So Homer, in the memory stored
      Of many a Grecian belle,
    Was once preserved--a richer hoard,
      But never lodged so well.

We add the verses addressed to Count Gravina, whom Cowper calls "the
amiable Count," and who had translated the well-known stanzas on the
Rose[717] into Italian verse.

  [717] 'The Rose had been washed, just washed in a shower,' &c.

    My Rose, Gravina, blooms anew,
      And, steep'd not now in rain,
    But in Castalian streams by you,
      Will never fade again.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Aug. 15, 1793.

    Instead of a pound or two, spending a mint
    Must serve me at least, I believe, with a hint,
    That building, and building, a man may be driven
    At last out of doors, and have no house to live in.

Besides, my dearest brother, they have not only built for me what I
did not want, but have ruined a notable tetrastic by doing so. I
had written one which I designed for a hermitage, and it will by no
means suit the fine and pompous affair which they have made instead
of one. So that, as a poet, I am every way afflicted; made poorer
than I need have been, and robbed of my verses: what case can be
more deplorable?[718]

  [718] The lines here alluded to are entitled, "Inscription for an
  Hermitage;" and are as follow:--

    This cabin, Mary, in my sight appears,
    Built as it has been in our waning years,
    A rest afforded to our weary feet,
    Preliminary to--the last retreat.

You must not suppose me ignorant of what Flaxman has done, or
that I have not seen it, or that I am not actually in possession
of it, at least of the engravings which you mention. In fact, I
have had them more than a fortnight. Lady Dowager Spencer, to
whom I inscribed my Odyssey, and who was at Rome when Sir John
Throckmorton was there, charged him with them as a present to
me, and arriving here lately he executed his commission. Romney,
I doubt not, is right in his judgment of them; he is an artist
himself, and cannot easily be mistaken; and I take his opinion
as an oracle, the rather because it coincides exactly with my
own. The figures are highly classical, antique, and elegant;
especially that of Penelope, who, whether she wakes or sleeps,
must necessarily charm all beholders.

Your scheme of embellishing my Odyssey with these plates is a
kind one, and the fruit of your benevolence to me; but Johnson,
I fear, will hardly stake so much money as the cost would amount
to, on a work, the fate of which is at present uncertain. Nor
could we adorn the Odyssey in this splendid manner, unless we
had similar ornaments to bestow on the Iliad. Such, I presume,
are not ready, and much time must elapse even if Flaxman should
accede to the plan, before he could possibly prepare them. Happy
indeed should I be to see a work of mine so nobly accompanied,
but, should that good fortune ever attend me, it cannot take
place till the third or fourth edition shall afford the occasion.
This I regret, and I regret too that you will have seen them
before I can have an opportunity to show them to you. Here is
sixpence for you if you will abstain from the sight of them while
you are in London.

  The sculptor?--nameless, though once dear to fame:
  But this man bears an everlasting name.[719]

  [719] A translation of Cowper's Greek verses on his bust of Homer.

So I purpose it shall stand; and on the pedestal, when you come,
in that form you will find it. The added line from the Odyssey is
charming, but the assumption of sonship to Homer seems too daring;
suppose it stood thus:

  Οζ δε παιζ ω πατοι και ουποτε γησομαι αυτου.

I am not sure that this would be clear of the same objection, and it
departs from the text still more.

With my poor Mary's best love and our united wishes to see you here,

  I remain, my dearest brother,
  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO MRS. COURTENAY.

  Weston, Aug. 20, 1793.

My dearest Catharina is too reasonable, I know, to expect news from
me, who live on the outside of the world, and know nothing that
passes within it. The best news is, that, though you are gone, you
are not gone for ever, as once I supposed you were, and said that
we should probably meet no more. Some news however we have; but
then I conclude that you have already received it from the Doctor,
and that thought almost deprives me of all courage to relate it. On
the evening of the feast, Bob Archer's house affording, I suppose,
the best room for the purpose, all the lads and lasses who felt
themselves disposed to dance, assembled there. Long time they
danced, at least long time they did something a little like it,
when at last the company having retired, the fiddler asked Bob for
a lodging; Bob replied--"that his beds were all full of his own
family, but if he chose it he would show him a hay-cock, where he
might sleep as sound as in any bed whatever."--So forth they went
together, and when they reached the place, the fiddler knocked down
Bob, and demanded his money. But, happily for Bob, though he might
be knocked down, and actually was so, yet he could not possibly
be robbed, having nothing. The fiddler, therefore, having amused
himself with kicking him and beating him, as he lay, as long as he
saw good, left him, and has never been heard of since, nor inquired
after indeed, being no doubt the last man in the world whom Bob
wishes to see again.

By a letter from Hayley, to-day, I learn, that Flaxman, to whom we
are indebted for those Odyssey figures which Lady Frog brought over,
has almost finished a set for the Iliad also. I should be glad to
embellish my Homer with them, but neither my bookseller, nor I,
shall probably choose to risk so expensive an ornament on a work,
whose reception with the public is at present doubtful.

Adieu, my dearest Catharina. Give my best love to your husband. Come
home as soon as you can, and accept our united very best wishes.

  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Weston, Aug. 22, 1793.

My dear Friend,--I rejoice that you have had so pleasant an
excursion, and have beheld so many beautiful scenes. Except the
delightful Upway, I have seen them all. I have lived much at
Southampton, have slept and caught a sore throat at Lyndhurst, and
have swum in the bay of Weymouth. It will give us great pleasure to
see you here, should your business give you an opportunity to finish
your excursions of this season with one to Weston.

As for my going on, it is much as usual. I rise at six; an
industrious and wholesome practice from which I have never swerved
since March. I breakfast generally about eleven--have given the
intermediate time to my old delightful bard. Villoisson no longer
keeps me company, I therefore now jog along with Clarke and Barnes
at my elbow, and from the excellent annotations of the former,
select such as I think likely to be useful, or that recommend
themselves by the amusement they may afford; of which sorts there
are not a few. Barnes also affords me some of both kinds, but not so
many, his notes being chiefly paraphrastical or grammatical. My only
fear is, lest between them both I should make my work too voluminous.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Aug. 27, 1793.

I thank you, my dear brother, for consulting the Gibbonian oracle on
the question concerning Homer's muse and his blindness. I proposed
it likewise to my little neighbour Buchanan, who gave me precisely
the same answer. I felt an insatiable thirst to learn something new
concerning him, and, despairing of information from others, was
willing to hope, that I had stumbled on matter unnoticed by the
commentators, and might, perhaps, acquire a little intelligence
from himself. But the great and the little oracle together have
extinguished that hope, and I despair now of making any curious
discoveries about him.

Since Flaxman (which I did not know till your letter told me so) has
been at work for the Iliad, as well as the Odyssey, it seems a great
pity, that the engravings should not be bound up with some Homer or
other; and, as I said before, I should have been too proud to have
bound them up in mine. But there is an objection, at least such
it seems to me, that threatens to disqualify them for such a use,
namely, the shape and size of them, which are such, that no book of
the usual form could possibly receive them, save in a folded state,
which, I apprehend, would be to murder them.

The monument of Lord Mansfield, for which you say he is engaged,
will (I dare say) prove a noble effort of genius.[720] Statuaries,
as I have heard an eminent one say, do not much trouble themselves
about a likeness: else I would give much to be able to communicate
to Flaxman the perfect idea that I have of the subject, such as
he was forty years ago. He was at that time wonderfully handsome,
and would expound the most mysterious intricacies of the law, or
recapitulate both matter and evidence of a cause, as long as from
hence to Eartham, with an intelligent smile on his features, that
bespoke plainly the perfect ease with which he did it. The most
abstruse studies (I believe) never cost him any labour.

  [720] The celebrated monument in Westminster Abbey.

You say nothing lately of your intended journey our way: yet the
year is waning, and the shorter days give you a hint to lose no time
unnecessarily. Lately we had the whole family at the Hall, and now
we have nobody. The Throckmortons are gone into Berkshire, and the
Courtenays into Yorkshire. They are so pleasant a family, that I
heartily wish you to see them; and at the same time wish to see you
before they return, which will not be sooner than October. How shall
I reconcile these wishes seemingly opposite? Why, by wishing that
you may come soon and stay long. I know no other way of doing it.

My poor Mary is much as usual. I have set up Homer's head, and
inscribed the pedestal; my own Greek at the top, with your
translation under it, and

                    Ος δε παις ω πατρι, &c.

It makes altogether a very smart and learned appearance.[721]

  W. C.

  [721] This bust and pedestal were afterwards removed to Sir
  George Throckmorton's grounds, and placed in the shrubbery.


TO LADY HESKETH.

  August 29, 1793.

Your question, at what time your coming to us will be most
agreeable, is a knotty one, and such as, had I the wisdom of
Solomon, I should be puzzled to answer. I will therefore leave it
still a question, and refer the time of your journey Weston-ward
entirely to your own election: adding this one limitation, however,
that I do not wish to see you exactly at present, on account of the
unfinished state of my study, the wainscot of which still smells
of paint, and which is not yet papered. But to return: as I have
insinuated, thy pleasant company is the thing which I always wish,
and as much at one time as at another. I believe, if I examine
myself minutely, since I despair of ever having it in the height of
summer, which for your sake I should desire most, the depth of the
winter is the season which would be most eligible to me. For then it
is, that in general I have most need of a cordial, and particularly
in the month of January, I am sorry, however, that I departed so far
from my first purpose, and am answering a question, which I declared
myself unable to answer. Choose thy own time, secure of this, that,
whatever time that be, it will always to us be a welcome one.

I thank you for your pleasant extract of Miss Fanshaw's letter.

    Her pen drops eloquence as sweet
    As any muse's tongue can speak;
    Nor need a scribe, like her, regret
    Her want of Latin or of Greek.[722]

  [722] Miss Fanshaw was an intimate friend of Lady Hesketh's, and
  frequently residing with her.

And now, my dear, adieu! I have done more than I expected, and begin
to feel myself exhausted with so much scribbling at the end of four
hours' close application to study.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. MR. JOHNSON.

  Weston, Sept. 4, 1793.

My dearest Johnny,--To do a kind thing, and in a kind manner, is a
double kindness, and no man is more addicted to both than you, or
more skilful in contriving them. Your plan to surprise me agreeably
succeeded to admiration. It was only the day before yesterday, that,
while we walked after dinner in the orchard, Mrs. Unwin between
Sam and me, hearing the Hall clock, I observed a great difference
between that and ours, and began immediately to lament, as I had
often done, that there was not a sun-dial in all Weston to ascertain
the true time for us. My complaint was long, and lasted till,
having turned into the grass-walk, we reached the new building at
the end of it; where we sat awhile and reposed ourselves. In a few
minutes we returned by the way we came, when what think you was my
astonishment to see what I had not seen before, though I had passed
close by it, a smart sun-dial mounted on a smart stone pedestal! I
assure you it seemed the effect of conjuration. I stopped short,
and exclaimed--"Why, here is a sun-dial, and upon our ground! How
is this? Tell me, Sam, how it came here? Do you know anything about
it?" At first I really thought (that is to say, as soon as I could
think at all) that this fac-totum of mine, Sam Roberts, having often
heard me deplore the want of one, had given orders for the supply
of that want himself, without my knowledge, and was half pleased
and half offended. But he soon exculpated himself by imputing the
fact to you. It was brought up to Weston (it seems) about noon: but
Andrews stopped the cart at the blacksmith's, whence he sent to
inquire if I was gone for my walk. As it happened, I walked not till
two o'clock. So there it stood waiting till I should go forth, and
was introduced before my return. Fortunately too I went out at the
church end of the village, and consequently saw nothing of it. How
I could possibly pass it without seeing it, when it stood in the
walk, I know not, but certain it is that I did. And where I shall
fix it now, I know as little. It cannot stand between the two gates,
the place of your choice, as I understand from Samuel, because the
hay-cart must pass that way in the season. But we are now busy in
winding the walk all round the orchard, and, in doing so, shall
doubtless stumble at last upon some open spot that will suit it.

There it shall stand while I live, a constant monument of your
kindness.

I have this moment finished the twelfth book of the Odyssey; and I
read the Iliad to Mrs. Unwin every evening.

The effect of this reading is, that I still spy blemishes, something
at least that I can mend; so that, after all, the transcript of
alterations which you and George have made will not be a perfect
one. It would be foolish to forego an opportunity of improvement
for such a reason; neither will I. It is ten o'clock, and I
must breakfast. Adieu, therefore, my dear Johnny! Remember your
appointment to see us in October.

  Ever yours,
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Sept. 8, 1793.

_Non sum quod simulo_, my dearest brother! I am cheerful upon
paper sometimes, when I am absolutely the most dejected of all
creatures. Desirous however to gain something myself by my own
letters, unprofitable as they may and must be to my friends, I keep
melancholy out of them as much as I can, that I may, if possible, by
assuming a less gloomy air, deceive myself, and, by feigning with a
continuance, improve the fiction into reality.

So you have seen Flaxman's figures, which I intended you should not
have seen till I had spread them before you. How did you dare to
look at them? You should have covered your eyes with both hands: I
am charmed with Flaxman's Penelope, and though you don't deserve
that I should, will send you a few lines, such as they are, with
which she inspired me the other day while I was taking my noon-day
walk.

    The suitors sinn'd, but with a fair excuse,
    Whom all this elegance might well seduce;
    Nor can our censure on the husband fall,
    Who, for a wife so lovely, slew them all.

I know not that you will meet any body here, when we see you in
October, unless perhaps my Johnny should happen to be with us. If
Tom is charmed with the thoughts of coming to Weston, we are equally
so with the thoughts of seeing him here. At his years I should
hardly hope to make his visit agreeable to him, did I not know that
he is of a temper and disposition that must make him happy every
where. Give our love to him. If Romney can come with you, we have
both room to receive him and hearts to make him most welcome.

  W. C.


TO MRS. COURTENAY.

  Weston, Sept. 15, 1793.

A thousand thanks, my dearest Catharina, for your pleasant letter;
one of the pleasantest that I have received since your departure.
You are very good to apologize for your delay, but I had not
flattered myself with the hopes of a speedier answer. Knowing full
well your talents for entertaining your friends who are present, I
was sure you would with difficulty find half an hour that you could
devote to an absent one.

I am glad that you think of your return. Poor Weston is a desolation
without you. In the meantime I amuse myself as well as I can,
thrumming old Homer's lyre, and turning the premises upside down.
Upside down indeed, for so it is literally that I have been dealing
with the orchard, almost ever since you went, digging and delving
it around to make a new walk, which now begins to assume the shape
of one, and to look as if some time or other it may serve in that
capacity. Taking my usual exercise there the other day with Mrs.
Unwin, a wide disagreement between your clock and ours occasioned me
to complain much, as I have often done, of the want of a dial. Guess
my surprise, when at the close of my complaint I saw one--saw one
close at my side; a smart one, glittering in the sun, and mounted
on a pedestal of stone. I was astonished. "This," I exclaimed, "is
absolute conjuration!"--It was a most mysterious affair, but the
mystery was at last explained.

This scribble I presume will find you just arrived at Bucklands.
I would with all my heart that since dials can be thus suddenly
conjured from one place to another, I could be so too, and could
start up before your eyes in the middle of some walk or lawn, where
you and Lady Frog are wandering.

While Pitcairne whistles for his family estate in Fifeshire, he
will do well if he will sound a few notes for me. I am originally
of the same shire, and a family of my name is still there, to whom
perhaps he may whistle on my behalf, not altogether in vain. So
shall his fife excel all my poetical efforts, which have not yet,
and I dare say never will, effectually charm one acre of ground into
my possession.

Remember me to Sir John, Lady Frog, and your husband--tell them I
love them all. She told me once she was jealous, now indeed she
seems to have some reason, since to her I have not written, and have
written twice to you. But bid her be of good courage, in due time I
will give her proof of my constancy.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. MR. JOHNSON.

  Weston, Sept. 29, 1793.

My dear Johnny,--You have done well to leave off visiting and being
visited. Visits are insatiable devourers of time, and fit only
for those who, if they did not that, would do nothing. The worst
consequence of such departures from common practice is to be termed
a singular sort of a fellow, or an odd fish; a sort of reproach
that a man might be wise enough to contemn who had not half your
understanding.

I look forward with pleasure to October the 11th, the day which I
expect will be _albo notandus lapillo_, on account of your arrival
here.

Here you will meet Mr. Rose, who comes on the 8th, and brings with
him Mr. Lawrence, the painter, you may guess for what purpose.
Lawrence returns when he has made his copy of me, but Mr. Rose will
remain perhaps as long as you will. Hayley on the contrary will
come, I suppose, just in time not to see you. Him we expect on the
20th. I trust, however, that thou wilt so order thy pastoral matters
as to make thy stay here as long as possible.

Lady Hesketh, in her last letter, inquires very kindly after you,
asks me for your address, and purposes soon to write to you. We hope
to see her in November--so that, after a summer without company, we
are likely to have an autumn and a winter sociable enough.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 5, 1793.

My good intentions towards you, my dearest brother, are continually
frustrated; and, which is most provoking, not by such engagements
and avocations as have a right to my attention, such as those to my
Mary and the old bard of Greece, but by mere impertinences, such
as calls of civility from persons not very interesting to me, and
letters from a distance still less interesting, because the writers
of them are strangers. A man sent me a long copy of verses, which
I could do no less than acknowledge. They were silly enough, and
cost me eighteenpence, which was seventeenpence halfpenny farthing
more than they were worth. Another sent me at the same time a plan,
requesting my opinion of it, and that I would lend him my name as
editor, a request with which I shall not comply, but I am obliged to
tell him so, and one letter is all that I have time to despatch in
a day, sometimes half a one, and sometimes I am not able to write
at all. Thus it is that my time perishes, and I can neither give so
much of it as I would to you or to any other valuable purpose.

On Tuesday we expect company--Mr. Rose, and Lawrence the painter.
Yet once more is my patience to be exercised, and once more I am
made to wish that my face had been moveable, to put on and take off
at pleasure, so as to be portable in a band-box, and sent to the
artist. These however will be gone, as I believe I told you, before
you arrive, at which time I know not that any body will be here,
except my Johnny, whose presence will not at all interfere with our
readings--you will not, I believe, find me a very slashing critic--I
hardly indeed expect to find any thing in your Life of Milton
that I shall sentence to amputation. How should it be too long? A
well-written work, sensible and spirited, such as yours was, when I
saw it, is never so. But, however, we shall see. I promise to spare
nothing that I think may be lopped off with advantage.

I began this letter yesterday, but could not finish it till now.
I have risen this morning like an infernal frog out of Acheron,
covered with the ooze and mud of melancholy. For this reason I
am not sorry to find myself at the bottom of my paper, for had I
more room perhaps I might fill it all with croaking, and make an
heart-ache at Eartham, which I wish to be always cheerful. Adieu. My
poor sympathising Mary is of course sad, but always mindful of you.

  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Oct. 18, 1793.

My dear Brother,--I have not at present much that is necessary to
say here, because I shall have the happiness of seeing you so soon;
my time, according to custom, is a mere scrap, for which reason such
must be my letter also.

You will find here more than I have hitherto given you reason to
expect, but none who will not be happy to see you. These, however,
stay with us but a short time, and will leave us in full possession
of Weston on Wednesday next.

I look forward with joy to your coming, heartily wishing you a
pleasant journey, in which my poor Mary joins me. Give our best love
to Tom; without whom, after having been taught to look for him, we
should feel our pleasure in the interview much diminished.

     Læti expectamus te puerumque tuum.

  W. C.


TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.[723]

  [723] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Oct. 22, 1793.

My dear Friend,--You are very kind to apologize for a short letter,
instead of reproaching me with having been so long entirely silent.
I persuaded myself, however, that while you were on your journey
you would miss me less as a correspondent than you do when you
are at home, and therefore allowed myself to pursue my literary
labours only, but still purposing to write as soon as I should have
reason to judge you returned to London. Hindrances, however, to the
execution even of that purpose, have interposed; and at this moment
I write in the utmost haste, as indeed I always do, partly because
I never begin a letter till I am already fatigued with study, and
partly through fear of interruption before I can possibly finish it.

I rejoice that you have travelled so much to your satisfaction.
As to me, my travelling days, I believe, are over. Our journey of
last year was less beneficial, both to Mrs. Unwin's health and my
spirits, than I hoped it might be; and we are hardly rich enough to
migrate in quest of pleasure merely.

I thank you much for your last publication, which I am reading, as
fast as I can snatch opportunity, to Mrs. Unwin. We have found it,
as far as we have gone, both interesting and amusing; and I never
cease to wonder at the fertility of your invention, that, shut up
as you were in your vessel, and disunited from the rest of mankind,
could yet furnish you with such variety, and with the means,
likewise, of saying the same thing in so many different ways.[724]

  Sincerely yours,
  W. C.

  [724] The publication alluded to is entitled, "Letters to a Wife;
  written during three voyages to Africa, from 1750 to 1754. By the
  Author of Cardiphonia."


TO THE REV. J. JEKYLL RYE.

  Weston, Nov. 3, 1793.

My dear Sir,--Sensible as I am of your kindness in taking such a
journey, at no very pleasant season, merely to serve a friend of
mine, I cannot allow my thanks to sleep till I may have the pleasure
of seeing you. I hope never to show myself unmindful of so great
a favour. Two lines which I received yesterday from Mr. Hurdis,
written hastily on the day of decision, informed me that it was
made in his favour, and by a majority of twenty.[725] I have great
satisfaction in the event, and consequently hold myself indebted to
all who at my instance have contributed to it.

  [725] He was appointed Professor of Poetry in the University of
  Oxford.

You may depend on me for due attention to the honest clerk's
request. When he called, it was not possible that I should answer
your obliging letter, for he arrived here very early, and if I
suffered anything to interfere with my morning studies I should
never accomplish my labours. Your hint concerning the subject for
this year's copy is a very good one, and shall not be neglected.

  I remain,
  Sincerely yours,
  W. C.



Hayley's second visit to Weston took place very soon after the date
of the last letter. He found Cowper enlivened by the society of his
young kinsman from Norfolk, and another of his favourite friends,
Mr. Rose. The latter came recently from the seat of Lord Spencer, in
Northamptonshire, commissioned to invite Cowper, and his guests, to
Althorpe, where Gibbon, the historian, was making a visit of some
continuance.

Cowper was strongly urged to accept this flattering invitation from
a nobleman whom he cordially respected, and whose library alone
might be regarded as a magnet of very powerful attraction. But the
constitutional shyness of the poet, and the infirm state of Mrs.
Unwin's health, conspired to prevent the meeting. It would have
been curious to have contemplated the Poet of Christianity and the
author of the celebrated sixteenth chapter in "The Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire" placed in juxtaposition with each other. The
reflection would not have escaped a pious observer how much happier,
in the eye of wisdom, was the state of Cowper, clouded as it was by
depression and sorrow, than that of the unbelieving philosopher,
though in the zenith of his fame. We know it has been asserted
that men are not answerable for their creed. Why then are the Jews
a scattered people, the living witnesses of the truth of a divine
Revelation and of the avenging justice of God? But scepticism can
never justly be said to originate in want of evidence. Men doubt
because they search after truth with the pride of the intellect,
instead of seeking it with the simplicity of a little child, and
that humility of spirit, by which only it is to be found.


TO MRS. COURTENAY.

  Weston, Nov. 4, 1793.

I seldom rejoice in a day of soaking rain like this, but in this,
my dearest Catharina, I do rejoice sincerely, because it affords
me an opportunity of writing to you, which, if fair weather had
invited us into the orchard-walk at the usual hour, I should not
easily have found. I am a most busy man, busy to a degree that
sometimes half distracts me; but, if complete distraction be
occasioned by having the thoughts too much and too long attached
to a single point, I am in no danger of it, with such a perpetual
whirl are mine whisked about from one subject to another. When two
poets meet, there are fine doings I can assure you. My Homer finds
work for Hayley, and his Life of Milton work for me, so that we
are neither of us one moment idle. Poor Mrs. Unwin in the meantime
sits quiet in her corner, occasionally laughing at us both, and not
seldom interrupting us with some question or remark, for which she
is constantly rewarded by me with a "Hush--hold your peace." Bless
yourself, my dear Catharina, that you are not connected with a poet,
especially that you have not two to deal with; ladies who have, may
be bidden indeed to hold their peace, but very little peace have
they. How should they in fact have any, continually enjoined as they
are to be silent.



The same fever that has been so epidemic there, has been severely
felt here likewise; some have died, and a multitude have been in
danger. Two under our own roof have been infected with it, and I am
not sure that I have perfectly escaped myself, but I am now well
again.

I have persuaded Hayley to stay a week longer, and again my
hopes revive, that he may yet have an opportunity to know my
friends before he returns into Sussex. I write amidst a chaos of
interruptions: Hayley on one hand spouts Greek, and on the other
hand Mrs. Unwin continues talking, sometimes to us, and sometimes,
because we are both too busy to attend to her, she holds a dialogue
with herself. Query, is not this a bull--and ought I not instead of
dialogue to have said soliloquy?

Adieu! With our united love to all your party, and with ardent
wishes soon to see you all at Weston, I remain, my dearest Catharina,

  Ever yours,
  W. C.



Though Cowper writes with apparent cheerfulness, yet Hayley,
referring to this visit, remarks, "My fears for him, in every point
of view, were alarmed by his present very singular condition. He
possessed completely, at this period, all the admirable faculties of
his mind, and all the native tenderness of his heart; but there was
something indescribable in his appearance, which led me to apprehend
that, without some signal event in his favour, to re-animate his
spirits, they would gradually sink into hopeless dejection. The
state of his aged infirm companion afforded additional ground for
increasing solicitude. Her cheerful and beneficent spirit could
hardly resist her own accumulated maladies, so far as to preserve
ability sufficient to watch over the tender health of him, whom she
had watched and guarded so long."

Under these circumstances, Hayley, with an ardour of zeal and a
regard for Cowper's welfare, that reflect the highest honour upon
his character, determined on his return to London to interest his
more powerful friends in his behalf, and thus secure, if possible,
a timely provision against future difficulties. The necessity for
this act of kindness will soon appear to be painfully urgent. In
the meantime he cheered Cowper's mind, harassed by his Miltonic
engagement, with intelligence that had a tendency to relieve him
from much of his present embarrassment and dejection.


TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.

  Weston, Nov. 5, 1793.

My dear Friend,--In a letter from Lady Hesketh, which I received
not long since, she informed me how very pleasantly she had spent
some time at Wargrave. We now begin to expect her here, where our
charms of situation are perhaps not equal to yours, yet by no means
contemptible. She told me she had spoken to you in very handsome
terms of the country round about us, but not so of our house and
the view before it. The house itself, however, is not unworthy some
commendation; small as it is, it is neat, and neater than she is
aware of; for my study and the room over it have been repaired and
beautified this summer, and little more was wanting to make it an
abode sufficiently commodious for a man of my moderate desires.
As to the prospect from it, that she misrepresented strangely,
as I hope soon to have an opportunity to convince her by ocular
demonstration. She told you, I know, of certain cottages opposite
to us, or rather she described them as poor houses and hovels,
that effectually blind our windows. But none such exist. On the
contrary, the opposite object and the only one, is an orchard, so
well planted, and with trees of such growth, that we seem to look
into a wood, or rather to be surrounded by one. Thus, placed as we
are in the midst of a village, we have none of those disagreeables
that belong to such a position, and the village itself is one of
the prettiest I know; terminated at one end by the church tower,
seen through the trees, and at the other by a very handsome gateway,
opening into a fine grove of elms, belonging to our neighbour
Courtenay. How happy should I be to show it instead of describing it
to you!

  Adieu, my dear friend,
  W. C.


TO THE REV. WALTER BAGOT.

  Weston, Nov. 10, 1793.

My dear Friend,--You are very kind to consider my literary
engagements, and to make them a reason for not interrupting me more
frequently with a letter; but though I am indeed as busy as an
author or an editor can well be, and am not apt to be overjoyed at
the arrival of letters from uninteresting quarters, I shall always,
I hope, have leisure both to peruse and to answer those of my real
friends, and to do both with pleasure.

I have to thank you much for your benevolent aid in the affair of
my friend Hurdis. You have doubtless learned, ere now, that he has
succeeded, and carried the prize by a majority of twenty. He is well
qualified for the post he has gained. So much the better for the
honour of the Oxonian laurel, and so much the more for the credit of
those who have favoured him with their suffrages.

I am entirely of your mind respecting this conflagration by which
all Europe suffers at present,[726] and is likely to suffer for
a long time to come. The same mistake seems to have prevailed as
in the American business. We then flattered ourselves that the
colonies would prove an easy conquest, and, when all the neighbour
nations armed themselves against France, we imagined, I believe,
that she too would be presently vanquished. But we begin already
to be undeceived, and God only knows to what a degree we may find
we have erred at the conclusion. Such, however, is the state of
things all around us, as reminds me continually of the Psalmist's
expression--"_He shall break them in pieces like a potter's
vessel._" And I rather wish than hope, in some of my melancholy
moods, that England herself may escape a fracture.

  I remain, truly yours,
  W. C.

  [726] The effects of the French Revolution.


TO THE REV. MR. HURDIS.

  Weston, Nov. 24, 1793.

My dear Sir,--Though my congratulations have been delayed, you have
no friend, numerous as your friends are, who has more sincerely
rejoiced in your success than I. It was no small mortification
to me, to find that three out of the six whom I had engaged were
not qualified to vote. You have prevailed, however, and by a
considerable majority; there is therefore no room left for regret.
When your short note arrived, which gave me the agreeable news
of your victory, our friend of Eartham was with me, and shared
largely in the joy that I felt on the occasion. He left me but a
few days since, having spent somewhat more than a fortnight here;
during which time we employed all our leisure hours in the revisal
of his Life of Milton. It is now finished, and a very finished
work it is; and one that will do great honour, I am persuaded, to
the biographer, and the excellent man of injured memory who is the
subject of it. As to my own concern with the works of this first of
poets, which has been long a matter of burthensome contemplation, I
have the happiness to find at last that I am at liberty to postpone
my labours. While I expected that my commentary would be called for
in the ensuing spring, I looked forward to the undertaking with
dismay, not seeing a shadow of probability that I should be ready to
answer the demand; for this ultimate revisal of my Homer, together
with the notes, occupies completely at present (and will for some
time longer) all the little leisure that I have for study--leisure
which I gain at this season of the year by rising long before
daylight.

You are now become a nearer neighbour, and, as your professorship, I
hope, will not engross you wholly, will find an opportunity to give
me your company at Weston. Let me hear from you soon; tell me how
you like your new office, and whether you perform the duties of it
with pleasure to yourself. With much pleasure to others you will, I
doubt not, and with equal advantage.

  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Weston, Nov. 29, 1793.

My dear Friend,--I have risen, while the owls are still hooting,
to pursue my accustomed labours in the mine of Homer; but before
I enter upon them, shall give the first moment of daylight to the
purpose of thanking you for your last letter, containing many
pleasant articles of intelligence, with nothing to abate the
pleasantness of them, except the single circumstance that we are
not likely to see you here so soon as I expected. My hope was,
that the first frost would bring you and the amiable painter with
you.[727] If, however, you are prevented by the business of your
respective professions, you are well prevented, and I will endeavour
to be patient. When the latter was here, he mentioned one day the
subject of Diomede's horses, driven under the axle of his chariot
by the thunderbolt which fell at their feet, as a subject for his
pencil.[728] It is certainly a noble one, and therefore worthy of
his study and attention. It occurred to me at the moment, but I know
not what it was that made me forget it again the next moment, that
the horses of Achilles flying over the foss, with Patroclus and
Automedon in the chariot, would be a good companion for it.[729]
Should you happen to recollect this, when you next see him, you may
submit it, if you please, to his consideration. I stumbled yesterday
on another subject, which reminded me of said excellent artist, as
likely to afford a fine opportunity to the expression that he could
give it. It is found in the shooting match in the twenty-third book
of the Iliad, between Meriones and Teucer. The former cuts the
string with which the dove is tied to the mast-head, and sets her at
liberty; the latter, standing at his side, in all the eagerness of
emulation, points an arrow at the mark with his right hand, while
with his left he snatches the bow from his competitor; he is a fine
poetical figure, but Mr. Lawrence himself must judge whether or not
he promises as well for the canvas.[730]

  [727] Lawrence.

  [728]

    He, thund'ring downward hurl'd his candent bolt
    To the horse-feet of Diomede: dire fum'd
    The flaming sulphur, and both horses drove
    Under the axle.--

  _Cowper's Version_, book viii.

  [729]

    Right o'er the hollow foes the coursers leap'd,
    By the immortal gods to Peleus given.--

  _Cowper's Version_, book xvi.


  [730] Cowper here inverts the order of the names, and attributes
  to Teucer, what in the original is ascribed to Meriones.

    At once Meriones withdrew the bow
    From Teucer's hand, but held the shaft the while,
    Already aim'd......
    He ey'd the dove aloft beneath a cloud,
    And struck her circling high in air; the shaft
    Pass'd through her, and returning pierc'd the soil
    Before the foot of brave Meriones.
    She, perching on the mast again, her head
    Reclin'd, and hung her wide-unfolded wing;
    But, soon expiring, dropp'd and fell remote.

  The concluding lines of this passage convey a beautiful and
  affecting image.

He does great honour to my physiognomy by his intention to get
it engraved; and, though I think I foresee that this _private
publication_ will grow in time into a publication of absolute
publicity, I find it impossible to be dissatisfied with anything
that seems eligible both to him and you. To say the truth, when a
man has once turned his mind inside out for the inspection of all
who choose to inspect it, to make a secret of his face seems but
little better than a self-contradiction. At the same time, however,
I shall be best pleased if it be kept, according to your intentions,
as a rarity.

I have lost Hayley, and begin to be uneasy at not hearing from him;
tell me about him when you write.

I should be happy to have a work of mine embellished by Lawrence,
and made a companion for a work of Hayley's. It is an event to which
I look forward with the utmost complacence. I cannot tell you what
a relief I feel it not to be pressed for Milton.

  W. C.


TO SAMUEL ROSE, ESQ.

  Weston, Dec. 8, 1793.

My dear Friend,--In my last I forgot to thank you for the box of
books, containing also the pamphlets. We have read, that is to
say, my cousin has, who reads to us in the evening, the history of
Jonathan Wild,[731] and found it highly entertaining. The satire
on great men is witty, and I believe perfectly just: we have no
censure to pass on it, unless that we think the character of Mrs.
Heartfree not well sustained; not quite delicate in the latter part
of it; and that the constant effect of her charms upon every man
who sees her, has a sameness in it that is tiresome, and betrays
either much carelessness, or idleness, or lack of invention. It is
possible, indeed, that the author might intend by this circumstance
a satirical glance at novelists, whose heroines are generally all
bewitching; but it is a fault that he had better have noticed in
another manner, and not have exemplified in his own.

  [731] A production of Fielding's.

The first volume of _Man as He is_ has lain unread in my
study-window this twelvemonth, and would have been returned unread
to its owner, had not my cousin come in good time to save it from
that disgrace. We are now reading it, and find it excellent;
abounding with wit and just sentiment, and knowledge both of books
and men.

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Dec. 8, 1793.

I have waited, and waited impatiently, for a line from you, and am
at last determined to send you one, to inquire what has become of
you, and why you are silent so much longer than usual.

I want to know many things, which only you can tell me, but
especially I want to know what has been the issue of your conference
with Nichol: has he seen your work?[732] I am impatient for the
appearance of it, because impatient to have the spotless credit of
the great poet's character, as a man and a citizen, vindicated, as
it ought to be, and as it never will be again.

  [732] Hayley's Life of Milton.

It is a great relief to me, that my Miltonic labours are suspended.
I am now busy in transcribing the alterations of Homer, having
finished the whole revisal. I must then write a new preface, which
done, I shall endeavour immediately to descant on _The Four Ages_.

  Adieu! my dear brother,
  W. C.



The Miltonic labours of Cowper were not only suspended at this time,
but we lament to say never resumed.

There is a period in the history of men of letters, when the mind
begins to shrink from the toil and responsibility of a great
undertaking, and to feel the necessity of contracting its exertions
within limits more suited to its diminished powers. Physical and
moral causes are often found to co-operate in hastening this crisis.
The sensibilities that are inseparable from genius, the ardour
that consumes itself by its own fires, the labour of thought, and
the inadequacy of the body to sustain the energies of the soul
within--these often unite in harassing the spirits, and sowing the
seeds of a premature decay. Such was now the case with Cowper.
His literary exertions had been too unremitting, and though we
must allow much to the influence of his unhappy malady, and to the
illness of Mrs. Unwin, yet there can be no doubt that his long and
laborious habits of study had no small share in undermining his
constitution.

It seems desirable therefore, at this period, to refer to the
intended edition of Milton, and briefly to state the result of his
labours.

The design is thus stated by Cowper himself, in one of his letters.
"A Milton, that is to rival, and if possible to exceed in splendour,
Boydell's Shakspeare, is in contemplation, and I am in the Editor's
office. Fuseli is the painter. My business will be to select notes
from others, and to write original notes; to translate the Latin and
Italian poems, and to give a correct text."

All that he was enabled to accomplish of this undertaking was as
follows:

He commenced the series of his translations about the middle of
September, 1791. In February, 1792, he had completed all his
Latin pieces, and shortly after he finished the Italian. While at
Eartham, in August, he revised all his translations, and they were
subsequently retouched, in his declining strength, at East Dereham.
From an amiable desire to avoid what might create irritation, he
omitted the Poems against the Catholics, and thus assigned his
motives in a letter to Johnson.


  Weston, Oct. 30, 1791.

"We and the Papists are at present on amicable terms. They have
behaved themselves peaceably many years, and have lately received
favours from Government. I should think, therefore, that the dying
embers of ancient animosity had better not be troubled."



He also omitted a few of the minuter poems, as not worthy of being
ranked with the rest.

He was assisted in the execution of this work by the Adamo of
Andreini, Bentley's Milton, an interleaved copy of Newton's, and
Warton's edition of the minor poems.[733]

  [733] Of these editions of Milton, that of Bentley has always
  been considered a complete failure. It is remarkable for the
  boldness of its conjectural emendations, and for the liberties
  taken with the text. An amusing anecdote is recorded on this
  subject. To a friend expostulating with him on the occasion,
  and urging that it was impossible for Milton, in so many
  instances, to have written as he alleged, he replied with his
  characteristic spirit, "Then he ought to have written so." Bishop
  Newton's edition has acquired just celebrity, and has served as
  the basis of all subsequent editions. It has been deservedly
  called "the best edited English Classic up to the period of its
  publication." Warton's edition of "The Juvenile and Minor Poems"
  discovers a classical and elegant taste. Its merit, however, is
  greatly impaired by the severity of its censures on Milton's
  republican and religious principles. It was to rescue that great
  poet from the animadversions of Warton and Dr. Johnson that
  Hayley engaged in a life of Milton, which does honour to the
  manliness and generosity of his feelings. But the most powerful
  defence is that of the Rev. Dr. Symmons, who, with considerable
  vigour of thought and language, has taken a most comprehensive
  view of the character and prose writings of Milton. He would
  have been entitled to distinguished praise, if, in vindicating
  the republicanism of Milton, he had not deeply fallen into it
  himself. In the present day the clouds of prejudice seem to
  have subsided, and the errors of the politician are deservedly
  forgotten in the celebrity of the poet. There was a period
  when, according to Dr. Johnson, a monument to Philips, with
  an inscription by Atterbury, in which he was said to be _soli
  Miltono secundus_, was refused admittance by Dean Sprat into
  Westminster Abbey, on the ground of its "being too detestable to
  be read on the wall of a building dedicated to devotion."

  The honours of a monument were at length conceded to Milton
  himself; but the beautiful and elegant Latin inscription,
  composed by Dr. George, Provost of King's College, Cambridge,
  shows that it was thought necessary to apologize for its
  admission into that sacred repository of kings and prelates.*

    *We cannot refrain from enriching our pages with this much
    admired Epitaph.

      "Augusti regum cineres sanctæque favillæ
      Heroum, Vosque O! venerandi nominis umbræ!
      Parcite, quod vestris, infensum regibus olim,
      Sedibus infertur nomen: liceatque supremis
      Funeribus finire odia, et mors obruat iras.
      Nunc sub foederibus coeant felicibus, una
      Libertas, et jus sacri inviolabile sceptri.
      Rege sub _Augusto_ fas sit laudare _Catonem_."

With respect to his critical labours, he proceeded with
singular slowness and difficulty. It appears to have been a
most oppressive burden on his spirits. "Milton especially," he
observes, "is my grievance; and I might almost as well be haunted
by his ghost as goaded with continual reproaches for neglecting
him." He was always soliciting more time, and when the appointed
period was expired, he renewed his application for fresh delay.
His commentary is restricted to the three first books of the
Paradise Lost.

This seems to imply that however nature designed him to be a
poet, she denied the qualifications necessary to constitute the
critic; for it will generally be found, that to execute with
delight and ease is the attribute of genius, and the evidence
of natural impulse; and that slowness of performance indicates
the want of those powers that afford the promise and pledge of
success.

In this unfinished state, the work was published by Hayley, in
the year 1808, for the benefit of the second son of Mr. Rose, the
godchild of Cowper. Some designs in outline were furnished by
Flaxman, highly characteristic of his graceful style.

The translations are a perfect model of beautiful and elegant
versification.

We consider Milton's address to his father to be one of the most
beautiful compositions extant, and rejoice in presenting it to
the reader in an English form, so worthy of the original Latin
poem.


TO HIS FATHER.

  Oh that Pieria's spring would thro' my breast
  Pour its inspiring influence, and rush,
  No rill, but rather an o'erflowing flood!
  That for my venerable father's sake,
  All meaner themes renounc'd, my muse on wings
  Of duty borne, might reach a loftier strain.
  For thee, my father! howsoe'er it please,
  She frames this slender work, nor know I aught,
  That may thy gifts more suitably requite;
  Though to requite them suitably would ask
  Returns much nobler, and surpassing far
  The meagre stores of verbal gratitude:
  But, such as I possess, I send thee all.
  This page presents thee in their full amount
  With thy son's treasures, and the sum is nought:
  Nought save the riches that from airy dream
  In secret grottoes, and in laurel bow'rs,
  I have, by golden Clio's gift, acquir'd.

He then sings the praises of song in the following animated
strain.

  Verse is a work divine; despise not thou
  Verse therefore, which evinces (nothing more)
  Man's heavenly source, and which, retaining still
  Some scintillations of Promethean fire,
  Bespeaks him animated from above.
  The gods love verse; the infernal pow'rs themselves
  Confess the influence of verse, which stirs
  The lowest deep, and binds in triple chains
  Of adamant both Pluto and the shades.
  In verse the Delphic priestess, and the pale
  Tremulous Sybil, make the future known,
  And he who sacrifices, on the shrine
  Hangs verse, both when he smites the threat'ning bull,
  And when he spreads his reeking entrails wide
  To scrutinize the Fates envelop'd there.

He anticipates it as one of the employments of glorified spirits
in heaven.

  We too, ourselves, what time we seek again
  Our native skies, and one eternal Now[734]
  Shall be the only measure of our being,
  Crown'd all with gold, and chanting to the lyre
  Harmonious verse, shall range the courts above,
  And make the starry firmament resound.

  [734] The same expression is used by Cowley:

    "Nothing is there to come, and nothing past,
    But an eternal Now does always last."

The sympathy existing between the two kindred studies of poetry
and music is described with happy effect.

  Now say, what wonder is it, if a son
  Of thine delight in verse, if so conjoin'd
  In close affinity, we sympathize
  In social arts, and kindred studies sweet?
  Such distribution of himself to us
  Was Phoebus' choice; thou hast thy gift,[735] and I
  Mine also, and between us we receive,
  Father and son, the whole inspiring god.

  [735] Milton's father was well skilled in music.

The following effusion of filial feeling is as honourable to the
discernment and liberality of the parent, as it is expressive of the
gratitude of the son.

    ... Thou never bad'st me tread
    The beaten path and broad, that leads right on
    To opulence, nor did'st condemn thy son
    To the insipid clamours of the bar,
    To laws voluminous and ill observ'd;
    But, wishing to enrich me more, to fill
    My mind with treasure, led'st me far away
    From city-din to deep retreats, to banks
    And streams Aonian, and, with free consent,
    Did'st place me happy at Apollo's side.
    I speak not now, on more important themes
    Intent, of common benefits, and such
    As nature bids, but of thy larger gifts,
    My father! who, when I had open'd once
    The stores of Roman rhetoric, and learn'd
    The full-ton'd language of the eloquent Greeks,
    Whose lofty music grac'd the lips of Jove,
    Thyself did'st counsel me to add the flow'rs,
    That Gallia boasts, those too, with which the smooth
    Italian his degen'rate speech adorns,
    That witnesses his mixture with the Goth;
    And Palestine's prophetic songs divine.

We delight in witnessing the exuberance of manly and generous
feeling in a son towards a parent, entitled by kind offices to his
gratitude, and therefore transcribe the following passage.

    Go now, and gather dross, ye sordid minds,
    That covet it; what could my father more?
    What more could Jove himself, unless he gave
    His own abode, the heaven in which he reigns?
    More eligible gifts than these were not
    Apollo's to his son, had they been safe,
    As they were insecure, who made the boy
    The world's vice-luminary, bade him rule
    The radiant chariot of the day, and bind
    To his young brows his own all-dazzling wreath.
    I therefore, although last and least my place
    Among the learned, in the laurel grove
    Will hold, and where the conqu'ror's ivy twines,
    Henceforth exempt from the unletter'd throng
    Profane, nor even to be seen by such.
    Away then, sleepless Care, Complaint, away!
    And Envy, with thy "jealous leer malign!"
    Nor let the monster Calumny shoot forth
    Her venom'd tongue at me. Detested foes!
    Ye all are impotent against my peace,
    For I am privileg'd, and bear my breast
    Safe, and too high for your viperean wound.

He thus beautifully concludes this affecting tribute of filial
gratitude.

      But thou, my father! since to render thanks
    Equivalent, and to requite by deeds
    Thy liberality, exceeds my power,
    Suffice it, that I thus record thy gifts,
    And bear them treasur'd in a grateful mind!
    Ye too, the favourite pastime of my youth,
    My voluntary numbers, if ye dare
    To hope longevity, and to survive
    Your master's funeral, not soon absorb'd
    In the oblivious Lethæan gulf,
    Shall to futurity perhaps convey
    This theme, and by these praises of my sire
    Improve the fathers of a distant age!

We subjoin Hayley's remark on this poem, in Cowper's edition of
Milton.

"These verses are founded on one of the most interesting subjects
that language can display, the warmth and felicity of strong
reciprocal kindness between a father and a son, not only united
by the most sacred tie of nature, but still more endeared to each
other by the happy cultivation of honourable and congenial arts. The
sublime description of poetry, and the noble and graceful portrait,
which the author here exhibits of his own mental character, may be
said to render this splendid poem the prime jewel in a coronet of
variegated gems."

We extract the following passages from the remarks and notes in
Cowper's Milton, as exhibiting the manner in which he executed this
portion of his labours.


BOOK I.

"There is a solemnity of sentiment, as well as majesty of numbers,
in the exordium of this noble poem, which, in the works of the
ancients, has no example.

"The sublimest of all subjects was reserved for Milton; and,
bringing to the contemplation of that subject, not only a genius
equal to the best of theirs but a heart also deeply impregnated with
the divine truths which lay before him, it is no wonder that he
has produced a composition, on the whole, superior to any that we
have received from former ages. But he who addresses himself to the
perusal of this work, with a mind entirely unaccustomed to serious
and spiritual contemplation, unacquainted with the word of God, or
prejudiced against it, is ill qualified to appreciate the value of
a poem built upon it, or to taste its beauties. Milton is the poet
of Christians: an infidel may have an ear for the harmony of his
numbers, may be aware of the dignity of his expression, and, in some
degree, of the sublimity of his conceptions; but the unaffected and
masculine piety, which was his true inspirer, and is the very soul
of his poem, he will either not perceive, or it will offend him."

  To bellow through the vast and boundless deep.

  Line 177.

"In this we seem to hear a thunder suited both to the scene and the
occasion, incomparably more awful than any ever heard on earth, and
the _thunder winged with lightning_ is highly poetical. It may be
observed here, that the thunder of Milton is not hurled from the
hand like Homer's, but discharged like an arrow. Thus in book vi.
line 712, the Father, ordering forth the Son for the destruction of
the rebel angels, says--

    ..... Bring forth all my war,
    _My bow, and thunder_.

As if, jealous for the honour of the true God, the poet disdained to
arm him like the god of the heathen."[736]

  He spake, and to confirm his words, &c. &c.

  Line 663.

  [736] Psalm vii. 12.

"This is another instance in which appears the advantage that Milton
derives from the grandeur of his subject. What description could
even he have given of a host of human warriors insulting their
conqueror, at all comparable to this? First, their multitude is
to be noticed. They are not thousands but millions; and they are
millions, not of puny mortals, but of mighty cherubim. Their swords
flame, not metaphorically, but they are swords of fire; they flash
not by reflection of the sunbeams, like the swords of Homer, but by
their own light, and that light plays not idly in the broad day, but
far round illumines Hell. And lastly, they defy not a created being
like themselves, but the Almighty."


BOOK II.

  As when from mountain tops, &c.

  Line 488.

"The reader loses half the beauty of this charming simile, who does
not give particular attention to the numbers. There is a majesty in
them not often equalled, and never surpassed, even by this great
poet himself; the movement is uncommonly slow; an effect produced by
means already hinted at, the assemblage of a greater proportion of
long syllables than usual. The pauses are also managed with great
skill and judgment; while the clouds rise, and the heavens gather
blackness, they fall in those parts of the verse, where they retard
the reader most, and thus become expressive of the solemnity of the
subject; but in the latter part of the simile, when the sun breaks
out, and the scene brightens, they are so disposed as to allow
the verse an easier and less interrupted flow, more suited to the
cheerfulness of the occasion."

He concludes with the following summary of the great doctrines that
form the foundation of the Paradise Lost.

"It may not be amiss, at the close of these admirable speeches--as
admirable for their sound divinity as for the perspicuity with
which it is expressed--to allow ourselves a moment's pause, for the
purpose of taking a short retrospect of the doctrines contained in
them. Man, in the beginning, is placed in a probationary state,
and made the arbiter of his own destiny. By his own fault, he
forfeits happiness, both for himself and his descendants. But
mercy interposes for his restoration. That mercy is represented as
perfectly free, as vouchsafed to the most unworthy; to creatures so
entirely dead in sin as to be destitute even of a sense of their
need of it, and consequently too stupid even to ask it. They are
also as poor as they are unfeeling; and, were it possible that they
could affect themselves with a just sense and apprehension of their
lapsed condition, they would have no compensation to offer to their
offended Maker, nothing with which they can satisfy the demands
of his justice,--in short, no atonement. In this ruinous state of
their affairs, and when all hope of reconciliation seems lost for
ever, the Son of God voluntarily undertakes for them,--undertakes
to become the son of man also, and to suffer, in man's stead,
the penalty annexed to his transgression. In consequence of
this self-substitution, Christ becomes the federal head of his
church, and the sole author of salvation to his people. As Adam's
sin was imputed to his posterity, so the faultless obedience of
the second Adam is imputed to all, who, in the great concern of
justification, shall renounce their own obedience as imperfect and
therefore incompetent. The sentence is thus reversed as to all
believers: 'Death is swallowed up in victory.' The Saviour presents
the redeemed before the throne of the Eternal Father, in whose
countenance no longer any symptom of displeasure appears against
them, but their joy and peace are thenceforth perfect. The general
resurrection takes place; the saints are made assessors with Christ
in the judgment, both of men and angels; the new heaven and earth,
the destined habitation of the just, succeed; the Son of God, his
whole undertaking accomplished, surrenders the kingdom to his
Father: God becomes all in all! It is easy to see, that, among these
doctrines, there are some which, in modern times, have been charged
with novelty; but how new they are Milton is a witness."

Fuseli, whose labours were so unfortunately superseded, completed
a series of admirable paintings from subjects furnished by the
Paradise Lost; which were afterwards exhibited in London, under the
name of the Milton Gallery. He thus acquired a reputation which
placed him in the first rank of artists; and the amateur had the
opportunity of seeing, in the Shakspeare and Milton galleries,
the most distinguished painters engaged in illustrating the
productions of the two greatest authors that ever adorned any age or
country.[737]

  [737] A popular writer paid the following eloquent tribute to
  these masterly specimens of professional art.

      Yet mark each willing Muse, where Boydell draws,
    And calls the sister pow'rs in Shakspeare's cause!
    By art controll'd the fire of Reynolds breaks,
    And nature's pathos in her Northcote speaks;
    The Grecian forms in Hamilton combine,
    Parrhasian grace and Zeuxis' softest line,
    There Barry's learning meets with Romney's strength,
    And Smirke portrays Thalia at full length.

      Lo! Fuseli (in whose tempestuous soul
    The unnavigable tides of genius roll,)
    Depicts the sulph'rous fire, the smould'ring light,
    The bridge chaotic o'er the abyss of night,
    With each accursed form and mystic spell,
    And singly "bears up all the fame of hell!"

  _Pursuits of Literature._

This projected edition of Milton is remarkable as having laid
the foundation of the intercourse, which soon ripened into
friendship, between Cowper and Hayley. The latter was at that
time engaged in writing a life of Milton, which gave rise to his
being represented as an opponent of Cowper. To exonerate himself
from such an imputation, he wrote the letter which we subjoin in
a note.[738]

  [738]

  Eartham, Feb. 1792.

  Dear Sir,--I have often been tempted, by affectionate admiration
  of your poetry, to trouble you with a letter; but I have
  repeatedly checked myself in recollecting that the vanity of
  believing ourselves distantly related in spirit to a man of
  genius is but a sorry apology for intruding on his time.

  Though I resisted my desire of professing myself your friend,
  that I might not disturb you with intrusive familiarity, I cannot
  resist a desire, equally affectionate, of disclaiming an idea
  which I am told is imputed to me, of considering myself, on a
  recent occasion, as an antagonist to you. Allow me, therefore,
  to say, I was solicited to write a Life of Milton, for Boydell
  and Nichol, before I had the least idea that you and Mr. Fuseli
  were concerned in a project similar to theirs. When I first heard
  of your intention, I was apprehensive that we might undesignedly
  thwart each other; but, on seeing your proposals, I am agreeably
  persuaded that our respective labours will be far from clashing;
  as it is your design to illustrate Milton with a series of notes,
  and I only mean to execute a more candid life of him than his
  late biographer has given us, upon a plan that will, I flatter
  myself, be particularly pleasing to those who love the author as
  we do.

  As to the pecuniary interest of those persons who venture large
  sums in expensive decoration of Milton, I am persuaded his
  expanding glory will support them all. Every splendid edition,
  where the merits of the pencil are in any degree worthy of the
  poet, will, I think, be secure of success. I wish it cordially
  to all; as I have a great affection for the arts, and a sincere
  regard for those whose talents reflect honour upon them.

  To you, my dear sir, I have a grateful attachment, for the
  infinite delight which your writings have afforded me; and if,
  in the course of your work, I have any opportunity to serve or
  oblige you, I shall seize it with that friendly spirit which has
  impelled me at present to assure you, both in prose and rhyme,
  that I am your cordial admirer,

  W. HAYLEY.

  P.S. I wrote the enclosed sonnet on being told that our names
  had been idly printed together in a newspaper, _as hostile
  competitors_. Pray forgive its partial defects for its
  affectionate sincerity. From my ignorance of your address, I send
  this to your bookseller's by a person commissioned to place my
  name in the list of your subscribers; and let me add, if you ever
  wish to form a new collection of names for any similar purpose,
  I entreat you to honour me so far as to rank _mine_, of your own
  accord, among those of your sincerest friends. Adieu!


  SONNET.

  TO WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.

  _On hearing that our names had been idly mentioned in a
  newspaper, as competitors in a Life of Milton._

    Cowper! delight of all who justly prize
    The splendid magic of a strain divine,
    That sweetly tempts th' enlighten'd soul to rise,
    As sunbeams lure an eagle to the skies.
    Poet! to whom I feel my heart incline
    As to a friend endear'd by virtue's ties;
    Ne'er shall my name in pride's contentious line
    With hostile emulation cope with thine!
    No, let us meet, with kind fraternal aim,
    Where Milton's shrine invites a votive throng.
    With thee I share a passion for his fame,
    His zeal for truth, his scorn of venal blame:
    But thou hast rarer gifts,--to thee belong
    His harp of highest tone, his sanctity of song.



Having detailed the circumstances connected with the edition of
Milton, we return to the regular correspondence.


  TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.[739]

  [739] Private correspondence.

  Weston, Dec. 10, 1793.

You mentioned, my dear friend, in your last letter, an unfavourable
sprain that you had received, which you apprehended might be very
inconvenient to you for some time to come; and having learned also
from Lady Hesketh the same unwelcome intelligence, in terms still
more alarming than those in which you related the accident yourself,
I cannot but be anxious, as well as my cousin, to know the present
state of it; and shall truly rejoice to hear that it is in a state
of recovery. Give us a line of information on this subject, as soon
as you can conveniently, and you will much oblige us.

I write by morning candle-light; my literary business obliging me
to be an early riser. Homer demands me: finished, indeed, but the
alterations not transcribed: a work to which I am now hastening as
fast as possible. The transcript ended, which is likely to amount
to a good sizeable volume, I must write a new preface: and then
farewell to Homer for ever! And if the remainder of my days be a
little gilded with the profits of this long and laborious work, I
shall not regret the time that I have bestowed on it.

  I remain, my dear friend,
  Affectionately yours,
  W. C.

Can you give us any news of Lord Howe's Armada; concerning which we
may inquire, as our forefathers did of the Spanish,--"an in coelum
sublata sit, an in Tartarum depressa?"[740]

  [740] Lord Howe was at this time in pursuit of the French fleet,
  and absent six weeks, during which the public received no
  intelligence of his movements. His lordship at length returned,
  having only seen the enemy, but without having been able to
  overtake and bring them to action. Though this furnished no
  argument against him, but rather showed the terror that he
  inspired, yet some of the wits of the day wrote the following
  _jeu d'esprit_ on the occasion.

    When Cæsar triumph'd o'er his Gallic foes,
    Three words concise,* his gallant acts disclose;
    But Howe, more brief, comprises his in _one_,
    And _vidi_ tells us all that he has done.

      *_Veni, vidi, vici._ I came, I saw, I conquered.

  Lord Howe subsequently proved his claim to the whole of this
  celebrated despatch of Cæsar, by the great victory which he
  gained off Ushant over the French fleet, June 1, 1794, a victory
  which forms one of the brightest triumphs of the British navy.



The reader may now be anxious to learn some particulars of the
projected poem, which has been repeatedly mentioned under the title
of _The Four Ages_; a poem to which the mind of Cowper looked
eagerly forward, as to a new and highly promising field for his
excursive fancy. The idea had been suggested to him in the year
1791, by his clerical neighbour, Mr. Buchanan, of Ravenstone, a
small sequestered village within the distance of an easy walk
from Weston. This gentleman, who had occasionally enjoyed the
gratification of visiting Cowper, suggested to him, with a becoming
diffidence, the project of a new poem on the four distinct periods
of life--infancy, youth, manhood, and old age. He imparted his ideas
to the poet by a letter, in which he observed, with equal modesty
and truth, that Cowper was particularly qualified to relish, and to
do justice to the subject; a subject which he supposed not hitherto
treated expressly, as its importance deserved, by any poet ancient
or modern.

Mr. Buchanan added to this letter a brief sketch of contents for the
projected composition. This hasty sketch he enlarged, at the request
of Cowper. How the poet appreciated the suggestion will appear from
the following billet.


TO THE REV. MR. BUCHANAN.

  Weston, May 11, 1793.

My dear Sir,--You have sent me a beautiful poem, wanting nothing
but metre. I would to heaven that you would give it that requisite
yourself; for he who could make the sketch, cannot but be well
qualified to finish. But if you will not, I will; provided always
nevertheless, that God gives me ability, for it will require no
common share to do justice to your conceptions.

  I am much yours,
  W. C.

Your little messenger vanished before I could catch him.



This work, in his first conception of it, was greatly endeared to
him, but he soon entertained an apprehension that he should never
accomplish it. Writing to his friend of St. Paul's in 1793, the poet
said--"_The Four Ages_ is a subject that delights me when I think
of it; but I am ready to fear, that all my ages will be exhausted
before I shall be at leisure to write upon it."

A fragment is all that he has left, for which we refer the reader
to the Poems. In his happier days, it would have been expanded in a
manner more commensurate with the copiousness of the subject, and
the poetical powers of the author.

It may be interesting to add, that a modern poem on the Four Ages
of Man was written by M. Werthmuller, a citizen of Zurich, and
translated into Latin verse, by Dr. Olstrochi, librarian to the
Ambrosian library at Milan. This performance gave rise to another
German poem on the Four Ages of Woman, by M. Zacharie, professor of
poetry at Brunswick.

The increasing infirmities of Cowper's aged companion, Mrs. Unwin,
his filial solicitude to alleviate her sufferings, and the gathering
clouds of deeper despondency that began to settle on his mind, in
the first month of the year 1794, not only rendered it impossible
for him to advance in any great original performance, but, to use
his own expressive words, in the close of his correspondence with
his highly-valued friend, Mr. Rose, made all composition either of
poetry or prose impracticable. Writing to that friend in January
1794, he says, "I have just ability enough to transcribe, which is
all that I have to do at present: God knows that I write, at this
moment, under the pressure of sadness not to be described."

It was a spectacle that might awaken compassion in the sternest of
human characters, to see the health, the comfort, and the little
fortune of a man, so distinguished by intellectual endowments, and
by moral excellence, perishing most deplorably. A sight so affecting
made many friends of Cowper solicitous and importunate that his
declining life should be honourably protected by public munificence.
Men of all parties agreed that a pension might be granted to an
author of his acknowledged merit, with graceful propriety.

But such is the difficulty of doing real good, experienced even
by the great and powerful, or so apt are statesmen to forget the
pressing exigence of meritorious individuals, in the distractions of
official perplexity, that month after month elapsed, without the
accomplishment of so desirable an object.

Imagination can hardly devise any human condition more truly
affecting than the state of the poet at this period. His generous
and faithful guardian, Mrs. Unwin, who had preserved him through
seasons of the severest calamity, was now, with her faculties and
fortune impaired, sinking fast into second childhood. The distress
of heart that he felt in beholding the afflicting change in a
companion so justly dear to him, conspiring with his constitutional
melancholy, was gradually undermining the exquisite faculties of his
mind. The disinterested and affectionate kindness of Lady Hesketh,
at this crisis, deserves to be recorded in terms of the highest
commendation. With a magnanimity of feeling to which it is difficult
to do justice, and to the visible detriment of her health, she
nobly devoted herself to the superintendence of a house, whose two
interesting inhabitants were almost incapacitated from attending to
the ordinary offices of life. Those only who have lived with the
superannuated and the melancholy, can properly appreciate the value
of such a sacrifice.

The two last of Cowper's letters to Hayley, that breathe a spirit of
mental activity and cheerful friendship, were written in the close
of the year 1793, and in the beginning of the next. They arose from
an accident that it may be proper to relate, before we insert them.

On Hayley's return from Weston, he had given an account of the poet
to his old friend, Lord Thurlow. That learned and powerful critic,
in speaking of Cowper's Homer, declared himself not satisfied with
his version of Hector's admirable prayer in caressing his child.
Both ventured on new translations of this prayer, which were
immediately sent to Cowper, and the following letters will prove
with what just and manly freedom of spirit he was at this time able
to criticize the composition of his friends and his own.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Dec. 17, 1793.

    Oh Jove! and all ye Gods! grant this my son
    To prove, like me, pre-eminent in Troy!
    In valour such, and firmness of command!
    Be he extoll'd, when he returns from fight,
    As far his sire's superior! may he slay
    His enemy, bring home his gory spoils,
    And may his mother's heart o'erflow with joy!

I rose this morning, at six o'clock, on purpose to translate this
prayer again, and to write to my dear brother. Here you have it,
such as it is, not perfectly according to my own liking, but as
well as I could make it, and I think better than either yours or
Lord Thurlow's. You with your six lines have made yourself stiff
and ungraceful, and he with his seven has produced as good prose
as heart can wish, but no poetry at all. A scrupulous attention to
the letter has spoiled you both; you have neither the spirit nor
the manner of Homer. A portion of both may be found, I believe, in
my version, but not so much as I could wish--it is better however
than the printed one. His lordship's two first lines I cannot very
well understand; he seems to me to give a sense to the original that
does not belong to it. Hector, I apprehend, does not say, "Grant
that he may prove himself my son, and be eminent," &c.--but "grant
that this my son may prove eminent"--which is a material difference.
In the latter sense I find the simplicity of an ancient; in the
former, that is to say, in the notion of a man proving himself
his father's son by similar merit, the finesse and dexterity of a
modern. His lordship too makes the man, who gives the young hero
his commendation, the person who returns from battle; whereas Homer
makes the young hero himself that person, at least if Clarke is a
just interpreter, which I suppose is hardly to be disputed.

If my old friend would look into my Preface, he would find a
principle laid down there, which perhaps it would not be easy to
invalidate, and which properly attended to would equally secure a
translation from stiffness and from wildness. The principle I mean
is this--"Close, but not so close as to be servile! free, but not
so free as to be licentious!" A superstitious fidelity loses the
spirit, and a loose deviation the sense of the translated author--a
happy moderation in either case is the only possible way of
preserving both.

Thus I have disciplined you both, and now, if you please, you may
both discipline me. I shall not enter my version in my book till
it has undergone your strictures at least, and, should you write
to the noble critic again, you are welcome to submit it to his. We
are three awkward fellows indeed, if we cannot amongst us make a
tolerable good translation of six lines of Homer.

  Adieu!
  W. C.


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Weston, Jan. 5, 1794.

My dear Hayley,--I have waited, but waited in vain, for a
propitious moment when I might give my old friend's objections the
consideration they deserve; I shall at last be forced to send a
vague answer, unworthy to be sent to a person accustomed, like him,
to close reasoning and abstruse discussion; for I rise after ill
rest, and with a frame of mind perfectly unsuited to the occasion. I
sit too at the window for light's sake, where I am so cold that my
pen slips out of my fingers. First, I will give you a translation,
_de novo_, of this untranslateable prayer. It is shaped as nearly
as I could contrive to his lordship's ideas, but I have little hope
that it will satisfy him.

    Grant Jove, and all ye Gods, that this my son
    Be, as myself have been, illustrious here!
    A valiant man! and let him reign in Troy!
    May all who witness his return from fight
    Hereafter, say--he far excels his sire;
    And let him bring back gory trophies, stript
    From foes slain by him, to his mother's joy.

Imlac in Rasselas says--I forget to whom, "You have convinced me
that it is impossible to be a poet." In like manner I might say to
his lordship, you have convinced me that it is impossible to be a
translator; to be a translator, on his terms at least, is I am sure
impossible. On his terms, I would defy Homer himself, were he alive,
to translate the Paradise Lost into Greek. Yet Milton had Homer much
in his eye when he composed that poem; whereas Homer never thought
of me or my translation. There are minutiæ in every language, which,
transfused into another, will spoil the version. Such extreme
fidelity is in fact unfaithful. Such close resemblance takes away
all likeness. The original is elegant, easy, natural; the copy
is clumsy, constrained, unnatural: to what is this owing? To the
adoption of terms not congenial to your purpose, and of a context,
such as no man writing an original work would make use of. Homer is
every thing that a poet should be. A translation of Homer, so made,
will be every thing a translation of Homer should not be; because
it will be written in no language under heaven. It will be English,
and it will be Greek, and therefore it will be neither. He is the
man, whoever he be, (I do not pretend to be that man myself,) he is
the man best qualified as a translator of Homer, who has drenched,
and steeped, and soaked himself in the effusions of his genius, till
he has imbibed their colour to the bone, and who, when he is thus
dyed through and through, distinguishing between what is essentially
Greek, and what may be habited in English, rejects the former, and
is faithful to the latter, as far as the purposes of fine poetry
will permit, and no farther: this, I think, may be easily proved.
Homer is everywhere remarkable either for ease, dignity, or energy
of expression; for grandeur of conception, and a majestic flow of
numbers. If we copy him so closely as to make every one of these
excellent properties of his absolutely unattainable, which will
certainly be the effect of too close a copy, instead of translating,
we murder him. Therefore, after all his lordship has said, I still
hold freedom to be an indispensable--freedom, I mean, with respect
to the expression; freedom so limited, as never to leave behind the
_matter_; but at the same time indulged with a sufficient scope to
secure the spirit, and as much as possible of the manner. I say as
much as possible, because an English manner must differ from a Greek
one, in order to be graceful, and for this there is no remedy. Can
an ungraceful, awkward, translation of Homer be a good one? No: but
a graceful, easy, natural, faithful version of him, will not that be
a good one? Yes: allow me but this, and I insist upon it, that such
a one may be produced on my principles, and can be produced on no
other.

I have not had time to criticise his lordship's other version. You
know how little time I have for anything, and can tell him so.

Adieu! my dear brother. I have now tired both you and myself; and
with the love of the whole trio, remain yours ever,

  W. C.

Reading his lordship's sentiments over again, I am inclined to
think, that in all I have said, I have only given him back the same
in other terms. He disallows both the absolute _free_, and the
absolute _close_--so do I, and, if I understand myself, I said so in
my preface. He wishes to recommend a medium, though he will not call
it so--so do I; only we express it differently. What is it then that
we dispute about? My head is not good enough to-day to discover.



These letters were followed by such a silence on the part of
Cowper, as excited the severest apprehensions, which were painfully
confirmed by the intelligence conveyed in the ensuing letter:--


FROM THE REV. MR. GREATHEED--TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

  Newport Pagnel, April 8, 1794.

Dear Sir,--Lady Hesketh's correspondence acquainted you with the
melancholy relapse of our dear friend at Weston; but I am uncertain
whether you know, that in the last fortnight he has refused food of
every kind, except now and then a very small piece of toasted bread
dipped generally in water, sometimes mixed with a little wine. This,
her ladyship informs me, was the case till last Saturday, since when
he has eat a little at each family meal. He persists in refusing
such medicines as are indispensable to his state of body. In such
circumstances, his long continuance in life cannot be expected. How
devoutly to be wished is the alleviation of his danger and distress!
You, dear sir, who know so well the worth of our beloved and admired
friend, sympathise with his affliction, and deprecate his loss
doubtless in no ordinary degree: you have already most effectually
expressed and proved the warmth of your friendship. I cannot think
that anything but your society would have been sufficient, during
the infirmity under which his mind has long been oppressed, to have
supported him against the shock of Mrs. Unwin's paralytic attack.
I am certain that nothing else could have prevailed upon him to
undertake the journey to Eartham. You have succeeded where his
other friends knew they could not, and where they apprehended no
one could. How natural therefore, nay, how reasonable, is it for
them to look to you, as most likely to be instrumental, under the
blessing of God, for relief in the present distressing and alarming
crisis! It is indeed scarcely attemptable to ask any person to take
such a journey, and involve himself in so melancholy a scene, with
an uncertainty of the desired success; increased as the apparent
difficulty is by dear Mr. Cowper's aversion to all company, and by
poor Mrs. Unwin's mental and bodily infirmities. On these accounts
Lady Hesketh dares not ask it of you, rejoiced as she would be
at your arrival. Am I not, dear sir, a very presumptuous person,
who, in the face of all opposition, dare do this? I am emboldened
by those two powerful supporters, conscience and experience. Was
I at Eartham, I would certainly undertake the labour I presume to
recommend, for the bare possibility of restoring Mr. Cowper to
himself, to his friends, to the public, and to God.



Hayley, on the receipt of this letter, lost no time in repairing
to Weston; but his unhappy friend was too much overwhelmed by his
oppressive malady to show even the least glimmering of satisfaction
at the appearance of a guest whom he used to receive with the most
lively expressions of affectionate delight.

It is the nature of this tremendous melancholy, not only to enshroud
and stifle the finest faculties of the mind, but it suspends, and
apparently annihilates, for a time, the strongest and best-rooted
affections of the heart.

Lady Hesketh, profiting by Hayley's presence, quitted her charge
for a few days, that she might have a personal conference with Dr.
Willis. A friendly letter from Lord Thurlow to that celebrated
physician had requested his attention to the highly interesting
sufferer. Dr. Willis prescribed for Cowper, and saw him at Weston,
but not with that success and felicity which made his medical skill
on another most awful occasion the source of national delight and
exultation.

Indeed, the extraordinary state of Cowper appeared to abound with
circumstances very unfavourable to his mental relief. The daily
sight of a being reduced to such deplorable imbecility as now
overwhelmed Mrs. Unwin, was in itself sufficient to plunge a tender
spirit into extreme melancholy; yet to separate two friends, so
long accustomed to minister, with the purest and most vigilant
benevolence, to the infirmities of each other, was a measure so
pregnant with complicated distraction, that it could not be advised
or attempted. It remained only to palliate the suffering of each in
their present most pitiable condition, and to trust in the mercy of
that God, who had supported them together through periods of very
dark affliction, though not so doubly deplorable as the present.

Who can contemplate this distressing spectacle without recalling the
following pathetic exclamation in the Sampson Agonistes of Milton?

    God of our fathers, what is man?
     . . . . .
    Since such as thou hast solemnly elected,
    With gifts and graces eminently adorned;
     . . . . .
    Yet towards these thus dignified, thou oft
    Amidst their height of noon,
    Changest thy count'nance, and thy hand, with no regard
    Of highest favours past
    From thee on them, or them to thee of service.
     . . . . .
    So deal not with this once thy glorious champion!
    What do I beg? How hast thou dealt already!
    Behold him in this state calamitous, and turn
    His labours, for thou canst, to peaceful end!

It was on the 23rd of April, 1794, in one of those melancholy
mornings, when his kind and affectionate relation, Lady Hesketh,
and Hayley, were watching together over this dejected sufferer,
that a letter from Lord Spencer arrived at Weston, to announce the
intended grant of a pension from his Majesty to Cowper, of 300_l._
per annum, rendered payable to his friend Mr. Rose, as the trustee
of Cowper. This intelligence produced in the friends of the poet
very lively emotions of delight, yet blended with pain almost as
powerful; for it was painful, in no trifling degree, to reflect that
these desirable smiles of good fortune could not impart even a faint
glimmering of joy to the dejected poet.

From the time when Hayley left his unhappy friend at Weston, in
the spring of the year 1794, he remained there under the tender
vigilance of Lady Hesketh, till the latter end of July, 1795: a long
season of the darkest depression! in which the best medical advice
and the influence of time appeared equally unable to lighten that
afflictive burthen which pressed incessantly on his spirits.

It was under these circumstances that my revered brother-in-law,
with a generous disinterestedness and affection that must ever
endear him to the admirers of Cowper, determined, with Lady
Hesketh's concurrence, to remove the poet and his afflicted
companion into Norfolk. In adopting this plan, he did not
contemplate more than a year's absence from Weston: but what was
intended to be only temporary, proved in the sequel to be a final
removal.

Few events could have been more painful to Cowper than a separation
from his beloved Weston. Every object was familiar to his eye, and
had long engaged the affections of his heart. Its beautiful scenery
had been traced with all the minuteness of description and the glow
of poetic fancy. The slow-winding Ouse, "bashful, yet impatient
to be seen," was henceforth to glide "in its sinuous course"
unperceived. The spacious meads, the lengthened colonnade, the proud
alcove, and the sound of the sweet village-bells--these memorials of
past happy days were to be seen and heard no more. All have felt the
pang excited by the separation or loss of friends; but who has not
also experienced that even trees have tongues, and that every object
in nature knows how to plead its empire over the heart?

What Cowper's sensations were on this occasion, may be collected
from the following little incident.

On the morning of his departure from Weston, he wrote the following
lines in pencil on the back of the shutter, in his bed-room.

    "Farewell, dear scenes, for ever closed to me!
    Oh! for what sorrows must I now exchange you!"

These lines have been carefully preserved as the expressive memorial
of his feelings on leaving Weston. Nor can the following little
poem fail to excite interest, not only as being the last original
production which he composed at Weston, but from its deep and
unaffected pathos. It is addressed to Mrs. Unwin. No language can
exhibit a specimen of verse more exquisitely tender.


TO MARY.

    The twentieth year is well-nigh past,
    Since first our sky was overcast,
    Ah, would that this might be the last!
                                      My Mary!

    Thy spirits have a fainter flow,
    I see thee daily weaker grow--
    'Twas my distress that brought thee low,
                                      My Mary!

    Thy needles, once a shining store,
    For my sake restless heretofore,
    Now rust disus'd, and shine no more,
                                      My Mary!

    For, though thou gladly wouldst fulfil
    The same kind office for me still,
    Thy sight now seconds not thy will,
                                      My Mary!

    But well thou playd'st the housewife's part,
    And all thy threads with magic art,
    Have wound themselves about this heart,
                                      My Mary!

    Thy indistinct expressions seem
    Like language utter'd in a dream;
    Yet me they charm, whate'er the theme,
                                      My Mary!

    Thy silver locks, once auburn bright,
    Are still more lovely in my sight
    Than golden beams of orient light,
                                      My Mary!

    For, could I view nor them nor thee,
    What sight worth seeing could I see?
    The sun would rise in vain for me,
                                      My Mary!

    Partakers of thy sad decline,
    Thy hands their little force resign;
    Yet, gently prest, press gently mine,
                                      My Mary!

    Such feebleness of limbs thou prov'st,
    That now at every step thou mov'st
    Upheld by two, yet still thou lov'st,
                                      My Mary!

    And still to love, though prest with ill,
    In wintry age to feel no chill,
    With me is to be lovely still,
                                      My Mary!

    But, ah! by constant heed I know,
    How oft the sadness that I show
    Transforms thy smiles to looks of woe,
                                      My Mary!

    And, should my future lot be cast
    With much resemblance of the past,
    Thy worn-out heart will break at last,
                                      My Mary!

On Tuesday, the twenty-eighth of July, 1795, Cowper and Mrs. Unwin
removed, under the care and guidance of Mr. Johnson, from Weston to
North-Tuddenham, in Norfolk, by a journey of three days, passing
through Cambridge without stopping there. In the evening of the
first day they rested at the village of Eaton, near St. Neot's.
Cowper walked with his young kinsman in the churchyard by moonlight,
and spoke with much composure on the subject of Thomson's Seasons,
and the circumstances under which they were probably written. This
conversation was almost his last glimmering of cheerfulness.

At North-Tuddenham the travellers were accommodated with a
commodious, untenanted parsonage-house, by the kindness of the Rev.
Leonard Shelford. Here they resided till the nineteenth of August.
It was the considerate intention of Mr. Johnson not to remove them
immediately to his own house, in the town of East-Dereham, lest the
situation in a market-place should be distressing to the tender
spirits of Cowper.

In their new temporary residence they were received by Miss Johnson
and Miss Perowne, whose gentle and sympathizing spirit peculiarly
qualified them to discharge so delicate an office, and to alleviate
the sufferings of the dejected poet.

Severe as his depressive malady appeared at this period, he was
still able to bear considerable exercise, and, before he left
Tuddenham, he walked with Mr. Johnson to the neighbouring village
of Mattishall, on a visit to his cousin, Mrs. Bodham. On surveying
his own portrait by Abbot, in the house of that lady, he clasped his
hands in a paroxysm of pain, and uttered a vehement wish, that his
present sensations might be such as they were when that picture was
painted.

In August 1795, Mr. Johnson conducted his two invalids to Mundsley,
a village on the Norfolk coast, in the hope that a situation by the
sea-side might prove salutary and amusing to Cowper. They continued
to reside there till October, but without any apparent benefit to
the health of the interesting sufferer.

He had long relinquished epistolary intercourse with his most
intimate friends, but his tender solicitude to hear some tidings of
his favourite Weston induced him, in September, to write a letter to
Mr. Buchanan. It shows the severity of his depression, but proves
also that transient gleams of pleasure could occasionally break
through the brooding darkness of melancholy.

He begins with a poetical quotation:

                  "To interpose a little ease,
    Let my frail thoughts dally with false surmise!"

"I will forget, for a moment, that to whomsoever I may address
myself, a letter from me can no otherwise be welcome than as a
curiosity. To you, sir, I address this; urged to it by extreme
penury of employment, and the desire I feel to learn something of
what is doing, and has been done, at Weston, (my beloved Weston!)
since I left it.

"The coldness of these blasts, even in the hottest days, has been
such, that, added to the irritation of the salt-spray, with which
they are always charged, they have occasioned me an inflammation
in the eye-lids, which threatened a few days since to confine me
entirely, but, by absenting myself as much as possible from the
beach, and guarding my face with an umbrella, that inconvenience is
in some degree abated. My chamber commands a very near view of the
ocean, and the ships at high water approach the coast so closely,
that a man furnished with better eyes than mine might, I doubt not,
discern the sailors from the window. No situation, at least when
the weather is clear and bright, can be pleasanter; which you will
easily credit, when I add, that it imparts something a little
resembling pleasure even to me.--Gratify me with news of Weston! If
Mr. Gregson, and your neighbours the Courtenays are there, mention
me to them in such terms as you see good. Tell me if my poor birds
are living! I never see the herbs I used to give them, without
a recollection of them, and sometimes am ready to gather them,
forgetting that I am not at home. Pardon this intrusion!

"Mrs. Unwin continues much as usual.

"Mundsley, Sept. 5, 1795."



Mr. Buchanan endeavoured, with great tenderness and ingenuity, to
allure his dejected friend to prolong a correspondence, that seemed
to promise some little alleviation to his melancholy; but this
distressing malady baffled all the various expedients that could be
devised to counteract its overwhelming influence.

Much hope was entertained from air and exercise, with a frequent
change of scene.--In September, Mr. Johnson conducted his kinsman
(to the promotion of whose recovery he devoted his most unwearied
efforts) to take a survey of Dunham-Lodge, a seat at that time
vacant; it is situated on high ground, in a park, about four miles
from Swaffham. Cowper spoke of it as a house rather too spacious
for him, yet such as he was not unwilling to inhabit--a remark
which induced Mr. Johnson, at a subsequent period, to become the
tenant of this mansion, as a scene more eligible for Cowper than the
town of Dereham.--This town they also surveyed in their excursion;
and, after passing a night there, returned to Mundsley, which they
quitted for the season on the seventh of October.

They removed immediately to Dereham; but left it in the course of a
month for Dunham-Lodge, which now became their settled residence.

The spirits of Cowper were not sufficiently revived to allow him to
resume either his pen or his books; but the kindness of his young
kinsman continued to furnish him with inexhaustible amusement, by
reading to him almost incessantly; and, although he was not led to
converse on what he heard, yet it failed not to rivet his attention,
and so to prevent his afflicted mind from preying on itself.

In April, 1796, Mrs. Unwin, whose infirmities continued to engage
the tender attention of Cowper, even in his darkest periods of
depression, received a visit from her daughter and son-in-law, Mr.
and Mrs. Powley. On their departure, Mr. Johnson assumed the office
which Mrs. Powley had tenderly performed for her venerable parent,
and regularly read a chapter in the Bible every morning to Mrs.
Unwin before she rose. It was the invariable custom of Cowper to
visit his poor old friend the moment he had finished his breakfast,
and to remain in her apartment while the chapter was read.

In June, the pressure of his melancholy appeared in some degree
alleviated, for, on Mr. Johnson's receiving the edition of Pope's
Homer, published by Wakefield, Cowper eagerly seized the book, and
began to read the notes to himself with visible interest. They
awakened his attention to his own version of Homer. In August he
deliberately engaged in a revisal of the whole, and for some time
produced almost sixty new lines a day.

This mental occupation animated all his intimate friends with a most
lively hope of his progressive recovery. But autumn repressed the
hope that summer had excited.

In September the family removed from Dunham-Lodge to try again the
influence of the sea-side, in their favourite village of Mundsley.

Cowper walked frequently by the sea; but no apparent benefit arose,
no mild relief from the incessant pressure of melancholy. He had
relinquished his Homer again, and could not yet be induced to resume
it.

Towards the end of October, this interesting party retired from the
coast to the house of Mr. Johnson, in Dereham--a house now chosen
for their winter residence, as Dunham-Lodge appeared to them too
dreary.

The long and exemplary life of Mrs. Unwin was drawing towards
a close:--the powers of nature were gradually exhausted, and
on the seventeenth of December she ended a troubled existence,
distinguished by a sublime spirit of piety and friendship, that
shone through long periods of calamity, and continued to glimmer
through the distressful twilight of her declining faculties. Her
death was calm and tranquil. Cowper saw her about half an hour
before the moment of expiration, which passed without a struggle or
a groan, as the clock was striking one in the afternoon.

On the morning of that day, he said to the servant who opened
the window of his chamber, "Sally, is there life above stairs?"
A striking proof of his bestowing incessant attention on the
sufferings of his aged friend, although he had long appeared almost
totally absorbed in his own.

In the dusk of the evening he attended Mr. Johnson to survey the
corpse; and after looking at it a very few moments he started
suddenly away, with a vehement but unfinished sentence of passionate
sorrow. He spoke of her no more.

She was buried by torch-light, on the twenty-third of December, in
the north aisle of Dereham church; and two of her friends, impressed
with a just and deep sense of her extraordinary merit, have raised a
marble tablet to her memory with the following inscription:

  IN MEMORY OF MARY,

  WIDOW OF THE REV. MORLEY UNWIN,
  AND
  MOTHER OF THE REV. WILLIAM CAWTHORN UNWIN,
  BORN AT ELY, 1724.
  BURIED IN THIS CHURCH 1796.

    Trusting in God, with all her heart and mind
    This woman prov'd magnanimously kind;
    Endur'd affliction's desolating hail,
    And watch'd a poet thro' misfortune's vale.
    Her spotless dust, angelic guards, defend!
    It is the dust of Unwin, Cowper's friend!
    That single title in itself is fame,
    For all who read his verse revere her name.

It might have been anticipated that the death of Mrs. Unwin, in
Cowper's enfeebled state, would have proved too severe a shock to
his agitated nerves. But it is mercifully ordained that, while
declining years incapacitate us for trials, they, at the same time,
weaken the sensibility to suffering, and thereby render us less
accessible to the influence of sorrow. It may be regarded as an
instance of providential mercy to this afflicted poet, that his aged
friend, whose life he had so long considered as essential to his
own, was taken from him at a time when the pressure of his malady, a
perpetual low fever, both of body and mind, had, in a great degree,
diminished the native energy of his faculties and affections.

Owing to these causes, Cowper was so far preserved in this season of
trial, that, instead of mourning the loss of a person in whose life
he had seemed to live, all perception of that loss was mercifully
taken from him; and, from the moment when he hurried away from the
inanimate object of his filial attachment, he appeared to have
no memory of her having existed, for he never asked a question
concerning her funeral, nor ever mentioned her name.

Towards the summer of 1797, his bodily health appeared to improve,
but not to such a degree as to restore any comfortable activity to
his mind. In June he wrote a brief letter to Hayley, but such as too
forcibly expressed the cruelty of his distemper.

The process of digestion never passed regularly in his frame during
the years that he resided in Norfolk. Medicine appeared to have
little or no influence on his complaint, and his aversion at the
sight of it was extreme.

From asses' milk, of which he began a course on the twenty-first of
June in this year, he gained a considerable acquisition of bodily
strength, and was enabled to bear an airing in an open carriage,
before breakfast, with Mr. Johnson.

A depression of mind, which suspended the studies of a writer so
eminently endeared to the public, was considered by men of piety
and learning as a national misfortune, and several individuals of
this description, though personally unknown to Cowper, wrote to him
in the benevolent hope that expressions of friendly praise, from
persons who could be influenced only by the most laudable motives
in bestowing it, might re-animate his dejected spirit. Among these
might be enumerated Dr. Watson, the Bishop of Llandaff, who kindly
addressed him in the language of encouragement and of soothing
consolation; but the pressure of his malady had now made him utterly
deaf to the most honourable praise.

He had long discontinued the revisal of his Homer, when his kinsman,
dreading the effect of the cessation of bodily exercise upon his
mind during a long winter, resolved, if possible, to engage him in
the revisal of this work. One morning, therefore, after breakfast,
in the month of September, he placed the Commentators on the table,
one by one; namely, Villoison, Barnes, and Clarke, opening them all,
together with the poet's translation, at the place where he had
left off a twelvemonth before, but talking with him, as he paced
the room upon a very different subject, namely, the impossibility
of the things befalling him which his imagination had represented;
when, as his companion had wished, he said to him, "And are you sure
that I shall be here till the book you are reading is finished?"
"Quite sure," replied his kinsman, "and that you will also be here
to complete the revisal of your Homer," pointing to the books, "if
you will resume it to-day." As he repeated these words he left the
room, rejoicing in the well-known token of their having sunk into
the poet's mind, namely, his seating himself on the sofa, taking up
one of the books, and saying in a low and plaintive voice, "I may as
well do this, for I can do nothing else."[741]

  [741] Sketch of the Life of Cowper.

In this labour he persevered, oppressed as he was by indisposition,
till March 1799. On Friday evening, the eighth of that month, he
completed his revisal of the Odyssey, and the next morning wrote
part of a new preface.

To watch over the disordered health of afflicted genius, and to
lead a powerful, but oppressed, spirit by gentle encouragement, to
exert itself in salutary occupation, is an office that requires
a very rare union of tenderness, intelligence, and fortitude. To
contemplate and minister to a great mind, in a state that borders on
mental desolation, is like surveying, in the midst of a desert, the
tottering ruins of palaces and temples, where the faculties of the
spectator are almost absorbed in wonder and regret, and where every
step is taken with awful apprehension.

Hayley, in alluding to Dr. Johnson's kind and affectionate offices,
at this period, bears the following honourable testimony to his
merits, which we are happy in transcribing. "It seemed as if
Providence had expressly formed the young kinsman of Cowper to prove
exactly such a guardian to his declining years as the peculiar
exigencies of his situation required. I never saw the human being
that could, I think, have sustained the delicate and arduous office
(in which the inexhaustible virtues of Mr. Johnson persevered to the
last) through a period so long, with an equal portion of unvaried
tenderness and unshaken fidelity. A man who wanted sensibility
would have renounced the duty; and a man endowed with a particle
too much of that valuable, though perilous, quality, must have felt
his own health utterly undermined, by an excess of sympathy with
the sufferings perpetually in his sight. Mr. Johnson has completely
discharged, perhaps, the most trying of human duties; and I trust
he will forgive me for this public declaration, that, in his mode
of discharging it, he has merited the most cordial esteem from all,
who love the memory of Cowper. Even a stranger may consider it as
a strong proof of his tender dexterity in soothing and guiding the
afflicted poet, that he was able to engage him steadily to pursue
and finish the revisal and correction of his Homer, during a long
period of bodily and mental sufferings, when his troubled mind
recoiled from all intercourse with his most intimate friends, and
laboured under a morbid abhorrence of all cheerful exertion."

In the summer of 1798, his kinsman was induced to vary his plan of
remaining for some months in the marine village of Mundsley, and
thought it more eligible to make frequent visits from Dereham to the
coast, passing a week at a time by the sea-side.

Cowper, in his poem on "Retirement," seems to inform us what his own
sentiments were, in a season of health, concerning the regimen most
proper for the disease of melancholy.

    Virtuous and faithful Heberden, whose skill
    Attempts no task it cannot well fulfil,
    Gives melancholy up to nature's care,
    And sends the patient into purer air.

The frequent change of place, and the magnificence of marine
scenery, produced at times a little relief to his depressed spirits.
On the 7th of June 1798, he surveyed the light-house at Happisburgh,
and expressed some pleasure on beholding, through a telescope,
several ships at a distance. Yet, in his usual walk with his
companion by the sea-side, he exemplified but too forcibly his own
affecting description of melancholy silence:

                  That silent tongue
    Could give advice, could censure, or commend,
    Or charm the sorrows of a drooping friend;
    Renounc'd alike its office and its sport,
    Its brisker and its graver strains fall short:
    Both fail beneath a fever's secret sway,
    And, like a summer-brook, are past away.

On the twenty-fourth of July, Cowper had the honour of a visit from
a lady, for whom he had long entertained affectionate respect, the
Dowager Lady Spencer--and it was rather remarkable, that on the very
morning she called upon him he had begun his revisal of the Odyssey,
which was originally inscribed to her. Such an incident in a happier
season would have produced a very enlivening effect on his spirits:
but, in his present state, it had not even the power to lead him
into any free conversation with his distinguished visitor.

The only amusement that he appeared to admit without reluctance was
the reading of his kinsman, who, indefatigable in the supply of such
amusement, had exhausted a successive series of works of fiction,
and at this period began reading to the poet his own works. To
these he listened also in silence, and heard all his poems recited
in order, till the reader arrived at the history of John Gilpin,
which he begged not to hear. Mr. Johnson proceeded to his manuscript
poems; to these he willingly listened, but made not a single remark
on any.

In October 1798, the pressure of his melancholy seemed to be
mitigated in some little degree, for he exerted himself so far as to
write the following letter, without solicitation, to Lady Hesketh.



Dear Cousin,--You describe delightful scenes, but you describe them
to one, who, if he even saw them, could receive no delight from
them: who has a faint recollection, and so faint, as to be like an
almost forgotten dream, that once he was susceptible of pleasure
from such causes. The country that you have had in prospect has been
always famed for its beauties; but the wretch who can derive no
gratification from a view of nature, even under the disadvantage of
her most ordinary dress, will have no eyes to admire her in any.

In one day, in one minute, I should rather have said, she became an
universal blank to me, and though from a different cause, yet with
an effect as difficult to remove as blindness itself.

     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

Mundsley, Oct. 13, 1798.



On his return from Mundsley to Dereham, in an evening towards
the end of October, Cowper, with Miss Perowne and Mr. Johnson,
was overturned in a post-chaise: he discovered no terror on the
occasion, and escaped without injury from the accident.

In December he received a visit from his highly esteemed friend, Sir
John Throckmorton, but his malady was at that time so oppressive
that it rendered him almost insensible to the kind solicitude of
friendship.

He still continued to exercise the powers of his astonishing mind:
upon his finishing the revisal of his Homer, in March, 1799, his
kinsman endeavoured in the gentlest manner to lead him into new
literary occupation.

For this purpose, on the eleventh of March he laid before him the
paper containing the comencement of his poem on "The Four Ages."
Cowper altered a few lines; he also added a few, but soon observed
to his kind attendant--"that it was too great a work for him to
attempt in his present situation."

At supper Mr. Johnson suggested to him several literary projects
that he might execute more easily. He replied--"that he had just
thought of six Latin verses, and if he could compose anything it
must be in pursuing that composition."

The next morning he wrote the six verses he had mentioned, and
subsequently added the remainder, entitling the poem, "Montes
Glaciales."

It proved a versification of a circumstance recorded in a newspaper,
which had been read to him a few weeks before, without his appearing
to notice it. This poem he translated into English verse, on the
nineteenth of March, to oblige Miss Perowne. Both the original and
the translation appear in the Poems.

On the twentieth of March he wrote the stanzas entitled "The
Cast-away," founded on an anecdote in Anson's Voyage, which his
memory suggested to him, although he had not looked into the book
for many years.

As this poem is the last original production from the pen of Cowper,
we shall introduce it here, persuaded that it will be read with an
interest proportioned to the extraordinary pathos of the subject,
and the still more extraordinary powers of the poet, whose lyre
could sound so forcibly, unsilenced by the gloom of the darkest
distemper, that was conducting him, by slow gradations, to the
shadow of death.

THE CAST-AWAY.

    Obscurest night involv'd the sky;
      Th' Atlantic billows roar'd,
    When such a destin'd wretch as I,
      Wash'd headlong from on board,
    Of friends, of hope, of all bereft,
    His floating home for ever left.

    No braver chief could Albion boast
      Than he with whom he went,
    Nor ever ship left Albion's coast,
      With warmer wishes sent.
    He lov'd them both, but both in vain,
    Nor him beheld, nor her again.

    Not long beneath the 'whelming brine,
      Expert to swim, he lay;
    Nor soon he felt his strength decline,
      Or courage die away;
    But wag'd with death a lasting strife,
    Supported by despair of life.

    He shouted; nor his friends had fail'd
      To check the vessel's course,
    But so the furious blast prevail'd,
      That, pitiless, per force,
    They left their out-cast mate behind,
    And scudded still before the wind.

    Some succour yet they could afford;
      And, such as storms allow,
    The cask, the coop, the floated cord,
      Delayed not to bestow.
    But he (they knew) nor ship, nor shore,
    Whate'er they gave, should visit more.

    Nor cruel, as it seem'd, could he
      Their haste himself condemn,
    Aware that flight, in such a sea,
      Alone could rescue them;
    Yet bitter felt it still to die
    Deserted, and his friends so nigh.

    He long survives, who lives an hour
      In ocean, self-upheld:
    And so long he, with unspent pow'r,
      His destiny repell'd:
    And ever, as the minutes flew,
    Entreated help, or cry'd--"Adieu!"

    At length his transient respite past,
      His comrades who before
    Had heard his voice in ev'ry blast,
      Could catch the sound no more.
    For then, by toil subdued, he drank
    The stifling wave, and then he sank.

    No poet wept him: but the page
      Of narrative sincere,
    That tells his name, his worth, his age,
      Is wet with Anson's tear.
    And tears by bards or heroes shed,
    Alike immortalize the dead.

    I therefore purpose not, or dream,
      Descanting on his fate!
    To give the melancholy theme
      A more enduring date,
    But misery still delights to trace
    Its 'semblance in another's case.

    No voice divine the storm allay'd,
      No light propitious shone;
    When, snatch'd from all effectual aid,
      We perish'd, each alone;
    But I beneath a rougher sea,
    And 'whelm'd in deeper gulfs than he.

In August he translated this poem into Latin verse. In October he
went with Miss Perowne and Mr. Johnson to survey a larger house in
Dereham, which he preferred to their present residence, and in which
the family were settled in the following December.

Though his corporeal strength was now evidently declining, the
urgent persuasion of his kinsman induced him to amuse his mind with
frequent composition. Between August and December, he wrote all the
translations from various Latin and Greek epigrams, which the reader
will find in the present volume.

In his new residence, he amused himself with translating a few
fables of Gay's into Latin verse. The fable which he used to recite
when a child--"The Hare and many Friends"--became one of his latest
amusements.

These Latin fables were all written in January 1800. Towards the end
of that month, Hayley requested him to new-model a passage in his
Homer, relating to the curious monument of ancient sculpture, so
gracefully described by Homer, called the Cretan Dance. This being
the last effort of his pen, and the passage being interesting, as a
representation of ancient manners, we here insert it.

      To these the glorious artist added next
    A varied dance, resembling that of old
    In Crete's broad isle, by Dædalus, compos'd
    For bright-hair'd Ariadne. There the youths
    And youth-alluring maidens, hand in hand,
    Danc'd jocund, ev'ry maiden neat attir'd
    In finest linen, and the youths in vests
    Well-woven, glossy as the glaze of oil.
    These all wore garlands, and bright falchions those,
    Of burnish'd gold, in silver trappings hung;--
    They, with well-tutor'd step, now, nimbly ran
    The circle, swift, as when, before his wheel
    Seated, the potter twirls it with both hands
    For trial of its speed; now, crossing quick
    They pass'd at once into each other's place.
    A circling crowd surveyed the lovely dance,
    Delighted; two, the leading pair, their head
    With graceful inclination bowing oft,
    Pass'd swift between them, and began the song.

  _See Cowper's Version_, Book xviii.

On the very day that this endearing mark of his kindness reached
Hayley, a dropsical appearance in his legs induced Mr. Johnson to
have recourse to fresh medical assistance. Cowper was with great
difficulty persuaded to take the remedies prescribed, and to try
the exercise of a post-chaise, an exercise which he could not bear
beyond the twenty-second of February.

In March, when his decline became more and more visible, he was
visited by Mr. Rose. He hardly expressed any pleasure on the arrival
of a friend whom he had so long and so tenderly regarded, yet he
showed evident signs of regret at his departure, on the sixth of
April.

The illness and impending death of his talented son precluded Hayley
from sharing with Mr. Rose in these last marks of affectionate
attention towards the man, whose genius and virtues they had once
contemplated together with mutual veneration and delight; whose
approaching dissolution they felt, not only as an irreparable loss
to themselves, but as a national misfortune. On the nineteenth of
April, Dr. Johnson remarks, the weakness of this truly pitiable
sufferer had so much increased, that his kinsman apprehended his
death to be near. Adverting, therefore, to the affliction, as well
of body as of mind, which his beloved inmate was then enduring,
he ventured to speak of his approaching dissolution as the signal
of his deliverance from both these miseries. After a pause of a
few moments, which was less interrupted by the objections of his
desponding relative than he had dared to hope, he proceeded to an
observation more consolatory still; namely, that, in the world to
which he was hastening, a merciful Redeemer had prepared unspeakable
happiness for all his children--and therefore for him. To the
first part of this sentence, he had listened with composure, but
the concluding words were no sooner uttered, than his passionately
expressed entreaties, that his companion would desist from any
further observations of a similar kind, clearly proved that, though
it was on the eve of being invested with angelic light, the darkness
of delusion still veiled his spirit.[742]

  [742] Sketch of the Life of Cowper, by Dr. Johnson.

On Sunday, the twentieth, he seemed a little revived.

On Monday he appeared dying, but recovered so much as to eat a
slight dinner.

Tuesday and Wednesday he grew apparently weaker every hour.

On Thursday he sat up as usual in the evening.

In the course of the night, when exceedingly exhausted, Miss Perowne
offered him some refreshment. He rejected it with these words, the
very last that he was heard to utter, "What can it signify?"

Dr. Johnson closes the affecting account in the following words.

"At five in the morning of Friday 25th, a deadly change in his
features was observed to take place. He remained in an insensible
state from that time till about five minutes before five in the
afternoon, when he ceased to breathe. And in so mild and gentle
a manner did his spirit take its flight, that though the writer
of this Memoir, his medical attendant Mr. Woods, and three other
persons, were standing at the foot and side of the bed, with their
eyes fixed upon his dying countenance, the precise moment of his
departure was unobserved by any."

From this mournful period, till the features of his deceased friend
were closed from his view, the expression which the kinsman of
Cowper observed in them, and which he was affectionately delighted
to suppose "an index of the last thoughts and enjoyments of his
soul, in its gradual escape from the depths of despondence, was that
of calmness and composure, mingled, as it were, with holy surprise."

He was buried in St. Edmund's Chapel, in the church of East Dereham,
on Saturday, May 2nd, attended by several of his relations.

He left a will, but without appointing his executor. The
administration, therefore, of the little property he possessed
devolved on his affectionate relative, Lady Hesketh; but not having
been carried into effect by that Lady, the office, on her decease,
was undertaken by his cousin german, Mrs. Bodham.

Lady Hesketh raised a marble tablet to his memory, with the
following inscription from the pen of Hayley:

  IN MEMORY OF
  WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.
  BORN IN HERTFORDSHIRE,
  1731,
  BURIED IN THIS CHURCH.

    Ye, who with warmth the public triumph feel
    Of talents, dignified by sacred zeal,
    Here, to devotion's bard devoutly just,
    Pay your fond tribute due to Cowper's dust!
    England, exulting in his spotless fame,
    Ranks with her dearest sons his favourite name.
    Sense, fancy, wit, suffice not all to raise
    So clear a title to affection's praise;
    His highest honours to the heart belong;
    His virtues form'd the magic of his song.

We have now conducted the endeared subject of this biography through
the various scenes of his chequered and eventful life, till its last
solemn termination; and it is impossible that any other feelings can
have been awakened than those of admiration for his genius, homage
for his virtues, and profound sympathy for his sufferings. It was
fully anticipated by his friends, that the hour of final liberation,
at least, would have been cheered by that calm sense of the divine
presence, which is the delightful foretaste of eternal rest and
glory. Young beautifully observes:

    The chamber where the good man meets his fate
    Is privileged beyond the common walk
    Of virtuous life, quite on the verge of heaven.

The Bible proclaims the same animating truth. "Mark the perfect
man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace!"
The divine faithfulness is an ample security for the fulfilment of
these declarations; but the promises of God, firm and unchangeable
as they are in themselves, after all, can be realized only in a
mind disposed for their reception; as the light cannot pass through
a medium that is incapable of admitting it. Such, alas! is the
influence of physical causes and of a morbid temperament on the
inward perceptions of the soul, that it is possible to be a child of
God, without a consciousness of the blessing, and to have a title to
a crown, and yet feel to be immured in the depths of a dungeon.

The consolation to the friends of the unhappy sufferer, if not to
the patient himself, is, that the chains are of his own forging, and
that, if he had but the discernment to know it, the delusion would
promptly vanish, and the peace of God flow into the soul like a
river.

That such was the case with Cowper, no one can doubt for a moment.
A species of mental aberration, on a particular subject, involved
his mind in a strange and sad delusion. The Sun of Righteousness,
therefore, failed in his last moments to impart its refreshing light
and comfort, because the cloud of despair intervened, and obscured
the setting beams of grace and glory.

Who can contemplate so mysterious a process of the mind, without
exclaiming--

    How poor, how rich, how abject, how august,
    How complicate, how wonderful is man!
    How passing wonder He, who made him such!
    Who centred in our make such strange extremes!

It is impossible to dwell on the manner of Cowper's death, and not
to be reminded of the wish cherished by himself on this subject, and
recorded so impressively in the following lines:

    So life glides smoothly and by stealth away,
    More golden than that age of fabled gold
    Renowned in ancient song; not vex'd with care,
    Or stained with guilt, beneficent, approved
    Of God and man, and peaceful in its end.
    _So glide my life away! and so, at last,
    My share of duties decently fulfill'd,
    May some disease, not tardy to perform
    Its destined office, yet with gentle stroke,
    Dismiss me weary to a safe retreat,
    Beneath the turf that I have often trod._[743]

  [743] The Task, book vi.

God mercifully granted the best portion of his prayer, but saw fit
to deny the rest. No conscious guilt or open transgression stained
his life; his heart was the seat of every beneficent and kind
affection. As an author, he was blessed with an honourable career
of usefulness; the public voice conferred upon him the title to
immortality, and succeeding times have ratified the claim. But if
perception be necessary to enjoyment, he was not "peaceful in his
end;" for he died without this conviction. He did not, like Elijah,
ascend in a chariot of fire; it was his lot rather to realize the
quaint remark of some of the old divines, "God sometimes puts his
children to bed in the dark," that they may have nothing whereof
to boast; that their salvation may appear to be more fully the
result of his own free and unmerited mercy, and that in this, as in
all things, he may be known to act as a sovereign, who "giveth no
account of his matters."[744]

  [744] Job xxxiii. 13.

But the severest exercises of faith are always mingled with some
gracious purpose; and God may perhaps see fit to appoint these
dark dispensations, that the transition into eternity may be more
glorious; and that the emancipated spirit, bursting the shackles of
death and sin, and delivered from the bondage of its fears, may rise
with a nobler triumph from the depths of humiliation into the very
presence-chamber of its God.

These remarks are so closely connected with the subject of Cowper's
afflicting malady, that the time is now arrived when it is necessary
to enter into a more detailed view of its nature and character; to
trace its origin and progress, and to disengage this complicated
question from that prejudice and misrepresentation which have so
inveterately attached to it. At the same time, it is with profound
reluctance that the Editor enters upon this painful theme, from
a deep conviction that it does not form a proper subject for
discussion, and that the veil of secrecy is never more suitably
employed, than when it is thrown over infirmities which are too
sacred to meet the gaze of public observation. This inquiry is now,
however, no longer optional. Cowper himself has, unfortunately,
suffered in the public estimation by the manner in which his
earliest biographer, Hayley, has presented him before the public. By
suppressing some very important letters, which tended to elucidate
his real character, an air of mystery has been imparted which deeply
affects its consistency; while, by attributing what he could not
sufficiently conceal of the malady of the poet to the operation
of religious causes, truth has been violated, and an unmerited
wound inflicted upon religion itself. Thus Hayley, from motives of
delicacy most probably, or from misapprehension of the subject, has
committed a double error; while others, misled by his authority,
have unhappily aided in propagating the delusion.

The Private Correspondence of Cowper, which is exclusively
incorporated with the present edition, is of the first importance,
as it dispels the mystery previously attached to his character. All
that now remains is, to establish by undeniable evidence that, so
far from religious causes having been instrumental to his malady,
the order of events and the testimony of positive facts both
militate against such a conclusion.

For this purpose, we shall now introduce to the notice of the
reader, copious extracts from the Memoir of Cowper, written by
himself, containing the particulars of his life, from his earliest
years to the period of his malady and subsequent recovery. This
remarkable document was intended to record his sense of the
Divine mercy in the preservation of his life, during a season of
disastrous feeling; and to perpetuate the remembrance of that grace
which overruled this event, in so remarkable a manner, to his best
and eternal interests. He designed this document principally for the
perusal of Mrs. Unwin, to whose hands it was most confidentially
entrusted. A copy was also presented to Mr. Newton, and ultimately
to Dr. Johnson; but the parties were strictly enjoined never to
allow another copy to be taken. By some means the Memoir at length
found its way before the public. On this ground the editor feels
less difficulty in communicating its purport; as the seal of secrecy
has been already broken, though in the estimation of Dr. Johnson and
his friends, in so unauthorized a manner. Its publication, however,
has been unquestionably attended by one beneficial result, in
having established, beyond the possibility of contradiction, that
so far from Cowper's religious views having been the source of his
malady, they were the first occasion and instrument of its cure.[745]

  [745] The following is the result of the information obtained
  by the Editor on this subject, after the minutest inquiry. A
  lady who was on a visit at Mr. Newton's, in London, saw, it is
  said, this Memoir of Cowper lying, among other papers, on the
  table. She was led to peruse it, and felt a deeper interest in
  the contents, from having herself been recently recovered from a
  state of derangement. She privately copied the manuscript, and
  communicated it to some friend. It was finally published by a
  pious character, who considered that in so doing he exonerated
  the religious views of Cowper from the charge of having been
  instrumental to his malady.

The Memoir is interesting in another respect. It elucidates the
early events of Cowper's history. One important subject is however
omitted, his attachment to Miss Theodora Cowper, the failure of
which formed no small ingredient in the disappointments of his early
life. This omission we shall be enabled to supply.

With these preliminary remarks we shall now introduce this curious
and remarkable document, simply suppressing those portions which
violate the feelings, without being essential to the substance of
the narrative.




MEMOIR OF THE EARLY LIFE OF WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.


I cannot recollect, that, till the month of December, in the
thirty-second year of my life, I had ever any serious impressions
of the religious kind, or at all bethought myself of the things of
my salvation, except in two or three instances. The first was of
so transitory a nature, and passed when I was so very young, that,
did I not intend what follows for a history of my heart, so far as
religion has been its object, I should hardly mention it.

At six years old, I was taken from the nursery, and from the
immediate care of a most indulgent mother, and sent to a
considerable school in Bedfordshire.[746] Here I had hardships of
different kinds to conflict with, which I felt more sensibly in
proportion to the tenderness with which I had been treated at home.
But my chief affliction consisted in my being singled out from all
the other boys, by a lad about fifteen years of age, as a proper
object upon whom he might let loose the cruelty of his temper. I
choose to forbear a particular recital of the many acts of barbarity
with which he made it his business continually to persecute me: it
will be sufficient to say, that he had, by his savage treatment of
me, impressed such a dread of his figure upon my mind, that I well
remember being afraid to lift up my eyes upon him, higher than his
knees; and that I knew him by his shoe-buckles better than any other
part of his dress. May the Lord pardon him, and may we meet in glory!

  [746] Market Street. Hayley places this village in Hertfordshire,
  and Cowper in Bedfordshire. Both are right, for the public road
  or street forms a boundary between the two counties.

One day, as I was sitting alone on a bench in the school,
melancholy, and almost ready to weep at the recollection of what I
had already suffered, and expecting at the same time my tormentor
every moment, these words of the Psalmist came into my mind, "I will
not be afraid of what man can do unto me." I applied this to my own
case, with a degree of trust and confidence in God that would have
been no disgrace to a much more experienced Christian. Instantly
I perceived in myself a briskness of spirits, and a cheerfulness,
which I had never before experienced,--and took several paces up and
down the room with joyful alacrity--_his_ gift in whom I trusted.
Happy had it been for me, if this early effort towards a dependence
on the blessed God had been frequently repeated by me. But, alas!
it was the first and last instance of the kind between infancy and
manhood. The cruelty of this boy, which he had long practised in
so secret a manner that no creature suspected it, was at length
discovered. He was expelled from the school, and I was taken from it.

From hence, at eight years old, I was sent to Mr. D., an eminent
surgeon and oculist, having very weak eyes, and being in danger
of losing one of them. I continued a year in this family, where
religion was neither known nor practised; and from thence was
despatched to Westminster. Whatever seeds of religion I might carry
thither, before my seven years' apprenticeship to the classics
was expired, they were all marred and corrupted; the duty of the
school-boy swallowed up every other; and I acquired Latin and Greek
at the expense of a knowledge much more important.[747]

  [747] We deeply lament that boys frequently leave public schools
  most discreditably deficient even in the common principles of
  the Christian faith. My late lamented friend, the Rev. Legh
  Richmond, used to observe that Christ was crucified between
  classics and mathematics. A great improvement might be effected
  in the system of modern education, if a brief but compendious
  summary of divine truth, or analysis of the Bible, were drawn up,
  divided into parts, suited to the different gradations of age
  and knowledge, and introduced into our public schools under the
  sanction of the Episcopal Bench. Care should also be taken, in
  the selection of under-masters, to appoint men of _acknowledged
  religious as well as classical attainments_, who might specially
  superintend the religious improvement of the boys. Such are to be
  found in our Universities, men not less eminent for divine than
  profane knowledge. A visible reformation would thus be effected,
  powerfully operating on the moral and spiritual character of the
  rising generation.

Here occurred the second instance of serious consideration. As I
was crossing St. Margaret's churchyard, late one evening, I saw a
glimmering light in the midst of it, which excited my curiosity.
Just as I arrived at the spot, a grave-digger, who was at work by
the light of his lanthorn, threw up a skull which struck me upon
the leg. This little accident was an alarm to my conscience; for
that event may be numbered among the best religious documents which
I received at Westminster. The impression, however, presently went
off, and I became so forgetful of mortality, that, strange as it may
seem, surveying my activity and strength, and observing the evenness
of my pulse, I began to entertain, with no small complacency, a
notion that perhaps I might never die! This notion was, however,
very short-lived; _for I was soon after struck with a lowness of
spirits_, uncommon at my age, and frequently had intimations of a
consumptive habit. I had skill enough to understand their meaning,
but could never prevail on myself to disclose them to any one; for I
thought any bodily infirmity a disgrace, especially a consumption.
This messenger from the Lord, however, did his errand, and perfectly
convinced me that I was mortal.

That I may do justice to the place of my education, I must relate
one mark of religious discipline, which, in my time, was observed at
Westminster; I mean, the pains which Dr. Nicholls took to prepare
us for confirmation. The old man acquitted himself of his duty like
one who had a deep sense of its importance; and I believe most of
us were struck by his manner, and affected by his exhortation. For
my own part, I then, for the first time, attempted prayer in secret;
but being little accustomed to that exercise of the heart, and
having very childish notions of religion, I found it a difficult and
painful task; and was even then frightened at my own insensibility.
This difficulty, though it did not subdue my good purposes, till the
ceremony of confirmation was past, soon after entirely conquered
them; I relapsed into a total forgetfulness of God, with the usual
disadvantage of being more hardened, for having been softened to no
purpose.

At twelve or thirteen I was seized with the small-pox. I only
mention this, to show that, at that early age, my heart was become
proof against the ordinary means which a gracious God employs for
our chastisement. Though I was severely handled by the disease, and
in imminent danger, yet neither in the course of it, nor during my
recovery, had I any sentiment of contrition, any thought of God or
eternity. On the contrary, I was scarcely raised from the bed of
pain and sickness, before the emotions of sin became more violent in
me than ever; and Satan seemed rather to have gained than lost an
advantage; so readily did I admit his suggestions, and so passive
was I under them.

By this time I became such an adept in falsehood that I was seldom
guilty of a fault for which I could not, at a very short notice,
invent an apology, capable of deceiving the wisest. These, I know,
are called school-boys' tricks; but a sad depravity of principle,
and the work of the father of lies, are universally at the bottom of
them.

At the age of eighteen, being tolerably furnished with grammatical
knowledge, but as ignorant in all points of religion as the satchel
at my back, I was taken from Westminster; and, having spent about
nine months at home, was sent to acquire the practice of the law
with an attorney. There I might have lived and died without hearing
or seeing any thing that might remind me of a single Christian duty,
had it not been that I was at liberty to spend my leisure time
(which was well nigh all my time) at my uncle's,[748] in Southampton
Row. By this means I had indeed an opportunity of seeing the inside
of a church, whither I went with the family on Sundays, which
probably I should otherwise never have seen.

  [748] Ashley Cowper, Esq.

At the expiration of this term, I became, in a manner, complete
master of myself; and took possession of a complete set of chambers
in the Temple, at the age of twenty-one. This being a critical
season of my life, and one upon which much depended, it pleased my
all-merciful Father in Jesus Christ to give a check to my rash and
ruinous career of wickedness at the very onset. _I was struck, not
long after my settlement in the Temple, with such a dejection of
spirits, as none but they who have felt the same can have the least
conception of. Day and night I was upon the rack, lying down in
horror, and rising up in despair._[749] I presently lost all relish
for those studies to which I had before been closely attached; the
classics had no longer any charms for me; I had need of something
more salutary than amusement, but I had no one to direct me where to
find it.

  [749] Here we first observe the ground-work of Cowper's malady,
  originating in constitutional causes, and morbid temperament.

At length I met with Herbert's Poems; and gothic and uncouth as
they were, I yet found in them a strain of piety which I could not
but admire. This was the only author I had any delight in reading.
I pored over him all day long; and though I found not here, what I
might have found, a cure for my malady, yet it never seemed so much
alleviated as while I was reading him. At length I was advised by a
very near and dear relative, to lay him aside; for he thought such
an author more likely to nourish my disorder than to remove it.[750]

  [750] A relative of Cowper's ought to have been the last to
  prohibit the perusal of Herbert's Poems, because Dr. John Donne,
  the pious and eminent Dean of St. Paul's, one of Cowper's
  ancestors, was the endeared friend of that holy man, to whom, not
  long before his death, he sent a seal, representing a figure of
  Christ extended upon an anchor, the emblem of Hope, to be kept as
  a memorial.

  Izaak Walton bears the following expressive testimony to
  Herbert's Temple, or Sacred Poems.

  "A book, in which by declaring his own spiritual conflicts, he
  hath comforted and raised many a dejected and discomposed soul,
  and charmed them into sweet and quiet thoughts; a book, by the
  frequent reading whereof, and the assistance of that Spirit that
  seemed to inspire the author, the reader may attain habits of
  _peace_ and _piety_, and all the gifts of the _Holy Ghost_ and
  _Heaven_: and may, by still reading, still keep those sacred
  fires burning upon the altar of so pure a heart, as shall free it
  from the anxieties of this world, and keep it fixed upon things
  that are above." _See Walton's Lives._

In this state of mind I continued near a twelvemonth; when, having
experienced the inefficacy of all human means, I at length betook
myself to God in prayer; such is the rank which our Redeemer holds
in our esteem, never resorted to but in the last instance, when all
creatures have failed to succour us. My hard heart was at length
softened; and my stubborn knees brought to bow. I composed a set
of prayers, and made frequent use of them. Weak as my faith was,
the Almighty, who will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking flax, was graciously pleased to hear me.

A change of scene was recommended to me; and I embraced an
opportunity of going with some friends to Southampton, where I
spent several months. Soon after our arrival, we walked to a place
called Freemantle, about a mile from the town: the morning was
clear and calm; the sun shone bright upon the sea; and the country
on the borders of it was the most beautiful I had ever seen. We
sat down upon an eminence, at the end of the arm of the sea, which
runs between Southampton and the New Forest. Here it was, that, on
a sudden, as if another sun had been kindled that instant in the
heavens, on purpose to dispel sorrow and vexation of spirit, I felt
the weight of all my misery taken off; my heart became light and
joyful in a moment; I could have wept with transport had I been
alone. I must needs believe that nothing less than the Almighty
fiat could have filled me with such inexpressible delight; not by
a gradual dawning of peace, but as it were with a flash of his
life-giving countenance. I think I remember something like a glow
of gratitude to the Father of mercies for this unexpected blessing,
and that I ascribed it to his gracious acceptance of my prayers.
But Satan, and my own wicked heart, quickly persuaded me that I was
indebted for my deliverance to nothing but a change of scene and the
amusing varieties of the place. By this means he turned the blessing
into a poison; teaching me to conclude, that nothing but a continued
circle of diversion, and indulgence of appetite, could secure me
from a relapse.[751]

  [751] We do not know a state of mind more to be deprecated
  than what is indicated in this passage. It is the science of
  self-tormenting, that withers every joy, and blights all our
  happiness. That Satan tempts is a scriptural truth; but the same
  divine authority also informs us, that "every man is tempted when
  he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed," James i. 14: that
  God suffereth no man to be tempted above what he is able, and
  that if we resist Satan he will flee from us. The mind that feels
  itself harassed by these mental temptations must take refuge in
  the promises of God, such as Isaiah xli. 10; xliii. 2; lix. 19; 2
  Cor. xii. 9, and plead them in prayer. Resistance to temptation
  will weaken it, faith will overcome it, and the panoply of
  Heaven, if we be careful to gird ourselves with it, will secure
  us against all its inroads.

Upon this false principle, as soon as I returned to London, I burnt
my prayers, and away went all thoughts of devotion and dependence
upon God my Saviour. Surely it was of his mercy that I was not
consumed; glory be to his grace! Two deliverances from danger not
making any impression, having spent about twelve years in the
Temple, in an uninterrupted course of sinful indulgence, and my
associates and companions being either, like myself, professed
Christians, or professed infidels, I obtained, at length, so
complete a victory over my conscience, that all remonstrances
from that quarter were in vain, and in a manner silenced; though
sometimes, indeed, a question would arise in my mind, whether it
were safe to proceed any farther in a course so plainly and utterly
condemned in the word of God. I saw clearly that if the gospel were
true, such a conduct must inevitably end in my destruction; but I
saw not by what means I could change my Ethiopian complexion, or
overcome such an inveterate habit of rebelling against God.

The next thing that occurred to me was a doubt whether the gospel
were true or false. To this succeeded many an anxious wish for the
decision of this important question; for I foolishly thought, that
obedience would presently follow, were I but convinced that it was
worth while to attempt it. Having no reason to expect a miracle,
and not hoping to be satisfied with any thing less, I acquiesced,
at length, in the force of that devilish conclusion, that the only
course I could take to secure my present peace was to wink hard
against the prospect of future misery, and to resolve to banish all
thoughts of a subject, upon which I thought to so little purpose.
Nevertheless, when I was in the company of deists, and heard the
gospel blasphemed, I never failed to assert the truth of it with
much vehemence of disputation; for which I was the better qualified,
having been always an industrious and diligent inquirer into the
evidences by which it was externally supported. I think I once went
so far into a controversy of this kind, as to assert, that I would
gladly submit to have my right hand cut off, so that I might but be
enabled to live according to the gospel. Thus have I been employed,
when half intoxicated, in vindicating the truth of scripture, while
in the very act of rebellion against its dictates. Lamentable
inconsistency of a convinced judgment with an unsanctified heart!
An inconsistency, indeed, evident to others as well as to myself,
inasmuch as a deistical friend of mine, with whom I was disputing
upon the subject, cut short the matter, by alleging that, if what I
said were true, I was certainly lost by my own showing.

By this time, my patrimony being well nigh spent, and there being
no appearance that I should ever repair the damage by a fortune of
my own getting, I began to be a little apprehensive of approaching
want. It was, I imagine, under some apprehensions of this kind, that
I one day said to a friend of mine, if the clerk to the journals of
the House of Lords should die, I had some hopes that my kinsman,
who had the place in his disposal, would appoint me to succeed him.
We both agreed that the business of that place, being transacted
in private, would exactly suit me. Thus did I covet what God had
commanded me not to covet. It pleased the Lord to give me my heart's
desire, and with it an immediate punishment for my crime. The man
died, and, by his death, not only the clerkship of the journals
became vacant, but it became necessary to appoint officers to two
other places, jointly, as deputies to Mr. De Grey,[752] who at this
time resigned. These were the office of reading clerk, and the
clerkship of the committees, of much greater value than that of the
journals. The patentee of these appointments (whom I pray to God
to bless for his benevolent intention to serve me) called on me at
my chambers, and, having invited me to take a turn with him in the
garden, there made me an offer of the two most profitable places;
intending the other for his friend Mr. A. Dazzled by so splendid
a proposal, and not immediately reflecting upon my incapacity to
execute a business of so public a nature, I at once accepted it; but
at the same time (such was the will of Him whose hand was in the
whole matter) seemed to receive a dagger in my heart. _The wound
was given, and every moment added to the smart of it._ All the
considerations, by which I endeavoured to compose my mind to its
former tranquillity, did but torment me the more; proving miserable
comforters and counsellors of no value. I returned to my chambers
thoughtful and unhappy; my countenance fell; and my friend was
astonished, instead of that additional cheerfulness he might so
reasonably expect, to find an air of deep melancholy in all I said
or did.

  [752] Afterwards Lord Chief Justice, in the Court of Common
  Pleas, and created Lord Walsingham.

Having been harassed in this manner by day and night, for the space
of a week, perplexed between the apparent folly of casting away
the only visible chance I had of being well provided for and the
impossibility of retaining it, I determined at length to write a
letter to my friend, though he lodged in a manner at the next door,
and we generally spent the day together. I did so, and therein
begged him to accept my resignation, and to appoint Mr. A. to the
places he had given me; and permit me to succeed Mr. A. I was well
aware of the disproportion between the value of his appointment
and mine; but my peace was gone; pecuniary advantages were not
equivalent to what I had lost; and I flattered myself, that the
clerkship of the journals would fall fairly and easily within the
scope of my abilities. Like a man in a fever, I thought a change
of posture would relieve my pain; and, as the event will show, was
equally disappointed. At length I carried my point; my friend, in
this instance, preferring the gratification of my desires to his
own interest; for nothing could be so likely to bring a suspicion
of bargain and sale upon his nomination, which the Lords would
not have endured, as his appointment of so near a relative to the
least profitable office, while the most valuable was allotted to a
stranger.

The matter being thus settled, something like a calm took place in
my mind. I was, indeed, not a little concerned about my character;
being aware, that it must needs suffer by the strange appearance of
my proceeding. This, however, being but a small part of the anxiety
I had laboured under, was hardly felt, when the rest was taken off.
I thought my path to an easy maintenance was now plain and open, and
for a day or two was tolerably cheerful. But, behold, the storm was
gathering all the while; and the fury of it was not the less violent
for this gleam of sunshine.

In the beginning, a strong opposition to my friend's right of
nomination began to show itself. A powerful party was formed among
the lords to thwart it, in favour of an old enemy of the family,
though one much indebted to its bounty; and it appeared plain that,
if we succeeded at last, it would only be by fighting our ground
by inches. Every advantage, I was told, would be sought for, and
eagerly seized, to disconcert us. I was bid to expect an examination
at the bar of the house, touching my sufficiency for the post I had
taken. Being necessarily ignorant of the nature of that business,
it became expedient that I should visit the office daily, in order
to qualify myself for the strictest scrutiny. All the horror of my
fears and perplexities now returned. A thunderbolt would have been
as welcome to me as this intelligence. I knew, to demonstration,
that upon these terms the clerkship of the journals was no place
for me. To require my attendance at the bar of the house, that I
might there publicly entitle myself to the office, was, in effect,
to exclude me from it. In the meantime, the interest of my friend,
the honour of his choice, my own reputation and circumstances, all
urged me forward; all pressed me to undertake that which I say to be
impracticable. They whose spirits are formed like mine, to whom _a
public exhibition of themselves, on any occasion, is mortal poison_,
may have some idea of the horrors of my situation; others can have
none.

My continual misery at length brought on a nervous fever: quiet
forsook me by day, and peace by night; a finger raised against me
was more than I could stand against. In this posture of mind, I
attended regularly at the office; where, instead of a soul upon
the rack, the the most active spirits were essentially necessary
for my purpose. I expected no assistance from anybody there, all
the inferior clerks being under the influence of my opponent; and
accordingly I received none. The journal books were indeed thrown
open to me, a thing which could not be refused; and from which,
perhaps, a man in health, and with a head turned to business, might
have gained all the information he wanted; but it was not so with
me. I read without perception, and was so distressed, that, had
every clerk in the office been my friend, it could have availed me
little; for I was not in a condition to receive instruction, much
less to elicit it out of manuscripts, without direction. Many months
went over me thus employed; constant in the use of means, despairing
as to the issue.

The feelings of a man when he arrives at the place of execution,
are probably much like mine every time I set my foot in the office,
which was every day for more than half a year together.

At length, the vacation being pretty far advanced, I made a shift
to get into the country, and repaired to Margate. There, by the
help of cheerful company, a new scene, and the intermission of my
painful employment, I presently began to recover my spirits; though
even here, for some time after my arrival (no-withstanding, perhaps,
that the preceding day had been spent agreeably, and without any
disturbing recollection of my circumstances), my first reflections,
when I awoke in the morning, were horrible and full of wretchedness.
I looked forward to the approaching winter, and regretted the flight
of every moment which brought it nearer; like a man borne away by a
rapid torrent into a stormy sea, whence he sees no possibility of
returning, and where he knows he cannot subsist. At length, indeed,
I acquired such a facility of turning away my thoughts from the
ensuing crisis, that, for weeks together, I hardly adverted to it at
all; but the stress of the tempest was yet to come, and was not to
be avoided by any resolution of mine to look another way.

"How wonderful are the works of the Lord, and his ways past finding
out!" Thus was he preparing me for an event which I least of all
expected, even the reception of his blessed gospel, working by means
which, in all human contemplation, must needs seem directly opposite
to that purpose, but which, in his wise and gracious disposal, have,
I trust, effectually accomplished it.

About the beginning of October, 1763, I was again required to attend
the office and prepare for the push. This no sooner took place, than
all my misery returned; again I visited the scene of ineffectual
labours; again I felt myself pressed by necessity on either side,
with nothing but despair in prospect. To this dilemma was I reduced,
either to keep possession of the office to the last extremity, and
by so doing expose myself to a public rejection for insufficiency
(for the little knowledge I had acquired would have quite forsaken
me at the bar of the house); or else to fling it up at once, and
by this means run the hazard of ruining my benefactor's right of
appointment, by bringing his discretion into question. In this
situation, such a fit of passion has sometimes seized me, when alone
in my chambers, that I have cried out aloud, and cursed the hour
of my birth; lifting up my eyes to heaven, at the same time, not
as a supplicant, but in the spirit of reproach against my Maker. A
thought would sometime come across my mind, that my sins had perhaps
brought this distress upon me, that the hand of divine vengeance was
in it; but in the pride of my heart, I presently acquitted myself,
and thereby implicitly charged God with injustice, saying, "What
sins have I committed to deserve this?"

I saw plainly that God alone could deliver me; but was firmly
persuaded that he would not, and therefore omitted to ask it. Indeed
at _his_ hands, I would not; but as Saul sought to the witch, so did
I to the physician, Dr. Heberden; and was as diligent in the use of
drugs, as if they would have healed my wounded spirit, or have made
the rough places plain before me. I made, indeed, one effort of a
devotional kind; for, having found a prayer or two, I said them a
few nights, but with so little expectation of prevailing that way,
that I soon laid aside the book, and with it all thoughts of God and
hopes of a remedy.

I now began to look upon madness as the only chance remaining. I
had a strong kind of foreboding that so it would one day fare with
me; and I wished for it earnestly, and looked forward to it with
impatient expectation. My chief fear was, that my senses would
not fail me time enough to excuse my appearance at the bar of the
House of Lords, which was the only purpose I wanted it to answer.
Accordingly, the day of decision drew near, and I was still in my
senses; though in my heart I had formed many wishes, and by word of
mouth expressed many expectations to the contrary.

Now came the grand temptation; the point to which Satan had all
the while been driving me. I grew more sullen and reserved, fled
from society, even from my most intimate friends, and shut myself
up in my chambers. The ruin of my fortune, the contempt of my
relations and acquaintance, the prejudice I should do to my patron,
were all urged on me with irresistible energy. Being reconciled
to the apprehension of madness, I began to be reconciled to the
apprehension of death. Though formerly, in my happiest hours, I
had never been able to glance a single thought that way, without
shuddering at the idea of dissolution, I now wished for it, and
found myself but little shocked at the idea of procuring it myself.
I considered life as my property, and therefore at my own disposal.
Men of great name, I observed, had destroyed themselves; and the
world still retained the profoundest respect for their memories.



[An imperative sense of duty compels me to throw a veil over the
afflicting details which follow. Respect for the known wishes of
my departed brother-in-law, a desire not to wound the feelings of
living characters, and a consciousness that such disclosures are
not suited to meet the public eye, confirm me in this resolution.
It may be said, the facts are accessible, and may be known;
why make a mystery of communicating them? My answer is, I am a
father; I will not inflict a shock on the youthful minds of my
own children, neither will I be instrumental in conveying it
to those of others. I will make such use of the Memoir as may
answer the purpose I have in view, but I will not be the medium
of revealing the secrets of the prison-house. It is sufficient
to state that Cowper meditated the crime of self-destruction,
and that he was arrested in his purpose by an Almighty arm. To
quote his own emphatic words, "Unless my Eternal Father in Christ
Jesus had interposed to disannul my covenant with death, and my
agreement with hell, that I might hereafter be admitted into the
covenant of mercy, I had by this time been the just object of his
boundless vengeance."

All expectation of being able to hold the office in parliament
being now at an end, he despatched a friend to his relative at
the coffee-house.]



As soon, he observes, as the latter arrived, I apprised him of the
attempt I had been making. His words were, "My dear Mr. Cowper, you
terrify me; to be sure you cannot hold the office at this rate.
Where is the deputation?" I gave him the key of the drawers where it
was deposited; and, his business requiring his immediate attendance,
he took it away with him; and thus ended all my connexion with the
parliament house.

To this moment I had felt no concern of a spiritual kind. Ignorant
of original sin, insensible of the guilt of actual transgression,
I understood neither the law nor the gospel; the condemning nature
of the one, nor the restoring mercies of the other. I was as much
unacquainted with Christ, in all his saving offices, as if his
blessed name had never reached me. Now, therefore, a new scene
opened upon me. Conviction of sin took place, especially of that
just committed; the meanness of it, as well as its atrocity, were
exhibited to me in colours so inconceivably strong, that I despised
myself, with a contempt not to be imagined or expressed, for having
attempted it. This sense of it secured me from the repetition of a
crime, which I could not now reflect on without abhorrence.

A sense of God's wrath, and a deep despair of escaping it, instantly
succeeded. The fear of death became much more prevalent in me than
ever the desire of it had been.

A frequent flashing, like that of fire, before my eyes, and an
excessive pressure upon the brain, made me apprehensive of an
apoplexy.

By the advice of my dear friend and benefactor, who called upon me
again at noon, I sent for a physician, and told him the fact, and
the stroke I apprehended. He assured me there was no danger of it,
and advised me by all means to retire into the country. Being made
easy in that particular, and not knowing where to better myself, I
continued in my chambers, where the solitude of my situation left me
at full liberty to attend to my spiritual state; a matter I had till
this day never sufficiently thought of.

At this time I wrote to my brother, at Cambridge, to inform him of
the distress I had been in, and the dreadful method I had taken to
deliver myself from it; assuring him, as I faithfully might, that I
had laid aside all such horrid intentions, and was desirous to live
as long as it would please the Almighty to permit me.

My sins were now set in array against me, and I began to see and
feel that I had lived without God in the world. As I walked to
and fro in my chamber, I said within myself, "_There never was so
abandoned a wretch, so great a sinner_." All my worldly sorrows
seemed as though they had never been; the terrors which succeeded
them seemed so great and so much more afflicting. One moment I
thought myself shut out from mercy by one chapter; the next by
another. The sword of the Spirit seemed to guard the tree of life
from my touch, and to flame against me in every avenue by which I
attempted to approach it. I particularly remember, that the parable
of the barren fig-tree was to me an inconceivable source of anguish;
and I applied it to myself, with a strong persuasion in my mind
that, when the Saviour pronounced a curse upon it, he had me in his
eye, and pointed that curse directly at me.

I turned over all Archbishop Tillotson's sermons, in hopes to find
one upon the subject, and consulted my brother upon the true meaning
of it; desirous, if possible, to obtain a different interpretation
of the matter than my evil conscience would suffer me to fasten on
it. "O Lord, thou didst vex me with all thy storms, all thy billows
went over me; thou didst run upon me like a giant in the night
season, thou didst scare me with visions in the night season."

In every book I opened, I found something that struck me to the
heart. I remember taking up a volume of Beaumont and Fletcher, which
lay upon the table in my kinsman's lodgings, and the first sentence
which I saw was this: "The justice of the gods is in it." My heart
instantly replied, "It is a truth;" and I cannot but observe, that
as I found something in every author to condemn me, so it was the
first sentence, in general, I pitched upon. Everything preached to
me, and everything preached the curse of the law.

I was now strongly tempted to use laudanum, not as a poison, but as
an opiate, to compose my spirits; to stupify my awakened and feeling
mind, harassed with sleepless nights and days of uninterrupted
misery. But God forbad it, who would have nothing to interfere with
the quickening work he had begun in me; and neither the want of
rest, nor continued agony of mind, could bring me to the use of it:
I hated and abhorred the very smell of it.

Having an obscure notion about the efficacy of faith, I resolved
upon an experiment to prove whether I had faith or not. For this
purpose, I resolved to repeat the Creed: when I came to the second
period of it, all traces of the former were struck out of my
memory, nor could I recollect one syllable of the matter. While I
endeavoured to recover it, and when just upon the point, I perceived
a sensation in my brain, like a tremulous vibration in all the
fibres of it. By this means I lost the words in the very instant
when I thought to have laid hold of them. This threw me into an
agony; but, growing a little calmer, I made an attempt for the third
time; here again I failed in the same manner as before.

In this condition my brother found me, and the first words I spoke
to him were, "Oh! brother, I am lost! think of eternity, and then
think what it is to be lost!" I had, indeed, a sense of eternity
impressed upon my mind, which seemed almost to amount to a full
comprehension of it.

My brother, pierced to the heart with the sight of my misery, tried
to comfort me, but all to no purpose. I refused comfort, and my mind
appeared to me in such colours, that to administer it to me was only
to exasperate me, and to mock my fears.

At length, I remembered my friend Martin Madan, and sent for him. I
used to think him an enthusiast, but now seemed convinced that, if
there was any balm in Gilead, he must administer it to me. On former
occasions, when my spiritual concerns had at any time occurred to
me, I thought likewise on the necessity of repentance. I knew that
many persons had spoken of shedding tears for sin; but, when I asked
myself, whether the time would ever come when I should weep for
mine, it seemed to me that a stone might sooner do it.

Not knowing that Christ was exalted to give repentance, I despaired
of ever attaining to it. My friend came to me; we sat on the
bed-side together, and he began to declare to me the gospel. He
spoke of original sin, and the corruption of every man born into the
world, whereby every one is a child of wrath. I perceived something
like hope dawning in my heart. This doctrine set me more on a
level with the rest of mankind, and made my condition appear less
desperate.

Next he insisted on the all-atoning efficacy of the blood of Jesus,
and his righteousness, for our justification. While I heard this
part of his discourse, and the scriptures on which he founded it,
my heart began to burn within me, my soul was pierced with a sense
of my bitter ingratitude to so merciful a Saviour; and those tears,
which I thought impossible, burst forth freely. I saw clearly that
my case required such a remedy, and had not the least doubt within
me but that this was the gospel of salvation.

Lastly, he urged the necessity of a lively faith in Jesus Christ;
not an assent only of the understanding, but a faith of application,
an actually laying hold of it, and embracing it as a salvation
wrought out for me personally. Here I failed, and deplored my want
of such a faith. He told me it was the gift of God, which he trusted
he would bestow upon me. I could only reply, "I wish he would:" a
very irreverent petition;[753] but a very sincere one, and such as
the blessed God, in his due time, was pleased to answer.

  [753] It could hardly be called irreverent, unless the manner in
  which it was uttered rendered it such.

My brother, finding that I had received consolation from Mr. Madan,
was very anxious that I should take the earliest opportunity of
conversing with him again; and, for this purpose, pressed me to go
to him immediately. I was for putting it off, but my brother seemed
impatient of delay; and, at length, prevailed on me to set out.
I mention this, to the honour of his candour and humanity; which
would suffer no difference of sentiments to interfere with them.
My welfare was his only object, and all prejudices fled before his
zeal to procure it. May he receive, for his recompence, all that
happiness the gospel, which I then first became acquainted with, is
alone able to impart!

Easier, indeed, I was, but far from easy. The wounded spirit within
me was less in pain, but by no means healed. What I had experienced
was but the beginning of sorrows, and a long train of still greater
terrors was at hand. I slept my three hours well, and then awoke
with ten times a stronger alienation from God than ever.

At eleven o'clock my brother called upon me, and, in about an hour
after his arrival, that distemper of mind, which I had so ardently
wished for, actually seized me.

While I traversed the apartment, expecting every moment the earth
would open her mouth and swallow me, my conscience scaring me, and
the city of refuge out of reach and out of sight, a strange and
horrible darkness fell upon me. If it were possible that a heavy
blow could light on the brain, without touching the skull, such was
the sensation I felt. I clapped my hand to my forehead, and cried
aloud, through the pain it gave me. At every stroke my thoughts and
expressions became more wild and incoherent; all that remained clear
was the sense of sin, and the expectation of punishment. These kept
undisturbed possession all through my illness, without interruption
or abatement.

My brother instantly observed the change, and consulted with my
friends on the best manner to dispose of me. It was agreed among
them, that I should be carried to St. Alban's, where Dr. Cotton
kept a house for the reception of such patients, and with whom I
was known to have a slight acquaintance. Not only his skill as
a physician recommended him to their choice, but his well-known
humanity and sweetness of temper. It will be proper to draw a veil
over the secrets of my prison-house: let it suffice to say, that the
low state of body and mind to which I was reduced was perfectly well
calculated to humble the natural vain-glory and pride of my heart.

These are the efficacious means which Infinite Wisdom thought
meet to make use of for that purpose. A sense of self-loathing
and abhorrence ran through all my insanity. Conviction of sin,
and expectation of instant judgment, never left me, from the 7th
of December 1763, until the middle of July following. The accuser
of the brethren was ever busy with me night and day, bringing to
my recollection in dreams the commission of long-forgotten sins,
and charging upon my conscience things of an indifferent nature as
atrocious crimes.

All that passed in this long interval of eight months may be classed
under two heads, conviction of sin, and despair of mercy. But,
blessed be the God of my salvation, for every sigh I drew, for every
tear I shed; since thus it pleased him to judge me here, that I
might not be judged hereafter.

After five months of continual expectation that the divine vengeance
would overtake me, I became so familiar with despair as to have
contracted a sort of hardiness and indifference as to the event. I
began to persuade myself that, while the execution of the sentence
was suspended, it would be for my interest to indulge a less
horrible train of ideas than I had been accustomed to muse upon.
By the means I entered into conversation with the doctor, laughed
at his stories, and told him some of my own to match them; still,
however, carrying a sentence of irrevocable doom in my heart.

He observed the seeming alteration with pleasure. Believing, as
well he might, that my smiles were sincere, he thought my recovery
well-nigh completed; but they were, in reality, like the green
surface of a morass, pleasant to the eye, but a cover for nothing
but rottenness and filth. _The only thing that could promote and
effectuate my cure was yet wanting; an experimental knowledge of the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus._

In about three months more (July 25, 1764) my brother came from
Cambridge to visit me. Dr. C. having told him that he thought me
greatly amended, he was rather disappointed at finding me almost as
silent and reserved as ever; for the first sight of him struck me
with many painful sensations both of sorrow for my own remediless
condition and envy of his happiness.

As soon as we were left alone, he asked me how I found myself; I
answered, "As much better as despair can make me." We went together
into the garden. Here, on expressing a settled assurance of sudden
judgment, he protested to me that it was all a delusion; and
protested so strongly, that I could not help giving some attention
to him. I burst into tears, and cried out, "If it be a delusion,
then am I the happiest of beings." Something like a ray of hope was
shot into my heart; but still I was afraid to indulge it. We dined
together, and I spent the afternoon in a more cheerful manner.
Something seemed to whisper to me every moment, "Still there is
mercy."

Even after he left me, this change of sentiment gathered ground
continually; yet my mind was in such a fluctuating state, that I
can only call it a vague presage of better things at hand, without
being able to assign a reason for it. The servant observed a sudden
alteration in me for the better: and the man, whom I have ever since
retained in my service,[754] expressed great joy on the occasion.

  [754] Samuel Roberts.

I went to bed and slept well. In the morning, I dreamed that the
sweetest boy I ever saw came dancing up to my bedside; he seemed
just out of leading-strings, yet I took particular notice of the
firmness and steadiness of his tread. The sight affected me with
pleasure, and served at least to harmonize my spirits; so that I
awoke for the first time with a sensation of delight on my mind.
Still, however, I knew not where to look for the establishment of
the comfort I felt; my joy was as much a mystery to myself as to
those about me. The blessed God was preparing for me the clearer
light of his countenance, by this first dawning of that light upon
me.

Within a few days of my first arrival at St. Alban's, I had thrown
aside the word of God, as a book in which I had no longer any
interest or portion. The only instance, in which I can recollect
reading a single chapter, was about two months before my recovery.
Having found a Bible on the bench in the garden, I opened upon the
11th of St. John, where Lazarus is raised from the dead; and saw
so much benevolence, mercy, goodness, and sympathy, with miserable
man, in our Saviour's conduct, that I almost shed tears even after
the relation; little thinking that it was an exact type of the mercy
which Jesus was on the point of extending towards myself. I sighed,
and said, "Oh, that I had not rejected so good a Redeemer, that I
had not forfeited all his favours!" Thus was my heart softened,
though not yet enlightened. I closed the book, without intending to
open it again.

Having risen with somewhat of a more cheerful feeling, I repaired
to my room, where breakfast waited for me. While I sat at table, I
found the cloud of horror, which had so long hung over me, was every
moment passing away; and every moment came fraught with hope. I was
continually more and more persuaded that I was not utterly doomed
to destruction. The way of salvation was still, however, hid from
my eyes; nor did I see it at all clearer than before my illness. I
only thought that, if it would please God to spare me, I would lead
a better life; and that I would yet escape hell, if a religious
observance of my duty would secure me from it.

_Thus may the terror of the Lord make a pharisee; but only the sweet
voice of mercy in the gospel can make a Christian._



[We are now arrived at the eventful crisis of Cowper's conversion
and restoration, which is thus recorded in his own words.]

But the happy period which was to shake off my fetters, and afford
me a clear opening of the free mercy of God in Christ Jesus, was
now arrived. I flung myself into a chair near the window, and,
seeing a Bible there, ventured once more to apply to it for comfort
and instruction. The first verse I saw was the 25th of the 3rd of
Romans; "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins
that are past, through the forbearance of God."

Immediately I received strength to believe it, and the full beams
of the Sun of Righteousness shone upon me. I saw the sufficiency of
the atonement he had made, my pardon sealed in his blood, and all
the fulness and completeness of his justification. In a moment I
believed, and received the gospel. Whatever my friend Madan had said
to me, long before, revived in all its clearness, with demonstration
of the Spirit and with power. Unless the Almighty arm had been under
me, I think I should have died with gratitude and joy. My eyes
filled with tears, and my voice choked with transport, I could only
look up to heaven in silent fear, overwhelmed with love and wonder.
But the work of the Holy Ghost is best described in his own words,
it is "joy unspeakable, and full of glory." Thus was my heavenly
Father in Christ Jesus pleased to give me the full assurance of
faith, and out of a strong, stony, unbelieving heart, to raise up a
child unto Abraham. How glad should I now have been to have spent
every moment in prayer and thanksgiving!

I lost no opportunity of repairing to a throne of grace; but flew
to it with an earnestness irresistible and never to be satisfied.
Could I help it? Could I do otherwise than love and rejoice in my
reconciled Father in Christ Jesus? The Lord had enlarged my heart,
and I ran in the way of his commandments. For many succeeding
weeks, tears were ready to flow, if I did but speak of the gospel,
or mention the name of Jesus. To rejoice day and night was all my
employment. Too happy to sleep much, I thought it was but lost time
that was spent in slumber. O that the ardour of my first love had
continued! But I have known many a lifeless and unhallowed hour
since; long intervals of darkness, interrupted by short returns of
peace and joy in believing.

My physician, ever watchful and apprehensive for my welfare, was
now alarmed, lest the sudden transition from despair to joy should
terminate in a fatal frenzy. But "the Lord was my strength and my
song, and was become my salvation." I said, "I shall not die, but
live, and declare the works of the Lord; he has chastened me sore,
but not given me over unto death. O give thanks unto the Lord, for
his mercy endureth for ever."

In a short time, Dr. C. became satisfied, and acquiesced in the
soundness of my cure: and much sweet communion I had with him,
concerning the things of our salvation. He visited me every
morning while I stayed with him, which was near twelve months
after my recovery, and the gospel was the delightful theme of our
conversation.

No trial has befallen me since, but what might be expected in a
state of warfare. Satan, indeed, has changed his battery. Before
my conversion, sensual gratification was the weapon with which he
sought to destroy me. Being naturally of an easy, quiet disposition,
I was seldom tempted to anger; yet that passion it is which now
gives me the most disturbance, and occasions the sharpest conflicts.
But, Jesus being my strength, I fight against it; and if I am not
conqueror, yet I am not overcome.

I now employed my brother to seek out an abode for me in the
neighbourhood of Cambridge, being determined, by the Lord's leave,
to see London, the scene of my former abominations, no more. I had
still one place of preferment left, which seemed to bind me under
the necessity of returning thither again. But I resolved to break
the bond, chiefly because my peace of conscience was in question.
I held, for some years, the office of commissioner of bankrupts,
with about 60_l_. per annum. Conscious of my ignorance of the law,
I could not take the accustomed oath, and resigned it; thereby
releasing myself from an occasion of great sin, and every obligation
to return to London. By this means, I reduced myself to an income
scarcely sufficient for my maintenance; but I would rather have
starved in reality than deliberately offend against my Saviour; and
his great mercy has since raised me up such friends, as have enabled
me to enjoy all the comforts and conveniences of life. I am well
assured that, while I live, "bread shall be given me, and water
shall be sure," according to his gracious promise.

After my brother had made many unsuccessful attempts to procure me
a dwelling near him, I one day poured out my soul in prayer to God,
beseeching him that, wherever he should be pleased, in his fatherly
mercy, to lead me, it might be in the society of those who feared
his name, and loved the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; a prayer of
which I have good reason to acknowledge his gracious acceptance.

In the beginning of June, 1765, I received a letter from my brother,
to say, he had taken lodgings for me at Huntingdon, which he
believed would suit me. Though it was sixteen miles from Cambridge,
I was resolved to take them; for I had been two months in perfect
health, and my circumstances required a less expensive way of life.
It was with great reluctance, however, that I thought of leaving the
place of my second nativity; I had so much leisure there to study
the blessed word of God, and had enjoyed so much happiness; but God
ordered everything for me like an indulgent Father, and had prepared
a more comfortable place of residence than I could have chosen for
myself.

On the 7th of June, 1765, having spent more than eighteen months at
St. Alban's, partly in bondage, and partly in the liberty wherewith
Christ had made me free, I took my leave of the place at four in the
morning, and set out for Cambridge.

The servant, whom I lately mentioned as rejoicing in my recovery,
attended me. He had maintained such an affectionate watchfulness
over me during my whole illness, and waited on me with so much
patience and gentleness, that I could not bear to leave him behind,
though it was with some difficulty the Doctor was prevailed on to
part with him. The strongest argument of all was the earnest desire
he expressed to follow me. He seemed to have been providentially
thrown in my way, having entered Dr. C.'s service just time enough
to attend me; and I have strong ground to hope, that God will use
me as an instrument to bring him to a knowledge of Jesus. It is
impossible to say with how delightful a sense of his protection
and fatherly care of me, it has pleased the Almighty to favour me,
during the whole journey.

I remembered the pollution which is in the world, and the sad
share I had in it myself; and my heart ached at the thought of
entering it again. The blessed God had endued me with some concern
for his glory, and I was fearful of hearing it traduced by oaths
and blasphemies, the common language of this highly favoured, but
ungrateful country.[755] But "fear not, I am with thee," was my
comfort. I passed the whole journey in silent communion with God;
and those hours are amongst the happiest I have known.

  [755] There is a considerable improvement in public manners since
  this period, and oaths and blasphemies would not be tolerated in
  well-bred society. May the hallowed influence of the Gospel be
  instrumental in producing a still happier change!

I repaired to Huntingdon the Saturday after my arrival at Cambridge.
My brother, who had attended me thither, had no sooner left me than,
finding myself surrounded by strangers and in a strange place, my
spirits began to sink, and I felt (such were the backslidings of
my heart) like a traveller in the midst of an inhospitable desert,
without a friend to comfort or a guide to direct me. I walked forth,
towards the close of the day, in this melancholy frame of mind, and,
having wandered about a mile from the town, I found my heart, at
length, so powerfully drawn towards the Lord, that, having gained
a retired and secret nook in the corner of a field, I kneeled down
under a bank, and poured forth my complaints before him. It pleased
my Saviour to hear me, in that this oppression was taken off, and I
was enabled to trust in him that careth for the stranger, to roll my
burden upon him, and to rest assured that, wheresoever he might cast
my lot, the God of all consolation would still be with me. But this
was not all. He did for me more than either I had asked or thought.

The next day, I went to church for the first time after my recovery.
Throughout the whole service, I had much to do to restrain my
emotions, so fully did I see the beauty and the glory of the Lord.
My heart was full of love to all the congregation, especially to
them in whom I observed an air of sober attention. A grave and sober
person sat in the pew with me; him I have since seen and often
conversed with, and have found him a pious man, and a true servant
of the blessed Redeemer. While he was singing the psalm, I looked at
him, and, observing him intent on his holy employment, I could not
help saying in my heart, with much emotion, "Bless you, for praising
Him whom my soul loveth!"

Such was the goodness of the Lord to me, that he gave me "the oil
of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness;" and though my voice was silent, being stopped by the
intenseness of what I felt, yet my soul sung within me, and even
leaped for joy. And when the gospel for the day was read, the sound
of it was more than I could well support. Oh, what a word is the
word of God, when the Spirit quickens us to receive it, and gives
the hearing ear, and the understanding heart! The harmony of heaven
is in it, and discovers its author. The parable of the prodigal son
was the portion. I saw myself in that glass so clearly, and the
loving-kindness of my slighted and forgotten Lord, that the whole
scene was realized to me, and acted over in my heart.

I went immediately after church to the place where I had prayed
the day before, and found the relief I had there received was but
the earnest of a richer blessing. How shall I express what the
Lord did for me, except by saying, that he made all his goodness
to pass before me! I seemed to speak to him face to face, as a man
conversing with his friend, except that my speech was only in tears
of joy, and groanings which cannot be uttered. I could say, indeed,
with Jacob, not "how dreadful," but how lovely, "is this place! This
is none other than the house of God."

Four months I continued in my lodging. Some few of the neighbours
came to see me, but their visits were not very frequent; and, in
general, I had but little intercourse, except with my God in Christ
Jesus. It was he who made my solitude sweet, and the wilderness
to bloom and blossom as the rose; and my meditation of him was so
delightful that, if I had few other comforts, neither did I want any.

One day, however, towards the expiration of this period, I found
myself in a state of desertion. That communion which I had so long
been able to maintain with the Lord was suddenly interrupted. I
began to dislike my solitary situation, and to fear I should never
be able to weather out the winter in so lonely a dwelling. Suddenly
a thought struck me, which I shall not fear to call a suggestion
of the good providence which had brought me to Huntingdon. A few
months before, I had formed an acquaintance with the Rev. Mr.
Unwin's family. His son, though he had heard that I rather declined
society than sought it, and though Mrs. Unwin herself dissuaded him
from visiting me on that account, was yet so strongly inclined
to it, that, notwithstanding all objections and arguments to the
contrary, he one day engaged himself, as we were coming out of
church, after morning prayers, to drink tea with me that afternoon.
To my inexpressible joy, I found him one whose notions of religion
were spiritual and lively; one whom the Lord had been training
up from his infancy for the service of the temple. We opened our
hearts to each other at the first interview, and, when we parted, I
immediately retired to my chamber, and prayed the Lord, who had been
the author, to be the guardian of our friendship, and to grant to it
fervency and perpetuity, even unto death: and I doubt not that my
gracious Father heard this prayer also.

The Sunday following I dined with him. That afternoon, while the
rest of the family was withdrawn, I had much discourse with Mrs.
Unwin. I am not at liberty to describe the pleasure I had in
conversing with her, because she will be one of the first who will
have the perusal of this narrative. Let it suffice to say, I found
we had one faith, and had been baptized with the same baptism.

When I returned home, I gave thanks to God, who had so graciously
answered my prayers, by bringing me into the society of Christians.
She has since been a means in the hand of God of supporting,
quickening, and strengthening me, in my walk with him. It was long
before I thought of any other connexion with this family, than
as a friend and neighbour. On the day, however, above mentioned,
while I was revolving in my mind the nature of my situation, and
beginning, for the first time, to find an irksomeness in such
retirement, suddenly it occurred to me, that I might probably find
a place in Mr. Unwin's family as a boarder. A young gentleman, who
had lived with him as a pupil, was the day before gone to Cambridge.
It appeared to me, at least, possible, that I might be allowed to
succeed him. From the moment this thought struck me, such a tumult
of anxious solicitude seized me, that for two or three days I could
not divert my mind to any other subject. I blamed and condemned
myself for want of submission to the Lord's will; but still the
language of my mutinous and disobedient heart was, "Give me the
blessing, or else I die."

About the third evening after I had determined upon this measure, I,
at length, made shift to fasten my thoughts upon a theme which had
no manner of connexion with it. While I was pursuing my meditations,
Mr. Unwin and family quite out of sight, my attention was suddenly
called home again by the words which had been continually playing in
my mind, and were, at length, repeated with such importunity that
I could not help regarding them:--"The Lord God of truth will do
this." I was effectually convinced, that they were not of my own
production, and accordingly I received from them some assurance of
success; but my unbelief and fearfulness robbed me of much of the
comfort they were intended to convey; though I have since had many
a blessed experience of the same kind, for which I can never be
sufficiently thankful. I immediately began to negotiate the affair,
and in a few days it was entirely concluded.

I took possession of my new abode, Nov. 11, 1765. I have found it
a place of rest prepared for me by God's own hand, where he has
blessed me with a thousand mercies, and instances of his fatherly
protection; and where he has given me abundant means of furtherance
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus, both by the study of his own
word, and communion with his dear disciples. May nothing but death
interrupt our union!

Peace be with the reader, through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen!



Painful as this memoir is in some of its earlier details, yet
we know nothing more simple and beautiful in narrative, more
touching and ingenuous in sentiment, than its happy sequel and
consummation. It resembles the storm that desolates the plain,
but which is afterwards succeeded by the glowing beauties of
the renovated landscape. No document ever furnished an ampler
refutation of the remark that ascribes his malady to the operation
of religious causes. On the contrary, it appears that his first
relief, under the tyranny of an unfeeling school-boy, was in the
exercise of prayer, and that some of his happiest moments, in
the enjoyment of the Divine presence, were experienced in the
frame of mind which he describes, when at Southampton--that in
proportion as he forgot the heavenly Monitor, his peace vanished,
his passions resumed the ascendency, and he presented an unhappy
compound of guilt and wretchedness. The history of his malady is
developed in his own memoir with all the clearness of the most
circumstantial evidence. A morbid temperament laid the foundation;
an extreme susceptibility exposed him to continual nervous
irritation; and early disappointments deepened the impression.
At length, with a mind unoccupied by study, and undisciplined by
self-command--contemplating a "public exhibition of himself as
mortal poison," he sank under an offer which a more buoyant spirit
would have grasped as an object of honourable ambition. In this
state religion found him, and administered the happy cure.

That a morbid temperament was the originating cause of his
depression is confirmed by an affecting passage in one of his poems.

In the beautiful and much admired lines on his mother's picture,
there is the following pathetic remark:

    My mother! when I learn'd that thou wast dead,
    Say, wast thou conscious of the tears I shed?
    Hover'd thy spirit o'er thy sorrowing son,
    _Wretch even then, life's journey just begun_?

In dwelling on these predisposing causes, the Editor thinks it
right to state, in the most unequivocal manner, that there is
not the remotest reason for supposing that any hereditary malady
existed in the family of Cowper sufficient to account for this
afflicting dispensation. There was an inflammatory action of his
blood, and peculiar irritability of the nervous system, which a
wise and salutary self-control and the early influence of religious
principles might have subdued, or at least modified. Employment,
also, or the active exercise of the faculties, seems indispensable
to health and happiness.[756] He who lives without an allotted
occupation is seldom either wise, virtuous, or happy. The mind
recoils upon itself, and is consumed by its own fires. Providence,
after the Fall, in mercy, not less than in justice, decreed that man
should live by the sweat of his brow; that, in the same moment that
he was reminded of his punishment, he might find the toil itself a
powerful alleviation to his sufferings, and the exercise of all his
faculties the road to competency, to usefulness, and honour.

  [756] Cowper adopted a profession, but never pursued it with
  perseverance.

Two events contributed to exercise a most injurious influence on the
morbid mind of Cowper, not recorded in his own Memoir. We allude
to the death of his friend Sir William Russel, and his hopeless
attachment to Miss Theodora Cowper.

Sir William was the contemporary of Cowper at Westminster, and his
most intimate friend. This intercourse was continued in their riper
years, on the footing of the most endearing friendship. Unhappily,
young Russel was cut off by a premature death,[757] while bathing
in the Thames, amidst all the opening prospects of life, and with
accomplishments and virtues that adorned his rank and station. This
occurrence inflicted a great moral shock on the sensitive mind of
Cowper.

  [757] Shortness of life seems to have been peculiar to this
  family. The writer well remembers the two last baronets, viz.
  Sir John Russel, whose form was so weak and fragile, that,
  when resident at the University of Oxford, he was supported by
  instruments of steel. He died at the early age of twenty-one.
  2ndly. Sir George Russel, his brother, who survived only till
  his twenty-second year. The editor followed him to his grave.
  The family residence was at Chequers, in Buckinghamshire, an
  ancient seat, and restored at great expense by these last direct
  descendants of their race. Chequers was formerly noted as the
  place where Hampden, Cromwell, and a few others, held their
  secret meetings, and concerted their measures of opposition
  against the government of Charles I. The estate afterwards
  devolved to Robert Greenhill, Esq.

But it was his attachment to Miss Theodora Jane Cowper that formed
the eventful era in his early life, and clouded all his future
prospects. The relation of this fact is wholly omitted by Hayley, in
compliance, we presume, with the express wishes of the family. It
was, indeed, understood to be a prohibited subject, and involved in
much mystery. The name of this lady was never uttered by Cowper, nor
mentioned in his presence; and, after his death, delicacy towards
the survivor equally imposed the duty of silence. The brother-in-law
of the Editor, the Rev. Dr. Johnson, conscious that a correspondence
must have existed between the poet and the fair object of his
attachment, requested to know whether he could be furnished with
any documents, and permitted without a violation of delicacy to lay
them before the public. The writer was also commissioned by him to
solicit an interview, and to urge the same request, but without
success. An intimation was at length conveyed that no documents
could see the light till after the decease of the owner. The death
of this lady, in the year 1824, at a very advanced age, removed
the veil of secrecy, though the leading facts were known by a
small circle of friends, through the confidential communications
of Lady Hesketh and Dr. Johnson. We now proceed to the details of
this transaction. Miss Theodora Cowper was the second daughter of
Ashley Cowper, Esq., the poet's uncle, and sister to Lady Hesketh;
she was, consequently, own cousin to Cowper. She is described as
having been a young lady possessed of great personal attractions,
highly accomplished, and distinguished by the qualities that engage
affection and regard. It is no wonder that a person of Cowper's
susceptibility yielded to so powerful an influence. She soon
became the theme of his poetical effusions, which have since been
communicated to the public.[758] They are juvenile compositions,
but interesting, as forming the earliest productions of his muse,
and recording his attachment to his cousin. Miss Theodora Cowper
was by no means insensible to the regards of her admirer, and the
father was eventually solicited to ratify her choice. But Mr.
Ashley Cowper, attached as he was to his nephew, and anxious to
promote the happiness of his daughter, could by no means be induced
to listen to the proposition. His objections were founded, first,
on the near degree of relationship in which they stood to each
other; and secondly, on the inadequacy of Cowper's fortune. From
this resolution no entreaty could induce him to depart. The poet
therefore was compelled to cherish a hopeless passion, which no
lapse of time was capable of effacing; and his fair cousin, on her
part, discovered a corresponding fidelity.

  [758] Poems, the Early Productions of William Cowper.

The subsequent melancholy event, recorded in the Memoir, at once
extinguished all further hopes on the subject.

How powerfully his feelings were affected by the death of his
friend, Sir William, and by his disappointment in love, may be seen
by the following pathetic lines, referring to Miss Theodora Cowper:--

    Doom'd as I am, in solitude to waste
    The present moments, and regret the past;
    Depriv'd of every joy I valued most,
    My friend torn from me and my mistress lost;
    Call not this gloom I wear, this anxious mien,
    The dull effect of humour, or of spleen!
    Still, still, I mourn with each returning day,
    Him, snatch'd by fate in early youth away;
    And her--through tedious years of doubt and pain
    Fix'd in her choice and faithful--but in vain!
    O prone to pity, generous, and sincere,
    Whose eye ne'er yet refused the wretch a tear;
    Whose heart the real claim of friendship knows,
    Nor thinks a lover's are but fancied woes;
    See me--ere yet my destin'd course half done,
    Cast forth a wand'rer on a world unknown!
    See me neglected on the world's rude coast,
    Each dear companion of my voyage lost!

Such were the preparatory causes that weakened and depressed the
mind of Cowper. _The immediate and exciting cause_ of his unhappy
derangement has already been faithfully disclosed, as well as the
occasion that ministered to its cure.

Pursuing this interesting and yet painful subject in the order of
events, it appears that, after spending nearly ten years in the
enjoyment of much inward peace, he was visited in the year 1773,
at Olney, with a return, not of his original derangement, but with
a severe nervous fever, and a settled depression of spirits. This
attack began to subside at the close of the year 1776, though
his full powers were not recovered till some time after. What he
suffered is feelingly expressed in a letter to Mr. Hill. "Other
distempers only batter the walls; but _they_ (nervous fevers) creep
silently into the citadel, and put the garrison to the sword."[759]

  [759] See p. 36.

The death of his brother, the Rev. John Cowper, may have been
instrumental to this long indisposition. At the same time we think
that his situation at Olney was by no means favourable to his
health; and that more time should have been allotted for relaxation
and exercise.

In January, 1787, he experienced a fresh attack, though surrounded
by the beautiful scenery of Weston; which seems to prove that local
causes were not so influential as some have suggested. A much better
reason may be assigned in the lamented death of his endeared
friend, Mr. Unwin. This illness continued eight months, and greatly
enfeebled his health and spirits. "This last tempest," he remarks,
in a letter to Mr. Newton, "has left my nerves in a worse condition
than it found them; my head, especially, though better informed,
is more infirm than ever."[760] In December 1791, Mrs. Unwin
experienced her first attack; and in May 1792, it was renewed with
aggravated symptoms, during Hayley's visit to Weston. He describes
its powerful effect on Cowper's nerves in expressive language, and
none can be more expressive than his own, at the close of the same
year. "The year ninety-two shall stand chronicled in my remembrance
as the most melancholy that I have ever known, except the few weeks
that I spent at Eartham."[761] Cowper's mental depression kept pace
with the spectacle of her increasing imbecility, till at length,
yielding to the pressure of these accumulating sorrows, he sank
under the violence of the shock.

  [760] See p. 264.

  [761] See Letter, Dec. 26, 1729.

The coincidence of these facts is worthy of observation, as they
seem to prove that the embers of the original constitutional malady
never became extinct, and required only some powerful stimulant
to revive the flame. Religious feelings unquestionably concurred,
because whatever predominates in the mind furnishes the materials of
excitement; but it was not the religion of a creed, for what creed
ever proclaimed the delusion under which Cowper laboured.[762] His
persuasion was in opposition to his creed, for he knew that he was
once saved, and yet believed that he should be lost, though his
creed assured him that, where divine grace had once revealed its
saving power, it never failed to perfect its work in mercy--that
the Saviour's love is unchangeable, and that whom he hath loved he
loveth unto the end (John xiii. 1). His case, therefore, was an
exception to his creed, and consequently must be imputed to the
operation of other causes.

  [762] Cowper believed that he had incurred the Divine
  displeasure, because he did not commit the crime of
  self-destruction; a persuasion so manifestly absurd as to afford
  undeniable proof of derangement.

We trust we have now succeeded in tracing to its true source the
origin of Cowper's malady, and that the numerous facts which have
been urged must preclude the possibility of future misconception.

There are some distinguishing features in this mysterious malady
which are too extraordinary not to be specified. We notice the
following:--

1st. The free exercise of his mental powers continued during the
whole period of his depression, with the exception of two intervals,
from 1773 to 1776, and a season of eight months in the year 1787.
With these intermissions of study, all his works were written in
moments of depression and unceasing nervous excitement.

It still further shows the singular mechanism of his wonderful
mind, that his Montes Glaciales, or Ice Islands, exhibiting decided
marks of vigour of genius, were composed in the last stage of
his malady--within five weeks of his decease--when his heart was
lacerated by sorrow, his imagination scared by dreams, and the
heavens over his head were as brass. The public papers had announced
a phenomenon, which the voyages of Captains Ross and Parry have now
made more familiar, viz., the disruption of immense masses of ice
in the North Pole, and their appearance in the German Ocean. Cowper
seized this incident as a fit subject for his poetic powers, and
produced the poem from which we make the following extract:--

    What portents, from what distant region, ride,
    Unseen till now in ours, th' astonish'd tide?--
    What view we now? more wondrous still! Behold!
    Like burnish'd brass they shine, or beaten gold;
    And all around the pearl's pure splendour show,
    And all around the ruby's fiery glow.
    Come they from India, where the burning earth,
    All bounteous, gives her richest treasures birth;
    And where the costly gems, that beam around
    The brows of mightiest potentates, are found?
    No. Never such a countless, dazzling store
    Had left, unseen, the Ganges' peopled shore--
    Whence sprang they then?
    ----Far hence, where most severe
    Bleak Winter well-nigh saddens all the year,
    Their infant growth began. He bade arise
    Their uncouth forms, portentous in our eyes.
    Oft, as dissolv'd by transient suns, the snow
    Left the tall cliff to join the flood below,
    He caught, and curdled with a freezing blast
    The current, ere it reach'd the boundless waste.
    By slow degrees uprose the wondrous pile
    And long successive ages roll'd the while,
    Till, ceaseless in its growth, it claim'd to stand
    Tall as its rival mountains on the land.
    Thus stood, and, unremovable by skill
    Or force of man, had stood the structure still;
    But that, though firmly fixt, supplanted yet
    By pressure of its own enormous weight,
    It left the shelving beach--and, with a sound
    That shook the bellowing waves and rocks around,
    Self-launch'd, and swiftly, to the briny wave,
    As if instinct with strong desire to lave,
    Down went the pond'rous mass.

  See Poems.

2ndly. His malady, however oppressive to himself, was not
perceptible to others.

The Editor is enabled to state this remarkable fact on the authority
of Dr. Johnson, confirmed by the testimony of Lady Throckmorton, and
John Higgins, Esq., of Turvey Abbey, formerly of Weston.

There was nothing in his general manner, or intercourse with
society, to excite the suspicion of the wretchedness that dwelt
within. Among strangers he was at all times reserved and silent,
but in the circle of familiar friends, where restraint was banished,
not only did he exhibit no marks of gloom, but he could participate
in the mirth of others, or inspire it from his own fertile resources
of wit and humour. The prismatic colours, so to speak, were
discernible through the descending shower. The bow in the heavens
was not only emblematic of his imagination, but might be interpreted
as the pledge of promised mercy. For it seemed to be graciously
ordered that his lively and sportive imagination should be a relief
to the gloomy forebodings of his mind; and that, in vouchsafing to
him this alleviation, God proclaimed, "Behold, I do set my bow in
the cloud, it shall be for a covenant between me and thee."

3rdly. The rare union, in the same mind, of a rich vein of humour
with a spirit of profound melancholy was never perhaps so strikingly
exemplified as in the celebrated production of John Gilpin. The town
resounded with its praises. Henderson recited it to overflowing
auditories; Mr. Henry Thornton addressed it to a large party of
friends at Mr. Newton's. Laughter might be said to hold both his
sides, and the gravest were compelled to acknowledge the power
of comic wit. We scarcely know a more extraordinary phenomenon
than what is furnished by the history of this performance. For it
appears, by the author's own testimony, that it was written "in the
saddest mood, and but for that saddest mood, perhaps, had never
been written at all."[763] It is also known that this depression
was not incidental or temporary, but a fixed and settled feeling;
that he was in fact absorbed, for the most part, in the profoundest
melancholy; that he considered himself to be cut off from the mercy
of his God, though his life was blameless and without reproach; and
that, finally, having enlightened his country with strains of the
sublimest morality, he died the victim of an incurable despair. As a
contrast to the inimitable humour of John Gilpin, let us now turn to
that most affecting representation which the poet draws of his own
mental sufferings, occasioned by the painful depression which has
been the subject of so many remarks.

  [763] See p. 122.

    Look where he comes--in this embowered alcove
    Stand close concealed, and see a statue move;
    Lips busy, and eyes fixt, foot falling slow,
    Arms hanging idly down, hands clasped below,
    Interpret to the marking eye distress,
    Such as its symptoms can alone express.
    That tongue is silent now; that silent tongue
    Could argue once, could jest or join the song,
    Could give advice, could censure or commend,
    Or charm the sorrows of a drooping friend.
    Renounced alike its office and its sport,
    Its brisker and its graver strains fall short;
    Both fail beneath _a fever's secret sway_,
    And like a summer-brook are past away.
    This is a sight for pity to peruse,
    Till she resemble faintly what she views;
    Till sympathy contract a kindred pain,
    Pierced with the woes that she laments in vain.
    This, of all maladies that man infest,
    Claims most compassion, and receives the least.

  _See Poem on Retirement._

The minute and mournful delineation of mental trouble here submitted
to the eye of the reader, and the fact of this living image of woe
being a portrait of Cowper drawn by his own hand, impart to it a
character of inimitable pathos, and of singular and indescribable
interest.

The physical and moral solution of this evil, and its painful
influence on the mind, till the cure is administered by an almighty
Physician, are beautifully and affectingly described.

    Man is a harp whose chords elude the sight,
    Each yielding harmony, disposed aright;
    The screws reversed (a task which if he please
    God in a moment executes with ease),
    Ten thousand thousand strings at once go loose,
    Lost, till he tune them, all their power and use.
    Then neither healthy wilds, nor scenes as fair
    As ever recompensed the peasant's care,
    Nor soft declivities, with tufted hills,
    Nor view of waters turning busy mills,
    Parks in which art preceptress nature weds,
    Nor gardens interspersed with flowery beds,
    Nor gales, that catch the scent of blooming groves,
    And waft it to the mourner as he roves--
    Can call up life into his faded eye,
    That passes all he sees unheeded by:
    No wounds like those a wounded spirit feels,
    No cure for such, till God, who makes them, heals.

  _Retirement._

The lines which follow are important, as proving by his own
testimony that, so far from his religious views being the occasion
of his wretchedness, it was to this source alone that he looked for
consolation and support.

    And thou, sad sufferer under nameless ill,
    That yields not to the touch of human skill;
    Improve the kind occasion, understand
    A Father's frown, and kiss his chastening hand:
    To thee the day-spring and the blaze of noon,
    The purple evening and resplendent moon,
    The stars, that, sprinkled o'er the vault of night,
    Seem drops descending in a shower of light,
    Shine not, or undesired and hated shine,
    Seen through the medium of a cloud like thine:
    Yet seek Him, in his favour life is found,
    All bliss beside, a shadow or a sound:
    Then heaven, eclipsed so long, and this dull earth,
    Shall seem to start into a second birth!
    Nature, assuming a more lovely face,
    Borrowing a beauty from the works of grace,
    Shall be despised and overlooked no more,
    Shall fill thee with delights unfelt before,
    Impart to things inanimate a voice,
    And bid her mountains and her hills rejoice;
    The sound shall run along the winding vales,
    And thou enjoy an Eden ere it fails.

  _Retirement._

The Editor has entered thus largely into the consideration of
Cowper's depressive malady, because it has been least understood,
and subject to the most erroneous misrepresentations, affecting the
character of Cowper and the honour of religion. One leading object
of the writer's, in engaging in the present undertaking, has been to
vindicate both from so injurious an imputation.



We have now to lay before the reader another most interesting
document, of which Cowper is the acknowledged author. It contains
the affecting account of the last illness and peaceful end of
his brother, the Rev. John Cowper, Fellow of Bennet College,
Cambridge. The original manuscript was faithfully transcribed by
Newton, and then published with a preface, which we have thought
proper to retain. It cannot fail to be read with deep interest
and edification; and, while it is a monument of Cowper's pious
zeal and fraternal love, it is a striking record of the power of
divine grace in producing that great change of heart which we
deem to be essential to every professing Christian. This document
is now extremely scarce, and not accessible but through private
sources.[764]

  [764] We are indebted for this copy to a much esteemed and highly
  valued friend, the Rev. Charles Bridges.




ADELPHI.

A SKETCH OF THE CHARACTER, AND AN ACCOUNT OF THE LAST ILLNESS,

OF THE LATE

REV. JOHN COWPER, A.M.

FELLOW OF BENNET COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,

WHO FINISHED HIS COURSE WITH JOY, 20TH MARCH, 1770.

WRITTEN BY HIS BROTHER,

THE LATE WILLIAM COWPER, ESQ.

OF THE INNER TEMPLE, AUTHOR OF "THE TASK," ETC.

FAITHFULLY TRANSCRIBED FROM HIS ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT,

BY JOHN NEWTON,

RECTOR OF ST. MARY WOOLNOTH, AND ST. MARY, WOOLCHURCH.

    Tu supplicanti protinus admoves
    Aurem, benignus: pro lachrimis mihi
    Risum reducis, pro dolore
    Lætitiamque, alacremque plausum.

  BUCHANAN, Ps. xxx.

NEWTON'S ORIGINAL PREFACE.

The Editor's motives, which induce him to publish the following
narrative, are chiefly two.

First, that so striking a display of the power and mercy of God may
be more generally known, to the praise and glory of his grace and
the instruction and comfort of his people.

Secondly, the boasted spirit of refinement, the stress laid upon
unassisted human reason, and the consequent scepticism to which they
lead, and which so strongly mark the character of the present times,
are not now confined merely to the dupes of infidelity; but many
persons are under their influence, who would be much offended if we
charged them with having renounced Christianity. While no theory is
admitted in natural history, which is not confirmed by actual and
positive experiment, religion is the only thing to which a trial by
this test is refused. The very name of vital experimental religion
excites contempt and scorn, and provokes resentment. The doctrines
of regeneration by the powerful operation of the Holy Spirit, and
the necessity of his continual agency and influence to advance the
holiness and comforts of those in whose hearts he has already begun
a work of grace, are not only exploded and contradicted by many who
profess a regard for the Bible, and by some who have subscribed to
the articles and liturgy of our established church, but they who
avow an attachment to them are, upon that account, and that account
only, considered as hypocrites or visionaries, knaves or fools.

The Editor fears that many unstable persons are misled and perverted
by the fine words and fair speeches of those who lie in wait to
deceive. But he likewise hopes that, by the blessing of God, a
candid perusal of what is here published, respecting the character,
sentiments, and happy death of the late Reverend John Cowper, may
convince them, some of them at least, of their mistake, and break
the snare in which they have been entangled.

  JOHN NEWTON.




A SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF THE LATE REV. JOHN COWPER, A.M.


As soon as it had pleased God, after a long and sharp season of
conviction, to visit me with the consolations of his grace, it
became one of my chief concerns, that my relations might be made
partakers of the same mercy. In the first letter I wrote to my
brother,[765] I took occasion to declare what God had done for my
soul, and am not conscious that from that period down to his last
illness I wilfully neglected an opportunity of engaging him, if it
were possible, in conversation of a spiritual kind. When I left St.
Alban's, and went to visit him at Cambridge, my heart being full of
the subject, I poured it out before him without reserve; and, in all
my subsequent dealings with him, so far as I was enabled, took care
to show that I had received, not merely a set of notions, but a real
impression of the truths of the gospel.

  [765]

  "... I had a brother once," &c.

  _The Task_, book ii.

At first I found him ready enough to talk with me upon these
subjects; sometimes he would dispute, but always without heat
or animosity; and sometimes would endeavour to reconcile the
difference of our sentiments, by supposing that, at the bottom,
we were both of a mind and meant the same thing.

He was a man of a most candid and ingenuous spirit; his temper
remarkably sweet, and in his behaviour to me he had always
manifested an uncommon affection. His outward conduct, so far as
it fell under my notice, or I could learn it by the report of
others, was perfectly decent and unblameable. There was nothing
vicious in any part of his practice; but, being of a studious,
thoughtful turn, he placed his chief delight in the acquisition
of learning, and made such acquisitions in it that he had but few
rivals in that of a classical kind. He was critically skilled in
the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew languages, was beginning to make
himself master of the Syriac, and perfectly understood the French
and Italian, the latter of which he could speak fluently. These
attainments, however, and many others in the literary way, he
lived heartily to despise, not as useless when sanctified and
employed in the service of God, but when sought after for their
own sake, and with a view to the praise of men. Learned however
as he was, he was easy and cheerful in his conversation, and
entirely free from the stiffness which is generally contracted by
men devoted to such pursuits.

Thus we spent about two years, conversing as occasion offered,
and we generally visited each other once or twice a week, as long
as I continued at Huntingdon, upon the leading truths of the
gospel. By this time, however, he began to be more reserved; he
would hear me patiently but never reply; and this I found, upon
his own confession afterward, was the effect of a resolution
he had taken, in order to avoid disputes, and to secure the
continuance of that peace which had always subsisted between
us. When our family removed to Olney, our intercourse became
less frequent. We exchanged an annual visit, and, whenever he
came amongst us, he observed the same conduct, conforming to
all our customs, attending family worship with us, and heard
the preaching, received civilly whatever passed in conversation
upon the subject, but adhered strictly to the rule he had
prescribed to himself, never remarking upon or objecting to any
thing he heard or saw. This, through the goodness of his natural
temper, he was enabled to carry so far that, though some things
unavoidably happened which we feared would give him offence, he
never took any; for it was not possible to offer him the pulpit,
nor when Mr. Newton was with us once at the time of family
prayer, could we ask my brother to officiate, though, being
himself a minister, and one of our own family for the time, the
office seemed naturally to fall into his hands.

In September 1769, I learned by letters from Cambridge that he
was dangerously ill. I set out for that place the day after I
received them, and found him as ill as I expected. He had taken
cold on his return from a journey into Wales; and, lest he should
be laid up at a distance from home, had pushed forward as far as
he could from Bath with a fever upon him. Soon after his arrival
at Cambridge he discharged, unknown to himself, such a prodigious
quantity of blood, that the physician ascribed it only to the
strength of his constitution that he was still alive; and assured
me, that if the discharge should be repeated, he must inevitably
die upon the spot. In this state of imminent danger, he seemed
to have no more concern about his spiritual interests than when
in perfect health. His couch was strewed with volumes of plays,
to which he had frequent recourse for amusement. I learned
indeed afterwards, that, even at this time, the thoughts of God
and eternity would often force themselves upon his mind; but,
not apprehending his life to be in danger, and trusting in the
morality of his past conduct, he found it no difficult matter to
thrust them out again.

As it pleased God that he had no relapse, he presently began
to recover strength, and in ten days' time I left him so far
restored, that he could ride many miles without fatigue, and had
every symptom of returning health. It is probable, however, that
though his recovery seemed perfect, this illness was the means
which God had appointed to bring down his strength in the midst
of his journey, and to hasten on the malady which proved his last.

On the 16th of February, 1770, I was again summoned to attend
him, by letters which represented him as so ill that the
physician entertained but little hopes of his recovery. I found
him afflicted with asthma and dropsy, supposed to be the effect
of an imposthume in his liver. He was, however, cheerful when I
first arrived, expressed great joy at seeing me, thought himself
much better than he had been, and seemed to flatter himself with
hopes that he should be well again. My situation at this time was
truly distressful. I learned from the physician, that, in this
instance as in the last, he was in much greater danger than he
suspected. He did not seem to lay his illness at all to heart,
nor could I find by his conversation that he had one serious
thought. As often as a suitable occasion offered, when we were
free from company and interruption, I endeavoured to give a
spiritual turn to the discourse; and, the day after my arrival,
asked his permission to pray with him, to which he readily
consented. I renewed my attempts in this way as often as I could,
though without any apparent success: still he seemed as careless
and unconcerned as ever; yet I could not but consider his
willingness in this instance as a token for good, and observed
with pleasure, that though at other times he discovered no mark
of seriousness, yet when I spoke to him of the Lord's dealings
with myself, he received what I said with affection, would press
my hand, and look kindly at me, and seemed to love me the better
for it.

On the 21st of the same month he had a violent fit of the asthma,
which seized him when he rose, about an hour before noon, and
lasted all the day. His agony was dreadful. Having never seen any
person afflicted in the same way, I could not help fearing that
he would be suffocated; nor was the physician himself without
fears of the same kind. This day the Lord was very present with
me, and enabled me, as I sat by the poor sufferer's side, to
wrestle for a blessing upon him. I observed to him, that though
it had pleased God to visit him with great afflictions, yet
mercy was mingled with the dispensation. I said, "You have many
friends, who love you, and are willing to do all they can to
serve you; and so perhaps have others in the like circumstances;
but it is not the lot of every sick man, how much soever he
may be beloved, to have a friend that can pray for him." He
replied, "That is true, and I hope God will have mercy upon me."
His love for me from this time became very remarkable; there
was a tenderness in it more than was merely natural; and he
generally expressed it by calling for blessings upon me in the
most affectionate terms, and with a look and manner not to be
described. At night, when he was quite worn out with the fatigue
of labouring for breath, and could get no rest, his asthma still
continuing, he turned to me and said, with a melancholy air,
"Brother, I seem to be marked out for misery; you know some
people are so." That moment I felt my heart enlarged, and such a
persuasion of the love of God towards him was wrought in my soul,
that I replied with confidence, and, as if I had authority given
me to say it, "But that is not your case; you are marked out for
mercy." Through the whole of this most painful dispensation, he
was blessed with a degree of patience and resignation to the
will of God, not always seen in the behaviour of established
Christians under sufferings so great as his. I never heard a
murmuring word escape him; on the contrary, he would often say,
when his pains were most acute, "I only wish it may please God
to enable me to suffer without complaining; I have no right to
complain." Once he said, with a loud voice, "Let thy rod and
thy staff support and comfort me:" and "Oh that it were with
me as in times past, when the candle of the Lord shone upon my
tabernacle!" One evening, when I had been expressing my hope
that the Lord would show him mercy, he replied, "I hope he
will; I am sure I pretend to nothing." Many times he spoke of
himself in terms of the greatest self-abasement, which I cannot
now particularly remember. I thought I could discern, in these
expressions, the glimpses of approaching day, and have no doubt
at present but that the Spirit of God was gradually preparing
him, in a way of true humiliation, for that bright display of
gospel-grace which he was soon after pleased to afford him.[766]

  [766] There is a beautiful illustration of this sudden and happy
  change, in Cowper's poem entitled "Hope."

  "As when a felon whom his country's laws," &c.

On Saturday the 10th of March, about three in the afternoon, he
suddenly burst into tears, and said with a loud cry, "Oh, forsake
me not!" I went to his bed-side, when he grasped my hand, and
presently, by his eyes and countenance, I found that he was in
prayer. Then turning to me he said, "Oh brother, I am full of
what I could say to you." The nurse asked him if he would have
any hartshorn or lavender. He replied, "None of these things will
serve my purpose." I said, "But I know what would, my dear, don't
I?" He answered, "You do, brother."

Having continued some time silent, he said, "Behold, I create new
heavens and a new earth,"--then, after a pause, "Ay, and he is
able to do it too."

I left him for about an hour, fearing lest he should fatigue
himself with talking, and because my surprise and joy were so
great that I could hardly bear them. When I returned, he threw
his arms about my neck, and, leaning his head against mine, he
said, "Brother, if I live, you and I shall be more like one
another than we have been. But whether I live or live not, all is
well, and will be so; I know it will; I have felt that which I
never felt before; and am sure that God has visited me with this
sickness to teach me what I was too proud to learn in health. I
never had satisfaction till now. The doctrines I had been used to
referred me to myself for the foundation of my hopes, and there
I could find nothing to rest upon. The sheet-anchor of the soul
was wanting. I thought you wrong, yet wished to believe as you
did. I found myself unable to believe, yet always thought that
I should one day be brought to do so. You suffered more than I
have done, before you believed these truths; but our sufferings,
though different in their kind and measure, were directed to the
same end. I hope he has taught me that, which he teaches none but
his own. I hope so. These things were foolishness to me once, but
now I have a firm foundation, and am satisfied."

In the evening, when I went to bid him good night, he looked
stedfastly in my face, and, with great solemnity in his air and
manner, taking me by the hand, resumed the discourse in these
very words: "As empty, and yet full; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things--I see the rock upon which I once split,
and I see the rock of my salvation. I have peace in myself,
and if I live I hope it will be that I may be made a messenger
of peace to others. I have learned _that_ in a moment, which I
could not have learned by reading many books for many years. I
have often studied these points, and studied them with great
attention, but was blinded by prejudice; and, unless He, who
alone is worthy to unloose the seals, had opened the book to me,
I had been blinded still. Now they appear so plain, that though
I am convinced no comment could ever have made me understand
them, I wonder I did not see them before. Yet, great as my doubts
and difficulties were, they have only served to pave the way,
and being solved they make it plainer. The light I have received
comes late, but it is a comfort to me that I never made the
gospel-truths a subject of ridicule. Though I dissented from the
persuasion and the ways of God's people, I ever thought them
respectable, and therefore not proper to be made a jest of. The
evil I suffer is the consequence of my descent from the corrupt
original stock, and of my own personal transgressions; the good I
enjoy comes to me as the overflowing of his bounty; but the crown
of all his mercies is this, that he has given me a Saviour, and
not only the Saviour of mankind, brother, but _my_ Saviour.

"I should delight to see the people at Olney, but am not worthy
to appear amongst them." He wept at speaking these words, and
repeated them with emphasis. "I should rejoice in an hour's
conversation with Mr. Newton, and, if I live, shall have much
discourse with him upon these subjects, but am so weak in body,
that at present I could not bear it." At the same time he gave
me to understand, that he had been five years inquiring after
the truth, that is, from the time of my first visit to him
after I left St. Albans, and that, from the very day of his
ordination, which was ten years ago, he had been dissatisfied
with his own views of the gospel, and sensible of their defect
and obscurity; that he had always had a sense of the importance
of the ministerial charge, and had used to consider himself
accountable for his doctrine no less than his practice; that he
could appeal to the Lord for his sincerity in all that time, and
had never wilfully erred, but always been desirous of coming to
the knowledge of the truth. He added, that the moment when he
sent forth that cry[767] was the moment when light was darted
into his soul; that he had thought much about these things in the
course of his illness, but never till that instant was able to
understand them.

  [767] On the 10th of March, vide supra.

It was remarkable that, from the very instant when he was first
enlightened, he was also wonderfully strengthened in body, so that
from the tenth to the fourteenth of March we all entertained hopes
of his recovery. He was himself very sanguine in his expectations
of it, but frequently said that his desire of recovery extended no
farther than his hope of usefulness; adding, "Unless I may live to
be an instrument of good to others, it were better for me to die
now."

As his assurance was clear and unshaken, so he was very sensible of
the goodness of the Lord to him in that respect. On the day when his
eyes were opened, he turned to me, and, in a low voice, said, "What
a mercy it is to a man in my condition to _know_ his acceptance! I
am completely satisfied of mine." On another occasion, speaking to
the same purpose, he said, "This bed would be a bed of misery, and
it is so--but it is likewise a bed of joy and a bed of discipline.
Was I to die this night, I know I should be happy. This assurance
I hope is quite consistent with the word of God. It is built upon
a sense of my own utter insufficiency, and the all-sufficiency of
Christ." At the same time he said, "Brother, I have been building
my glory upon a sandy foundation; I have laboured night and day to
perfect myself in things of no profit; I have sacrificed my health
to these pursuits, and am now suffering the consequence of my
misspent labour. But how contemptible do the writers I once highly
valued now appear to me! 'Yea, doubtless, I count all things loss
and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord.' I must now go to a new school. I have many things to learn.
I succeeded in my former pursuits. I wanted to be highly applauded,
and I was so. I was flattered up to the height of my wishes: now, I
must learn a new lesson."

On the evening of the thirteenth, he said, "What comfort have I in
this bed, miserable as I seem to be! Brother, I love to look at
you. I see now who was right, and who was mistaken. But it seems
wonderful that such a dispensation should be necessary to enforce
what seems so very plain. I wish myself at Olney; you have a good
river there, better than all the rivers of Damascus. What a scene is
passing before me! Ideas upon these subjects crowd upon me faster
than I can give them utterance. How plain do many texts appear, to
which, after consulting all the commentators, I could hardly affix
a meaning; and now I have their true meaning without any comment at
all. There is but one key to the New Testament; there is but one
interpreter. I cannot describe to you, nor shall ever be able to
describe, what I felt in the moment when it was given to me. May I
make a good use of it! How I shudder when I think of the danger I
have just escaped! I had made up my mind upon these subjects, and
was determined to hazard all upon the justness of my own opinions."

Speaking of his illness, he said, he had been followed night and day
from the very beginning of it with this text: _I shall not die, but
live, and declare the works of the Lord_. This notice was fulfilled
to him, though not in such a sense as my desires of his recovery
prompted me to put upon it. His remarkable amendment soon appeared
to be no more than a present supply of strength and spirits, that
he might be able to speak of the better life which God had given
him, which was no sooner done than he relapsed as suddenly as he
had revived. About this time he formed a purpose of receiving the
sacrament, induced to it principally by a desire of setting his
seal to the truth, in presence of those who were strangers to
the change which had taken place in his sentiments. It must have
been administered to him by the Master of the College, to whom he
designed to have made this short declaration, "If I die, I die in
the belief of the doctrines of the Reformation, and of the Church
of England, as it was at the time of the Reformation." But, his
strength declining apace, and his pains becoming more severe, he
could never find a proper opportunity of doing it. His experience
was rather peace than joy, if a distinction may be made between
joy and that heartfelt peace which he often spoke of in the most
comfortable terms; and which he expressed by a heavenly smile upon
his countenance under the bitterest bodily distress. His words upon
this subject once were these--"How wonderful is it that God should
look upon man, especially that he should look upon _me_! Yet he sees
me, and takes notice of all that I suffer. I see him too; he is
present before me, and I hear him say, _Come unto me, all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest_." Matt. xi. 28.

On the fourteenth, in the afternoon, I perceived that the strength
and spirits which had been afforded him were suddenly withdrawn, so
that by the next day his mind became weak, and his speech roving
and faltering. But still, at intervals, he was enabled to speak of
divine things with great force and clearness. On the evening of the
fifteenth, he said, "'There is more joy in heaven over one sinner
that repenteth, than over ninety and nine just persons who need no
repentance.' That text has been sadly misunderstood by me as well as
by others. Where is that just person to be found? Alas! what must
have become of me, if I had died this day se'nnight? What should I
have had to plead? My own righteousness! _That_ would have been of
great service to me, to be sure. Well, whither next? Why, to the
mountains to fall upon us, and to the hills to cover us. I am not
duly thankful for the mercy I have received. Perhaps I may ascribe
some part of my insensibility to my great weakness of body. I hope
at least that if I was better in health, it would be better with me
in these respects also."

The next day, perceiving that his understanding began to suffer by
the extreme weakness of his body, he said, "I have been vain of my
understanding and of my acquirements in this place; and now God has
made me little better than an idiot, as much as to say, now be proud
if you can. Well, while I have any senses left, my thoughts will
be poured out in the praise of God. I have an interest in Christ,
in his blood and sufferings, and my sins are forgiven me. Have I
not cause to praise him? When my understanding fails me quite, as I
think it will soon, then he will pity my weakness."

Though the Lord intended that his warfare should be short, yet a
warfare he was to have, and to be exposed to a measure of conflict
with his own corruptions. His pain being extreme, his powers of
recollection much impaired, and the Comforter withholding for a
season his sensible support, he was betrayed into a fretfulness and
impatience of spirit which had never been permitted to show itself
before. This appearance alarmed me, and, having an opportunity
afforded me by everybody's absence, I said to him, "You were happier
last Saturday than you are to-day. Are you entirely destitute of
the consolations you then spoke of? And do you not sometimes feel
comfort flowing into your heart from a sense of your acceptance
with God?" He replied, "Sometimes I do, but sometimes I am left to
desperation." The same day, in the evening, he said, "Brother, I
believe you are often uneasy, lest what lately passed should come
to nothing." I replied by asking him, whether, when he found his
patience and his temper fail, he endeavoured to pray for power
against his corruptions? He answered, "Yes, a thousand times in a
day. But I see myself odiously vile and wicked. If I die in this
illness, I beg you will place no other inscription over me than such
as may just mention my name and the parish where I was minister;
for that I ever had a being, and what sort of a being I had, cannot
be too soon forgot. I was just beginning to be a deist, and had
long desired to be so; and I will own to you what I never confessed
before, that my function and the duties of it were a weariness to me
which I could not bear. Yet, wretched creature and beast as I was,
I was esteemed religious, though I lived without God in the world."
About this time, I reminded him of the account of Janeway, which
he once read at my desire. He said he had laughed at it in his own
mind, and accounted it mere madness and folly. "Yet base as I am,"
said he, "I have no doubt now but God has accepted me also, and
forgiven me all my sins."

I then asked him what he thought of my narrative?[768] He replied,
"I thought it strange, and ascribed much of it to the state in
which you had been. When I came to visit you in London, and found
you in that deep distress, I would have given the universe to have
administered some comfort to you. You may remember that I tried
every method of doing it. When I found that all my attempts were
vain, I was shocked to the greatest degree. I began to consider your
sufferings as a judgment upon you, and my inability to alleviate
them as a judgment upon myself. When Mr. M.[769] came, he succeeded
in a moment. This surprised me; but it does not surprise me now.
He had the key to your heart, which I had not. That which filled
me with disgust against my office as a minister, was the same ill
success which attended me in my own parish. There I endeavoured
to soothe the afflicted, and to reform the unruly by warning and
reproof; but all that I could say in either case was spoken to the
wind, and attended with no effect."

  [768] Cowper's Memoir of Himself.

  [769] The Rev. Martin Madan.

There is that in the nature of salvation by grace, when it is truly
and experimentally known, which prompts every person to think
himself the most extraordinary instance of its power. Accordingly,
my brother insisted upon the precedence in this respect; and, upon
comparing his case with mine, would by no means allow my deliverance
to have been so wonderful as his own. He observed that, from the
beginning, both his manner of life and his connexions had been such
as had a natural tendency to blind his eyes, and to confirm and
rivet his prejudices against the truth. Blameless in his outward
conduct, and having no open immorality to charge himself with, his
acquaintance had been with men of the same stamp, who trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and despised the doctrines of
the cross. Such were all who, from his earliest days, he had been
used to propose to himself as patterns for his imitation. Not to
go farther back, such was the clergyman under whom he received the
first rudiments of his education; such was the schoolmaster, under
whom he was prepared for the University; and such were all the
most admired characters there, with whom he was most ambitious of
being connected. He lamented the dark and Christless condition of
the place, where learning and morality were all in all, and where,
if a man was possessed of these qualifications, he neither doubted
himself, nor did any body else question, the safety of his state. He
concluded, therefore, that to show the fallacy of such appearances,
and to root out the prejudices which long familiarity with them had
fastened upon his mind, required a more than ordinary exertion of
divine power, and that the grace of God was more clearly manifested
in such a work than in the conversion of one like me, who had no
outside righteousness to boast of, and who, if I was ignorant of
the truth, was not, however, so desperately prejudiced against it.

His thoughts, I suppose, had been led to this subject, when, one
afternoon, while I was writing by the fire-side, he thus addressed
himself to the nurse, who sat at his bolster. "Nurse, I have lived
three-and-thirty years, and I will tell you how I have spent them.
When I was a boy, they taught me Latin; and because I was the son of
a gentleman, they taught me Greek. These I learned under a sort of
private tutor; at the age of fourteen, or thereabouts, they sent me
to a public school, where I learned more Latin and Greek, and, last
of all, to this place, where I have been learning more Latin and
Greek still. Now has not this been a blessed life, and much to the
glory of God?" Then directing his speech to me, he said, "Brother,
I was going to say I was born in such a year; but I correct myself:
I would rather say, in such a year I came into the world. You know
when I was born."

As long as he expected to recover, the souls committed to his care
were much upon his mind. One day, when none was present but myself,
he prayed thus:--"O Lord, thou art good; goodness is thy very
essence, and thou art the fountain of wisdom. I am a poor worm, weak
and foolish as a child. Thou hast entrusted many souls unto me; and
I have not been able to teach them, because I knew thee not myself.
Grant me ability, O Lord, for I can do nothing without thee, and
give me grace to be faithful."

In a time of severe and continual pain, he smiled in my face, and
said, "Brother, I am as happy as a king." And, the day before he
died, when I asked him what sort of a night he had had, he replied,
a "sad night, not a wink of sleep." I said, "Perhaps, though, your
mind has been composed, and you have been enabled to pray?" "Yes,"
said he, "I have endeavoured to spend the hours in the thoughts of
God and prayer; I have been much comforted, and all the comfort I
got came to me in this way."

The next morning I was called up to be witness of his last moments.
I found him in a deep sleep, lying perfectly still, and seemingly
free from pain. I stayed with him till they pressed me to quit
the room, and in about five minutes after I had left him he died;
sooner, indeed, than I expected, though for some days there had
been no hopes of his recovery. His death at that time was rather
extraordinary; at least, I thought it so; for, when I took leave of
him the night before, he did not seem worse or weaker than he had
been, and, for aught that appeared, might have lasted many days; but
the Lord, in whose sight the death of his saints is precious, cut
short his sufferings, and gave him a speedy and peaceful departure.

He died at seven in the morning, on the 20th of March, 1770.

    Thou art the source and centre of all minds,
    Their only point of rest, eternal Word!
    From Thee departing, they are lost, and rove
    At random, without honour, hope, or peace.
    From Thee is all that soothes the life of man,
    His high endeavour and his glad success,
    His strength to suffer, and his will to serve.
    But, oh! thou bounteous Giver of all good,
    Thou art of all thy gifts Thyself the crown.
    Give what thou canst, without Thee we are poor,
    And with Thee rich, take what Thou wilt away.

  _The Task_, book v.



The fraternal love and piety of Cowper are beautifully illustrated
in this most interesting document. No sooner had he experienced the
value of religion, and its inward peace and hope, in his own heart,
than he feels solicitous to communicate the blessing to others. True
piety is always diffusive. It does not, like the sordid miser, hoard
up the treasure for self-enjoyment, but is enriched by giving, and
impoverished only by withholding.

    Friends, parents, kindred, first it will embrace,
    Our country next, and next all human race.

The prejudices of his brother, and yet his mild and amiable spirit
of forbearance; the zeal of Cowper, and its final happy result,
impart to this narrative a singular degree of interest. Others
would have been deterred by apparent difficulties; but true zeal is
full of faith, as well as of love, and does not contemplate man's
resistance but God's mighty power.

The example of John Cowper furnishes also a remarkable evidence
that a man may be distinguished by the highest endowments of
human learning, and yet be ignorant of that knowledge which is
emphatically called life eternal.

The distinction between the knowledge that is derived from books and
the wisdom that cometh from above, is drawn by Cowper with a happy
and just discrimination.

    Knowledge and wisdom, far from being one,
    Have ofttimes no connexion--knowledge dwells
    In heads replete with thoughts of other men;
    Wisdom in minds attentive to their own.
    Knowledge, a rude, unprofitable mass,
    The mere materials with which wisdom builds,
    'Till smooth'd, and squar'd, and fitted to its place,
    Does but encumber whom it seems t' enrich.
    Knowledge is proud that he has learn'd so much;
    Wisdom is humble that he knows no more.

  _The Task_, book vi.

It is important to know how far the powers of human reason extend
in matters of religion, and where they fail. Reason can examine the
claims of a divine revelation, and determine its authority by the
most conclusive arguments. It can expose error, and establish the
truth; attack infidelity within its own entrenchments, and carry its
victorious arms into the very camp of the enemy. It can defend all
the outworks of religion, and vindicate its insulted majesty. But at
this point its powers begin to fail. It cannot confer a _spiritual_
apprehension of the truth in the understanding, nor a _spiritual_
reception of it in the heart. This is the province of grace. "No
man knoweth the things of God, but the Spirit of God, _and he to
whom the Spirit hath revealed them_." "Not by might, nor by power,
_but by my Spirit_, saith the Lord." Men of learning endeavour to
attain to the knowledge of divine things, in the same manner as
they acquire an insight into human things, that is, by human power
and human teaching. Whereas divine things require a divine power
and divine teaching. "All thy children shall be taught of God." Not
that human reason is superseded in its use. Man is always a rational
and moral agent. But it is reason, conscious of its own weakness,
simple in its views, and humble in its spirit, enlightened, guided,
and regulated in all its researches by the grace and wisdom that
is from above. John Cowper expresses the substance of this idea in
the following emphatic words:--"I have learned _that_ in a moment,
which I could not have learned by reading many books for many years.
I have often studied these points, and studied them with great
attention, but was blinded by prejudice; and unless He, who alone is
worthy to unloose the seals, had opened the book to me, I had been
blinded still."

The information supplied respecting John Cowper by preceding
biographers is brief and scanty. The following are the particulars
which the Editor has succeeded in obtaining. John Cowper was
considered to be one of the best scholars in the university of
Cambridge. In 1759 he obtained the Chancellor's gold medal,
and in 1762 gained both the prizes for Masters of Arts. He was
subsequently elected Fellow of Bennet, and became private tutor
to to Lord Walsingham. He translated the four first books of the
Henriade; his brother William, it is said, the four next (Hayley
states two cantos only, and alleges Cowper's own authority for the
fact); E. B. Greene, Esq., a relative of Dr. Greene, the master of
the college,[770] the ninth, and Robert Lloyd the tenth book. It
appeared in Smollett's edition, in 1762, but the writer has not
been able to procure a copy. He afterwards engaged in an edition
of Apollonius Rhodius,[771] when his sedentary and studious habits
produced an imposthume in the liver, which brought him to his grave
in the thirty-third year of his age. He was buried at Foxton in
Cambridgeshire, of which place he was rector.

  [770] He was afterwards Bishop of Lincoln.

  [771] The subject of this poem is the Argonautic expedition under
  Jason.

Dr. Bennet, Bishop of Cloyne, in a letter addressed to Dr. Parr,
bears the following honourable testimony to his merits.


"TO THE REV. DR. PARR.

  "Emanuel College, April 18, 1770.

"We have lost the best classic and most liberal thinker in our
university, Cowper of Ben'et. He sat so long at his studies, that
the posture gave rise to an abscess in his liver, and he fell a
victim to learning. The goddess has so few votaries here, that
she resolved to take the best offering we had, and she employed
Apollonius Rhodius to strike the blow. I write the author again,
Apollonius Rhodius. Cowper had laboured hard at an edition of him
for several years, and applied so much to his favourite author, that
it cost his life. I shall make a bold push for his papers. Yet, what
omens I have! Melancthon did but think of a translation, and he
died. Hoeltzlinus owns he wrote the latter part of the annotations,
manu lassissimâ et corpore imbecillo, and died before he put the
last hand to them. Cowper collates all the editions, makes a new
translation, and follows his predecessors. One would think that by
some unknown fate, or by some curse of his master, Callimachus, our
poet was doomed to remain in obscurity. His enemies may say, that
the dulness of his verses bears some resemblance to the torpedo, and
benumbs or kills whatever touches it."--_See Dr. Parr's Works_, vol.
vii. p. 75.



The following elegy was also composed in honour of his memory by one
of his fellow collegians, which evinces the high sense entertained
of his character and classical attainments.


ELEGY

ON THE DEATH OF THE REV. JOHN COWPER, OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE,
  CAMBRIDGE, BY A FELLOW COLLEGIAN.

    Where art thou, Moschus, and where are we all?
    Thou from high Helicon's muse-haunted hill
    Advanc'd to Sion's mount celestial:
    Encumber'd we with earth and sorrow still.

    Before the throne thy golden lyre is strung,
    Seraphic descant fills thy raptur'd mind:
    On Camus' willows pale our harps are hung;
    Our footsteps linger on his banks behind.

    The chosen Lawgiver from Pisgah's hill,
    His wond'ring eyes around in transport threw:
    On earthly Canaan having gaz'd his fill,
    To heavenly Canaan's glories quick withdrew.

    So, nurst in sacred and in classic lore,
    With varied science at its fountain fraught,
    From human knowledge to th' exhaustless store
    Of heaven he stole to taste the fuller draught.

    What boots the beauty of the classic page,
    And what philosophy's sublimer rule,
    What all th' advances of maturing age,
    If dies the wise man as departs the fool?

    Master of Greece's thundering eloquence,
    The force of Roman grace to him was known;
    The well-turn'd period, join'd with manly sense:
    Sage criticism mark'd him for her own.

    Ah! what avails the power of harmony,
    The poet's melody, the critic's skill!
    The verse may live, yet must the maker die;
    Such is stern Atropos's solemn will.

    Sweet bard of Rhodes,[772] bright star of Egypt's court,
    Whom Ptolemy's discerning bounty drew
    To guard fair science in the learn'd resort,
    Thy muse alone can pay the tribute due.

    Thy muse, that paints Medea's frantic love,
    And all the transports of the enamour'd maid,
    Who dared each strongest obstacle remove,
    Her reason and her art by love betray'd.

    While hardy Jason ploughs old Ocean's plain,
    First of the Greeks to tempt Barbarian seas,
    With him we share the dangers of the main,
    Nor dread the crash of the Symplegades.

    Vain wish! thy deathless heroes should commend
    Thy verse to fame, and bid it sweeter sound.
    He who thy name's revival did intend,
    In bloom of youth is buried under ground.[773]

    So, nested on the rock, the parent dove
    Sees down the cleft her callow offspring fall;
    Full little may its chirping plaints behove;
    She only hears, but cannot help its call.[774]

    Like the fair swan of fame, the grateful muse
    Assiduous tends on Lethe's barren bank,
    To raise the name that envious time would lose,
    Where many millions erst for ever sank.

    While yet I wait, thou ever-honour'd shade,
    Some better bard should the memorial rear,
    The debt to friendship due by me be paid,
    Weak in poetic fire, in friendship's zeal sincere.

  [772] Apollonius Rhodius. He had the charge of the celebrated
  library at Alexandria, in the time of Ptolemy.

  [773] John Cowper.

  [774] The idea in this stanza is taken from the 4th book of
  Apollonius, line 1298.



We add the letter addressed by Cowper to his friend Mr. Unwin on
this occasion.


TO THE REV. WILLIAM UNWIN.

  March 31, 1770.

My dear Friend,--I am glad that the Lord made you a fellow labourer
with us in praying my dear brother out of darkness into light. It
was a blessed work; and when it shall be your turn to die in the
Lord, and to rest from all your labours, that work shall follow
you. I once entertained hopes of his recovery: from the moment
when it pleased God to give him light in his soul, there was, for
four days, such a visible amendment in his body as surprised us
all. Dr. Glynn himself was puzzled, and began to think that all
his threatening conjectures would fail of their accomplishment. I
am well satisfied that it was thus ordered, not for his own sake,
but for the sake of us, who had been so deeply concerned for his
spiritual welfare, that he might be able to give such evident proof
of the work of God upon his soul as should leave no doubt behind it.
As to his friends at Cambridge, they knew nothing of the matter. He
never spoke of these things but to myself; nor to me, when others
were within hearing, except that he sometimes would speak in the
presence of the nurse. He knew well to make the distinction between
those who could understand him and those who could not; and that
he was not in circumstances to maintain such a controversy as a
declaration of his new views and sentiments would have exposed him
to. Just after his death, I spoke of this change to a dear friend of
his, a fellow of the college, who had attended him through all his
sickness with assiduity and tenderness. But he did not understand me.

I now proceed to mention such particulars as I can recollect; and
which I had not opportunity to insert in my letters to Olney; for
I left Cambridge suddenly, and sooner than I expected. He was
deeply impressed with a sense of the difficulties he should have to
encounter, if it should please God to raise him again. He saw the
necessity of being faithful, and the opposition he should expose
himself to by being so. Under the weight of these thoughts, he
one day broke out in the following prayer, when only myself was
with him. "O Lord, thou art light; and in thee is no darkness at
all. Thou art the fountain of all wisdom, and it is essential to
thee to be good and gracious. I am a child; O Lord, teach me how I
shall conduct myself! Give me the wisdom of the serpent with the
harmlessness of the dove! Bless the souls thou hast committed to
the care of thy helpless miserable creature, who has no wisdom or
knowledge of his own, and make me faithful to them, for thy mercy's
sake!" Another time he said, "How wonderful it is, that God should
look upon man; and how much more wonderful that he should look
upon such a worm as I am! Yet he does look upon me, and takes the
exactest notice of all my sufferings. He is present, and I see him
(I mean, by faith), and he stretches out his arms towards me,"--and
he then stretched out his own--"and he says, 'Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest!'"
He smiled and wept, when he spoke these words. When he expressed
himself upon these subjects, there was a weight and dignity in
his manner such as I never saw before. He spoke with the greatest
deliberation, making a pause at the end of every sentence; and there
was something in his air and in the tone of his voice inexpressibly
solemn, unlike himself, unlike what I had ever seen in another.

This had God wrought. I have praised him for his marvellous act, and
have felt a joy of heart upon the subject of my brother's death,
such as I never felt but in my own conversion. He is now before the
throne; and yet a little while and we shall meet, never more to be
divided. Yours, my very dear friend, with my affectionate respects
to yourself and yours,

  W. C.

Postscript.--A day or two before his death, he grew so weak and was
so very ill, that he required continual attendance, so that he had
neither strength nor opportunity to say much to me. Only the day
before, he said he had had a sleepless, but a composed and quiet
night. I asked him, if he had been able to collect his thoughts. He
replied, "All night long I have endeavoured to think upon God and to
continue in prayer. I had great peace and comfort; and what comfort
I had came in that way." When I saw him the next morning at seven
o'clock he was dying, fast asleep, and exempted, in all appearance,
from the sense of those pangs which accompany dissolution. I shall
be glad to hear from you, my dear friend, when you can find time to
write, and are so inclined. The death of my beloved brother teems
with many useful lessons. May God seal the instruction upon our
hearts!



Besides the documents already inserted, Cowper translated the
narrative of Mr. Van Lier, a minister of the Reformed Church, at the
Cape of Good Hope. Mr. Van Lier was born in Holland, in the year
1764; his mother was pious, and brought him up in the principles of
true religion, endeavouring from his early youth to direct his mind
to the ministry. After the usual course of education, he entered
at the University, where, though he did not neglect his studies,
he forgot his God. His talents seem to have been considerable,
his imagination ardent, but his passions not under sufficient
control; and, with all the elements that might have formed a great
character, by the misapplication of his time, opportunities, and
faculties, he became vicious, and subsequently a sceptic. God, in
mercy, exercised him with a series of trials, but the impression
was always ultimately effaced--till at length the blow reached him
which lacerated his heart, extinguished all his hopes of earthly
happiness, and thus finally brought him to God. Among the excellent
books that contributed to dispel his errors, he specified the
"Cardiphonia" of Newton with grateful acknowledgment. It is justly
considered the best of all his works, and has been made eminently
useful. Mr. Van Lier subsequently wrote a narrative, in Latin,
containing an account of his conversion, and of all the remarkable
events of his life. This narrative he addressed to Newton, at whose
request it was translated by Cowper. It was published under the
title of "The Power of Grace illustrated." Interesting as are its
contents, yet, as they comprise nearly two hundred pages, we find
it impossible to allow space for its insertion, though it is well
entitled to appear in a separate form.

He concludes his narrative in these words: "O happy and glorious
hour, when I shall be delivered from all trouble and sin, from this
body of death, from the wicked world, and from the snares of Satan!
when I shall appear before my Saviour without spot, and shall so
behold his glory, and be filled with his presence, as to be wholly
and for ever engaged in adoration, admiration, gratitude, and love!"



As we are now drawing towards the conclusion of this undertaking,
some reference is due to names once honoured by Cowper's friendship,
and perpetuated in his works. A distinguished place is due to the
Rev. William Cawthorne Unwin. His death has been recorded in a
former volume, as well as his burial in the cathedral at Winchester.
A Latin epitaph was composed on this occasion by Cowper, but
objected to by a relative of the family, because it adverted to
his mother's early prayers that God might incline his heart to
the ministry. We subjoin the epitaph which replaced the pious and
classical composition of Cowper.

  IN MEMORY OF THE
  REV. WILLIAM CAWTHORNE UNWIN, M.A.
  RECTOR OF STOCK, IN ESSEX.

He was educated at the Charter-house, in London, under the Rev. Dr.
Crusius; and, having gone through the education of that school, he
was at an early period admitted to Christ's College, Cambridge. He
died in this city, the 29th of Nov. 1786, aged forty-one years,
leaving a widow and three young children.

(The above is on a flat stone in the cathedral.)



And is this the memorial of the interesting and pious Unwin? Shall
no monumental tablet record that he was "the endeared and valued
friend of Cowper?" We have seldom seen so cold and _jejune_ an
epitaph to commemorate a man distinguished by so many virtues,
and associated with such interesting recollections. We are happy
in being enabled to furnish a testimony more worthy of him in the
following letter, addressed by Cowper to the present Lord Carrington.


TO ROBERT SMITH, ESQ.[775]

  [775] Afterwards created Lord Carrington.

  Weston-Underwood, near Olney, Dec. 9, 1786.

My dear Sir,--We have indeed suffered a great loss by the death
of our friend Unwin; and the shock that attended it was the more
severe, as till within a few hours of his decease there seemed to be
no very alarming symptoms. All the account that we received from Mr.
Henry Thornton, who acted like a true friend on the occasion, and
with a tenderness toward all concerned that does him great honour,
encouraged our hopes of his recovery; and Mrs. Unwin herself found
him on her arrival at Winchester so cheerful, and in appearance
so likely to live, that her letter also seemed to promise us all
that we could wish on the subject. But an unexpected turn in his
distemper, which suddenly seized his bowels, dashed all our hopes,
and deprived us almost immediately of a man whom we must ever
regret. His mind having been from his infancy deeply tinctured with
religious sentiments, he was always impressed with a sense of the
importance of the great change of all; and, on former occasions,
when at any time he found himself indisposed, was consequently
subject to distressing alarms and apprehensions. But in this last
instance his mind was from the first composed and easy; his fears
were taken away, and succeeded by such a resignation as warrants us
in saying, "that God made all his bed in his sickness." I believe
it is always thus, where the heart, though upright toward God, as
Unwin's assuredly was, is yet troubled with the fear of death. When
death indeed comes, he is either welcome, or at least has lost his
sting.

I have known many such instances, and his mother, from the moment
that she learned with what tranquillity he was favoured in his last
illness, for that very reason expected it would be his last. Yet not
with so much certainty, but that the favourable accounts of him at
length, in a great measure, superseded that persuasion.

She begs me to assure you, my dear sir, how sensible she is, as
well as myself, of the kindness of your inquiries. She suffers this
stroke, not with more patience and submission than expected, for I
never knew her hurried by any affliction into the loss of either,
but in appearance at least, and at present, with less injury to
health than I apprehended. She observed to me, after reading your
kind letter, that, though it was a proof of the greatness of her
loss, yet it afforded her pleasure, though a melancholy one, to
see how much her son had been loved and valued by such a person as
yourself.

Mrs. Unwin wrote to her daughter-in-law, to invite her and the
family hither, hoping that a change of scene, and a situation so
pleasant as this, may be of service to her, but we have not yet
received her answer. I have good hope, however, that, great as her
affliction must be, she will yet be able to support it, for she well
knows whither to resort for consolation.

The virtues and amiable qualities of our friends are the things for
which we most wish to keep them; but they are, on the other hand,
the very things that in particular ought to reconcile us to their
departure. We find ourselves sometimes connected with, and engaged
in affection, too, to a person of whose readiness and fitness for
another life we cannot have the highest opinion. The death of such
men has a bitterness in it, both to themselves and survivors, which,
thank God! is not to be found in the death of Unwin.

I know, my dear sir, how much you valued him, and I know also, how
much he valued you. With respect to him, all is well; and of you, if
I should survive you, which perhaps, is not very probable, I shall
say the same.

In the meantime, believe me, with the warmest wishes for your health
and happiness, and with Mrs. Unwin's affectionate respects,

  Yours, my dear sir,
  Most faithfully,
  W. C.



Joseph Hill, Esq., survived Cowper many years, and lived to an
advanced age. He formerly resided in Great Queen Street, and
afterwards in Saville Row, and was eminent in his profession. His
widow survived him, and died in the year 1824. The letters addressed
to him by Cowper were arranged by Dr. Johnson, and ornamented with
a suitable binding. They were finally left as an heir-loom at
Wargrave, near Henley. Joseph Jekyll, Esq., the barrister, once
celebrated for his wit and humour, succeeded to that property, and
still survives at the moment in which we are writing.

Samuel Rose, Esq., after a comparatively short career of
professional eminence, was seized with a rheumatic fever, which he
caught at Horsham, in attending the Sussex sessions, in 1804. He
died in the thirty-eighth year of his age, declaring to those around
him, "I have lived long enough to review my grounds for confidence,
and I have unspeakable comfort in assuring those I love that I
am daily more reconciled in leaving the world now than at a later
period."

Cowper's sentiments of him are expressed in the following letter.


TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.

  Weston-Underwood, Dec. 2, 1788.

My dear Friend,--I told you lately, that I had an ambition to
introduce to your acquaintance my valuable friend, Mr. Rose. He is
now before you. You will find him a person of genteel manners and
agreeable conversation. As to his other virtues and good qualities,
which are many, and such as are not often found in men of his years,
I consign them over to your own discernment, perfectly sure, that
none of them will escape you. I give you joy of each other, and
remain, my dear old friend, most truly yours,

  W. C.



In recalling the name of Lady Austen, it is sufficient to entitle
her to grateful remembrance, that it is to her we are indebted
for the first suggestion of the poem of "The Task," that lasting
monument of the fame of Cowper. It has also been recorded that she
subsequently furnished the materials for the story of John Gilpin.

Her maiden name was Richardson; she was married very early in life
to Sir Robert Austen, Baronet, and resided with him in France, where
he died. After this event, she lived with her sister Mrs. Jones, the
wife of the Rev. Mr. Jones, minister of Clifton, near Olney. It was
thus that her intercourse commenced with Cowper. In a subsequent
period, she was married to a native of France, M. de Tardif, a
gentleman, and a poet, who has expressed, in some elegant French
verses, his just and deep sense of her accomplished, endearing
character. In visiting Paris with him in the course of the summer
of 1802, she sank under the fatigue of the excursion, and died in
that city on the 12th of August. It is due to the memory of this
lady to rescue her name from a surmise injurious to her sincerity
and honour; and the Editor rejoices that he possesses the means
of affording her, what he conceives to be an ample justification.
In the published correspondence of the late respected Alexander
Knox, Esq., a doubt is expressed how far she is not chargeable with
endeavouring to supplant Mrs. Unwin in the affections of Cowper. It
is already recorded that a breach occurred between the two ladies,
and that the poet, with a sensitiveness and delicacy that reflect
the highest credit on his feelings and judgment, relinquished the
society of Lady Austen from that period. They never met again. There
is no direct charge conveyed by Mr. Knox, but there is evidently
expressed the language of doubt and surmise. Local impressions are
often the best interpretation of questionable occurrences. With this
view the Editor has endeavoured to trace the nature of the rupture,
on the spot, by a communication with surviving parties. From these
sources of inquiry it appears that Lady Austen was a woman of great
wit and vivacity, and possessed the power of exciting much interest
by her manner and conversation--that Mrs. Unwin, who was of a
more sedate and quiet character, seeing the ascendency that Lady
Austen thus acquired, became jealous, and that a rupture was the
consequence. Mr. Andrews, an intelligent inhabitant of Olney, who is
my informant, assured me that such was the substance of the case,
and that the rest was mere surmise and conjecture. On my asking him
whether he knew the impressions on Mr. Scott's mind with regard to
this event, he added, "that he himself asked Mr. Scott the question,
and that his reply was, 'Who can be surprised that two women should
be continually in the society of one man, and quarrel sooner or
later with each other?'" The blunt and honest reply of Mr. Scott we
apprehend to be the best commentary on the transaction. There may be
jealousies in friendship as well as in love; and the possibility of
female rivalship is sufficient to account for the rupture, without
the intervention of either friendship or love.

From Mrs. Livius, of Bedford, formerly Miss Barham,[776] and
intimate with Newton, Cowper, and Lady Austen, I learn that, though
the vivacity and manner of Lady Austen weakened the belief of the
depth of her personal religion, yet Mrs. Livius never entertained
any doubt of its reality. Her own deep personal piety during a long
life, and her just discrimination of character, are sufficient to
give weight and authority to her judgment.

  [776] Sister of the late Joseph Foster Barham, Esq. I cannot
  mention this endeared character, with whom I have the privilege
  of being so nearly connected, without recording my affectionate
  regard, and high estimation of her piety and virtues.

I take this opportunity of expressing her conviction that the loss
of Lady Austen's society was a great privation to Cowper; that she
both enlivened his spirits and stimulated his genius, and that the
jealousy of Mrs. Unwin operated injuriously by compelling him to
relinquish so innocent a source of gratification. Hayley, in some
lines written on the occasion of her death, speaks of her as one who

    Wak'd in a poet inspiration's flame;
    Sent the freed eagle in the sun to bask,
    And from the mind of Cowper--call'd "The Task."

Of the Rev. Walter Bagot, who departed in the year 1806; aged
seventy-five, the poet always spoke in the language of unfeigned
esteem and affection.

Sir George Throckmorton's death has been already recorded, and with
this event the genius of the place may be said to have deserted its
hallowed retreats, for the mansion exists no longer. His surviving
estimable widow the Catharina of Cowper, resides at Northampton.

Lady Hesketh, whose affectionate kindness to the poet must
have endeared her to every reader, died in the year 1807, aged
seventy-four.

To the Editor's brother-in-law, the Rev. Dr. Johnson, several
testimonies have already been borne in the course of this work. He
was cousin to the poet, by one remove, which was the reason why he
was usually designated as Cowper's _kinsman_, his mother having been
the daughter of the Rev. Roger Donne, rector of Catfield, Norfolk,
own brother to Cowper's mother. His unremitting and watchful care
over the poet, for several successive years, and during a period
marked by a painful and protracted malady, his generous sacrifice
of his time, and of every personal consideration, that he might
administer to the peace and comfort of his afflicted friend--his
affectionate sympathy, and uniform forgetfulness of self, in all
the various relations of life--these virtues have justly claimed
for Dr. Johnson the esteem and love of his friends, and the
honourable distinction of being ever identified with the endeared
name of Cowper. He was rector of the united parishes of Yaxham and
Welborne, in the county of Norfolk, where he preached the doctrines
of the gospel with fidelity, and adorned them by the Christian
tenor of his life and conduct. He married Miss Livius, daughter
of the late George Livius, Esq., formerly at the head of the
commissariat, in India, during the government of Warren Hastings.
The Editor was connected with him by marrying the sister of Mrs.
Johnson. He departed in the autumn of the year 1833, after a short
illness, and was followed to the grave by a crowded assemblage
of his parishioners, to whom he was endeared by his virtues. He
left his estimable widow and four surviving children to lament his
loss. Cowper was engraved on his heart, and his Poems minutely
impressed on his memory. Both, therefore, became a frequent theme of
conversation; and it is to these sources of information, that the
writer is indebted for the knowledge of many facts and incidents
that are incorporated in the present edition.



The value which Cowper attached to the esteem of the Rev. W. Bull,
the friend and travelling companion of John Thornton, Esq., may
be seen in the following letter. It alludes to the approbation
expressed by Mr. Bull on the publication of his first volume of
poems.


TO THE REV. WILLIAM BULL.

  March 24, 1782.

Your letter gave me great pleasure, both as a testimony of your
approbation and of your regard. I wrote in hopes of pleasing you,
and such as you; and though I must confess that, at the same time,
I cast a sidelong glance at the good liking of the world at large,
I believe I can say it was more for the sake of their advantage and
instruction than their praise. They are children; if we give them
physic, we must sweeten the rim of the cup with honey--if my book is
so far honoured as to be made the vehicle of true knowledge to any
that are ignorant, I shall rejoice, and do already rejoice that it
has procured me a proof of your esteem.

  Yours, most truly,
  W. C.



Mr. Bull was distinguished by no common powers of mind, brilliant
wit, and imagination. It was at his suggestion that Cowper engaged
in translating the poems of Madame Guion. He died, as he lived, in
the hopes and consolations of the Gospel, and left a son, the Rev.
Thomas Bull, who inherits his father's virtues.



Wherever men have acquired celebrity by those powers of genius with
which Providence has seen fit to discriminate them, a curiosity
prevails to learn all the minuter traits of person, habit, and real
character. We wish to realize the portrait before our eyes, to see
how far all the component parts are in harmony with each other; or
whether the elevation of mind which raises them beyond the general
standard is perceptible in the occurrences of common life. Tell
me, said an inquirer, writing from America, what was the figure of
Cowper, what the character of his countenance, the expression of
his eye, his manner, his habits, the house he lived in, whether its
aspect was north or south, &c. This is amusing, but it shows the
power of sympathy with which we are drawn to whatever commands our
admiration, and excites the emotions of esteem and love.

The person and mind of Cowper seem to have been formed with equal
kindness by nature; and it may be questioned if she ever bestowed on
any man, with a fonder prodigality, all the requisites to conciliate
affection and to inspire respect.

He is said to have been handsome in his youth. His features strongly
expressed the powers of his mind and all the sensibility of his
heart; and even in his declining years, time seemed to have spared
much of its ravages, though his mind was harassed by unceasing
nervous excitement.

He was of a middle stature, rather strong than delicate in the form
of his limbs; the colour of his hair was a light brown, that of his
eyes a bluish grey, and his complexion ruddy. In his dress he was
neat, but not finical; in his diet temperate, and not dainty.

He had an air of pensive reserve in his deportment, and his extreme
shyness sometimes produced in his manners an indescribable mixture
of awkwardness and dignity; but no person could be more truly
graceful, when he was in perfect health, and perfectly pleased
with his society. Towards women, in particular, his behaviour and
conversation were delicate and fascinating in the highest degree.

There was a simplicity of manner and character in Cowper which
always charms, and is often the attribute of real genius. He
was singularly calculated to excite emotions of esteem and love
by those qualities that win confidence and inspire sympathy. In
friendship he was uniformly faithful; and, if the events of life
had not disappointed his fondest hopes, no man would have been more
eminently adapted for the endearments of domestic life.

His daily habits of study and exercise are so minutely and agreeably
delineated in his letters, that they present a perfect portrait of
his domestic character.

His voice conspired with his features to announce to all who saw and
heard him the extreme sensibility of his heart; and in reading aloud
he furnished the chief delight of those social, enchanting, winter
evenings, which he has described so happily in the fourth book of
"The Task."

Secluded from the world, as he had long been, he yet retained in
advanced life singular talents for conversation; and his remarks
were uniformly distinguished by mild and benevolent pleasantry, by a
strain of delicate humour, varied by solid and serious good sense,
and those united charms of a cultivated mind, which he has himself
very happily described in drawing the character of a venerable
friend:

    Grave without dullness, learned without pride,
    Exact, yet not precise: though meek, keen-eyed;
    Who, when occasion justified its use,
    Had wit, as bright as ready, to produce;
    Could fetch from records of an earlier age,
    Or from philosophy's enlightened page,
    His rich materials, and regale your ear
    With strains, it was a privilege to hear.
    Yet, above all, his luxury supreme,
    And his chief glory, was the gospel theme:
    Ambitious not to shine or to excel,
    But to treat justly what he lov'd so well.

But the traits of his character are nowhere developed with happier
effect than in his own writings, and especially in his poems. From
these we shall make a few extracts, and suffer him to draw the
portrait for himself.

His admiration of the works of Nature:

    I never fram'd a wish, or form'd a plan,
    That flatter'd me with hopes of earthly bliss
    But there I laid the scene. There early stray'd
    My fancy, ere yet liberty of choice
    Had found me, or the hope of being free,
    My very dreams were rural; rural too
    The first-born efforts of my youthful muse,
    Sportive and jingling her poetic bells,
    Ere yet her ear was mistress of their pow'rs.
    No bard could please me but whose lyre was tun'd
    To Nature's praises.

  _Task_, book iv.

                The love of Nature's works
    Is an ingredient in the compound man,
    Infus'd at the creation of the kind.
                          This obtains in all,
    That all discern a beauty in his works,
    And all can taste them. Minds, that have been form'd
    And tutor'd with a relish more exact,
    But none without some relish, none unmov'd.
    It is a flame that dies not even there
    Where nothing feeds it: neither business, crowds,
    Nor habits of luxurious city-life,
    Whatever else they smother of true worth
    In human bosoms, quench it or abate.
    The villas with which London stands begirt,
    Like a swarth Indian with his belt or beads,
    Prove it. A breath of unadult'rate air,
    The glimpse of a green pasture, how they cheer
    The citizen, and brace his languid frame.

  Book iv.

God seen, and adored, in the works of Nature:

                        Not a flow'r
    But shows some touch, in freckle, streak, or stain,
    Of his unrivall'd pencil. He inspires
    Their balmy odours, and imparts their hues,
    And bathes their eyes with nectar, and includes,
    In grains as countless as the sea-side sands,
    The forms with which he sprinkles all the earth.

  Book vi.

His fondness for retirement:

    Since then, with few associates, in remote
    And silent woods I wander, far from those
    My former partners of the peopled scene;
    With few associates, and not wishing more.
    Here much I ruminate, as much I may,
    With other views of men and manners now
    Than once, and others of a life to come.
    I see that all are wand'rers, gone astray,
    Each in his own delusions; they are lost
    In chace of fancied happiness, still woo'd
    And never won. Dream after dream ensues;
    And still they dream that they shall still succeed,
    And still are disappointed. Rings the world
    With the vain stir. I sum up half mankind,
    And add two-thirds of the remaining half,
    And find the total of their hopes and fears
    Dreams, empty dreams.

  Book iii.

His love for his country:

    England, with all thy faults I love thee still--
    My country! and, while yet a nook is left,
    Where English minds and manners may be found,
    Shall be constrain'd to love thee. Tho' thy clime
    Be fickle, and thy year most part deform'd
    With dripping rains, or wither'd by a frost,
    I would not yet exchange thy sullen skies,
    And fields without a flower, for warmer France
    With all her vines; nor for Ausonia's groves
    Of golden fruitage, and her myrtle bow'rs.

  Book ii.

His humane and generous feelings:

      I was born of woman, and drew milk
    As sweet as charity from human breasts.
    I think, articulate, I laugh and weep,
    And exercise all functions of a man.
    How then should I and any man that lives
    Be strangers to each other? Pierce my vein,
    Take of the crimson stream meand'ring there,
    And catechise it well; apply thy glass,
    Search it, and prove now if it be not blood
    Congenial with thine own.

  Book iii.

His love of liberty:

    Oh Liberty! the prisoner's pleasing dream,
    The poet's muse, his passion and his theme;
    Genius is thine, and thou art fancy's nurse;
    Lost without thee the ennobling powers of verse;
    Heroic song from thy free touch acquires
    Its clearest tone, the rapture it inspires:
    Place me where winter breathes his keenest air,
    And I will sing, if liberty be there;
    And I will sing at liberty's dear feet,
    In Afric's torrid clime, or India's fiercest heat.

  _Table Talk._

    'Tis liberty alone, that gives the flow'r
    Of fleeting life its lustre and perfume;
    And we are weeds without it.

  _Task_, book v.

His depressive malady, and the source of its cure:

    I was a stricken deer, that left the herd
    Long since; with many an arrow deep infix'd
    My panting side was charg'd, when I withdrew
    To seek a tranquil death in distant shades.
    There was I found by One, who had himself
    Been hurt by th' archers. In his side he bore,
    And in his hands and feet, the cruel scars.[777]
    With gentle force soliciting the darts
    He drew them forth, and heal'd, and bade me live.

  Book iii.

  [777] The Saviour.

The employment of his time, and design of his life and writings:

    Me therefore studious of laborious ease,
    Not slothful, happy to deceive the time,
    Not waste it, and aware that human life
    Is but a loan to be repaid with use,
    When He shall call his debtors to account,
    From whom are all our blessings; business finds
    E'en here: while sedulous I seek t' improve,
    At least neglect not, or leave unemploy'd,
    The mind he gave me; driving it, though slack
    Too oft, and much impeded in its work
    By causes not to be divulg'd in vain,
    To its just point--_the service of mankind_.

  Book iii.

    But all is in his hand, whose praise I seek.
    In vain the poet sings, and the world hears,
    If he regard not, though divine the theme.
    'Tis not in artful measures, in the chime
    And idle tinkling of a minstrel's lyre,
    To charm his ear whose eye is on the heart,
    Whose frown can disappoint the proudest strain,
    Whose approbation prosper--even mine.

  Book vi.

The office of doing justice to the poetical genius of Cowper has
been assigned to an individual so well qualified to execute it with
taste and ability, that the Editor begs thus publicly to record
his acknowledgements and his unmingled satisfaction. The bowers
of the Muses are not unknown to the Rev. John Cunningham, and, in
contemplating the poetical labours of others, he might, with a small
variation, justly apply to himself the well-known exclamation, "Ed
anch'io son pittore."[778]

  [778] Attributed to Correggio, after contemplating the works of
  Raphael.

All therefore that seems necessary, is simply to illustrate the
beauties of Cowper's poetry in the same manner as we have exhibited
his personal character. We shall present a brief series of poetical
portraits.



The following portrait of Lord Chatham is drawn with great force and
spirit:

    In him Demosthenes was heard again;
    And freedom taught him her Athenian strain.
    She clothed him with authority and awe,
    Spoke from his lips, and in his books gave law.
    His speech, his form, his action, full of grace,
    And all his country beaming in his face,
    He stood, as some inimitable hand
    Would strive to make a Paul or Tully stand.
    No sycophant or slave, that dared oppose
    Her sacred cause, but trembled when he rose;
    And every venal stickler for the yoke
    Felt himself crushed at the first word he spoke.

  _Table Talk._

Sir Joshua Reynolds:

    There, touch'd by Reynolds, a dull blank becomes
    A lucid mirror, in which Natures sees
    All her reflected features.

Bacon the sculptor:

                              Bacon there
    Gives more than female beauty to a stone,
    And Chatham's eloquence to marble lips.[779]

  [779] Alluding to the monument of Lord Chatham, in Westminster
  Abbey.

John Thornton, Esq.:

    Some men make gain a fountain, whence proceeds
    A stream of liberal and heroic deeds;
    The swell of pity, not to be confined
    Within the scanty limits of the mind,
    Disdains the bank, and throws the golden sands,
    A rich deposit, on the bordering lands:
    These have an ear for his paternal call,
    Who make some rich for the supply of all;
    God's gift with pleasure in his praise employ,
    And Thornton is familiar with the joy.

  _Charity._

The martyrs of the Reformation:

                            Their blood is shed
    In confirmation of the noblest claim,
    Our claim to feed upon immortal truth,
    To walk with God, to be divinely free,
    To soar, and to anticipate the skies.
    Yet few remember them. They liv'd unknown,
    Till persecution dragg'd them into fame,
    And chas'd them up to heav'n. Their ashes flew
    --No marble tells us whither. With their names
    No bard embalms and sanctifies his song:
    And history, so warm on meaner themes,
    Is cold on this. She execrates indeed
    The tyranny that doom'd them to the fire,
    But gives the glorious suff'rers little praise.

  _Task_, book v.

Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress:

    O thou, whom, borne on fancy's eager wing
    Back to the season of life's happy spring,
    I pleas'd remember, and, while mem'ry yet
    Holds fast her office here, can ne'er forget;
    Ingenious dreamer, in whose well-told tale
    Sweet fiction and sweet truth alike prevail;
    Whose hum'rous vein, strong sense, and simple style,
    May teach the gayest, make the gravest smile;
    Witty, and well-employ'd, and, like thy Lord,
    Speaking in parables his slighted word:
    I name thee not, lest so despis'd a name
    Should move a sneer at thy deserved fame:
    Yet, e'en in transitory life's late day,
    That mingles all my brown with sober grey,
    Revere the man, whose Pilgrim marks the road,
    And guides the Progress of the soul to God.

  _Tirocinium._

Brown, the rural designer:[780]

  [780] Brown, in Cowper's time, was the great designer in the art
  of laying out grounds for the nobility and gentry.

                  Lo! he comes--
    Th' omnipotent magician, Brown appears.
    Down falls the venerable pile, th' abode
    Of our forefathers, a grave whisker'd race,
    But tasteless. Springs a palace in its stead,
    But in a distant spot; where more expos'd
    It may enjoy th' advantage of the north,
    And agueish east, till time shall have transform'd
    Those naked acres to a shelt'ring grove.
    He speaks. The lake in front becomes a lawn,
    Woods vanish, hills subside, and valleys rise,
    And streams, as if created for his use,
    Pursue the track of his directing wand,
    Sinuous or straight, now rapid and now slow,
    Now murm'ring soft, now roaring in cascades,
    E'en as he bids. Th' enraptur'd owner smiles.
    'Tis finish'd. And yet, finished as it seems.
    Still wants a grace, the loveliest it could show,
    A mine to satisfy the enormous cost.

  _The Task_, book iii.

London:

    Oh! thou resort and mart of all the earth,
    Chequer'd with all complexions of mankind,
    And spotted with all crimes; in whom I see
    Much that I love and much that I admire,
    And all that I abhor; thou freckled fair,
    That pleases and yet shocks me, I can laugh,
    And I can weep, can hope, and yet despond,
    Feel wrath and pity when I think on thee!
    Ten righteous would have sav'd a city once,
    And thou hast many righteous.--Well for thee--
    That salt preserves thee; more corrupted else,
    And therefore more obnoxious at this hour,
    Than Sodom in her day had power to be,
    For whom God heard his Abram plead in vain.

THE CONTRAST.

    Where finds Philosophy her eagle eye,
    With which she gazes at yon burning disk
    Undazzled, and detects and counts his spots?
    In London. Where her implements exact,
    With which she calculates, computes, and scans,
    All distance, motion, magnitude, and now
    Measures an atom, and now girds a world?
    In London. Where has commerce such a mart,
    So rich, so throng'd, so drain'd, and so supplied,
    As London--opulent, enlarg'd, and still
    Increasing, London? Babylon of old
    Not more the glory of the earth than she,
    A more accomplish'd world's chief glory now.

  Book i.

The gin-palace:

    Behold the schools, in which plebeian minds
    Once simple are initiated in arts,
    Which some may practice with politer grace,
    But none with readier skill. 'Tis here they learn
    The road that leads from competence and peace,
    To indigence and rapine, till at last
    Society, grown weary of the load,
    Shakes her incumber'd lap, and casts them out.
    But censure profits little: vain th' attempt
    To advertise in verse a public pest,
    That, like the filth with which the peasant feeds
    His hungry acres, stinks, and is of use.
    Th' excise is fatten'd with the rich result
    Of all this riot, and ten thousand casks,
    For ever dribbling out their base contents,
    Touch'd by the Midas finger of the state,
    Bleed gold for ministers to sport away.
    Drink, and be mad then; 'tis your country bids!
    Gloriously drunk obey th' important call!
    Her cause demands the assistance of your throats;
    Ye all can swallow, and she asks no more.

  _Task_, book iv.

We add a few short passages:

    How sweet, how passing sweet, is solitude!
    But grant me still a friend in my retreat
    Whom I may whisper--solitude is sweet.

    Not to understand a treasure's worth
    Till time has stolen away the slighted good
    Is cause of half the poverty we feel,
    And makes the world the wilderness it is.

          Not a year but pilfers as he goes
    Some youthful grace, that age would gladly keep.

    When one that holds communion with the skies
    Has fill'd his urn where these pure waters rise,
    And once more mingles with us meaner things,
    'Tis even as if an angel shook his wings;
    Immortal fragrance fills the circuit wide,
    That tells us whence his treasures are supplied.

We must not omit a most splendid specimen of Cowper's poetic genius,
entitled the "Yardley Oak." It is an unfinished poem, and supposed
to have been written in the year 1791, and laid aside, without ever
having been resumed, when his attention was engrossed with the
edition of Milton. Whatever may be the history of this admirable
fragment, it has justly acquired for Cowper the reputation of having
produced one of the richest and most highly finished pieces of
versification that ever flowed from the pen of a poet. Its existence
even was unknown both to Dr. Johnson and Hayley, till the latter
discovered it buried in a mass of papers. We subjoin in a note
a letter addressed by Dr. Johnson to Hayley, containing further
particulars.[781]

  [781]

  "January 6, 1804.

  "Among our dear Cowper's papers, I found the following memorandum:

  YARDLEY OAK IN GIRTH, FEET 22, INCHES 6½.
  THE OAK AT YARDLEY LODGE, FEET 28, INCHES 5.

  As to Yardley Oak, it stands in Yardley Chase, where the Earls of
  Northampton have a fine seat. It was a favourite walk of our dear
  Cowper, and he once carried me to see that oak. I believe it is
  five miles at least from Weston Lodge. It is indeed a noble tree,
  perfectly sound, and stands in an open part of the Chase, with
  only one or two others near it, so as to be seen to advantage.

  "With respect to the oak at Yardley Lodge, that is quite in
  decay--a pollard, and almost hollow. I took an excrescence from
  it in the year 1791, and, if I mistake not, Cowper told me it
  is said to have been an oak in the time of the Conqueror. This
  latter oak is on the road to the former, but not above half
  so far from Weston Lodge, being only just beyond Killick and
  Dinglederry. This is all I can tell you about the oaks. They were
  old acquaintance and great favourites of the bard. How rejoiced I
  am to hear that he has immortalized one of them in blank verse!
  Where could those one hundred and sixty-one lines lie hid? Till
  this very day I never heard of their existence, nor suspected it."

Though this fragment is inserted among the poems, we extract the
following passages, as expressive of the vigour and inspiration of
true poetic genius.

    Thou wast a bauble once, a cup and ball,
    Which babes might play with; and the thievish jay,
    Seeking her food, with ease might have purloin'd
    The auburn nut that held thee, swallowing down
    Thy yet close-folded latitude of boughs,
    And all thine embryo vastness at a gulp.
    But Fate thy growth decreed; autumnal rains
    Beneath thy parent tree mellow'd the soil,
    Design'd thy cradle; and a skipping deer,
    With pointed hoof dibbling the glebe, prepar'd
    The soft receptacle, in which, secure,
    Thy rudiments should sleep the winter through.
    So Fancy dreams.

    Time made thee what thou wast, king of the woods;
    And Time hath made thee what thou art--a cave
    For owls to roost in! Once thy spreading boughs
    O'erhung the champaign: and the numerous flocks,
    That graz'd it, stood beneath that ample cope
    Uncrowded, yet safe-sheltered from the storm.
    No flock frequents thee now.
    While thus through all the stages thou hast push'd
    Of treeship--first a seedling, hid in grass;
    Then twig; then sapling; and as cent'ry roll'd
    Slow after century, a giant bulk
    Of girth enormous, with moss-cushion'd root
    Upheav'd above the soil, and sides imboss'd
    With prominent wens globose--till, at the last,
    The rottenness which time is charg'd to inflict
    On other mighty ones found also thee.

    Time was, when, settling on thy leaf, a fly
    Could shake thee to the root--and time has been
    When tempests could not.[782]

  [782] The late Samuel Whitbread, Esq., was an enthusiastic
  admirer of the poetry of Cowper, and solicitous to obtain a relic
  of the Yardley oak. Mr. Bull, of Newport Pagnel, promised to send
  a specimen, but some little delay having occurred, Mr. Whitbread
  addressed to him the following verses, which, emanating from such
  a man, and not having met the public eye, will, we are persuaded,
  be considered as a literary curiosity, and of no mean merit.

    "Send me the precious bit of oak,
    Which your own hand so fondly took
    From off the consecrated tree,
    A relic dear to you and me.
    To many 'twould a bauble prove
    Not worth the keeping.--Those who love
    The teeming grand poetic mind,
    Which God thought fit in chains to bind,
    Of dreadful, dark despairing gloom;
    Yet left within such ample room,
    For coruscations strong and bright:
    Such beams of everlasting light,
    As make men envy, love, and dread,
    The structure of that wondrous head,
    Must prize a bit of Judith's stem,
    That brought to light that precious gem--
    The fragment: which in verse sublime
    Records her honours to all time."

With these acknowledged claims to popular favour, it is pleasing
to reflect on the singular moderation of Cowper amidst the snares
of literary fame. His motives seem to have been pure and simple,
and his main design to elevate the character of the age, and to
glorify God. He was not insensible to the value of applause,
when conferred by a liberal and powerful mind, but even in this
instance it was a subdued and chastened feeling. A more pleasing
evidence could not be adduced than when Hayley, in one of his
visits to Weston, brought a recent newspaper containing a speech
of Mr. Fox, in which that distinguished orator had quoted the
following impressive verses on the Bastille, in the House of
Commons.

  Ye horrid tow'rs, the abode of broken hearts:
  Ye dungeons, and ye cages of despair,
  That monarchs have supplied from age to age
  With music, such as suits their sov'reign ears,
  The sighs and groans of miserable men!
  There's not an English heart that would not leap,
  To hear that ye were fall'n at last; to know,
  That e'en our enemies, so oft employ'd
  In forging chains for us, themselves were free.[783]

  [783] These lines were written prophetically, and previously to
  the event.

Mrs. Unwin discovered marks of vivid satisfaction, Cowper smiled,
and was silent.[784]

  [784] The late Lord Erskine was a frequent reciter of passages
  from Cowper's poems. The Editor is indebted to E. H. Barker, Esq.
  of Thetford, for the following anecdote which was communicated to
  him by Joseph Jekyll, Esq., the eminent counsellor.

  Mr. Jekyll was dining with Lord Oxford, and among the company
  were Dr. Parr, Horne Tooke, Lord Erskine, and Mr. W. Scott,
  (brother to Lady Oxford.) Lord Erskine recited, in his admirable
  manner, the verses of Cowper about the _Captive_, without
  saying whose they were: Dr. Parr expressed great admiration of
  the verses, and said that he had never heard of them or seen
  them before; he inquired whose they were? H. Tooke said, "Why,
  Cowper's." Dr. Parr said he had never read Cowper's poems. "Not
  read Cowper's poems!" said Horne Tooke, "and you never will, I
  suppose, Dr. Parr, till they are turned into Greek?" When the
  company went into the drawing-room, Lady Oxford presented Dr.
  Parr with a small edition of Cowper's Poems, and Mr. Jekyll was
  desired by her ladyship to write in the book, "From the Countess
  of Oxford to Dr. Parr." Horne Tooke wrote also underneath, "Who
  never read the book," and signed his name to it: all present
  signed their names and added some remark, and among the rest W.
  Scott. At the sale of Dr. Parr's books, this volume fetched about
  five pounds, being considered valuable and curious, as the W.
  Scott signed was supposed to have been _Sir_ W. Scott (since Lord
  Stowell.) Lord Stowell afterwards took great pains to contradict
  the report.

We have mentioned how little Cowper was elated by praise. We shall
now state how much he was depressed by unjust censure. His first
volume of poems had been severely criticised by the Analytical
Review. His feelings are recorded in the following (hitherto
unpublished) letter to John Thornton, Esq.


  Olney, May 21, 1782.

Dear Sir,--You have my sincere thanks for your obliging
communication, both of my book to Dr. Franklin, and of his opinion
of it to me. Some of the periodical critics, I understand have
spoken of it with contempt enough; but, while gentlemen of taste
and candour have more favourable thoughts of it, I see reason to be
less concerned than I have been about their judgment, hastily framed
perhaps, and certainly not without prejudice against the subjects of
which it treats.

Your friendly intimation of the Doctor's sentiments reached me very
seasonably, just when, in a fit of despondence, to which no man
is naturally more inclined, I had begun to regret the publication
of it, and had consequently resolved to write no more. For if
a man has the fortune to please none but his friends and their
connexions, he has reason enough to conclude that he is indebted for
the measure of success he meets with, not to the real value of his
book, but to the partiality of the few that approve it. But I now
feel myself differently affected towards my favourite employment;
for which sudden change in my sentiments I may thank you and your
correspondent in France, his entire unacquaintedness with me, a man
whom he never saw, nor will see, his character as a man of sense and
condition, and his acknowledged merit as an ingenious and elegant
writer, and especially his having arrived at an age when men are not
to be pleased they know not why, are so many circumstances that give
a value to his commendations, and make them the most flattering
a poor poet could receive, quite out of conceit with himself, and
quite out of heart with his occupations.

If you think it worth your while, when you write next to the Doctor,
to inform him how much he has encouraged me by his approbation, and
to add my respects to him, you will oblige me still further; for
next to the pleasure it would afford me to hear that it has been
useful to any, I cannot have a greater, so far as my volume is in
question, than to hear that it has pleased the judicious.

Mrs. Unwin desires me to add her respectful compliments.

  I am, dear sir,
  Your affectionate and most obedient servant,
  W. C.

  To John Thornton, Esq.
  Clapham, Surrey.



Through this harsh and unwarrantable exercise of criticism, the
world might never have possessed the immortal poem of "The Task," if
an American philosopher had not awarded that honourable meed of just
praise and commendation, which an English critic thought proper to
withhold.

But it is not merely the poetic claims of Cowper which have earned
for him so just a title to public gratitude and praise. It would
be unjust not to bestow particular notice on a talent, in which he
singularly excelled, and one that friendship ought especially to
honour, as she is indebted to it for a considerable portion of her
happiest sources of delight--we mean the talent of writing letters.

Those of Pope are generally considered to be too laboured, and
deficient in ease. Swift is frequently ill-natured and offensive.
Gray is admirable, but not equal to Cowper either in the graces of
simplicity, or in the warmth of affection.

The letters of Cowper are not distinguished by any remarkable
superiority of thought or diction; it is rather the easy and
graceful flow of sentiment and feeling, his enthusiastic love
of nature, his touching representations of common and domestic
life, and above all, the ingenuous disclosure of the recesses
of his own heart, that constitute their charm and excellence.
They form a kind of biographical sketch, drawn by his own hand.
His poetry proclaims the author, his correspondence depicts the
man. We see him in his walks, in the privacy of his study, in his
daily occupations, amid the endearments of home, and with all
the qualities that inspire friendship, and awaken confidence and
love. We learn what he thought, what he said, his views of men and
manners, his personal habits and history. His ideas usually flow
without premeditation. All is natural and easy. There is no display,
no evidence of conscious superiority, no concealment of his real
sentiments. He writes as he feels and thinks, and with such an air
of truth and frankness, that he seems to stamp upon the letter the
image of his mind, with the same fidelity of resemblance that the
canvass represents his external form and features. We see in them
the sterling good sense of a man, the playfulness and simplicity
of a child, and the winning softness and delicacy of a woman's
feelings. He can write upon any subject, or write without one. He
can embellish what is real by the graces of his imagination, or
invest what is imaginary with the semblance of reality. He can smile
or he can weep, philosophize or trifle, descant with fervour on
the loveliness of nature, talk about his tame hares, or cast the
overflowings of an affectionate heart at the shrine of friendship.
His correspondence is a wreath of many flowers. His letters will
always be read with delight and interest, and by many, perhaps,
will be considered to be the rivals of his poems. They are justly
entitled to the eulogium which we know to have been pronounced
upon them by Charles Fox,--that of being "the best specimens of
epistolary excellence in the English language."

Among men distinguished by classical taste and acquirements,
his Latin poems will ever be considered as elegant specimens of
composition, and formed after the best models of antiquity.

There is one exquisite little gem, in Latin hexameters, entitled
"Votum," beginning thus:

  O matutini rores, auræque salubres,

which we believe has never received an English dress. A gentleman
of literary taste has kindly furnished us with a pleasing version,
which we are happy to subjoin in a note.[785] We trust the author
will excuse the insertion of his name.

  [785] THE WISH.

    "Ye verdant hills, ye soft umbrageous vales,
    Fann'd by light Zephyr's health-inspiring gales;
    Ye woods, whose boughs in rich luxuriance wave;
    Ye sparkling rivulets, whose waters lave
    Those meads, where erst, at morning's dewy prime,
    (Reckless of shoals beneath the stream of Time,)
    My vagrant feet your flowery margin press'd,
    Whilst Heaven gave back the sunshine in my breast:--
    O, would the powers that rule my wayward lot
    Restore me to the lone paternal cot!

    There, far from folly, fraud's ensnaring wiles,
    The world's dark frown, or still more dangerous smiles,
    Let peaceful duties peaceful hours engage;
    Till, winding gently down the slope of age,
    Tranquil I mark life's swift-declining day
    Fling deeper shades athwart my lessening way;
    And pleased, at last put off this mortal coil,
    Again to mingle with its kindred soil
    Beneath the grassy turf, or silent stone;
    Unseen the path I trod, my resting-place unknown."

  _T. Ostler._

We have thus endeavoured to exhibit the singular versatility
of Cowper's genius, and the combination of powers not often
united in the same mind. All that now remains is to consider
the consecration of these faculties to high and holy ends; and
the influence of his writings on the literary, the moral, and
religious character of the age.

The great end and aim which he proposed to himself as an author,
has already been illustrated from his writings; we add one more
passage to show the sanctity of his character.

  Since the dear hour that brought me to thy foot,
  And cut up all my follies by the root,
  I never trusted in an arm but thine,
  Nor hoped, but in thy righteousness divine.
  My prayers and alms, imperfect and defiled,
  Were but the feeble efforts of a child;
  Howe'er perform'd, it was their brightest part,
  That they proceeded from a grateful heart.
  Cleansed in thine own all-purifying blood,
  Forgive their evil, and accept their good.
  I cast them at thy feet--my only plea
  Is what it was--dependence upon thee:
  While struggling in the vale of tears below,
  _That_ never failed, nor shall it fail me now.

_Truth._

We confess that we are edified by this simple, yet sublime and
holy piety.

It was from this source that Cowper drew the materials that have
given to his writings the character of so elevated a morality.
Too seldom, alas! have poets consecrated their powers to the
cause of divine truth. In modern times, especially, we have
witnessed a voluptuous imagery and appeal to the passions, in
some highly-gifted writers, which have contributed to undermine
public morality, and to tarnish the purity of female minds.
But it is the honourable distinction of Cowper's poetry, that
nothing is to be found to excite a blush on the cheek of modesty,
nor a single line that requires to be blotted out. He has done
much to introduce a purer and more exalted taste; he is the
poet of nature, the poet of the heart and conscience, and, what
is a still higher praise, the poet of Christianity. He mingled
the waters of Helicon with the hallowed streams of Siloam,
and planted the cross amid the bowers of the muses. Johnson,
indeed, has remarked, that religion is not susceptible of
poetry.[786] If this be true, it can arise only from the want of
religious authors and religious readers. But we venture to deny
the position, and to maintain that religion ennobles whatever
it touches. In architecture, what building ever rivalled the
magnificence of the temple of Jerusalem, St. Peter's in Rome,
or the imposing grandeur of St. Paul's? In painting, what power
of art can surpass the Transfiguration of a Raphael, the Ecce
Homo of a Guido, or the Elevation and Descent of the Cross in a
Rubens? In poetry, where shall we find a nobler production of
human genius than the Paradise Lost? Again, let us listen to the
language of the pious Fénelon:

"No Greek or Latin poetry is comparable to the Psalms. That which
begins, 'The God of gods, the Lord hath spoken, and hath called
up the earth,' exceeds whatever human imagination has produced.
Neither Homer, nor any other poet, equals Isaiah, in describing
the majesty of God, in whose presence empires are as a grain of
sand, and the whole universe as a tent, which to-day is set up,
and removed to-morrow. Sometimes, as when he paints the charms of
peace, Isaiah has the softness and sweetness of an eclogue; at
others, he soars above mortal conception. But what is there in
profane antiquity comparable to the wailings of Jeremiah, when
he mourns over the calamities of his people? or to Nahum, when
he foresees in spirit the downfall of Nineveh, under the assault
of an innumerable army? We almost behold the formidable host,
and hear the arms and the chariots. Read Daniel, denouncing
to Belshazzar the vengeance of God, ready to fall upon him;
compare it with the most sublime passages of pagan antiquity;
you find nothing comparable to it. It must be added that, in the
Scriptures, every thing sustains itself; whether we consider the
historical, the legal, or the poetical part of it, the proper
character appears in all."

  [786] The reasons which he assigns, in justification of this
  opinion, are thus specified.

  "Let no pious ear be offended if I advance, in opposition to
  many authorities, that poetical devotion cannot often please.
  The doctrines of religion may indeed be defended in a didactic
  poem; and he who has the happy power of arguing in verse will not
  lose it because his subject is sacred. A poet may describe the
  beauty and the grandeur of nature, the flowers of the spring,
  and the harvests of autumn, the vicissitudes of the tide, and
  the revolutions of the sky, and praise the Maker for his works,
  in lines which no reader shall lay aside. The subject of the
  disputation is not piety, but the motives to piety; that of the
  description is not God, but the works of God.

  "Contemplative piety, or the intercourse between God and the
  human soul, cannot be poetical. Man, admitted to implore the
  mercy of his Creator, and plead the merits of his Redeemer, is
  already in a higher state than poetry can confer.

  "The essence of poetry is invention; such invention as, by
  producing something unexpected, surprises and delights. The
  topics of devotion are few, and being few are universally known;
  but, few as they are, they can be made no more; they can receive
  no grace from novelty of sentiment, and very little from novelty
  of expression.

  "Poetry pleases by exhibiting an idea more grateful to the
  mind than things themselves afford. This effect proceeds from
  the display of those parts of nature which attract, and the
  concealment of those which repel the imagination. But Religion
  must be shown as it is: suppression and addition equally corrupt
  it; and such as it is, it is known already.

  "From poetry the reader justly expects, and from good poetry
  always obtains, the enlargement of his comprehension and
  elevation of his fancy; but this is rarely to be hoped by
  Christians from metrical devotion. Whatever is great, desirable,
  or tremendous, is comprised in the name of the Supreme Being.
  Omnipotence cannot be exalted; Infinity cannot be amplified;
  Perfection cannot be improved.

  "The employments of pious meditation are Faith, Thanksgiving,
  Repentance, and Supplication. Faith invariably uniform, cannot be
  invested by fancy with decorations. Thanksgiving, the most joyful
  of all holy effusions, yet addressed to a Being without passions,
  is confined to a few modes, and is to be felt, rather than
  expressed. Repentance, trembling in the presence of the Judge,
  is not at leisure for cadences and epithets. Supplication of man
  to man may diffuse itself through many topics of persuasion; but
  supplication to God can only cry for mercy.

  "Of sentiments purely religious it will be found that the most
  simple expression is the most sublime. Poetry loses its lustre
  and its power, because it is applied to the decoration of
  something more excellent than itself. All that pious verse can do
  is to help the memory and delight the ear, and for these purposes
  it may be very useful; but it supplies nothing to the mind. The
  ideas of Christian theology are too simple for eloquence, too
  sacred for fiction, and too majestic for ornament; to recommend
  them by tropes and figures, is to magnify by a concave mirror the
  sidereal hemisphere."--See Life of Waller.

  These remarks seem to be founded on very erroneous principles;
  but having already offered our sentiments, we forbear any further
  comment, except to state that we profess to belong to the school
  of Cowper; that we participate in the expression of his regret,

    "Pity that Religion has so seldom found
    A skilful guide into poetic ground:"

  and that we cordially share in his conviction,

    "The flowers would spring where'er she deign'd to stray,
    And every Muse attend her on her way."

  _Table Talk._

It would be singular, if a subject which unveils to the eye of
faith the glories of the invisible world, and which is to be a
theme of gratitude and praise throughout eternity, could inspire
no ardour in a poet's soul; and if the wings of imagination could
take flight to every world save to that which is eternal. We
leave our Montgomeries to refute so gross an error, and appeal
with confidence to the page of Cowper.

We quote the following passage, to show that religion can
not only supply the noblest theme, but also communicate a
corresponding sublimity of thought and language. It is the
glowing and poetical description of the millennial period,
commencing with--

Sweet is the harp of prophecy.

We have room only for the concluding portion:--

  One song employs all nations, and all cry,
  "Worthy the Lamb, for he was slain for us!"
  The dwellers in the vales and on the rocks
  Shout to each other, and the mountain tops
  From distant mountains catch the flying joy;
  Till nation after nation taught the strain,
  Earth rolls the rapturous Hosanna round.
  Behold the measure of the promise fill'd;
  See Salem built, the labour of a god!
  Bright as a sun the sacred city shines;
  All kingdoms and all princes of the earth
  Flock to that light; the glory of all lands
  Flows into her; unbounded is her joy,
  And endless her increase. Thy rams are there,
  Nebaioth, and the flocks of Kedar there;
  The looms of Ormus, and the mines of Ind,
  And Saba's spicy groves pay tribute there.
  Praise is in all her gates: upon her walls,
  And in her streets, and in her spacious courts,
  Is heard salvation. Eastern Java there
  Kneels with the native of the farthest west;
  And Ethiopia spreads abroad the hand,
  And worships. Her report has travell'd forth
  Into all lands. From every clime they come
  To see thy beauty, and to share thy joy,
  O Sion! An assembly such as Earth
  Saw never, such as Heaven stoops down to see.

_Task_, book vi.

By this devotional strain of poetry, so adapted to the spirit of
the present age, Cowper is rapidly accomplishing a revolution
in the public taste, and creating a new race of readers. He is
purifying the literary atmosphere from its noxious vapours. The
muse has too long taken her flight _downwards_; Cowper leads
her to hold communion with the skies. He has taught us that
literary celebrity, acquired at the cost of public morals, is
but an inglorious triumph, and merits no better title than that
of splendid infamy. His page has fully proved that the varied
field of nature, the scenes of domestic life, and the rich
domain of moral and religious truth, are sufficiently ample for
the exercise of poetic taste and fancy; while they never fail
to tranquillize the mind, to invigorate the principles, and to
enlarge the bounds of virtuous pleasure.

The writings of Cowper have also been highly beneficial to the
church of England. If he has been a severe, he has also been a
faithful monitor. We allude to such passages as the following--

  There stands the messenger of truth: there stands
  The legate of the skies!--His theme divine,
  His office sacred, his credentials clear.
  By him the violated law speaks out
  Its thunders; and by him, in strains as sweet
  As angels use, the gospel whispers peace.
  He 'stablishes the strong, restores the weak,
  Reclaims the wand'rer, binds the broken heart,
  And, arm'd himself in panoply complete
  Of heavenly temper, furnishes with arms
  Bright as his own, and trains, by every rule
  Of holy discipline, to glorious war,
  The sacramental host of God's elect!
  Are all such teachers? Would to Heaven all were!

_Task_, book ii.

    I venerate the man, whose heart is warm,
  Whose hands are pure, whose doctrine and whose life,
  Coincident, exhibit lucid proof
  That he is honest in the sacred cause.
  To such I render more than mere respect,
  Whose actions say that they respect themselves.
  But, loose in morals, and in manners vain,
  In conversation frivolous, in dress
  Extreme--
  From such apostles, O ye mitred heads,
  Preserve the church! and lay not careless hands
  On skulls that cannot teach and will not learn.

There was a period when the chase was not considered to be
incompatible with the functions of the sacred office. On this
subject Cowper exclaims, with just and indignant feeling--

  Is this the path of sanctity? Is this
  To stand a way-mark in the road to bliss?
  Go, cast your orders at your bishop's feet,
  Send your dishonour'd gown to Monmouth-street!
  The sacred function in your hands is made--
  Sad sacrilege! no function, but a trade!

_The Progress of Error._

The danger of popular applause:

  O popular applause! what heart of man
  Is proof against thy sweet seducing charms?
  The wisest and the best feel urgent need
  Of all their caution in the gentlest gales;
  But, swell'd into a gust--who then, alas!
  With all his canvass set, and inexpert,
  And therefore heedless, can withstand thy power?
  Ah, spare your idol! think him human still.
  Charms he may have, but he has frailties too!
  Dote not too much, nor spoil what ye admire.

These rebukes, pungent as they are, were needed. The works of
Mrs. Hannah More bear unquestionable testimony to this fact. But
we may now record with gratitude a very perceptible change, and
appeal to the evidences of reviving piety among all classes of
the clergy.

Though the singular and mysterious malady of Cowper has been the
occasion of repeated remark, yet we cannot dismiss the subject
without a few concluding reflections.

In contrasting with his other letters the correspondence with
Newton, the chosen depositary of all his secret woe, it is
difficult to recognise in the writer the same identity of
character. His mind appears to have undergone some transforming
process, and the gay and lively tints of his sportive imagination
to be suddenly shrouded in the gloom of a mysterious and
appalling darkness. We seem to enter into the regions of sorrow
and despair, and to trace the terrific inscription so finely
drawn by the poet, in his celebrated "Inferno:"

  "Voi ch' entrate lasciate ogni speranza."[787]

  Ye who enter here leave all hope behind.

  [787] See the "Inferno" of Dante, where this motto is inscribed
  over the entrance into the abodes of woe.

In contemplating this afflicting dispensation, and referring every
event, as we must, to the appointment or permissive providence
of God, we feel constrained to exclaim with the patriarch, "_The
thunder of his power who can understand?_"[788] But life, as Bishop
Hall observes, is made up of perturbations; and those seem most
subject to their occurrence who are distinguished by the gifts of
rank, fortune, or genius. Such is the discipline which the moral
Governor of the world sees fit to employ for the purification of
their possessors! In recording the lot of genius, Milton, it is
known, was blind, Pope was afflicted with sickness, and Tasso,
Swift, Smart, and Collins, were exposed to the aberrations of
reason. "Moralists," says Dr. Johnson, "talk of the uncertainty of
fortune, and of the transitoriness of beauty; but it is yet more
dreadful to consider that the powers of the mind are equally liable
to change--that understanding may make its appearance and depart,
that it may blaze and expire." It seems as if the mind were too
ethereal to be confined within the bounds of its earthly prison,
or that the too frequent and intense exercise of thought disturbs
the digestive organs, and lays the foundation of hypochondriacal
feelings, which cloud the serenity of the soul. It is painful to
reflect how much our sensations of comfort and happiness depend on
the even flow and circulation of the blood. But the connexion of
physical and moral causes has been the subject of philosophical
remark in all ages. The somewhat analogous case of the celebrated
Dr. Johnson seems to have been overlooked by preceding biographers
of Cowper. "The morbid melancholy," observes Boswell, "which was
lurking in his constitution, and to which we may ascribe those
peculiarities, and that aversion to regular life, which, at a very
early period, marked his character, gathered such strength in his
twentieth year, as to afflict him in a dreadful manner. While he
was at Lichfield, in the college vacation, in 1729, he felt himself
overwhelmed with a horrible hypochondria, with perpetual irritation,
fretfulness, and impatience; and with a dejection, gloom, and
despair, which made existence misery. From this dismal malady he
never afterwards was perfectly relieved; and all his labours, and
all his enjoyments, were but temporary interruptions of its baleful
influence."

  [788] Job xxvi. 14.

Let those to whom Providence has assigned a humbler path, learn the
duty of contentment, and be thankful that if they are denied the
honours attendant on rank and genius, they are at least exempted
from its trials. For where there are _heights_, there are _depths_;
and he who occupies the summit is often seen descending into the
valley of humiliation.

That a similar morbid temperament may be traced in the case of
Cowper is indisputable; nor can a more conclusive evidence be
adduced than the words of his own memoir:--"I was struck, not
long after my settlement in the Temple, with such a dejection of
spirits, as none but they who have felt the same can have the least
conception of. Day and night I was upon the rack, lying down in
horror, and rising up in despair."[789] In his subsequent attack,
religion became an adjunct, not a cause, for he describes himself
at that period as having lived without religion. The impression
under which he laboured was therefore manifestly not suggested by
a theological creed, but was the delusion of a distempered fancy.
Every other view is founded on misconception, and must inevitably
tend to mislead the public.

  [789] See page 451.

Before we conclude the Life of Cowper, there are some important
reflections, arising from his unhappy malady, which we beg to
impress on the attention of the reader.

The fruitful source of all his misery was the indulgence of an
over-excited state of feeling. His mind was never quiescent.
Occurrences, which an ordinary degree of self-possession would
have met with calmness, or passive indifference, were to him the
subject of mental agony and distress. His imagination gave magnitude
to trifles, till what was at first ideal, at length assumed the
character of a terrible reality. He was always anticipating evil;
and so powerful is the influence of fancy that what we dread we
seldom fail to realize. Thus Swift lived in the constant fear of
mental imbecility, and at length incurred the calamity. We scarcely
know a spectacle more pitiable, and yet more reprehensible. For what
is the use of reason, if we reject its dictates? or the promise
of the Spirit to help our infirmities, if we nevertheless yield
to their sway? How important in the education of youth to repress
the first symptoms of nervous irritability, to invigorate the
principles, and to train the mind to habits of self-discipline,
and firm reliance upon God! The far greater proportion of human
trials originate not in the appointment of Providence, but may be
traced to the want of a well-ordered and duly regulated mind; to
the ascendency of passion, and to the absence of mental and moral
energy. It is possible to indulge in a state of mind that shall rob
every blessing of half its enjoyment, and give to every trial a
double portion of bitterness.

We turn with delight to a more edifying feature in his character--

_His submission under this dark dispensation._

It is easy to exhibit the triumphs of faith in moments of
exultation and joy; but the vivid energy of true faith is never
more powerfully exemplified, than when it is left to its own naked
exercise, unaided by the influence of exciting causes. It is amid
the desolation of hope, and when the iron enters into the soul--it
is amid pain, depression, and sorrow, when the eye is suffused with
tears, and every nerve vibrates with emotion--to be able to exclaim
at such a moment, "Here I am, let him do with me as seemeth him
good;"[790] this is indeed the faith which is of the operation of
the Spirit, which none but God can give, and which will finally lead
to a triumphant crown.

  [790] Letter to Newton, May 20, 1786.

That the mind should still indulge its sorrows, in moments of
awakened feeling, is natural. On this subject we know nothing
more touching than the manner in which Cowper parodies and
appropriates to himself Milton's affecting lamentation over his own
blindness:[791]

    Seasons return, but not to me returns
    God, or the sweet approach of heavenly day,
    Or sight of cheering truth, or pardon seal'd,
    Or joy, or hope, or Jesus' face divine;
    But cloud, &c.

To this quotation we might add the affecting conclusion of the poem
of "The Castaway."

      We perish'd each alone;
    But I beneath a rougher sea,
    And whelm'd in deeper gulfs than he.[792]

  [791] Paradise Lost, book iii.

  [792] See p. 446.

_The overruling Providence of God is no less discernible in this
event._

The severest trials are not without their alleviation, nor the
accompaniment of some gracious purpose. Had it not been for Cowper's
visitation, the world might never have been presented with The Task,
nor the Church of Christ been edified with the Olney Hymns. He was
constrained to write, in order to divert his melancholy. "Despair,"
he observes, "made amusement necessary, and I found poetry the most
agreeable amusement."[793] "In such a situation of mind, encompassed
by the midnight of absolute despair, and a thousand times filled
with unspeakable horror, I first commenced an author. Distress
drove me to it; and the impossibility of subsisting without some
employment, still recommends it."[794] How wonderful are the ways of
God, and what a powerful commentary on Cowper's own celebrated hymn--

  God moves in a mysterious way, &c.

It will probably be found, at the last great day, that the darkest
dispensations were the most essential links in the chain of
providential dealings; and that what we least understood, and often
contemplated with solemn awe on earth, will form the subject of
never-ceasing praise in eternity.

  [793] Letter to Newton, Aug. 6, 1785.

  [794] Letter to Newton, May 20, 1786.

_Whatever were the trials of Cowper, they are now terminated._

It will be remembered that his kinsman saw, or thought he saw, in
the features of his deceased friend, "an expression of calmness and
composure, mingled, as it were, with holy surprise."[795] We would
not attach too much importance to a look, but rather rest our hopes
of Cowper's happiness on the covenanted mercy and faithfulness
of God. Still the supposition is natural and soothing; and we by
no means think it improbable that the disembodied spirit might
communicate to the earthly lineaments, in the moment of departure,
the impression of its own heavenly joy. And O! what must have been
the expression of that surprise and joy, when, as his immortal
spirit ascended to him that gave it, instead of beholding the
averted eye of an offended God, he recognised the radiant smiles of
his reconciled countenance, and the caresses of his tenderness and
love--when all heaven burst upon his astonished view; and when, amid
angels, and archangels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, he
was invited to bear his part in the glorious song of the redeemed,
_Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power;
for thou hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, and hast made us unto
our God kings and priests for ever and ever_.

  [795] See page 448.

But it is time to close our remarks on the Life and Writings of
Cowper. It is a name that has long entwined itself around the
affections of our heart, and appealed, from early days, both to
conscience and feeling. We lament our inadequacy to fulfil all the
duties of the present important undertaking, but the motives which
have powerfully urged us to engage in it, are founded on a wish to
exhibit Cowper in accordance with his own Christian character and
principles; to vindicate him from prevailing misconceptions; and
in imputing the gloom of depression, under which he laboured, to
its true causes, so to treat this delicate subject as to make it
the occasion of sympathizing interest, and not of revolting and
agonized feelings. The private correspondence, in this respect, is
invaluable, and absolutely essential to the clear elucidation of his
case. Other documents have also been inserted that never appeared in
any previous biography of Cowper; and private sources of information
have been explored, not easily accessible to other inquirers. We
trust this object has been attained, and the hope of so important a
result is a source of cheering consolation. The history of Cowper
is fruitful in the pathetic, the sublime, and the terrible, so as
to produce an effect that seems almost to realize the fictions of
romance. A life composed of such materials cannot fail to command
attention. It possesses all the bolder lineaments of character,
relieved by the familiar, the tender, the sportive, and the gay.
Emotions are thus excited in which the heart loves to indulge; for
who does not delight alternately in the calmness of repose, and in
the excitement of awakened feeling?

But, independently of the interest created by the events of Cowper's
life, there is something singularly impressive in the mechanism of
his mind. It is so curiously wrought, and wonderfully made, as to
form a subject for contemplation to the philosopher, the Christian,
and the medical observer. The union of these several qualifications
seems necessary to analyze the interior springs of thought and
action, to mark the character of God's providential dealings, and
to trace the influence of morbid temperament on the powers of the
intellect and the passions of the soul. His mind presents the most
wonderful combinations of the grave and the gay, the social and the
retired, ministering to the spiritual joy of others, yet enveloped
in the gloom of darkness, enchained with fetters, yet vigorous and
free, soaring to the heights of Zion, yet precipitated to the depths
below. It resembles a beautiful landscape, overshadowed by a dark
and impending cloud. Every moment we expect the cloud to burst on
the head of the devoted sufferer; and the awful anticipation would
be fulfilled, were it not that a divine hand, which guides every
event, and without which not even a sparrow falls to the ground,
interposes and arrests the shock. Upwards of twenty years expired,
during which he was thus graciously upheld. He then began to sink
under his accumulated sorrows. But it is worthy of observation, that
during this period his mind never suffered _a total alienation_.
It was a partial eclipse, not night, nor yet day. He lived long
enough, both for himself and others, sufficient to discharge all
the claims of an affectionate friendship, and to raise to himself
an imperishable name on the noble foundation of moral virtue. At
length, when he stood alone, as it were, like a column in the
melancholy waste; when he was his own world, and the solitary
agent, around which clung the sensations of a heart always full,
and the reflections of a mind unconscious of a pause--he died. But
his last days and moments were soothed by the offices of Christian
kindness, and the most disinterested regard. His beloved kinsman
never left him till he had closed his eyes in death, and till the
disembodied spirit, at length, found the rest in heaven, which for
ever obliterated all its earthly sorrows.

_And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God and of the
Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him. And they
shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads. And
there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither
light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light; and they shall
reign for ever and ever._--Rev. xxii. 3-5.




ON THE GENIUS AND POETRY OF COWPER.

BY THE REV. J. W. CUNNINGHAM, A.M., VICAR OF HARROW.


In presenting to the public the first Complete Edition of the Works
of Cowper, it is thought desirable to prefix to the Poems a short
dissertation on his Genius and Poetry. It is true that criticisms
abound which have nearly the same object. It is true also that
some of these criticisms are of a very high order of excellence.
But perhaps their very number and merit supply a reason for adding
at least one to the catalogue. The observations of the different
Reviewers are scattered over so large a number of volumes, and these
volumes are many of them, either of so expensive or so ephemeral
a character, that an essay which endeavours to collect these
criticisms into a focus, and present them at once to the eye of the
reader, is far from superfluous. And the present critique pretends
to little more than the accomplishment of this object. The writer is
not ashamed to profit from the labour and genius of his predecessors
in the same course, and to let them say for him, what he could not
say so well for himself.

With this apology for what might otherwise be deemed a work of
supererogation, we enter upon the proposed undertaking.

And here we must begin by observing that it is impossible not to be
struck with certain peculiarities in the _history_ of Cowper, as
connected with his poetical productions. Although, as it has been
truly said of him--"born a poet, if ever there was one,"--thinking
and feeling upon all occasions as none but a poet could, expressing
himself in verse with almost incredible facility, it does not appear
that Cowper, between the ages of fourteen and thirty-three, produced
anything beyond the most trifling specimens of his art. The only
lines characteristic of his genius and peculiarities as a poet, and
which, though composed at a distance of more than thirty years from
the publication of "The Task," have so intimate a resemblance to it
as to seem to be a page out of the same volume, are those written at
the age of eighteen, on finding the heel of an old shoe.

    "This ponderous heel of perforated hide,
    Compact, with pegs indented, many a row,
    Haply (for such its massy form bespeaks)
    The weighty tread of some rude peasant clown
    Upbore: on this supported, oft he stretched,
    With uncouth strides, along the furrow'd glebe,
    Flattening the stubborn clod; till cruel time,
    (What will not cruel time?) or a wry step,
    Sever'd the strict cohesion; when, alas!
    He who could erst, with even, equal pace,
    Pursue his destin'd way, with symmetry,
    And some proportion form'd, now, on one side,
    Curtail'd and maim'd, the sport of vagrant boys,
    Cursing his frail supporter, treach'rous prop!
    With toilsome steps, and difficult, moves on."

A few light and agreeable poems, two hymns written at Huntingdon,
with about sixty others composed at Olney, are almost the only known
poetical productions of his pen between the years 1749 and 1782,
at which last period he committed his volume of poems in rhyme to
the press. There are examples in the physical world, of mountains
reposing in coldness and quietness for ages; and, at length, without
any apparently new stimulus, awaking from their slumber, and
deluging the surrounding vineyards with streams of fire. But it is,
we believe, an unheard-of poetical phenomenon, for a mind teeming
with such tendencies and capabilities as that of Cowper, to sleep
through so long a period, and, at length, suddenly to awake, when
illness and age might seem to have laid their palsying hand upon
its energies, and at once to erect itself into poetical life and
supremacy. In general, the poet either 'lisps in numbers,' or begins
to put forth his hidden powers under the exciting influence of some
new passion or emotion--such as love, fear, hope, or disappointment.
But, how wide of this was the history of Cowper! In his case, the
muse had no infancy, but sprang full armed from the brain of the
poet.

But, if the tardy development of the poetical powers of our author
was one peculiarity in his case, the suddenness and completeness
of the development, when it did take place, was, under his
circumstances, a still greater subject of surprise. In the account
of his life we learn, that, after quitting Westminster school, at
the age of eighteen, he spent three years in a solicitor's office;
and passed from thence, at the age of twenty-one, into chambers
in the Inner Temple. Soon after this event, he says of himself,
"I was struck, not long after my settlement in the Temple, with
such a dejection of spirits, as none but they who have felt the
same can have the least conception of. Day and night I was upon
the rack, lying down in horror, rising up in despair. I presently
lost all relish for the studies to which before I had been closely
attached. The classics had no longer any charm for me. I had
need of something more salutary than amusement, but I had no one
to direct me where to find it." This dejection of mind, as our
readers are aware, led him onward from depth to depth of misery and
despair, till at length he was borne away, helpless and hopeless,
in the year 1768, to an asylum for insane patients at St. Albans.
Released from the awful grasp of a perverted imagination, chiefly
by the power of that religion, which, in spite of every fact in his
history, has been, with malignant hatred to Christianity, charged
as the cause of his madness, he spent the two happiest years of his
life at Huntingdon. After this, he retired with the Unwin family
to Olney, in Buckinghamshire; and there, after passing through
the most tremendous mental conflicts, sank again into a state of
despondency; from which he at length awoke, (if it might be called
awaking,) not indeed to be freed from his delusions, but, whilst
under their dominion, to delight, instruct, and astonish mankind,
with some of the most original and enchanting poems in any language.
The philosophical work of Browne, dedicated to Queen Caroline, and
composed, as the author says, by a man who had lost his "rational
soul," has been always reputed the miracle of literature. But
Browne's case is scarcely more remarkable than that of Cowper.
That a work sparkling with the most childlike gaiety and brilliant
wit; exhibiting the most cheerful views of the character of God,
the face of nature, and the circumstances of man, should proceed
from a writer who at the time regarded God as an implacable enemy;
the earth we live on, as the mere porch to a world of punishment;
and human life, at least in his own case, as the cloudy morning of
a day of interminable anguish--all this is to be explained only
by the fact that madness disdains all rules, and reconciles all
contrarieties. His history supplies an example, not without its
parallel, of a mind--like some weapon drawn from its sheath to fight
a particular battle, and then suspended on the walls again--called
forth to accomplish an important end, and then sent back again into
obscurity. And it is no less an evidence, amongst a thousand other
instances, that our heavenly Father "in judgment remembers mercy,"
and bestows this mitigation of the heaviest of all maladies, that
those exposed to its deadliest influence and themselves denied all
access to the bright sources of happiness, are sometimes privileged
to pour the streams of consolation over the path of others. How
truly may it be said of such persons, "_Sic vos, non vobis,
mellificatis apes_."

But whilst we speak of certain peculiarities in the case of Cowper,
as calculated to destroy all reasonable expectation of such poems
as he has given to the public, we are not sure that these very
peculiarities have not assisted to supply his poetry with some of
its characteristic and most valuable features. Among the qualities,
for example, by which his compositions are distinguished, are
those of strong sense--moderation on all the subjects most apt to
throw the mind off its balance--maturity in thought, reasoning and
imagination--fulness without inflation--the "strength of the oak
without its nodosities"--the "inspiration of the Sybil without her
contortions"--the most profound and extensive views of human nature.
But perhaps every one of these qualities is oftener the growth
of age than of youth; and is rather the tardy fruit of patient
experience than the sudden shoot of untrained and undisciplined
genius.

In like manner, the poetry of Cowper is characterised by the most
touching tenderness, by the deepest sympathy with the sufferings of
others, by a penetrating insight into the dark recesses of a tempted
and troubled heart. But where are qualities such as these so likely
to be cultivated as in the shady places of a suffering mind, and
in the school of that stern mistress who teaches us "from our own,
to melt at others' woe," and to administer to others the medicines
which have healed ourselves? A celebrated physician is said to
have inoculated himself with the virus of the plague, in order to
practise with more efficacy in the case of others. Such voluntary
initiation in sorrow was needless in the case of Cowper;--another
hand had opened the wound which was to familiarize him with the
deepest trials of suffering humanity.

It is time, however, that we should proceed to consider some of
the claims of Cowper to the character of a poet. Large multitudes
have found an almost irresistible charm in his writings. In what
peculiarities does this powerful influence mainly reside?

In order to reply to this question, we would first direct the
attention of our readers to the constitution of his mind.

And here we may enter on our work by observing, that almost all
critics have regarded an _ardent love of nature_ as a _sine quâ non_
in the constitution of a poet. And nature, surely, never had a more
enthusiastic admirer than the author of the Task. How feelingly does
he write on this subject!

    "I have loved the rural walk through lanes
    Of grassy swarth, close cropp'd by nibbling sheep,
    And skirted thick with intertexture firm
    Of thorny bows; have loved the rural walk
    O'er hills, through valleys, and by river's brink,
    E'er since, a truant boy, I pass'd my bounds,
    T' enjoy a ramble on the banks of Thames.

When Homer describes his shepherd as contemplating the heavens
and earth by the light of the moon and stars, and says, with his
accustomed simplicity and grace,--"The heart of the shepherd is
glad;" our author might seem to have sat for the portrait. Although
unacquainted with nature in her sublimest aspect, every point in
creation appears to have a charm for him. To no lips would the
strain of another poet be more appropriate.

    "I care not, fortune, what you me deny;
    You cannot rob me of free nature's grace;
    You cannot shut the windows of the sky,
    Through which Aurora shows her brightening face;
    You cannot bar my constant feet to trace
    The woods and lawns by living stream at eve."

It is true, that every enthusiastic lover of nature is not a poet:
but a man can scarcely rise to the dignity of that high office
who has not a touch of this enthusiasm. Poetry is essentially an
imitative art; and he who is no lover of nature loses all the finest
subjects of imitation. On the contrary, this attachment, especially
if it be of an ardent character, supplies subjects to the muse every
where. Winter or summer, the wilderness and the garden, the cedar of
Libanus, and the hyssop on the wall; all that is dull and ineloquent
to another has a voice for him, and rouses him to think, to feel,
to admire, and to speak. The following lines are said to have been
introduced into "The Task," to gratify Mrs. Unwin, after the first
draught of the poem was finished. But what language can exhibit a
more genuine attachment to nature?

    "And witness, dear companion of my walks,
    Whose arm this twentieth winter I perceive
    Fast lock'd in mine....
    Witness a joy that thou hast doubled long.
    Thou know'st my praise of nature most sincere,
    And that my raptures are not conjur'd up
    To serve occasion of poetic pomp,
    But genuine; and art partner of them all."

Nor was the delight which he derived from nature confined, in the
case of our poet, to one sense. "All the _sounds_," he writes, "that
nature utters are delightful, at least in this country. I should not
perhaps find the roarings of lions in Africa, or of bears in Russia,
very pleasing; but I know of no beast in England, whose voice I do
not account musical, save and except only the braying of an ass. The
notes of all our birds and fowls please me, without one exception. I
should not indeed think of keeping a goose in a cage, that I might
hang him up in the parlour for the sake of his melody, but the goose
upon a common, or in a farm-yard, is no bad performer. Seriously,
however, it strikes me as a very observable instance of providential
kindness to man, that such an exact accord has been contrived
between his ear and the sounds with which, at least in a rural
situation, it is almost every moment visited. The fields, the woods,
the gardens, have each their concerts; and the ear of man is for
ever regaled by creatures who seem only to please themselves. Even
the ears that are deaf to the Gospel are continually entertained,
though without knowing it, by sounds for which they are solely
indebted to its Author."[796]

  [796] Letter to Mr. Newton.

It is interesting to compare with this the poetical expression of
the same thought.

    "Nor rural sights alone, but rural sounds
    Exhilirate the spirit, and restore
    The tone of languid nature....
    ........
    Nature inanimate employs sweet sounds,
    But animated nature sweeter still,
    To soothe or satisfy the human ear.
    Ten thousand warblers cheer the day, and one
    The live-long night. Nor those alone whose notes
    Nice finger'd art must emulate in vain;
    But cawing rooks, and kites, that swim sublime
    In still repeated circles, screaming loud;
    The jay, the pie, and e'en the boding owl,
    That hails the rising moon, have charms for me."

Another poetical quality in the mind of Cowper is his _ardent love
of his species_--a love which led him to contemplate, with the most
solicitous regard, their wants, tastes, passions; their diseases,
and the appropriate remedies for them. It has been justly observed,
that, if there are some who have little taste for the poetry which
delineates only inanimate beings or objects, there is hardly any
one who does not listen, with sympathy and delight, to that which
exhibits the fortunes and feelings of man. The truth is, we suppose,
that this last order of topics is most easily brought home to our
own business and bosoms. Aristotle considers that the imitation or
delineation of human action is one of the main objects of poetry.
But if this be true, if the "proper study of mankind is man," and
one of the highest offices of poetry be to exhibit, as upon the
stage, the fortunes and passions of his fellow beings--few have
attained such eminence in his art as Cowper. His hymns are the
close transcripts of his own soul. His rhymed poems have more of a
didactic character; but they are for the most part exhibitions of
man in all his attitudes of thought and action. They are mirrors
in which every man may contemplate his own mind. In the "Task," he
passes every moment from the contemplation of nature to that of the
being who inhabits this fair, though fallen, world. He lashes the
vices, laughs at the follies, mourns over the guilt of his species;
he spares no pains to conduct the guilty to the feet of their only
true Friend, and to land the miserable amidst the green pastures and
still waters of heavenly consolation.

Another property in the mind of Cowper, which has given birth to
some of the noblest passages in his poems, is his intense love of
freedom. The political state of this country was scarcely ever more
degraded than at the period when he began to write; and every real
patriot who could wield the pen, or lift the voice in the cause of
legitimate and regulated freedom, had plenty to do at home. At the
same period also the profligacy and tyranny of the privileged orders
in France, and other of the old European dynasties, were such as to
provoke the indignation of every lover of liberty. And lastly, at
this time, that horrible traffic in human flesh, that capital crime,
disgrace, and curse of the human species, the Slave Trade, prevailed
in all its horrors. How splendid are many of the passages scattered
so prodigally through his poems, in which the author rebukes the
crimes of despotism and cruelty at home or abroad, and claims for
mankind the high privileges with which God, by an everlasting
charter, had endowed them.

What lines can breathe a deeper indignation, than those quoted with
such admiration by Mr. Fox, in the House of Commons, on the Bastile?

    "Ye horrid towers, th' abode of broken hearts,
    Ye dungeons and ye cages of despair,
    That monarchs have supplied, from age to age,
    With music such as suits their sovereign ears,
    The sighs and groans of miserable men:
    There's not an English heart that would not leap
    To hear that ye were fallen at last."

And what passage in any uninspired writer is more noble and
heart-stirring, than that on the decision in the case tried by the
illustrious Granville Sharpe, to establish the liberty of all who
touched the soil of England--a passage confessedly the foundation of
the noblest effort of Curran, in his great speech on the liberty of
the subject!

    "I would not have a slave to till my ground,
    To carry me, to fan me while I sleep,
    And tremble when I wake, for all the wealth
    That sinews bought and sold have ever earn'd.
    No: dear as freedom is, and in my heart's
    Just estimation priz'd above all price,
    I had much rather be myself the slave,
    And wear the bonds, than fasten them on him.
    We have no slaves at home--then why abroad?
    And they themselves once ferried o'er the wave
    That parts us, are emancipate and loos'd.
    Slaves cannot breathe in England; if their lungs
    Receive our air, that moment they are free;
    They touch our country, and their shackles fall.
    That's noble, and bespeaks a nation proud
    And jealous of the blessing. Spread it then,
    And let it circulate through ev'ry vein
    Of all your empire; that, where Britain's pow'r
    Is felt, mankind may feel her mercy too."

But after all, perhaps, the peculiarity in the mind of Cowper, which
gives the chief charm to his poetry, is the _depth and ardour of his
piety_.

It is impossible not to be aware of the severance which critics
have laboured to effect between religion and poetry,--between the
character of the prophet and the poet: and that Johnson's decision
is thought by some to be final on the subject. Cowper himself admits
that the connexion has been rare between the two characters--as
witness the following lines--

    "Pity religion has so seldom found
    A skilful guide into poetic ground!
    For flow'rs would spring where'er she deigned to stray,
    And ev'ry muse attend her in her way.
    Virtue indeed meets many a rhyming friend,
    And many a compliment politely penn'd;
    But, unattir'd in that becoming vest
    Religion weaves for her, and half undrest,
    Stands in the desert, shiv'ring and forlorn,
    A wintry figure like a wither'd thorn."

But he does not despair of seeing some

                              "Bard all fire,
    Touch'd with a coal from heaven, assume the lyre,
    And tell the world, still kindling as he sung,
    With more than mortal music on his tongue,
    That He who died below, and reigns above,
    Inspires the song, and that his name is 'Love.'"

Indeed no theory can have less foundation either in philosophy or in
fact, than that poetry and religion have too little in common, for
either to gain by an attempt to unite them. They seem to us born for
each other. And, so important is this topic, that, although at the
risk of repeating what has been said elsewhere, it may be well for a
moment, to dwell upon it.

The theory which endeavours to secure a perpetual divorce between
religion and poetry has not the authority of the great critics of
antiquity. Longinus maintains, in one place, that "he who aims at
the reputation of a sublime writer must spare no labour to educate
his soul to grandeur, and to impregnate it with great and generous
ideas." And he affirms, in another, that "the faculties of the soul
will grow stupid, the spirit be lost, and good sense and genius
lie in ruins, when the care and study of man is engaged about the
mortal and worthless part of himself, and he has ceased to cultivate
virtue, and polish up the nobler part, his soul." Quintilian has a
whole chapter to prove that a great writer must be a good man. And
the greatest modern critics hold the same language. But, perhaps,
in no passage is the truth upon this subject more nobly expressed,
and a difficulty connected with it more ably explained, than in the
following verses of a poem now difficult of access:

    "But, of our souls, the high-born loftier part,
    Th' ethereal energies that touch the heart;
    Conceptions ardent, labouring thought intense,
    Creative fancy's wild magnificence;
    And all the dread sublimities of song
    --These, Virtue, these to thee alone belong.
    Chill'd by the breath of Vice, their radiance dies,
    And brightest burns, when lighted at the skies;
    Like vestal lamps, to purest bosoms giv'n,
    And kindled only by a ray from heav'n."[797]

  [797] Grant's (now Lord Glenelg) prize poem on "Restoration of
  Learning in the East."

Nor does this sentiment stand on the mere authority of critics;
but appears to be founded on just views of the constitution of our
nature. Lighter themes can be expected to awaken only light and
transient feelings in the bosom. The profounder topics of religion
sink deeper; touch all the hidden springs of thought and action;
and awaken emotions, which have all the force and permanence of the
great principles and interests in which they originate.

To us, no assertion would seem to have less warrant, than that
_taste_ suffers by its alliance with religion. The proper objects of
taste are beauty and sublimity; and if (as a modern critic seems to
us to have incontrovertibly established) beauty and sublimity do not
reside in the mere forms and colours of the objects we contemplate,
but in the associations which they suggest to the mind, it cannot
be questioned that the associations suggested to a man of piety,
exceed both in beauty and sublimity those of every other class. God,
as a Father, is the most lovely of all objects--God, as an avenger,
is the most terrible; and it is to the religious man exclusively,
that this at once most tender and most terrible Being is disclosed,
in all the beauty and majesty of holiness, by every object which he
contemplates--

    "Præsentiorem conspicimus Deum
    Per invias rupes, fera per juga,
    Clivosque præruptos sonantes,
    Inter aquas, nemorumque noctem."

Or, as the same sentiment is expressed by Cowper,

    "His are the mountains, and the valleys his,
    And the resplendent rivers. His to enjoy
    With a propriety that none can feel,
    But who, with filial confidence inspired,
    Can lift to heaven an unpresumptuous eye,
    And smiling say,--'My Father made them all!'"

It is striking to what an extent the greatest poets of all ages and
countries have called in religion, under some form or other, to
their assistance. How are the Iliad and Odyssey ennobled by their
mythological machinery; by the scales of Fate, the frown of Jove,
and the intercession of Minerva! How anxiously does Virgil labour to
give a moral and religious character to his Georgics and Æneid! And
how nobly do these kindred spirits, by a bold fiction bordering upon
truth, display the eternal mansions of joy and of misery, of reward
and of punishment; thus disclosing, not by the light of revelation,
but by the blended flashes of genius and tradition, the strongest
incentives to virtue, and the most terrific penalties of crime.

The same may be affirmed of many of our own most distinguished
poets; of "the sage and serious Spenser," and the immortal author
of "the Paradise Lost" himself. Nor can we hesitate to trace the
deep interest continually excited by the poetry of Cowper, in great
measure, to the same source. Though often careless in the structure
of his verse; though sometimes lame, and lengthy, and prosaic in
his manner; though frequently employed about unpopular topics; he
is perhaps the most popular, with the exception of one, of all
the English poets: and we believe that the main source of his
general acceptance is the fact that he never fails to introduce the
Creator into the scenes of his own universe; that, by the soarings
of his own mind, he lifts us from earth to heaven, and "makes us
familiar with a world unseen;" that he draws largely from the mine
of Scripture, and thus exhibits the majesty and love of the Divine
Being, in words and imagery which the great object of his wonder and
love Himself provides.

It is wholly needless for us to refer to any particular parts of the
works of our author, as illustrative of his deep and sanguine spirit
of piety. That spirit breathes through every line, and letter. It
is, if we may so speak, the animating soul of his verses. The mind
of the Christian reader is refreshed, in every step of his progress,
by the conviction that the songs thus sung on earth were taught from
Heaven; and that, in resigning himself to the sweetest associate
for this world, he is choosing the very best guide to another.
Indeed, few have been disposed to deny to Cowper the highest of all
poetical titles--that of The Poet of Christianity. In this field he
has but one rival, the author of the "Paradise Lost." And happily
the provinces which they have chosen for themselves within the
sacred enclosure are, for the most part, so distinct, that it is
scarcely necessary to bring them into comparison. The distinguishing
qualities of Milton are a surpassing elevation of thought and energy
of expression, which leave the mind scarcely able to breathe under
the pressure of his majesty, courage, and sublimity. The main defect
of his poetry, as has been justly stated by an anonymous critic, is
"the absence of a charm neither to be named nor defined, which would
render the whole as lovely as it is beautiful, and as captivating
as it is sublime." "His poetry," it is added by the same critic,
"will be ever praised by the many, and read by the few. The weakest
capacity may be offended by its faults, but it requires a genius
equal to his own to comprehend and enjoy all his merits.

"Cowper rarely equals Milton in sublimity, to which his subjects but
seldom led; he excels him in easy expression, delicate pleasantry,
and generous satire; and he resembles him in the temperate use of
all his transcendent abilities. He never crushes his subject by
falling upon it, nor permits his subject to crush him by falling
beneath it. Invested with a sovereign command of diction, and
enjoying unlimited freedom of thought, he is never prodigal of
words, and he never riots amidst the exuberance of his conceptions;
his economy displays his wealth, and his moderation is the proof of
his power; his richest phrases seem the most obvious expression of
his ideas, and his mightiest exertions are made apparently without
toil. This, as we have already observed, is one of the grandest
characteristics of Milton. It would be difficult to name a third
poet of our country who could claim a similar distinction. Others,
like Cowley, overwhelm their theme with their eloquence, or, like
Young, sink exhausted beneath it, by aiming at magnificent, but
unattainable, compression; a third class, like Pope, whenever they
write well, write their best, and never win but at full speed, and
with all their might; while a fourth, like Dryden and Churchill,
are confident of their strength, yet so careless of their strokes,
that when they conquer, it seems a matter of course, and when they
fall, a matter of no consequence, for they can rise again as soon
as they please. Milton and Cowper alone appear always to walk
_within_ the limits of their genius, yet up to the height of their
great argument. We are not pretending to exalt them above all other
British poets; we have only compared them together on one point,
wherein they accord with each other, and differ from the rest. But
there is one feature of resemblance between them of a nobler kind.
These good and faithful servants, who had received ten talents each,
neither buried them in the earth, nor expended them for their own
glory, nor lavished them in profligacy, but occupied them for their
Master's service; and we trust have both entered into his joy.
Their unfading labours, (not subject to change, from being formed
according to the fashion of this world, but being of equal and
eternal interest to man in all ages,) have disproved the idle and
impious position which vain philosophy, hating all godliness, has
endeavoured to establish,--that religion can neither be adorned by
poetry, nor poetry ennobled by religion."[798]

  [798] Eclectic Review. This criticism it has been ascertained is
  from the pen of Mr. James Montgomery; and the desire inseparably
  to connect what is so just and able with the works of Cowper has
  been the inducement, notwithstanding its length, to introduce it
  here.

Having thus noticed some of those grand peculiarities in the mind
of Cowper, which appear to have mainly contributed to place him
among the highest order of poets, we proceed to point out some
subordinate qualifications, without which, those already referred to
would have failed to raise him to his present elevation. Even the
buoyant spirit of a poet has certain inferior members by which it is
materially assisted in its upward flight.

In the first place, then, he was one of the most _simple_ and
_natural_ of all writers. With the exception of the sacred volume,
it would perhaps be impossible to name any compositions with so
large a proportion of simple ideas and Saxon monosyllables. He
began to be an author when Pope, with his admirable critic Johnson,
had established a taste for all that was most ornate, pompous,
and complicated in phraseology. But, with due respect for the
genius and power of this class of writers, he may be said to have
hewn out for himself a new path to glory. It has been justly said
by an accomplished modern critic and poet, that, "between the
school of Dryden and Pope, with their few remembered successors,
not one of whom ranks now above a fourth-rate poet; for Young,
Thomson, Goldsmith, Gray, and Collins, though flourishing in the
interval, were not of their school, but all, in their respective
ways, originals;--between the school of Dryden and Pope, and our
undisciplined, independent contemporaries, Cowper stands as having
closed the age of the former illustrious masters, and commenced
that of the eccentric leaders of the modern fashions in song. We
cannot stop to trace the affinity which he bears to either of these
generations, so dissimilar from each other; but it would be easy to
show how little he owed to his immediate forerunners, and how much
his immediate followers have been indebted to him. All the cant
phrases, all the technicalities, of the former school he utterly
threw away, and by his rejection of them they became obsolete. He
boldly adopted cadences of verse unattempted before, which though
frequently uncouth, and sometimes scarcely reducible to rhythm,
were not seldom ingeniously significant, and signally energetic. He
feared not to employ colloquial, philosophical, judicial idioms, and
forms of argument, and illustrations, which enlarged the vocabulary
of poetical terms, less by recurring to obsolete ones, (which has
been too prodigally done since,) than by hazardous, and generally
happy innovations of more recent origin, which have become graceful
and dignified by usage, though Pope and his imitators durst not
have touched them. The eminent adventurous revivers of English
poetry about thirty years ago, Southey, Wordsworth, and Coleridge,
in their blank verse, trod directly in the steps of Cowper, and,
in their early productions at least, were each, in a measure, what
he made them. Our author may be legitimately styled the father of
this triumvirate, who are, in truth, the living fathers of the
innumerable race of moderns, whom no human ingenuity could well
classify into their respective schools."[799]

  [799] Montgomery's Essay on Cowper's Poems.

The simplicity of Cowper as a thinker, examiner, and writer, is
unquestionably one of his greatest charms. He constantly reminds
us of a highly-gifted and intelligent child. In all that he says
and does, there is a total absence of all plot and stratagem, of
all pretensions to think profoundly, or write finely; though,
without an effort, he does both. His manner is to invite you to
walk abroad with him amidst the glories of nature; to fix at
random on some point in the landscape; to display its beauties or
its peculiarities--to touch on some feature which has, perhaps,
altogether escaped your own eye--to pour out the simplest thoughts
in the simplest language--and to make you feel that never man before
had so sweet, so moral, so devout, so affectionate, so gifted, so
musical a companion. The simplicity of his style is, we believe,
considering its strength, without a parallel. No author, perhaps,
has done more to recover the language of our country from the grasp
and tyranny of a foreign idiom, and to teach English people to speak
in English accents. In some instances, it may be granted, that he
is somewhat more colloquial and homely than the dignity of his
subject warrants. But for offences of this kind he makes the amplest
compensation, by leading us to those "wells of undefiled English,"
at which he had drunk so deeply, and whence alone the pure streams
of our national composition are to be drawn.

It is next to be noticed, as to the style of Cowper, that it is
as _nervous_ as it is clear and unpretending. It is impossible to
compare the works of Addison, and others of the simple class of
writers, with Johnson, and those of the opposite class, without
feeling that what they gain in simplicity they often lose in
strength and power. But the language of Cowper is often to the full
as vigorous and masculine as that of Shakspeare. Bring a tyrant or a
slave-driver before him for judgment; and the axe of the one and the
scourge of the other are not keener weapons than the words of the
poet.

It would be difficult to find in any writer a more striking example
of nervous phraseology than we have in the well-known lines:

    "But hark--the doctor's voice!--fast wedged between
    Two empirics he stands, and with swoll'n cheeks
    Inspires the news, his trumpet. Keener far
    Than all invective, is his bold harangue,
    While through that public organ of report
    He hails the clergy; and defying shame,
    Announces to the world his own and theirs!
    He teaches those to read, whom schools dismissed
    And colleges, untaught; sells accent, tone,
    And emphasis in score, and gives to pray'r
    Th' _adagio_ and _andante_ it demands.
    He grinds divinity of other days
    Down into modern use; transforms old print
    To zigzag manuscript, and cheats the eyes
    Of gall'ry critics by a thousand arts.
    Are there who purchase of the doctor's ware?
    O name it not in Gath!--It cannot be,
    That grave and learned clerks should need such aid.
    He doubtless is in sport, and does but droll;
    Assuming thus a rank unknown before--
    Grand caterer and dry-nurse of the church!"

In the next place, it will not be questioned, we think, by any
reader of the preceding letters, that Cowper was a _wit_ of the
very highest order--and this quality is by no means confined to
his prose, but enters largely into everything that he writes. No
author surprises us more frequently with rapid turns and unexpected
coincidences. The mock sublime is one of his favourite implements;
and he employs it with almost unrivalled success. There is also a
delicacy of touch in his witticisms which is more easily felt than
described. And his wit has this noble singularity, that it is never
derived from wrong sources, or directed to wrong ends. It never
wounds a feeling heart, or deepens the blush upon a modest cheek.
Other wits are apt to dip their vessels in any stream which presents
itself; Cowper draws only from the purest fountains. It has been
said of Sterne, that he hides his pearls in a ditch, and forces his
readers to dive for them; but the witticisms of Cowper are as well
calculated to instruct as to delight.

This last topic is intimately connected with another, which, in
touching on the excellences of Cowper as a poet, cannot be passed
over,--we mean, the astonishing _fertility of his imagination_. It
was observed to the writer of these pages by the late Sir James
Mackintosh, of the friend and ornament of his species, William
Wilberforce, that "he was perhaps the finest of all orators of
his own particular order--that the wealth of his imagination was
such, that no idea seemed to present itself to his mind without its
accompanying image or ghost, which he could produce at his pleasure,
and which it was a matter of self-denial if he did not produce."
And the latter part of this criticism might seem to be made for
Cowper. His mind appears never to wait for an image, but to be
overrun by them. In argument or description--in hurling the thunders
of rebuke, or whispering the messages of mercy--he does but wave his
wand, and a host of spiritual essences descend to darken or brighten
the scenes at his bidding; to supply new weapons of rebuke, or new
visions of love and joy. Some of his personifications are among the
finest specimens in any language. What, for example, has more of the
genuine spirit of poetry, than the personification of Famine, in the
following lines?--

    "He calls for Famine......
    ......and the meagre fiend
    Blows mildew from between his shrivell'd lips
    And taints the golden ear."

What is more lively or forcible than his description of Time?--

    "Time, as he passes us, has a dove's wing,
    Unsoiled and swift, and of a silken sound;
    But the world's Time is Time in masquerade!
    Theirs, should I paint him, has his pinions fledged
    With motley plumes; and where the peacock shows
    His azure eyes, is tinctured black and red
    With spots quadrangular of diamond form,
    Ensanguined hearts, clubs typical of strife,
    And spades, the emblems of untimely graves.
    What should be and what was an hour-glass once,
    Become a dice-box, and a billiard mace
    Well does the work of his destructive scythe."

What, again, is superior in this way to his address to Winter?--

    "O Winter! ruler of the inverted year!
    Thy scattered hair with sleet-like ashes filled,
    Thy breath congealed upon thy lips, thy cheeks
    Fringed with a beard made white with other snows
    Than those of age, thy forehead wrapped in clouds,
    A lifeless branch thy sceptre, and thy throne
    A sliding car, indebted to no wheels,
    But urged by storms along its slippery way."

But the examples of this species of personification are without
number; and we are not afraid to bring many of them into comparison
with the Discord of Homer, the Fame of Virgil, or the Famine of
Ovid--passages of so powerful a cast as at once, and without any
assistance, to establish the poetical authority of their inventors.

It may seem strange to some, that we should assign a place, among
the poetical claims of Cowper, to his _strong sense_. He appears to
us to be one of the most just, natural, and rational of all writers;
and, however Poetry may seem to appropriate to herself rather the
remote and visionary regions of fiction than that of dull reality,
we are disposed to think, that, even in her wildest wanderings, she
will maintain no real and permanent ascendency over the mind, if
she widely deviates from nature and good sense. "Monstrous sights,"
says Beattie, and he might have added, monstrous conceptions,
"please but for a moment, if they please at all; for they derive
their charm merely from the beholders' amazement. I have read
indeed of a man of rank in Sicily who chooses to adorn his villa
with pictures and statues of the most unnatural deformity. But it
is a singular instance; and one would not be much more surprised to
hear of a man living without food, or growing fat upon poison. To
say of anything that it is 'contrary to nature,' denotes censure
and disgust on the part of the speaker; as the epithet 'natural'
intimates an agreeable quality, and seems, for the most part, to
imply that a thing is as it ought to be, suitable to our own taste,
and congenial to our own disposition.... Think how we should relish
a painting in which there was no regard to colours, proportions,
or any of the physical laws of nature; where the eyes and ears of
animals were placed in their shoulders; where the sky was green,
and the grass crimson." Such distortions and anomalies would not
be less offensive in poetry than in the sister art. And it is one
of the main sources of delight in Cowper, that all is in its due
proportion, and wears its right colours; that the "eyes and ears"
are in "their proper places;" that his skies are blue, and his grass
is green; and that every reflection of the poet has, what he himself
calls the

  "Stamp and clear impression of good sense."

The very passage in the sixth book of "The Task" from which this
line is taken, and which furnishes perhaps the most perfect
uninspired delineation of a true Christian, supplies, at the same
time, an admirable example of the quality we mean; and shows, that
even where his feelings were the most intensely interested, his
passions were under the control of his reason; that, when he mounted
the chariot of the sun, he took care not to approach too near the
flaming luminary.

It would be impossible, in a sketch such as this, not to advert
to the powers of the author as a _satirist_. And here, we think
the most partial critic will be scarcely disposed to deny, that he
sometimes handles his knife a little at random and with too much
severity. He had early in life been intimate with Churchill; and,
with scarcely a touch of the temper of that right English poet,
had plainly caught something of his manner. There is this wide
distinction between him and his master--that his irony and rebuke
are never the weapons of party, or personality, but of truth,
honour, and the public good. The strong, though homely, image
applied by Churchill to another critic,--

    "Like a butcher, doom'd for life
    In his mouth to wear his knife,"--

is too just a picture of its author, but is infinitely far from
being that of Cowper. It was well said of his satire, that "it was
the offspring of benevolence; and that, like the Pelian spear,
it furnishes the only cure for the wound it inflicts. When he is
obliged to blame, he pities; when he condemns, it is with regret.
His censures display no triumphant superiority; but rather express a
turn of feeling such as we might suppose angels to indulge in at the
prospect of human frailty."

But, if his satirical powers were sometimes indulged to excess,
it is impossible to deny that he was, generally and habitually,
of all poets the most _sympathizing and tender_. Nothing in human
composition can surpass the tenderness of the poem on receiving his
mother's picture, or of those exquisite lines addressed to a lady in
France suffering under deep calamity, of which last we shall quote a
few for the ornament of our page:--

    "The path of sorrow, and that path alone,
    Leads to the land where sorrow is unknown:
    No trav'ller ever reach'd that blest abode,
    Who found not thorns and briers in his road.
    The world may dance along the flowery plain,
    Cheer'd as they go by many a sprightly strain,
    Where Nature has her mossy velvet spread
    With unshod feet they yet securely tread,
    Admonish'd, scorn the caution and the friend,
    Bent all on pleasure, heedless of its end.
    But He, who knew what human hearts would prove,
    How slow to learn the dictates of his love,
    That, hard by nature, and of stubborn will,
    A life of ease would make them harder still,
    In pity to the souls his grace design'd
    To rescue from the ruins of mankind,
    Call'd for a cloud to darken all their years,
    And said, 'Go, spend them in the vale of tears.'
    O balmy gales of soul-reviving air!
    O salutary streams that murmur there!
    These flowing from the fount of grace above,
    Those breathed from lips of everlasting love."

The Hymns are almost uniformly of the same character. Drawn from the
deep recesses of a broken heart, they find a short and certain way
to the bosom of others.

And this leads to the notice of another peculiarity in his writings.
It is said to have been a favourite maxim with Lord Byron, "that
every writer is interesting to others in proportion as he is able
and willing to seize and to display to them the hidden workings of
his own soul." The noble critic is himself a strong exemplification
of the truth of his own rule. Not merely his heroes and his
heroines, but his rocks, mountains, and rivers, are a sort of _fac
simile_ of himself. The blue lake reposing among the mountains is
the bard in a state of repose. The thunder leaping from rock to
rock is the same mind under the strong excitement of passion. But
perhaps of all writers Cowper is the most habitually what may be
termed an experimentalist in poetry. He sought in "the man within,"
the secret machinery by which to touch and to control the world
without. He felt deeply; and caught the feeling as it arose, and
transferred it, warm from the heart to his own paper. Hence one
great attraction of his writings. "As face answereth to face in
water, so the heart of man to man." The sensations of other men are
to a great degree our own; and the poetical exhibition of these
sensations is the presenting to us a sort of illuminated mirror,
in which we see ourselves, and are, according to the view, moved
to sorrow or to joy. Preachers as well as poets will do well to
remember this law of our nature, and will endeavour to analyze and
to delineate their own feelings, if they mean to reach those of
others. Unhappily, the noble author of this canon in philosophy and
literature had no very profitable picture of this kind to display
to his fellow men. He speaks, however, of "unmasking the hell that
dwelt within." And he has taught no unimportant lesson to his
species, if he has instructed us in the utter wretchedness of those
who, gifted with the noblest powers, refuse to consecrate them to
the glorious Giver. But, however unprofitable his own application of
the rule, the rule itself is valuable; and, in the case of Cowper,
we have the application of it, both on the largest scale and to the
best possible purpose.

There is one other feature in the mind of Cowper on which, before
quitting the subject of this examination, we must be permitted to
say a few words. It has been the habit with many, while freely
conceding to our poet most of the humbler claims to reputation for
which we have contended, to assign him only a second or third place
in the scale of poets, on the ground that he is, according to their
estimate, altogether "incapable of the _true sublime_." Now it must
be admitted that, if the only true sublimity in writing be to write
like Milton, Cowper cannot be ranked in the same class as a poet. Of
Milton it may be said, in the words of a poet as great as himself--

          "He doth bestride the world
    Like a Colossus: and we petty men
    Walk under his huge legs."

Nothing can be more astonishing than the composure and dignity
with which, like his own Satan, he climbs the "empyreal
height"--sails between worlds and worlds--and moves among thrones
and principalities, as if in his natural element. "The genius of
Cowper," as it has been justly said, "did not lead him to emulate
the songs of the seraphim:" but though, in one respect, he moves
in a lower region than his great master, in what may be termed the
"moral sublime," he is by no means inferior to him. Scarcely any
poetry awakens in the mind more of those deep emotions of "pity and
terror," which the great critic of antiquity describes as the main
sources of the sublime; and by which poetry is said to "_purge_ the
mind of her votaries." In this view of the sublime we know of few
passages which surpass the description of "liberty of soul," in the
conclusion of the 5th book of "The Task."

                    "Then liberty, like day,
    Breaks on the soul; and, by a flash from heav'n,
    Fires all the faculties with glorious joy.
    A voice is heard that mortal ears hear not,
    Till Thou hast touch'd them; 'tis the voice of song,
    A loud hosanna sent from all thy works;
    Which he that hears it with a shout repeats,
    And adds his rapture to the gen'ral praise.
    In that blest moment, Nature, throwing wide
    Her veil opaque, discloses with a smile
    The Author of her beauties; who, retir'd
    Behind His own creation, works unseen
    By the impure, and hears his pow'r denied.
    Thou art the source and centre of all minds,
    Their only point of rest, eternal Word!
    From Thee departing, they are lost, and rove
    At random, without honour, hope, or peace.
    From Thee is all that soothes the life of man,
    His high endeavour, and his glad success,
    His strength to suffer, and his will to serve.
    But, O Thou bounteous Giver of all good,
    Thou art of all thy gifts thyself the crown!
    Give what thou canst, without thee we are poor;
    And with thee rich, take what thou wilt away!"

In like manner the Millennium of Cowper is at least not inferior to
the Messiah of Pope. The corresponding passage in the latter writer
is greatly inferior to that in which our poet says,--

    "... No foe to man
    Lurks in the serpent now--the mother sees,
    And smiles to see, her infant's hand
    Stretch'd forth to dally with the crested worm,
    To stroke his azure neck, and to receive
    The lambent homage of his arrowy tongue."

And few passages in any poem have more of the true sublime than that
which follows soon after the last extract:--

    "One song employs all nations, and all cry
    'Worthy the Lamb, for he was slain for us!'
    The dwellers in the vales and on the rocks
    Shout to each other, and the mountain tops
    From distant mountains catch the flying joy:
    Till, nation after nation taught the strain,
    Earth rolls the rapturous hosanna round."

Having offered these general observations "on the Genius and
Poetry" of Cowper, and having so largely drawn from his sweet and
instructive pages, it is not thought necessary to supply any more
specific notice of his several poems. It is superfluous to enter
upon a detailed proof that his poems in rhyme, though occasionally
brightened by passages of extraordinary merit, are often prosaic in
their character, and halting and feeble in the versification; that
his shorter poems, whether of a gay or of a devotional cast, are,
for pathos, wit, delicacy of conception, and felicity of expression,
unequalled in our language; that his Homer is an evidence, not
of his incapacity as a translator, but of the impossibility of
transmuting into stiff unyielding English monosyllables the rich
compounds of the Greek, without a sacrifice both of sound and
sense; that "The Task" outruns in power, variety, depth of thought,
fertility of imagination, vigour of expression, in short, in all
which constitutes a poet of the highest order, every hope which
his earlier poems had allowed his readers to indulge. The dawn
gave little or no promise of such a day. The porch was in no sense
commensurate to the temple afterwards to be erected.--On the whole,
his "Poems" will always be considered as one of the richest legacies
which genius and virtue have bequeathed to mankind; and will be
welcomed wherever the English language is known, and English minds,
tastes, and habits prevail; wherever the approbation of what is
good and the abhorrence of what is evil are felt; wherever truth is
honoured, and God and his creatures are loved.

With these observations, we bring our imperfect criticisms on
the Poems of Cowper to a conclusion. The writer of them does
not hesitate to say that he has been amply rewarded for his own
critical labours, by the privilege of often escaping from his own
page to that of his author. And the reader of them will be still
more largely compensated if, when weary of the critic, he will turn
aside to breathe an ardent supplication to the Giver of all that was
good and great in Cowper, that he himself may drink deeply of the
spirit, without participating in the sorrows of this most holy, most
distinguished, most suffering, but now most triumphant, servant of
the God and Saviour to whom he so nobly and habitually dedicated all
his powers.




PREFACE TO THE POEMS.


When an author, by appearing in print, requests an audience of the
public, and is upon the point of speaking for himself, whoever
presumes to step before him with a preface, and to say, "Nay, but
hear me first," should have something worthy of attention to offer,
or he will be justly deemed officious and impertinent. The judicious
reader has probably, upon other occasions, been beforehand with
me in this reflection: and I am not very willing it should now be
applied to me, however I may seem to expose myself to the danger of
it. But the thought of having my own name perpetuated in connexion
with the name in the title-page is so pleasing and flattering to the
feelings of my heart, that I am content to risk something for the
gratification.

This Preface is not designed to commend the Poems to which it is
prefixed. My testimony would be insufficient for those who are not
qualified to judge properly for themselves, and unnecessary to those
who are. Besides, the reasons which render it improper and unseemly
for a man to celebrate his own performances, or those of his nearest
relatives, will have some influence in suppressing much of what he
might otherwise wish to say in favour of a friend, when that friend
is indeed an _alter idem_, and excites almost the same emotions of
sensibility and affection as he feels for himself.

It is very probable these Poems may come into the hands of some
persons, in whom the sight of the author's name will awaken a
recollection of incidents and scenes, which through length of time
they had almost forgotten. They will be reminded of one, who was
once the companion of their chosen hours, and who set out with
them in early life in the paths which lead to literary honours, to
influence and affluence, with equal prospects of success. But he
was suddenly and powerfully withdrawn from those pursuits, and he
left them without regret; yet not till he had sufficient opportunity
of counting the cost, and of knowing the value of what he gave up.
If happiness could have been found in classical attainments, in an
elegant taste, in the exertions of wit, fancy, and genius, and in
the esteem and converse of such persons, as in these respects were
most congenial with himself, he would have been happy. But he was
not--he wondered (as thousands in a similar situation still do)
that he should continue dissatisfied, with all the means apparently
conducive to satisfaction within his reach--But in due time the
cause of his disappointment was discovered to him--he had lived
without God in the world. In a memorable hour, the wisdom which is
from above visited his heart. Then he felt himself a wanderer, and
then he found a guide. Upon this change of views, a change of plan
and conduct followed of course. When he saw the busy and the gay
world in its true light, he left it with as little reluctance as a
prisoner, when called to liberty, leaves his dungeon. Not that he
became a Cynic or an Ascetic--a heart filled with love to God will
assuredly breathe benevolence to men. But the turn of his temper
inclining him to rural life, he indulged it, and, the providence
of God evidently preparing his way and marking out his retreat,
he retired into the country. By these steps the good hand of God,
unknown to me, was providing for me one of the principal blessings
of my life; a friend and a counsellor, in whose company for almost
seven years, though we were seldom seven successive waking hours
separated, I always found new pleasure--a friend who was not only a
comfort to myself, but a blessing to the affectionate poor people
among whom I then lived.

Some time after inclination had thus removed him from the hurry and
bustle of life, he was still more secluded by a long indisposition,
and my pleasure was succeeded by a proportionable degree of anxiety
and concern. But a hope, that the God whom he served would support
him under his affliction, and at length vouchsafe him a happy
deliverance, never forsook me. The desirable crisis, I trust, is
now nearly approaching. The dawn, the presage of returning day, is
already arrived. He is again enabled to resume his pen, and some of
the first fruits of his recovery are here presented to the public.
In his principal subjects, the same acumen, which distinguished him
in the early period of life, is happily employed in illustrating and
enforcing the truths of which he received such deep and unalterable
impressions in his maturer years. His satire, if it may be called
so, is benevolent, (like the operations of the skilful and humane
surgeon, who wounds only to heal,) dictated by a just regard for the
honour of God, an indignant grief excited by the profligacy of the
age, and a tender compassion for the souls of men.

His favourite topics are least insisted on in the piece entitled
Table Talk; which therefore, with some regard to the prevailing
taste, and that those, who are governed by it, may not be
discouraged at the very threshold from proceeding farther, is placed
first. In most of the large poems which follow, his leading design
is more explicitly avowed and pursued. He aims to communicate
his own perceptions of the truth, beauty, and influence of the
religion of the Bible--a religion, which, however discredited by
the misconduct of many, who have not renounced the Christian name,
proves itself, when rightly understood, and cordially embraced, to
be the grand desideratum, which alone can relieve the mind of man
from painful and unavoidable anxieties, inspire it with stable peace
and solid hope, and furnish those motives and prospects which, in
the present state of things, are absolutely necessary to produce a
conduct worthy of a rational creature, distinguished by a vastness
of capacity which no assemblage of earthly good can satisfy, and by
a principle and pre-intimation of immortality.

At a time when hypothesis and conjecture in philosophy are so
justly exploded, and little is considered as deserving the name of
knowledge, which will not stand the test of experiment, the very use
of the term experimental in religious concernments is by too many
unhappily rejected with disgust. But we well know, that they, who
affect to despise the inward feelings which religious persons speak
of, and to treat them as enthusiasm and folly, have inward feelings
of their own, which, though they would, they cannot, suppress.
We have been too long in the secret ourselves, to account the
proud, the ambitious, or the voluptuous, happy. We must lose the
remembrance of what we once were, before we can believe that a man
is satisfied with himself, merely because he endeavours to appear
so. A smile upon the face is often but a mask worn occasionally and
in company, to prevent, if possible, a suspicion of what at the same
time is passing in the heart. We know that there are people who
seldom smile when they are alone, who therefore are glad to hide
themselves in a throng from the violence of their own reflections;
and who, while by their looks and their language they wish to
persuade us they are happy, would be glad to change their conditions
with a dog. But in defiance of all their efforts they continue to
think, forbode, and tremble. This we know, for it has been our own
state, and therefore we know how to commiserate it in others.--From
this state the Bible relieved us--when we were led to read it with
attention, we found ourselves described. We learned the causes of
our inquietude--we were directed to a method of relief--we tried,
and we were not disappointed.

  Deus nobis hæc otia fecit.

We are now certain that the gospel of Christ is the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believeth. It has reconciled us to
God, and to ourselves, to our duty and our situation. It is the balm
and cordial of the present life, and a sovereign antidote against
the fear of death.

Sed hactenus hæc. Some smaller pieces upon less important subjects
close the volume. Not one of them, I believe, was written with a
view to publication, but I was unwilling they should be omitted.

  JOHN NEWTON.

  Charles Square, Hoxton,
  February 18, 1782.




TABLE TALK.

    Si te fortè meæ gravis uret sarcina chartæ,
    Abjicito.

  HOR. LIB. I. EP. 13.


THE ARGUMENT.

     True and false glory--Kings made for man--Attributes of
     royalty in England--Quevedo's satire on kings--Kings objects
     of pity--Inquiry concerning the cause of Englishmen's
     scorn of arbitrary rule--Character of the Englishman and
     the Frenchman--Charms of freedom--Freedom sometimes needs
     the restraint of discipline--Reference to the riots in
     London--Tribute to Lord Chatham--Political state of England--The
     vices that debase her portend her downfall--Political events
     the instruments of Providence--The poet disclaims prophetic
     inspiration--The choice of a mean subject denotes a weak
     mind--Reference to Homer, Virgil, and Milton--Progress of
     poesy--The poet laments that religion is not more frequently
     united with poetry.


    _A._ You told me, I remember, glory, built
    On selfish principles, is shame and guilt:
    The deeds, that men admire as half divine,
    Stark naught, because corrupt in their design.
    Strange doctrine this! that without scruple tears
    The laurel that the very lightning spares;
    Brings down the warrior's trophy to the dust,
    And eats into his bloody sword like rust.

      _B._ I grant that, men continuing what they are,
    Fierce, avaricious, proud, there must be war,
    And never meant the rule should be applied
    To him that fights with justice on his side.
      Let laurels drench'd in pure Parnassian dews
    Reward his memory, dear to every muse,
    Who, with a courage of unshaken root,
    In honour's field advancing his firm foot,
    Plants it upon the line that Justice draws,
    And will prevail or perish in her cause.
    'Tis to the virtues of such men man owes
    His portion in the good that Heaven bestows.
    And, when recording History displays
    Feats of renown, though wrought in ancient days,
    Tells of a few stout hearts, that fought and died,
    Where duty placed them, at their country's side;
    The man that is not moved with what he reads,
    That takes not fire at their heroic deeds,
    Unworthy of the blessings of the brave,
    Is base in kind, and born to be a slave.
      But let eternal infamy pursue
    The wretch to nought but his ambition true,
    Who, for the sake of filling with one blast
    The post-horns of all Europe, lays her waste.
    Think yourself stationed on a towering rock,
    To see a people scattered like a flock,
    Some royal mastiff panting at their heels,
    With all the savage thirst a tiger feels;
    Then view him self-proclaim'd in a gazette
    Chief monster that has plagued the nations yet.
    The globe and sceptre in such hands misplaced,
    Those ensigns of dominion, how disgraced!
    The glass, that bids man mark the fleeting hour,
    And Death's own scythe, would better speak his power;
    Then grace the bony phantom in their stead
    With the king's shoulder-knot and gay cockade;
    Clothe the twin brethren in each other's dress,
    The same their occupation and success.

      _A._ 'Tis your belief the world was made for man;
    Kings do but reason on the self-same plan:
    Maintaining yours, you cannot theirs condemn,
    Who think, or seem to think, man made for them.

      _B._ Seldom, alas! the power of logic reigns
    With much sufficiency in royal brains;
    Such reasoning falls like an inverted cone,
    Wanting its proper base to stand upon.
    Man made for kings! those optics are but dim
    That tell you so--say, rather, they for him.
    That were indeed a king-ennobling thought,
    Could they, or would they, reason as they ought.
    The diadem, with mighty projects lined,
    To catch renown by ruining mankind,
    Is worth, with all its gold and glittering store,
    Just what the toy will sell for, and no more.
      Oh! bright occasions of dispensing good,
    How seldom used, how little understood!
    To pour in Virtue's lap her just reward;
    Keep Vice restrain'd behind a double guard;
    To quell the faction that affronts the throne
    By silent magnanimity alone;
    To nurse with tender care the thriving arts;
    Watch every beam Philosophy imparts;
    To give religion her unbridled scope,
    Nor judge by statute a believer's hope;
    With close fidelity and love unfeign'd
    To keep the matrimonial bond unstain'd;
    Covetous only of a virtuous praise;
    His life a lesson to the land he sways;
    To touch the sword with conscientious awe,
    Nor draw it but when duty bids him draw;
    To sheath it in the peace-restoring close
    With joy beyond what victory bestows--
    Blest country, where these kingly glories shine!
    Blest England, if this happiness be thine!

      _A._ Guard what you say: the patriotic tribe
    Will sneer, and charge you with a bribe.--_B._ A bribe?
    The worth of his three kingdoms I defy,
    To lure me to the baseness of a lie;
    And, of all lies, (be that one poet's boast,)
    The lie that flatters I abhor the most.
    Those arts be theirs who hate his gentle reign,
    But he that loves him has no need to feign.

      _A._ Your smooth eulogium, to one crown address'd,
    Seems to imply a censure on the rest.

      _B._ Quevedo, as he tells his sober tale,
    Ask'd, when in hell, to see the royal jail;
    Approv'd their method in all other things;
    But where, good sir, do you confine your kings?
    There--said his guide--the group is in full view.
    Indeed!--replied the don--there are but few.
    His black interpreter the charge disdain'd--
    Few, fellow?--there are all that ever reign'd.
    Wit, undistinguishing, is apt to strike
    The guilty and not guilty both alike:
    I grant the sarcasm is too severe,
    And we can readily refute it here;
    While Alfred's name, the father of his age,
    And the Sixth Edward's grace the historic page.

     _A._ Kings then at last have but the lot of all:
    By their own conduct they must stand or fall.

      _B._ True. While they live, the courtly laureate pays
    His quitrent ode, his peppercorn of praise,
    And many a dunce, whose fingers itch to write,
    Adds, as he can, his tributary mite:
    A subject's faults a subject may proclaim,
    A monarch's errors are forbidden game!
    Thus, free from censure, overawed by fear,
    And prais'd for virtues that they scorn to wear,
    The fleeting forms of majesty engage
    Respect, while stalking o'er life's narrow stage:
    Then leave their crimes for history to scan,
    And ask, with busy scorn, Was this the man?
      I pity kings, whom worship waits upon,
    Obsequious from the cradle to the throne;
    Before whose infant eyes the flatterer bows,
    And binds a wreath about their baby brows:
    Whom education stiffens into state,
    And death awakens from that dream too late.
    Oh! if servility with supple knees,
    Whose trade it is to smile, to crouch, to please;
    If smooth dissimulation, skill'd to grace
    A devil's purpose with an angel's face;
    If smiling peeresses and simpering peers,
    Encompassing his throne a few short years;
    If the gilt carriage and the pamper'd steed,
    That wants no driving, and disdains the lead:
    If guards, mechanically form'd in ranks,
    Playing, at beat of drum, their martial pranks,
    Shouldering and standing as if stuck to stone,
    While condescending majesty looks on--
    If monarchy consist in such base things,
    Sighing, I say again, I pity kings!
      To be suspected, thwarted, and withstood,
    E'en when he labours for his country's good;
    To see a band call'd patriot for no cause,
    But that they catch at popular applause,
    Careless of all the anxiety he feels,
    Hook disappointment on the public wheels;
    With all their flippant fluency of tongue,
    Most confident, when palpably most wrong--
    If this be kingly, then farewell for me
    All kingship, and may I be poor and free!
      To be the Table Talk of clubs up stairs,
    To which the unwash'd artificer repairs,
    To indulge his genius after long fatigue,
    By diving into cabinet intrigue;
    (For what kings deem a toil, as well they may,
    To him is relaxation, and mere play:)
    To win no praise when well wrought plans prevail,
    But to be rudely censur'd when they fail;
    To doubt the love his favourites may pretend,
    And in reality to find no friend;
    If he indulge a cultivated taste,
    His galleries with the works of art well graced,
    To hear it call'd extravagance and waste;
    If these attendants, and if such as these,
    Must follow royalty, then welcome ease;
    However humble and confined the sphere,
    Happy the state that has not these to fear!

      _A._ Thus men, whose thoughts contemplative have dwelt
    On situations that they never felt,
    Start up sagacious, cover'd with the dust
    Of dreaming study and pedantic rust,
    And prate and preach about what others prove,
    As if the world and they were hand and glove.
    Leave kingly backs to cope with kingly cares;
    They have their weight to carry, subjects theirs;
    Poets, of all men, ever least regret
    Increasing taxes and the nation's debt.
    Could you contrive the payment, and rehearse
    The mighty plan, oracular, in verse,
    No bard, howe'er majestic, old or new,
    Should claim my fix'd attention more than you.

      _B._ Not Brindley nor Bridgewater would essay
    To turn the course of Helicon that way:
    Nor would the Nine consent the sacred tide
    Should purl amidst the traffic of Cheapside,
    Or tinkle in 'Change Alley, to amuse
    The leathern ears of stockjobbers and Jews.

     _A._ Vouchsafe, at least, to pitch the key of rhyme,
    To themes more pertinent, if less sublime.
    When ministers and ministerial arts;
    Patriots, who love good places at their hearts;
    When admirals, extoll'd for standing still,
    Or doing nothing with a deal of skill;
    Generals, who will not conquer when they may,
    Firm friends to peace, to pleasure, and good pay;
    When Freedom, wounded almost to despair,
    Though discontent alone can find out where--
    When themes like these employ the poet's tongue,
    I hear as mute as if a syren sung.
    Or tell me, if you can, what power maintains
    A Briton's scorn of arbitrary chains?
    That were a theme might animate the dead,
    And move the lips of poets cast in lead.

      _B._ The cause, though worth the search, may yet elude
    Conjecture and remark, however shrewd.
    They take, perhaps, a well directed aim,
    Who seek it in his climate and his frame.
    Liberal in all things else, yet Nature here
    With stern severity deals out the year.
    Winter invades the spring, and often pours
    A chilling flood on summer's drooping flowers;
    Unwelcome vapours quench autumnal beams,
    Ungenial blasts attending curl the streams:
    The peasants urge their harvest, ply the fork
    With double toil, and shiver at their work;
    Thus with a rigour, for his good design'd,
    She rears her favourite man of all mankind,
    His form robust, and of elastic tone,
    Proportion'd well, half muscle and half bone,
    Supplies with warm activity and force
    A mind well lodged, and masculine of course.
    Hence Liberty, sweet Liberty inspires
    And keeps alive his fierce but noble fires.
    Patient of constitutional control,
    He bears it with meek manliness of soul;
    But, if authority grow wanton, woe
    To him that treads upon his free-born toe;
    One step beyond the boundary of the laws
    Fires him at once in Freedom's glorious cause.
    Thus proud Prerogative, not much rever'd,
    Is seldom felt, though sometimes seen and heard;
    And in his cage, like parrot fine and gay,
    Is kept to strut, look big, and talk away.
      Born in a climate softer far than ours,
    Not form'd like us, with such Herculean powers,
    The Frenchman, easy, debonair, and brisk,
    Give him his lass, his fiddle, and his frisk,
    Is always happy, reign whoever may,
    And laughs the sense of misery far away:
    He drinks his simple beverage with a gust;
    And, feasting on an onion and a crust,
    We never feel the alacrity and joy
    With which he shouts and carols, Vive le Roi!
    Filled with as much true merriment and glee
    As if he heard his king say--Slave, be free.
      Thus happiness depends, as Nature shows,
    Less on exterior things than most suppose.
    Vigilant over all that he has made,
    Kind Providence attends with gracious aid;
    Bids equity throughout his works prevail,
    And weighs the nations in an even scale;
    He can encourage slavery to a smile,
    And fill with discontent a British isle.

      _A._ Freeman and slave then, if the case be such,
    Stand on a level; and you prove too much:
    If all men indiscriminately share
    His fostering power, and tutelary care,
    As well be yoked by Despotism's hand,
    As dwell at large in Britain's charter'd land.

      _B._ No. Freedom has a thousand charms to show,
    That slaves, howe'er contented, never know.
    The mind attains beneath her happy reign
    The growth that Nature meant she should attain;
    The varied fields of science, ever new,
    Opening and wider opening on her view,
    She ventures onward with a prosperous force,
    While no base fear impedes her in her course:
    Religion, richest favour of the skies,
    Stands most reveal'd before the freeman's eyes;
    No shades of superstition blot the day,
    Liberty chases all that gloom away.
    The soul, emancipated, unoppress'd,
    Free to prove all things and hold fast the best,
    Learns much; and to a thousand listening minds
    Communicates with joy the good she finds;
    Courage in arms, and ever prompt to show
    His manly forehead to the fiercest foe;
    Glorious in war, but for the sake of peace,
    His spirits rising as his toils increase,
    Guards well what arts and industry have won,
    And Freedom claims him for her firstborn son.
    Slaves fight for what were better cast away--
    The chain that binds them, and a tyrant's sway,
    But they that fight for freedom undertake
    The noblest cause mankind can have at stake:
    Religion, virtue, truth, whate'er we call
    A blessing--freedom is the pledge of all.
    O Liberty! the prisoner's pleasing dream,
    The poet's muse, his passion, and his theme;
    Genius is thine, and thou art Fancy's nurse;
    Lost without thee the ennobling powers of verse;
    Heroic song from thy free touch acquires
    Its clearest tone, the rapture it inspires.
    Place me where Winter breathes his keenest air,
    And I will sing, if Liberty be there;
    And I will sing at Liberty's dear feet,
    In Afric's torrid clime, or India's fiercest heat.

      _A._ Sing where you please; in such a cause I grant
    An English poet's privilege to rant;
    But is not Freedom--at least, is not ours
    Too apt to play the wanton with her powers,
    Grow freakish, and, o'erleaping every mound,
    Spread anarchy and terror all around?

      _B._ Agreed. But would you sell or slay your horse
    For bounding and curveting in his course?
    Or if, when ridden with a careless rein,
    He break away, and seek the distant plain?
    No. His high mettle, under good control,
    Gives him Olympic speed, and shoots him to the goal.
      Let Discipline employ her wholesome arts;
    Let magistrates alert perform their parts,
    Not skulk or put on a prudential mask,
    As if their duty were a desperate task;
    Let active laws apply the needful curb,
    To guard the peace that riot would disturb;
    And Liberty, preserved from wild excess,
    Shall raise no feuds for armies to suppress.
    When Tumult lately burst his prison door,
    And set plebeian thousands in a roar;
    When he usurp'd authority's just place,
    And dared to look his master in the face;
    When the rude rabble's watchword was--Destroy,
    And blazing London seem'd a second Troy;
    Liberty blush'd, and hung her drooping head,
    Beheld their progress with the deepest dread;
    Blush'd that effects like these she should produce,
    Worse than the deeds of galley-slaves broke loose.
    She loses in such storms her very name,
    And fierce licentiousness should bear the blame.
      Incomparable gem! thy worth untold;
    Cheap, though blood-bought, and thrown away when sold;
    May no foes ravish thee, and no false friend
    Betray thee, while professing to defend!
    Prize it, ye ministers; ye monarchs, spare;
    Ye patriots, guard it with a miser's care.

      _A._ Patriots, alas! the few that have been found,
    Where most they flourish, upon English ground,
    The country's need have scantily supplied,
    And the last left the scene when Chatham died.

      _B._ Not so--the virtue still adorns our age,
    Though the chief actor died upon the stage.
    In him Demosthenes was heard again;
    Liberty taught him her Athenian strain;
    She clothed him with authority and awe,
    Spoke from his lips, and in his looks gave law.
    His speech, his form, his action, full of grace,
    And all his country beaming in his face,
    He stood, as some inimitable hand
    Would strive to make a Paul or Tully stand.
    No sycophant or slave, that dared oppose
    Her sacred cause, but trembled when he rose;
    And every venal stickler for the yoke
    Felt himself crushed at the first word he spoke.
      Such men are raised to station and command,
    When Providence means mercy to a land.
    He speaks, and they appear; to him they owe
    Skill to direct, and strength to strike the blow;
    To manage with address, to seize with power
    The crisis of a dark decisive hour.
    So Gideon earned a victory not his own;
    Subserviency his praise, and that alone.
      Poor England! thou art a devoted deer,
    Beset with every ill but that of fear.
    The nations hunt; all mark thee for a prey;
    They swarm around thee, and thou stand'st at bay:
    Undaunted still, though wearied and perplex'd,
    Once Chatham saved thee; but who saves thee next?
    Alas! the tide of pleasure sweeps along
    All that should be the boast of British song.
    'Tis not the wreath that once adorn'd thy brow,
    The prize of happier times, will serve thee now.
    Our ancestry, a gallant Christian race,
    Patterns of every virtue, every grace,
    Confess'd a God; they kneel'd before they fought,
    And praised him in the victories he wrought.
    Now from the dust of ancient days bring forth
    Their sober zeal, integrity, and worth;
    Courage, ungraced by these, affronts the skies,
    Is but the fire without the sacrifice.
    The stream that feeds the wellspring of the heart
    Not more invigorates life's noblest part,
    Than virtue quickens with a warmth divine
    The powers that sin has brought to a decline.

      _A._ The inestimable estimate of Brown
    Rose like a paper-kite, and charm'd the town;
    But measures, plann'd and executed well,
    Shifted the wind that raised it, and it fell.
    He trod the very selfsame ground you tread,
    And victory refuted all he said.

      _B._ And yet his judgment was not framed amiss;
    Its error, if it err'd, was merely this--
    He thought the dying hour already come,
    And a complete recovery struck him dumb.
    But that effeminacy, folly, lust,
    Enervate and enfeeble, and needs must;
    And that a nation shamefully debased
    Will be despised and trampled on at last,
    Unless sweet penitence her powers renew,
    Is truth, if history itself be true.
    There is a time, and justice marks the date,
    For long forbearing clemency to wait;
    That hour elapsed, the incurable revolt
    Is punish'd, and down comes the thunderbolt.
    If Mercy then put by the threatening blow,
    Must she perform the same kind office now?
    May she! and, if offended Heaven be still
    Accessible, and prayer prevail, she will.
    'Tis not, however, insolence and noise,
    The tempest of tumultuary joys,
    Nor is it yet despondence and dismay
    Will win her visits or engage her stay;
    Prayer only, and the penitential tear,
    Can call her smiling down, and fix her here.
      But when a country (one that I could name)
    In prostitution sinks the sense of shame;
    When infamous venality, grown bold,
    Writes on his bosom, to be let or sold;
    When perjury, that Heaven-defying vice,
    Sells oaths by tale, and at the lowest price,
    Stamps God's own name upon a lie just made,
    To turn a penny in the way of trade;
    When avarice starves (and never hides his face)
    Two or three millions of the human race,
    And not a tongue inquires how, where, or when,
    Though conscience will have twinges now and then:
    When profanation of the sacred cause
    In all its parts, times, ministry, and laws,
    Bespeaks a land, once Christian, fallen and lost,
    In all that wars against that title most;
    What follows next let cities of great name,
    And regions long since desolate proclaim.
    Nineveh, Babylon, and ancient Rome
    Speak to the present times and times to come;
    They cry aloud in every careless ear,
    Stop, while ye may; suspend your mad career;
    O learn, from our example and our fate,
    Learn wisdom and repentance ere too late!
      Not only Vice disposes and prepares
    The mind that slumbers sweetly in her snares,
    To stoop to tyranny's usurped command,
    And bend her polish'd neck beneath his hand
    (A dire effect, by one of Nature's laws
    Unchangeably connected with its cause);
    But Providence himself will intervene,
    To throw his dark displeasure o'er the scene.
    All are his instruments; each form of war,
    What burns at home, or threatens from afar,
    Nature in arms, her elements at strife,
    The storms that overset the joys of life,
    Are but his rods to scourge a guilty land,
    And waste it at the bidding of his hand.
    He gives the word, and mutiny soon roars
    In all her gates, and shakes her distant shores;
    The standards of all nations are unfurl'd;
    She has one foe, and that one foe the world.
    And if he doom that people with a frown,
    And mark them with a seal of wrath press'd down,
    Obduracy takes place; callous and tough,
    The reprobated race grows judgment-proof:
    Earth shakes beneath them, and Heaven roars above;
    But nothing scares them from the course they love.
    To the lascivious pipe and wanton song,
    That charm down fear, they frolic it along,
    With mad rapidity and unconcern,
    Down to the gulf from which is no return.
    They trust in navies, and their navies fail--
    God's curse can cast away ten thousand sail!
    They trust in armies, and their courage dies;
    In wisdom, wealth, in fortune, and in lies;
    But all they trust in withers, as it must,
    When He commands in whom they place no trust.
    Vengeance at last pours down upon their coast
    A long despised, but now victorious, host;
    Tyranny sends the chain that must abridge
    The noble sweep of all their privilege;
    Gives liberty the last, the mortal, shock;
    Slips the slave's collar on, and snaps the lock.

      _A._ Such lofty strains embellish what you teach,
    Mean you to prophesy, or but to preach?

      _B._ I know the mind that feels indeed the fire
    The Muse imparts, and can command the lyre,
    Acts with a force, and kindles with a zeal,
    Whatever the theme, that others never feel.
    If human woes her soft attention claim,
    A tender sympathy pervades the frame,
    She pours a sensibility divine
    Along the nerve of every feeling line.
    But if a deed not tamely to be borne
    Fire indignation and a sense of scorn,
    The strings are swept with such a power, so loud,
    The storm of music shakes the astonish'd crowd.
    So, when remote futurity is brought
    Before the keen inquiry of her thought,
    A terrible sagacity informs
    The poet's heart; he looks to distant storms;
    He hears the thunder ere the tempest lowers!
    And, arm'd with strength surpassing human powers,
    Seizes events as yet unknown to man,
    And darts his soul into the dawning plan.
    Hence, in a Roman mouth, the graceful name
    Of prophet and of poet was the same;
    Hence British poets too the priesthood shared,
    And every hallowed druid was a bard.
    But no prophetic fires to me belong;
    I play with syllables, and sport in song.

      _A._ At Westminster, where little poets strive
    To set a distich upon six and five,
    Where Discipline helps opening buds of sense
    And makes his pupils proud with silver pence,
    I was a poet too: but modern taste
    Is so refined, and delicate, and chaste,
    That verse, whatever fire the fancy warms,
    Without a creamy smoothness has no charms.
    Thus all success depending on an ear,
    And thinking I might purchase it too dear,
    If sentiment were sacrificed to sound,
    And truth cut short to make a period round,
    I judged a man of sense could scarce do worse
    Than caper in the morris-dance of verse.

      _B._ Thus reputation is a spur to wit,
    And some wits flag through fear of losing it,
    Give me the line that ploughs its stately course,
    Like a proud swan, conquering the stream by force;
    That, like some cottage beauty, strikes the heart,
    Quite unindebted to the tricks of art.
    When labour and when dullness, club in hand,
    Like the two figures at St. Dunstan's stand,
    Beating alternately, in measured time,
    The clockwork tintinnabulum of rhyme,
    Exact and regular the sounds will be;
    But such mere quarter-strokes are not for me.
      From him who rears a poem lank and long,
    To him who strains his all into a song;
    Perhaps some bonny Caledonian air,
    All birks and braes, though he was never there;
    Or, having whelp'd a prologue with great pains,
    Feels himself spent, and fumbles for his brains;
    A prologue interdash'd with many a stroke--
    An art contriv'd to advertise a joke,
    So that the jest is clearly to be seen,
    Not in the words--but in the gap between;
    Manner is all in all, whate'er is writ,
    The substitute for genius, sense, and wit.
      To dally much with subjects mean and low
    Proves that the mind is weak, or makes it so.
    Neglected talents rust into decay,
    And every effort ends in pushpin play
    The man that means success should soar above
    A soldier's feather, or a lady's glove;
    Else, summoning the muse to such a theme,
    The fruit of all her labour is whipp'd cream.
    As if an eagle flew aloft, and then--
    Stoop'd from its highest pitch to pounce a wren.
    As if the poet, purposing to wed,
    Should carve himself a wife in gingerbread.
      Ages elaps'd ere Homer's lamp appear'd,
    And ages ere the Mantuan swan was heard;
    To carry nature lengths unknown before,
    To give a Milton birth, ask'd ages more.
    Thus genius rose and set at order'd times,
    And shot a day-spring into distant climes,
    Ennobling every region that he chose;
    He sunk in Greece, in Italy he rose;
    And, tedious years of Gothic darkness pass'd,
    Emerged all splendour in our isle at last.
    Thus lovely halcyons dive into the main,
    Then show far off their shining plumes again.

      _A._ Is genius only found in epic lays?
    Prove this, and forfeit all pretence to praise.
    Make their heroic powers your own at once,
    Or candidly confess yourself a dunce.

      _B._ These were the chief; each interval of night
    Was graced with many an undulating light.
    In less illustrious bards his beauty shone
    A meteor, or a star; in these, the sun.
      The nightingale may claim the topmost bough,
    While the poor grasshopper must chirp below.
    Like him unnoticed, I, and such as I,
    Spread little wings, and rather skip than fly;
    Perch'd on the meagre produce of the land,
    An ell or two of prospect we command;
    But never peep beyond the thorny bound,
    Or oaken fence, that hems the paddock round.
      In Eden, ere yet innocence of heart
    Had faded, poetry was not an art;
    Language, above all teaching, or if taught,
    Only by gratitude and glowing thought,
    Elegant as simplicity, and warm
    As ecstacy, unmanacled by form,
    Not prompted, as in our degenerate days,
    By low ambition and the thirst of praise,
    Was natural as is the flowing stream,
    And yet magnificent--a God the theme!
    That theme on earth exhausted, though above
    'Tis found as everlasting as his love,
    Man lavish'd all his thoughts on human things--
    The feats of heroes and the wrath of kings;
    But still, while virtue kindled his delight,
    The song was moral, and so far was right.
    'Twas thus till luxury seduced the mind
    To joys less innocent, as less refined;
    Then Genius danced a bacchanal; he crown'd
    The brimming goblet, seized the thyrsus, bound
    His brows with ivy, rush'd into the field
    Of wild imagination, and there reel'd,
    The victim of his own lascivious fires,
    And, dizzy with delight, profaned the sacred wires:
    Anacreon, Horace, play'd in Greece and Rome
    This bedlam part; and others nearer home.
    When Cromwell fought for power, and while he reign'd
    The proud protector of the power he gain'd,
    Religion, harsh, intolerant, austere,
    Parent of manners like herself severe,
    Drew a rough copy of the Christian face,
    Without the smile, the sweetness, or the grace;
    The dark and sullen humour of the time
    Judged every effort of the muse a crime;
    Verse, in the finest mould of fancy cast,
    Was lumber in an age so void of taste.
    But when the second Charles assumed the sway,
    And arts revived beneath a softer day,
    Then, like a bow long forced into a curve,
    The mind, released from too constrain'd a nerve,
    Flew to its first position with a spring,
    That made the vaulted roofs of pleasure ring.
    His court, the dissolute and hateful school
    Of wantonness, where vice was taught by rule,
    Swarm'd with a scribbling herd, as deep inlaid
    With brutal lust as ever Circe made.
    From these a long succession, in the rage
    Of rank obscenity, debauch'd their age:
    Nor ceased till, ever anxious to redress
    The abuses of her sacred charge, the press,
    The Muse instructed a well nurtured train
    Of abler votaries to cleanse the stain,
    And claim the palm for purity of song,
    That lewdness had usurp'd and worn so long.
    Then decent pleasantry and sterling sense,
    That neither gave nor would endure offence,
    Whipp'd out of sight, with satire just and keen,
    The puppy pack that had defiled the scene.
      In front of these came Addison. In him
    Humour in holiday and sightly trim,
    Sublimity and Attic taste combined,
    To polish, furnish, and delight the mind.
    Then Pope, as harmony itself exact,
    In verse well disciplined, complete, compact,
    Gave virtue and morality a grace,
    That, quite eclipsing pleasure's painted face,
    Levied a tax of wonder and applause,
    E'en on the fools that trampled on their laws.
    But he (his musical finesse was such,
    So nice his ear, so delicate his touch)
    Made poetry a mere mechanic art;
    And every warbler has his tune by heart.
    Nature imparting her satiric gift,
    Her serious mirth, to Arbuthnot and Swift,
    With droll sobriety they raised a smile
    At folly's cost, themselves unmov'd the while
    That constellation set, the world in vain
    Must hope to look upon their like again.

      _A._ Are we then left?--_B._ Not wholly in the dark;
    Wit now and then, struck smartly, shows a spark,
    Sufficient to redeem the modern race
    From total night and absolute disgrace.
    While servile trick and imitative knack
    Confine the million in the beaten track,
    Perhaps some courser, who disdains the road,
    Snuffs up the wind, and flings himself abroad.
      Contemporaries all surpass'd, see one;
    Short his career indeed, but ably run;
    Churchill, himself unconscious of his powers,
    In penury consumed his idle hours;
    And, like a scatter'd seed at random sown,
    Was left to spring by vigour of his own.
    Lifted at length, by dignity of thought
    And dint of genius, to an affluent lot,
    He laid his head in luxury's soft lap,
    And took, too often, there his easy nap.
    If brighter beams than all he threw not forth,
    'Twas negligence in him, not want of worth.
    Surly and slovenly, and bold and coarse,
    Too proud for art, and trusting in mere force,
    Spendthrift alike of money and of wit,
    Always at speed, and never drawing bit,
    He struck the lyre in such a careless mood,
    And so disdain'd the rules he understood,
    The laurel seem'd to wait on his command;
    He snatch'd it rudely from the muses' hand.
    Nature, exerting an unwearied power,
    Forms, opens, and gives scent to every flower;
    Spreads the fresh verdure of the field, and leads
    The dancing Naiads through the dewy meads;
    She fills profuse ten thousand little throats
    With music modulating all their notes;
    And charms the woodland scenes and wilds unknown,
    With artless airs and concerts of her own:
    But seldom (as if fearful of expense)
    Vouchsafes to man a poet's just pretence--
    Fervency, freedom, fluency of thought,
    Harmony, strength, words exquisitely sought;
    Fancy, that from the bow that spans the sky
    Brings colours, dipp'd in heaven, that never die;
    A soul exalted above earth, a mind
    Skill'd in the characters that form mankind;
    And, as the sun, in rising beauty dress'd,
    Looks to the westward from the dappled east,
    And marks, whatever clouds may interpose,
    Ere yet his race begins, its glorious close;
    An eye like his to catch the distant goal;
    Or, ere the wheels of verse begin to roll,
    Like his to shed illuminating rays
    On every scene and subject it surveys:
    Thus graced, the man asserts a poet's name,
    And the world cheerfully admits the claim.
    Pity Religion has so seldom found
    A skilful guide into poetic ground!
    The flowers would spring where'er she deign'd to stray,
    And every muse attend her in her way.
    Virtue indeed meets many a rhyming friend,
    And many a compliment politely penn'd;
    But, unattired in that becoming vest
    Religion weaves for her, and half undress'd,
    Stands in the desert shivering and forlorn,
    A wintry figure, like a wither'd thorn.
    The shelves are full, all other themes are sped;
    Hackney'd and worn to the last flimsy thread,
    Satire has long since done his best; and curst
    And loathsome ribaldry has done his worst;
    Fancy has sported all her powers away
    In tales, in trifles, and in children's play;
    And 'tis the sad complaint, and almost true,
    Whate'er we write, we bring forth nothing new.
    'Twere new indeed to see a bard all fire,
    Touch'd with a coal from heaven, assume the lyre.
    And tell the world, still kindling as he sung,
    With more than mortal music on his tongue,
    That He, who died below, and reigns above,
    Inspires the song, and that his name is Love.
      For, after all, if merely to beguile,
    By flowing numbers and a flowery style,
    The tedium that the lazy rich endure,
    Which now and then sweet poetry may cure;
    Or, if to see the name of idol self,
    Stamp'd on the well-bound quarto, grace the shelf,
    To float a bubble on the breath of fame,
    Prompt his endeavour and engage his aim,
    Debased to servile purposes of pride,
    How are the powers of genius misapplied!
    The gift, whose office is the Giver's praise,
    To trace him in his word, his works, his ways!
    Then spread the rich discovery, and invite
    Mankind to share in the divine delight:
    Distorted from its use and just design,
    To make the pitiful possessor shine,
    To purchase at the fool-frequented fair
    Of vanity a wreath for self to wear,
    Is profanation of the basest kind--
    Proof of a trifling and a worthless mind.
      _A._ Hail, Sternhold, then! and, Hopkins, hail!--_B._ Amen.
    If flattery, folly, lust, employ the pen;
    If acrimony, slander, and abuse,
    Give it a charge to blacken and traduce;
    Though Butler's wit, Pope's numbers, Prior's ease,
    With all that fancy can invent to please,
    Adorn the polish'd periods as they fall,
    One madrigal of theirs is worth them all.

      _A._ 'Twould thin the ranks of the poetic tribe,
    To dash the pen through all that you proscribe

      _B._ No matter--we could shift when they were not;
    And should, no doubt, if they were all forgot.




THE PROGRESS OF ERROR.

  Si quid loquar audiendum. HOR. lib. iv. Od. 2.


THE ARGUMENT.

     Origin of error--Man endowed with freedom of will--Motives
     for action--Attractions of music--The chase--Those amusements
     not suited to the Clergy--Case of Occiduus--Force of
     example--Due observance of the Sabbath--Cards and dancing--The
     drunkard and the coxcomb--Folly and innocence--Hurtful
     pleasures--Virtuous pleasures--Effects of the inordinate
     indulgence of pleasure--Dangerous tendency of many works of
     imagination--Apostrophe to Lord Chesterfield--Our earliest
     years the most important--Fashionable education--The grand
     tour--Accomplishments have taken the place of virtue--Qualities
     requisite in a critic of the Bible--Power of the
     press--Solicitude of enthusiasm to make proselytes--Fondness
     of authors for their literary progeny--The blunderer impatient
     of contradiction--Moral faults and errors of the understanding
     reciprocally produce one another--The cup of pleasure to be
     tasted with caution--Force of habit--The wanderer from the right
     path directed to the Cross.


    Sing, muse (if such a theme, so dark, so long,
    May find a muse to grace it with a song),
    By what unseen and unsuspected arts
    The serpent Error twines round human hearts;
    Tell where she lurks, beneath what flowery shades,
    That not a glimpse of genuine light pervades,
    The poisonous, black, insinuating worm
    Successfully conceals her loathsome form.
    Take, if ye can, ye careless and supine,
    Counsel and caution from a voice like mine!
    Truths, that the theorist could never reach,
    And observation taught me, I would teach.
      Not all, whose eloquence the fancy fills,
    Musical as the chime of tinkling rills,
    Weak to perform, though mighty to pretend,
    Can trace her mazy windings to their end;
    Discern the fraud beneath the specious lure,
    Prevent the danger, or prescribe the cure.
    The clear harangue, and cold as it is clear,
    Falls soporific on the listless ear;
    Like quicksilver, the rhetoric they display
    Shines as it runs, but, grasp'd at, slips away.
      Placed for his trial on this bustling stage,
    From thoughtless youth to ruminating age,
    Free in his will to choose or to refuse,
    Man may improve the crisis, or abuse;
    Else, on the fatalist's unrighteous plan,
    Say, to what bar amenable were man?
    With nought in charge he could betray no trust:
    And, if he fell, would fall because he must;
    If love reward him, or if vengeance strike,
    His recompence in both unjust alike.
    Divine authority within his breast
    Brings every thought, word, action, to the test;
    Warns him or prompts, approves him or restrains,
    As reason, or as passion, takes the reins.
    Heaven from above, and conscience from within,
    Cries in his startled ear--Abstain from sin!
    The world around solicits his desire,
    And kindles in his soul a treacherous fire;
    While, all his purposes and steps to guard,
    Peace follows virtue as its sure reward;
    And pleasure brings as surely in her train
    Remorse, and sorrow, and vindictive pain.
      Man, thus endued with an elective voice,
    Must be supplied with objects of his choice,
    Where'er he turns, enjoyment and delight,
    Or present or in prospect, meet his sight:
    Those open on the spot their honeyed store;
    These call him loudly to pursuit of more.
    His unexhausted mine the sordid vice
    Avarice shows, and virtue is the price.
    Here various motives his ambition raise--
    Power, pomp, and splendour, and the thirst of praise;
    There beauty wooes him with expanded arms;
    E'en bacchanalian madness has its charms.
      Nor these alone, whose pleasures less refined
    Might well alarm the most unguarded mind,
    Seek to supplant his inexperienced youth,
    Or lead him devious from the path of truth;
    Hourly allurements on his passions press,
    Safe in themselves, but dangerous in the excess.
      Hark! how it floats upon the dewy air!
    O what a dying, dying close was there!
    'Tis harmony, from yon sequester'd bower.
    Sweet harmony, that soothes the midnight hour!
    Long ere the charioteer of day had run
    His morning course the enchantment was begun;
    And he shall gild yon mountain's height again,
    Ere yet the pleasing toil becomes a pain.
      Is this the rugged path, the steep ascent,
    That virtue points to? Can a life thus spent
    Lead to the bliss she promises the wise,
    Detach the soul from earth, and speed her to the skies?
    Ye devotees to your adored employ,
    Enthusiasts, drunk with an unreal joy,
    Love makes the music of the blest above,
    Heaven's harmony is universal love;
    And earthly sounds, though sweet and well combined,
    And lenient as soft opiates to the mind,
    Leave vice and folly unsubdued behind.
    Grey dawn appears; the sportsman and his train
    Speckle the bosom of the distant plain;
    'Tis he, the Nimrod of the neighbouring lairs;
    Save that his scent is less acute than theirs,
    For persevering chase, and headlong leaps,
    True beagle as the stanchest hound he keeps.
    Charged with the folly of his life's mad scene,
    He takes offence, and wonders what you mean;
    The joy the danger and the toil o'erpays--
    'Tis exercise, and health, and length of days.
    Again impetuous to the field he flies;
    Leaps every fence but one, there falls and dies;
    Like a slain deer, the tumbrel brings him home,
    Unmiss'd but by his dogs and by his groom.
      Ye clergy, while your orbit is your place,
    Lights of the world and stars of human race;
    But, if eccentric ye forsake your sphere,
    Prodigies ominous and view'd with fear:
    The comet's baneful influence is a dream;
    Yours real, and pernicious in the extreme.
    What then! are appetites and lusts laid down
    With the same ease that man puts on his gown?
    Will avarice and concupiscence give place,
    Charm'd by the sounds--Your Reverence, or your Grace?
    No. But his own engagement binds him fast;
    Or, if it does not, brands him to the last
    What atheists call him--a designing knave,
    A mere church juggler, hypocrite and slave.
    Oh, laugh or mourn with me the rueful jest,
    A cassock'd huntsman and a fiddling priest!
    He from Italian songsters takes his cue:
    Set Paul to music, he shall quote him too.
    He takes the field. The master of the pack
    Cries--Well done, saint! and claps him on the back.
    Is this the path of sanctity? Is this
    To stand a waymark on the road to bliss?
    Himself a wanderer from the narrow way,
    His silly sheep, what wonder if they stray?
    Go, cast your orders at your bishop's feet,
    Send your dishonour'd gown to Monmouth-street!
    The sacred function in your hands is made--
    Sad sacrilege--no function, but a trade!
      Occiduus is a pastor of renown,
    When he has pray'd and preach'd the sabbath down,
    With wire and catgut he concludes the day,
    Quavering and semiquavering care away.
    The full concerto swells upon your ear;
    All elbows shake. Look in, and you would swear
    The Babylonian tyrant with a nod
    Had summon'd them to serve his golden god.
    So well that thought the employment seems to suit,
    Psaltery and sackbut, dulcimer and flute.
    O fie! 'tis evangelical and pure:
    Observe each face, how sober and demure!
    Ecstacy sets her stamp on every mien;
    Chins fallen, and not an eyeball to be seen.
    Still I insist, though music heretofore
    Has charm'd me much (not e'en Occiduus more),
    Love, joy, and peace make harmony more meet
    For sabbath evenings, and perhaps as sweet.
      Will not the sickliest sheep of every flock
    Resort to this example as a rock;
    There stand, and justify the foul abuse
    Of sabbath hours with plausible excuse;
    If apostolic gravity be free
    To play the fool on Sundays, why not we?
    If he the tinkling harpsichord regards
    As inoffensive, what offence in cards?
    Strike up the fiddles, let us all be gay!
    Laymen have leave to dance, if parsons play.
      O Italy!--Thy sabbaths will be soon
    Our sabbaths, closed with mummery and buffoon.
    Preaching and pranks will share the motley scene,
    Ours parcelled out, as thine have ever been,
    God's worship and the mountebank between.
    What says the prophet? Let that day be blest
    With holiness and consecrated rest.
    Pastime and business, both it should exclude,
    And bar the door the moment they intrude;
    Nobly distinguished above all the six
    By deeds in which the world must never mix.
    Hear him again. He calls it a delight,
    A day of luxury observed aright,
    When the glad soul is made Heaven's welcome guest,
    Sits banqueting, and God provides the feast.
    But triflers are engaged and cannot come;
    Their answer to the call is--Not at home.
      O the dear pleasures of the velvet plain,
    The painted tablets, dealt and dealt again!
    Cards, with what rapture, and the polish'd die,
    The yawning chasm of indolence supply!
    Then to the dance, and make the sober moon
    Witness of joys that shun the sight of noon.
    Blame, cynic, if you can, quadrille or ball,
    The snug close party, or the splendid hall,
    Where Night, down stooping from her ebon throne,
    Views constellations brighter than her own.
    'Tis innocent, and harmless, and refined,
    The balm of care, Elysium of the mind.
    Innocent! Oh, if venerable Time
    Slain at the foot of Pleasure be no crime,
    Then, with his silver beard and magic wand,
    Let Comus rise archbishop of the land;
    Let him your rubric and your feasts prescribe,
    Grand metropolitan of all the tribe.
      Of manners rough, and coarse athletic cast,
    The rank debauch suits Clodio's filthy taste.
    Rufillus, exquisitely form'd by rule,
    Not of the moral but the dancing school,
    Wonders at Clodio's follies, in a tone
    As tragical as others at his own.
    He cannot drink five bottles, bilk the score,
    Then kill a constable, and drink five more;
    But he can draw a pattern, make a tart,
    And has the ladies' etiquette by heart.
    Go, fool; and, arm in arm with Clodio, plead
    Your cause before a bar you little dread;
    But know, the law that bids the drunkard die
    Is far too just to pass the trifler by.
    Both baby-featured, and of infant size,
    View'd from a distance, and with heedless eyes,
    Folly and innocence are so alike,
    The difference, though essential, fails to strike.
    Yet Folly ever has a vacant stare,
    A simpering countenance, and a trifling air;
    But Innocence, sedate, serene, erect,
    Delights us, by engaging our respect.
    Man, Nature's guest by invitation sweet,
    Receives from her both appetite and treat;
    But, if he play the glutton and exceed,
    His benefactress blushes at the deed.
    For Nature, nice, as liberal to dispense,
    Made nothing but a brute the slave of sense.
    Daniel ate pulse by choice--example rare!
    Heaven bless'd the youth, and made him fresh and fair.
    Gorgonius sits, abdominous and wan,
    Like a fat squab upon a Chinese fan:
    He snuffs far off the anticipated joy;
    Turtle and venison all his thoughts employ;
    Prepares for meals as jockeys take a sweat,
    Oh, nauseous!--an emetic for a whet!
    Will Providence o'erlook the wasted good?
    Temperance were no virtue if he could.
      That pleasures, therefore, or what such we call,
    Are hurtful, is a truth confess'd by all.
    And some, that seem to threaten virtue less
    Still hurtful in the abuse, or by the excess.
      Is man then only for his torment placed
    The centre of delights he may not taste?
    Like fabled Tantalus, condemn'd to hear
    The precious stream still purling in his ear,
    Lip-deep in what he longs for, and yet curst
    With prohibition and perpetual thirst?
    No, wrangler--destitute of shame and sense,
    The precept, that enjoins him abstinence,
    Forbids him none but the licentious joy,
    Whose fruit, though fair, tempts only to destroy.
    Remorse, the fatal egg by Pleasure laid
    In every bosom where her nest is made,
    Hatch'd by the beams of truth, denies him rest,
    And proves a raging scorpion in his breast.
    No pleasure? Are domestic comforts dead?
    Are all the nameless sweets of friendship fled?
    Has time worn out, or fashion put to shame,
    Good sense, good health, good conscience, and good fame?
    All these belong to virtue, and all prove
    That virtue has a title to your love.
    Have you no touch of pity, that the poor
    Stand starved at your inhospitable door?
    Or if yourself, too scantily supplied,
    Need help, let honest industry provide.
    Earn, if you want; if you abound, impart:
    These both are pleasures to the feeling heart.
    No pleasure? Has some sickly eastern waste
    Sent us a wind to parch us at a blast?
    Can British Paradise no scenes afford
    To please her sated and indifferent lord?
    Are sweet philosophy's enjoyments run
    Quite to the lees? And has religion none?
    Brutes capable would tell you 'tis a lie,
    And judge you from the kennel and the stye.
    Delights like these, ye sensual and profane,
    Ye are bid, begg'd, besought, to entertain;
    Call'd to these crystal streams, do ye turn off
    Obscene to swill and swallow at a trough?
    Envy the beast, then, on whom Heaven bestows
    Your pleasures, with no curses at the close.
      Pleasure admitted in undue degree
    Enslaves the will, nor leaves the judgment free.
    'Tis not alone the grape's enticing juice
    Unnerves the moral powers, and mars their use;
    Ambition, avarice, and the lust of fame,
    And woman, lovely woman, does the same.
    The heart, surrender'd to the ruling power
    Of some ungovern'd passion every hour,
    Finds by degrees the truths that once bore sway,
    And all their deep impressions, wear away;
    So coin grows smooth, in traffic current pass'd,
    Till Cæsar's image is effaced at last.
      The breach, though small at first, soon opening wide,
    In rushes folly with a full-moon tide,
    Then welcome errors, of whatever size,
    To justify it by a thousand lies.
    As creeping ivy clings to wood or stone,
    And hides the ruin that it feeds upon;
    So sophistry cleaves close to and protects
    Sin's rotten trunk, concealing its defects.
    Mortals, whose pleasures are their only care,
    First wish to be imposed on, and then are.
    And lest the fulsome artifice should fail,
    Themselves will hide its coarseness with a veil.
    Not more industrious are the just and true
    To give to Virtue what is Virtue's due--
    The praise of wisdom, comeliness, and worth,
    And call her charms to public notice forth--
    Than Vice's mean and disingenuous race
    To hide the shocking features of her face.
    Her form with dress and lotion they repair;
    Then kiss their idol, and pronounce her fair.
      The sacred implement I now employ
    Might prove a mischief, or at best a toy;
    A trifle, if it move but to amuse;
    But, if to wrong the judgment and abuse,
    Worse than a poniard in the basest hand,
    It stabs at once the morals of a land.
      Ye writers of what none with safety reads,
    Footing it in the dance that Fancy leads;
    Ye novelists, who mar what ye would mend,
    Snivelling and drivelling folly without end;
    Whose corresponding misses fill the ream
    With sentimental frippery and dream,
    Caught in a delicate soft silken net
    By some lewd earl, or rake-hell baronet:
    Ye pimps, who, under virtue's fair pretence,
    Steal to the closet of young innocence,
    And teach her, inexperienced yet and green,
    To scribble as you scribbled at fifteen;
    Who, kindling a combustion of desire,
    With some cold moral think to quench the fire;
    Though all your engineering proves in vain
    The dribbling stream ne'er puts it out again:
    Oh that a verse had power, and could command
    Far, far away, these flesh-flies of the land,
    Who fasten without mercy on the fair,
    And suck, and leave a craving maggot there!
    Howe'er disguised the inflammatory tale,
    And cover'd with a fine-spun specious veil;
    Such writers, and such readers, owe the gust
    And relish of their pleasure all to lust.
      But the muse, eagle-pinion'd, has in view
    A quarry more important still than you;
    Down, down the wind she swims, and sails away,
    Now stoops upon it, and now grasps the prey.
      Petronius! all the muses weep for thee;
    But every tear shall scald thy memory:
    The graces too, while Virtue at their shrine
    Lay bleeding under that soft hand of thine,
    Felt each a mortal stab in her own breast,
    Abhorr'd the sacrifice, and cursed the priest.
    Thou polish'd and high-finish'd foe to truth,
    Graybeard corrupter of our listening youth,
    To purge and skim away the filth of vice,
    That so refined it might the more entice,
    Then pour it on the morals of thy son,
    To taint his heart, was worthy of thine own!
    Now, while the poison all high life pervades,
    Write, if thou canst, one letter from the shades,
    One, and one only, charged with deep regret,
    That thy worst part, thy principles, live yet;
    One sad epistle thence may cure mankind
    Of the plague spread by bundles left behind.
      'Tis granted, and no plainer truth appears,
    Our most important are our earliest years;
    The mind, impressible and soft, with ease
    Imbibes and copies what she hears and sees,
    And through life's labyrinth holds fast the clue
    That Education gives her, false or true.
    Plants raised with tenderness are seldom strong;
    Man's coltish disposition asks the thong;
    And without discipline the favourite child,
    Like a neglected forester, runs wild.
    But we, as if good qualities would grow
    Spontaneous, take but little pains to sow:
    We give some Latin and a smatch of Greek;
    Teach him to fence and figure twice a week;
    And having done, we think, the best we can,
    Praise his proficiency, and dub him man.
      From school to Cam or Isis, and thence home;
    And thence with all convenient speed to Rome,
    With reverend tutor, clad in habit lay,
    To tease for cash, and quarrel with all day;
    With memorandum book for every town,
    And every post, and where the chaise broke down;
    His stock, a few French phrases got by heart,
    With much to learn, but nothing to impart;
    The youth, obedient to his sire's commands,
    Sets off a wanderer into foreign lands.
    Surprised at all they meet, the gosling pair,
    With awkward gait, stretch'd neck, and silly stare,
    Discover huge cathedrals built with stone,
    And steeples towering high, much like our own;
    But show peculiar light by many a grin
    At popish practices observed within.
      Ere long some bowing, smirking, smart abbé
    Remarks two loiterers that have lost their way;
    And, being always primed with politesse
    For men of their appearance and address,
    With much compassion undertakes the task
    To tell them more than they have wit to ask;
    Points to inscriptions wheresoe'er they tread,
    Such as, when legible, were never read,
    But being canker'd now and half worn out,
    Craze antiquarian brains with endless doubt;
    Some headless hero, or some Cæsar shows--
    Defective only in his Roman nose;
    Exhibits elevations, drawings, plans,
    Models of Herculanum pots and pans;
    And sells them medals, which, if neither rare
    Nor ancient, will be so, preserved with care.
      Strange the recital! from whatever cause
    His great improvement and new lights he draws,
    The squire, once bashful, is shamefaced no more,
    But teems with powers he never felt before;
    Whether increased momentum, and the force
    With which from clime to clime he sped his course,
    (As axles sometimes kindle as they go,)
    Chafed him, and brought dull nature to a glow;
    Or whether clearer skies and softer air,
    That make Italian flowers so sweet and fair,
    Freshening his lazy spirits as he ran,
    Unfolded genially, and spread the man;
    Returning, he proclaims, by many a grace,
    By shrugs and strange contortions of his face,
    How much a dunce, that has been sent to roam,
    Excels a dunce that has been kept at home.
      Accomplishments have taken virtue's place,
    And wisdom falls before exterior grace:
    We slight the precious kernel of the stone,
    And toil to polish its rough coat alone.
    A just deportment, manners graced with ease,
    Elegant phrase, and figure form'd to please,
    Are qualities that seem to comprehend
    Whatever parents, guardians, schools, intend;
    Hence an unfurnish'd and a listless mind,
    Though busy, trifling; empty, though refined;
    Hence all that interferes, and dares to clash
    With indolence and luxury, is trash;
    While learning, once the man's exclusive pride,
    Seems verging fast towards the female side.
    Learning itself, received into a mind
    By nature weak, or viciously inclined,
    Serves but to lead philosophers astray,
    Where children would with ease discern the way.
    And of all arts sagacious dupes invent,
    To cheat themselves and gain the world's assent,
    The worst is--Scripture warp'd from its intent.
      The carriage bowls along, and all are pleased
    If Tom be sober, and the wheels well greased;
    But if the rogue be gone a cup too far,
    Left out his linchpin, or forgot his tar,
    It suffers interruption and delay,
    And meets with hindrance in the smoothest way.
    When some hypothesis absurd and vain
    Has fill'd with all its fumes a critic's brain,
    The text that sorts not with his darling whim,
    Though plain to others, is obscure to him.
    The will made subject to a lawless force,
    All is irregular, and out of course;
    And Judgment drunk, and bribed to lose his way,
    Winks hard, and talks of darkness at noonday.
      A critic on the sacred book should be
    Candid and learn'd, dispassionate and free;
    Free from the wayward bias bigots feel,
    From fancy's influence, and intemperate zeal;
    But above all, (or let the wretch refrain,
    Nor touch the page he cannot but profane,)
    Free from the domineering power of lust;
    A lewd interpreter is never just.
      How shall I speak thee, or thy power address,
    Thou god of our idolatry, the Press?
    By thee religion, liberty, and laws,
    Exert their influence and advance their cause:
    By thee worse plagues than Pharaoh's land befell,
    Diffused, make Earth the vestibule of Hell;
    Thou fountain, at which drink the good and wise,
    Thou ever-bubbling spring of endless lies;
    Like Eden's dread probationary tree,
    Knowledge of good and evil is from thee!
      No wild enthusiast ever yet could rest
    Till half mankind were like himself possess'd.
    Philosophers, who darken and put out
    Eternal truth by everlasting doubt;
    Church quacks, with passions under no command,
    Who fill the world with doctrines contraband,
    Discoverers of they know not what, confined
    Within no bounds--the blind that lead the blind;
    To streams of popular opinion drawn,
    Deposit in those shallows all their spawn.
    The wriggling fry soon fill the creeks around,
    Poisoning the waters where their swarms abound.
    Scorn'd by the nobler tenants of the flood,
    Minnows and gudgeons gorge the unwholesome food.
    The propagated myriads spread so fast,
    E'en Leuwenhoeck himself would stand aghast,
    Employ'd to calculate the enormous sum,
    And own his crab-computing powers o'ercome.
    Is this hyperbole? The world well known,
    Your sober thoughts will hardly find it one.
      Fresh confidence the speculatist takes
    From every hair-brain'd proselyte he makes;
    And therefore prints: himself but half deceived,
    Till others have the soothing tale believed.
    Hence comment after comment, spun as fine
    As bloated spiders draw the flimsy line.
    Hence the same word that bids our lusts obey
    Is misapplied to sanctify their sway.
    If stubborn Greek refuse to be his friend,
    Hebrew or Syriac shall be forced to bend;
    If languages and copies all cry, No--
    Somebody proved it centuries ago.
    Like trout pursued, the critic in despair
    Darts to the mud, and finds his safety there:
    Women, whom custom has forbid to fly
    The scholar's pitch, (the scholar best knows why,)
    With all the simple and unletter'd poor,
    Admire his learning, and almost adore.
    Whoever errs, the priest can ne'er be wrong,
    With such fine words familiar to his tongue.
      Ye ladies! (for, indifferent in your cause,
    I should deserve to forfeit all applause)
    Whatever shocks or gives the least offence
    To virtue, delicacy, truth, or sense,
    (Try the criterion, 'tis a faithful guide,)
    Nor has, nor can have, Scripture on its side.
      None but an author knows an author's cares,
    Or Fancy's fondness for the child she bears.
    Committed once into the public arms,
    The baby seems to smile with added charms.
    Like something precious ventured far from shore,
    'Tis valued for the danger's sake the more.
    He views it with complacency supreme,
    Solicits kind attention to his dream;
    And daily, more enamour'd of the cheat,
    Kneels, and asks Heaven to bless the dear deceit.
    So one, whose story serves at least to show
    Men loved their own productions long ago,
    Wooed an unfeeling statue for his wife,
    Nor rested till the gods had given it life.
    If some mere driveller suck the sugar'd fib,
    One that still needs his leading string and bib,
    And praise his genius, he is soon repaid
    In praise applied to the same part--his head;
    For 'tis a rule that holds for ever true,
    Grant me discernment, and I grant it you.
      Patient of contradiction as a child,
    Affable, humble, diffident, and mild;
    Such was Sir Isaac, and such Boyle and Locke;
    Your blunderer is as sturdy as a rock.
    The creature is so sure to kick and bite,
    A muleteer's the man to set him right.
    First Appetite enlists him Truth's sworn foe,
    Then obstinate Self-will confirms him so.
    Tell him he wanders; that his error leads
    To fatal ills; that, though the path he treads
    Be flowery, and he see no cause of fear,
    Death and the pains of hell attend him there:
    In vain; the slave of arrogance and pride,
    He has no hearing on the prudent side.
    His still refuted quirks he still repeats;
    New raised objections with new quibbles meets;
    Till, sinking in the quicksand he defends,
    He dies disputing, and the contest ends--
    But not the mischiefs; they, still left behind,
    Like thistle-seeds, are sown by every wind.
      Thus men go wrong with an ingenious skill;
    Bend the straight rule to their own crooked will;
    And, with a clear and shining lamp supplied,
    First put it out, then take it for a guide.
    Halting on crutches of unequal size,
    One leg by truth supported, one by lies,
    They sidle to the goal with awkward pace,
    Secure of nothing--but to lose the race.
      Faults in the life breed errors in the brain,
    And these reciprocally those again.
    The mind and conduct mutually imprint
    And stamp their image in each other's mint;
    Each, sire and dam of an infernal race,
    Begetting and conceiving all that's base.
      None sends his arrow to the mark in view,
    Whose hand is feeble, or his aim untrue.
    For though, ere yet the shaft is on the wing,
    Or when it first forsakes the elastic string,
    It err but little from the intended line,
    It falls at last far wide of his design;
    So he who seeks a mansion in the sky,
    Must watch his purpose with a stedfast eye;
    That prize belongs to none but the sincere,
    The least obliquity is fatal here.
      With caution taste the sweet Circean cup;
    He that sips often, at last drinks it up.
    Habits are soon assumed; but when we strive
    To strip them off, 'tis being flay'd alive.
    Call'd to the temple of impure delight,
    He that abstains, and he alone, does right.
    If a wish wander that way, call it home;
    He cannot long be safe whose wishes roam.
    But if you pass the threshold, you are caught;
    Die then, if power Almighty save you not.
    There hardening by degrees, till double steel'd,
    Take leave of nature's God, and God reveal'd;
    Then laugh at all you trembled at before;
    And, joining the freethinkers' brutal roar,
    Swallow the two grand nostrums they dispense--
    That Scripture lies, and blasphemy is sense.
    If clemency revolted by abuse
    Be damnable, then damn'd without excuse.
      Some dream that they can silence, when they will,
    The storm of passion, and say, Peace, be still:
    But "Thus far and no farther," when address'd
    To the wild wave, or wilder human breast,
    Implies authority that never can,
    That never ought to be the lot of man.
      But, muse, forbear; long flights forebode a fall;
    Strike on the deep-toned chord the sum of all.
      Hear the just law--the judgment of the skies!
    He that hates truth shall be the dupe of lies;
    And he that will be cheated to the last,
    Delusions strong as hell shall bind him fast.
    But if the wanderer his mistake discern,
    Judge his own ways, and sigh for a return,
    Bewilder'd once, must he bewail his loss
    For ever and for ever? No--the cross!
    There and there only (though the deist rave,
    And atheist, if Earth bear so base a slave);
    There and there only is the power to save.
    There no delusive hope invites despair;
    No mockery meets you, no deception there.
    The spells and charms, that blinded you before,
    All vanish there, and fascinate no more.
      I am no preacher, let this hint suffice--
    The cross once seen is death to every vice;
    Else He that hung there suffer'd all his pain,
    Bled, groan'd, and agonized, and died, in vain.




TRUTH.

Pensantur trutinâ. HOR. lib. ii. Ep. 1.


THE ARGUMENT.

     The pursuit of error leads to destruction--Grace leads the
     right way--Its direction despised--The self-sufficient Pharisee
     compared with the peacock--The pheasant compared with the
     Christian--Heaven abhors affected sanctity--The hermit and
     his penances--The self-torturing Bramin--Pride the ruling
     principle of both--Picture of a sanctimonious prude--Picture
     of a saint--Freedom of a Christian--Importance of motives,
     illustrated by the conduct of two servants--The traveller
     overtaken by a storm likened to the sinner dreading the
     vengeance of the Almighty--Dangerous state of those who are just
     in their own conceit--The last moments of the infidel--Content
     of the ignorant but believing cottager--The rich, the wise, and
     the great, neglect the means of winning heaven--Poverty the
     best soil for religion--What man really is, and what in his own
     esteem--Unbelief often terminates in suicide--Scripture the only
     cure of woe--Pride the passion most hostile to truth--Danger of
     slighting the mercy offered by the Gospel--Plea for the virtuous
     heathen--Commands given by God on Sinai--The judgment-day--Plea
     of the believer.

    Man, on the dubious waves of error toss'd,
    His ship half founder'd, and his compass lost,
    Sees, far as human optics may command,
    A sleeping fog, and fancies it dry land;
    Spreads all his canvas, every sinew plies;
    Pants for it, aims at it, enters it, and dies!
    Then farewell all self-satisfying schemes,
    His well-built systems, philosophic dreams;
    Deceitful views of future bliss, farewell!
    He reads his sentence at the flames of hell.
      Hard lot of man--to toil for the reward
    Of virtue, and yet lose it! Wherefore hard?--
    He that would win the race must guide his horse
    Obedient to the customs of the course;
    Else, though unequall'd to the goal he flies,
    A meaner than himself shall gain the prize.
    Grace leads the right way: if you choose the wrong,
    Take it and perish; but restrain your tongue;
    Charge not, with light sufficient and left free,
    Your wilful suicide on God's decree.
      Oh how unlike the complex works of man,
    Heav'n's easy, artless, unencumber'd plan!
    No meretricious graces to beguile,
    No clustering ornaments to clog the pile;
    From ostentation, as from weakness, free,
    It stands like the cerulian arch we see,
    Majestic in its own simplicity.
    Inscribed above the portal, from afar
    Conspicuous as the brightness of a star,
    Legible only by the light they give,
    Stand the soul-quickening words--BELIEVE, AND LIVE.
    Too many, shock'd at what should charm them most,
    Despise the plain direction, and are lost.
    Heaven on such terms! (they cry with proud disdain)
    Incredible, impossible, and vain!--
    Rebel, because 'tis easy to obey;
    And scorn, for its own sake, the gracious way.
    These are the sober, in whose cooler brains
    Some thought of immortality remains;
    The rest too busy or too gay to wait
    On the sad theme, their everlasting state,
    Sport for a day, and perish in a night;
    The foam upon the waters not so light.
      Who judged the Pharisee! What odious cause
    Exposed him to the vengeance of the laws?
    Had he seduced a virgin, wrong'd a friend,
    Or stabb'd a man to serve some private end?
    Was blasphemy his sin? Or did he stray
    From the strict duties of the sacred day?
    Sit long and late at the carousing board?
    (Such were the sins with which he charged his Lord.)
    No--the man's morals were exact. What then?
    'Twas his ambition to be seen of men;
    His virtues were his pride; and that one vice
    Made all his virtues gewgaws of no price;
    He wore them as fine trappings for a show,
    A praying, synagogue-frequenting beau.
      The self-applauding bird, the peacock, see--
    Mark what a sumptuous pharisee is he!
    Meridian sunbeams tempt him to unfold
    His radiant glories, azure, green, and gold:
    He treads as if, some solemn music near,
    His measured step were govern'd by his ear;
    And seems to say--Ye meaner fowl give place;
    I am all splendour, dignity, and grace!
      Not so the pheasant on his charms presumes,
    Though he, too, has a glory in his plumes.
    He, Christian-like, retreats with modest mien
    To the close copse or far sequester'd green,
    And shines without desiring to be seen.
    The plea of works, as arrogant and vain,
    Heaven turns from with abhorrence and disdain;
    Not more affronted by avowed neglect,
    Than by the mere dissembler's feign'd respect.
    What is all righteousness that men devise?
    What--but a sordid bargain for the skies?
    But Christ as soon would abdicate his own,
    As stoop from heaven to sell the proud a throne.
      His dwelling a recess in some rude rock;
    Book, beads, and maple dish, his meagre stock;
    In shirt of hair and weeds of canvas dress'd,
    Girt with a bell-rope that the pope has bless'd;
    Adust with stripes told out for every crime,
    And sore tormented, long before his time;
    His prayer preferr'd to saints that cannot aid,
    His praise postponed, and never to be paid;
    See the sage hermit, by mankind admired,
    With all that bigotry adopts inspired,
    Wearing out life in his religious whim,
    Till his religious whimsy wears out him.
    His works, his abstinence, his zeal allow'd,
    You think him humble--God accounts him proud.
    High in demand, though lowly in pretence,
    Of all his conduct this the genuine sense--
    My penitential stripes, my streaming blood,
    Have purchased heaven, and proved my title good.
      Turn eastward now, and fancy shall apply
    To your weak sight her telescopic eye.
    The bramin kindles on his own bare head
    The sacred fire, self-torturing his trade!
    His voluntary pains, severe and long,
    Would give a barbarous air to British song;
    No grand inquisitor could worse invent,
    Than he contrives to suffer well content.
      Which is the saintlier worthy of the two?
    Past all dispute, yon anchorite, say you.
    Your sentence and mine differ. What's a name?
    I say the bramin has the fairer claim.
    If sufferings scripture nowhere recommends,
    Devised by self, to answer selfish ends,
    Give saintship, then all Europe must agree
    Ten starveling hermits suffer less than he.
    The truth is (if the truth may suit your ear,
    And prejudice have left a passage clear)
    Pride has attained a most luxuriant growth,
    And poison'd every virtue in them both.
    Pride may be pamper'd while the flesh grows lean;
    Humility may clothe an English dean;
    That grace was Cowper's--his, confess'd by all--
    Though placed in golden Durham's second stall.
    Not all the plenty of a bishop's board,
    His palace, and his lacqueys, and "My Lord,"
    More nourish pride, that condescending vice,
    Than abstinence, and beggary, and lice;
    It thrives in misery, and abundant grows:
    In misery fools upon themselves impose.
      But why before us protestants produce
    An Indian mystic or a French recluse?
    Their sin is plain; but what have we to fear,
    Reform'd and well-instructed? You shall hear.
      Yon ancient prude, whose wither'd features show
    She might be young some forty years ago,
    Her elbows pinioned close upon her hips,
    Her head erect, her fan upon her lips,
    Her eyebrows arched, her eyes both gone astray
    To watch yon amorous couple in their play,
    With bony and unkerchief'd neck defies
    The rude inclemency of wintry skies,
    And sails with lappet head and mincing airs
    Duly at clink of bell to morning prayers.
    To thrift and parsimony much inclined,
    She yet allows herself that boy behind;
    The shivering urchin, bending as he goes,
    With slipshod heels and dewdrop at his nose,
    His predecessor's coat advanced to wear,
    Which future pages yet are doom'd to share,
    Carries her Bible tuck'd beneath his arm,
    And hides his hands to keep his fingers warm.
      She, half an angel in her own account,
    Doubts not hereafter with the saints to mount,
    Though not a grace appears on strictest search,
    But that she fasts, and _item_, goes to church.
    Conscious of age, she recollects her youth,
    And tells, not always with an eye to truth,
    Who spann'd her waist, and who, where'er he came,
    Scrawl'd upon glass Miss Bridget's lovely name;
    Who stole her slipper, fill'd it with tokay,
    And drank the little bumper every day.
    Of temper as envenom'd as an asp,
    Censorious, and her every word a wasp;
    In faithful memory she records the crimes
    Or real, or fictitious, of the times;
    Laughs at the reputations she has torn,
    And holds them dangling at arm's length in scorn.
      Such are the fruits of sanctimonious pride,
    Of malice fed while flesh is mortified:
    Take, madam, the reward of all your prayers,
    Where hermits and where bramins meet with theirs;
    Your portion is with them.--Nay, never frown,
    But, if you please, some fathoms lower down.
      Artist, attend--your brushes and your paint--
    Produce them--take a chair--now draw a saint.
    Oh sorrowful and sad! the streaming tears
    Channel her cheeks--a Niobe appears!
    Is this a saint? Throw tints and all away--
    True piety is cheerful as the day,
    Will weep indeed and heave a pitying groan
    For others' woes, but smiles upon her own.
      What purpose has the King of saints in view?
    Why falls the gospel like a gracious dew?
    To call up plenty from the teeming earth,
    Or curse the desert with a tenfold dearth?
    Is it that Adam's offspring may be saved
    From servile fear, or be the more enslaved?
    To loose the links that gall'd mankind before,
    Or bind them faster on, and add still more?
    The freeborn Christian has no chains to prove,
    Or, if a chain, the golden one of love:
    No fear attends to quench his glowing fires,
    What fear he feels his gratitude inspires.
    Shall he, for such deliverance freely wrought,
    Recompense ill? He trembles at the thought.
    His Master's interest and his own combined
    Prompt every movement of his heart and mind:
    Thought, word, and deed, his liberty evince,
    His freedom is the freedom of a prince.
      Man's obligations infinite, of course
    His life should prove that he perceives their force;
    His utmost he can render is but small--
    The principle and motive all in all.
    You have two servants--Tom, an arch, sly rogue,
    From top to toe the Geta now in vogue,
    Genteel in figure, easy in address,
    Moves without noise, and swift as an express,
    Reports a message with a pleasing grace,
    Expert in all the duties of his place;
    Say, on what hinge does his obedience move?
    Has he a world of gratitude and love?
    No, not a spark--'tis all mere sharper's play;
    He likes your house, your housemaid, and your pay;
    Reduce his wages, or get rid of her,
    Tom quits you, with--Your most obedient, sir.
      The dinner served, Charles takes his usual stand,
    Watches your eye, anticipates command;
    Sighs, if perhaps your appetite should fail;
    And, if he but suspects a frown, turns pale;
    Consults all day your interest and your ease,
    Richly rewarded if he can but please;
    And, proud to make his firm attachment known,
    To save your life would nobly risk his own.
      Now which stands highest in your serious thought?
    Charles, without doubt, say you--and so he ought;
    One act, that from a thankful heart proceeds,
    Excels ten thousand mercenary deeds.
      Thus Heaven approves as honest and sincere
    The work of generous love and filial fear;
    But with averted eyes the omniscient Judge
    Scorns the base hireling and the slavish drudge.
      Where dwell these matchless saints? old Curio cries.
    E'en at your side, sir, and before your eyes,
    The favour'd few--the enthusiasts you despise.
    And, pleased at heart because on holy ground,
    Sometimes a canting hypocrite is found,
    Reproach a people with his single fall,
    And cast his filthy raiment at them all.
    Attend! an apt similitude shall show
    Whence springs the conduct that offends you so.
      See where it smokes along the sounding plain,
    Blown all aslant, a driving, dashing rain,
    Peal upon peal redoubling all around,
    Shakes it again and faster to the ground;
    Now flashing wide, now glancing as in play,
    Swift beyond thought the lightnings dart away.
    Ere yet it came the traveller urged his steed,
    And hurried, but with unsuccessful speed;
    Now drench'd throughout, and hopeless of his case,
    He drops the rein, and leaves him to his pace.
    Suppose, unlook'd for in a scene so rude,
    Long hid by interposing hill or wood,
    Some mansion, neat and elegantly dress'd,
    By some kind hospitable heart possess'd,
    Offer him warmth, security, and rest;
    Think with what pleasure, safe, and at his ease,
    He hears the tempest howling in the trees;
    What glowing thanks his lips and heart employ,
    While danger past is turn'd to present joy.
    So fares it with the sinner, when he feels
    A growing dread of vengeance at his heels:
    His conscience like a glassy lake before,
    Lash'd into foaming waves, begins to roar;
    The law, grown clamorous, though silent long,
    Arraigns him, charges him with every wrong--
    Asserts the right of his offended Lord,
    And death, or restitution, is the word:
    The last impossible, he fears the first,
    And, having well deserved, expects the worst.
    Then welcome refuge and a peaceful home;
    Oh for a shelter from the wrath to come!
    Crush me, ye rocks; ye falling mountains, hide,
    Or bury me in ocean's angry tide!--
    The scrutiny of those all-seeing eyes
    I dare not--And you need not, God replies;
    The remedy you want I freely give;
    The book shall teach you--read, believe, and live!
    'Tis done--the raging storm is heard no more,
    Mercy receives him on her peaceful shore:
    And Justice, guardian of the dread command,
    Drops the red vengeance from his willing hand.
    A soul redeem'd demands a life of praise;
    Hence the complexion of his future days,
    Hence a demeanour holy and unspeck'd,
    And the world's hatred, as its sure effect.
      Some lead a life unblameable and just,
    Their own dear virtue their unshaken trust:
    They never sin--or if (as all offend)
    Some trivial slips their daily walk attend,
    The poor are near at hand, the charge is small,
    A slight gratuity atones for all.
    For though the pope has lost his interest here,
    And pardons are not sold as once they were,
    No papist more desirous to compound,
    Than some grave sinners upon English ground.
    That plea refuted, other quirks they seek--
    Mercy is infinite, and man is weak;
    The future shall obliterate the past,
    And heaven, no doubt, shall be their home at last.
      Come, then--a still, small whisper in your ear--
    He has no hope who never had a fear;
    And he that never doubted of his state,
    He may perhaps--perhaps he may--too late.
      The path to bliss abounds with many a snare;
    Learning is one, and wit, however rare.
    The Frenchman, first in literary fame,
    (Mention him, if you please. Voltaire?--The same)
    With spirit, genius, eloquence, supplied,
    Lived long, wrote much, laugh'd heartily, and died;
    The Scripture was his jest book, whence he drew
    _Bon-mots_ to gall the Christian and the Jew;
    An infidel in health, but what when sick?
    Oh--then a text would touch him at the quick;
    View him at Paris in his last career,
    Surrounding throngs the demi-god revere;
    Exalted on his pedestal of pride,
    And fumed with frankincense on every side,
    He begs their flattery with his latest breath,
    And, smother'd in't at last, is praised to death!
      Yon cottager, who weaves at her own door,
    Pillow and bobbins all her little store;
    Content though mean, and cheerful if not gay,
    Shuffling her threads about the live-long day,
    Just earns a scanty pittance, and at night
    Lies down secure, her heart and pocket light;
    She, for her humble sphere by nature fit,
    Has little understanding, and no wit,
    Receives no praise; but though her lot be such,
    (Toilsome and indigent,) she renders much;
    Just knows, and knows no more, her Bible true--
    A truth the brilliant Frenchman never knew;
    And in that charter reads with sparkling eyes,
    Her title to a treasure in the skies.
    Oh, happy peasant! Oh, unhappy bard!
    His the mere tinsel, hers the rich reward;
    He praised perhaps for ages yet to come,
    She never heard of half a mile from home:
    He, lost in errors, his vain heart prefers,
    She, safe in the simplicity of hers.
      Not many wise, rich, noble, or profound
    In science win one inch of heavenly ground.
    And is it not a mortifying thought
    The poor should gain it, and the rich should not?
    No--the voluptuaries, who ne'er forget
    One pleasure lost, lose heaven without regret;
    Regret would rouse them, and give birth to prayer,
    Prayer would add faith, and faith would fix them there.
      Not that the Former of us all in this,
    Or aught he does, is govern'd by caprice;
    The supposition is replete with sin,
    And bears the brand of blasphemy burnt in.
    Not so--the silver trumpet's heavenly call
    Sounds for the poor, but sounds alike for all:
    Kings are invited, and would kings obey,
    No slaves on earth more welcome were than they;
    But royalty, nobility, and state,
    Are such a dead preponderating weight,
    That endless bliss, (how strange soe'er it seem,)
    In counterpoise, flies up and kicks the beam.
    'Tis open, and ye cannot enter--why?
    Because ye will not, Conyers would reply--
    And he says much that many may dispute
    And cavil at with ease, but none refute.
    Oh, bless'd effect of penury and want,
    The seed sown there, how vigorous is the plant!
    No soil like poverty for growth divine,
    As leanest land supplies the richest wine.
    Earth gives too little, giving only bread,
    To nourish pride, or turn the weakest head:
    To them the sounding jargon of the schools
    Seems what it is--a cap and bells for fools:
    The light they walk by, kindled from above,
    Shows them the shortest way to life and love:
    They, strangers to the controversial field,
    Where deists, always foil'd, yet scorn to yield,
    And never check'd by what impedes the wise,
    Believe, rush forward, and possess the prize.
      Envy, ye great, the dull unletter'd small:
    Ye have much cause for envy--but not all.
    We boast some rich ones whom the Gospel sways,
    And one who wears a coronet and prays;
    Like gleanings of an olive tree, they show
    Here and there one upon the topmost bough.
      How readily, upon the Gospel plan,
    That question has its answer--What is man?
    Sinful and weak, in every sense a wretch;
    An instrument, whose chords, upon the stretch,
    And strain'd to the last screw that he can bear,
    Yield only discord in his Maker's ear:
    Once the blest residence of truth divine,
    Glorious as Solyma's interior shrine,
    Where, in his own oracular abode,
    Dwelt visibly the light-creating God;
    But made long since, like Babylon of old,
    A den of mischiefs never to be told:
    And she, once mistress of the realms around,
    Now scattered wide and no where to be found,
    As soon shall rise and re-ascend the throne,
    By native power and energy her own,
    As nature, at her own peculiar cost,
    Restore to man the glories he has lost.
    Go--bid the winter cease to chill the year,
    Replace the wandering comet in his sphere,
    Then boast (but wait for that unhoped for hour)
    The self-restoring arm of human power.
    But what is man in his own proud esteem?
    Hear him--himself the poet and the theme:
    A monarch clothed with majesty and awe,
    His mind his kingdom, and his will his law;
    Grace in his mien, and glory in his eyes,
    Supreme on earth, and worthy of the skies,
    Strength in his heart, dominion in his nod,
    And, thunderbolts excepted, quite a God!
      So sings he, charm'd with his own mind and form,
    The song magnificent--the theme a worm!
    Himself so much the source of his delight,
    His Maker has no beauty in his sight.
    See where he sits, contemplative and fix'd,
    Pleasure and wonder in his features mix'd,
    His passions tamed and all at his control,
    How perfect the composure of his soul!
    Complacency has breathed a gentle gale
    O'er all his thoughts, and swell'd his easy sail:
    His books well trimm'd, and in the gayest style,
    Like regimental coxcombs, rank and file,
    Adorn his intellects as well as shelves,
    And teach him notions splendid as themselves:
    The Bible only stands neglected there,
    Though that of all most worthy of his care;
    And, like an infant troublesome awake,
    Is left to sleep for peace and quiet sake.
      What shall the man deserve of human kind,
    Whose happy skill and industry combined
    Shall prove (what argument could never yet)
    The Bible an imposture and a cheat?
    The praises of the libertine profess'd,
    The worst of men, and curses of the best.
    Where should the living, weeping o'er his woes;
    The dying, trembling at the awful close;
    Where the betray'd, forsaken, and oppress'd;
    The thousands whom the world forbids to rest;
    Where should they find, (those comforts at an end,
    The Scripture yields,) or hope to find, a friend?
    Sorrow might muse herself to madness then,
    And, seeking exile from the sight of men,
    Bury herself in solitude profound,
    Grow frantic with her pangs, and bite the ground.
    Thus often Unbelief, grown sick of life,
    Flies to the tempting pool, or felon knife.
    The jury meet, the coroner is short,
    And lunacy the verdict of the court.
    Reverse the sentence, let the truth be known,
    Such lunacy is ignorance alone;
    They knew not, what some bishops may not know,
    That Scripture is the only cure of woe.
    That field of promise how it flings abroad
    Its odour o'er the Christian's thorny road!
    The soul, reposing on assured relief,
    Feels herself happy amidst all her grief,
    Forgets her labour as she toils along,
    Weeps tears of joy, and bursts into a song.
      But the same word, that, like the polish'd share,
    Ploughs up the roots of a believer's care,
    Kills too the flowery weeds, where'er they grow,
    That bind the sinner's Bacchanalian brow.
    Oh, that unwelcome voice of heavenly love,
    Sad messenger of mercy from above!
    How does it grate upon his thankless ear,
    Crippling his pleasures with the cramp of fear!
    His will and judgment at continual strife,
    That civil war embitters all his life;
    In vain he points his powers against the skies,
    In vain he closes or averts his eyes,
    Truth will intrude--she bids him yet beware;
    And shakes the sceptic in the scorner's chair.
    Though various foes against the Truth combine,
    Pride above all opposes her design;
    Pride, of a growth superior to the rest,
    The subtlest serpent with the loftiest crest,
    Swells at the thought, and, kindling into rage,
    Would hiss the cherub Mercy from the stage.
      And is the soul indeed so lost?--she cries,
    Fallen from her glory, and too weak to rise?
    Torpid and dull, beneath a frozen zone,
    Has she no spark that may be deem'd her own?
    Grant her indebted to what zealots call
    Grace undeserved, yet surely not for all!
    Some beams of rectitude she yet displays,
    Some love of virtue, and some power to praise;
    Can lift herself above corporeal things,
    And, soaring on her own unborrow'd wings,
    Possess herself of all that's good or true,
    Assert the skies, and vindicate her due.
    Past indiscretion is a venial crime;
    And if the youth, unmellowed yet by time,
    Bore on his branch, luxuriant then and rude,
    Fruits of a blighted size, austere and crude,
    Maturer years shall happier stores produce,
    And meliorate the well-concocted juice.
    Then, conscious of her meritorious zeal,
    To Justice she may make her bold appeal;
    And leave to Mercy, with a tranquil mind,
    The worthless and unfruitful of mankind.
    Hear then how Mercy, slighted and defied,
    Retorts the affront against the crown of pride.
      Perish the virtue, as it ought, abhorr'd,
    And the fool with it, who insults his Lord.
    The atonement a Redeemer's love has wrought
    Is not for you--the righteous need it not.
    Seest thou yon harlot, wooing all she meets,
    The worn-out nuisance of the public streets,
    Herself from morn to night, from night to morn,
    Her own abhorrence, and as much your scorn?
    The gracious shower, unlimited and free,
    Shall fall on her, when Heaven denies it thee.
    Of all that wisdom dictates, this the drift--
    That man is dead in sin, and life a gift.
      Is virtue, then, unless of Christian growth,
    Mere fallacy, or foolishness, or both?
    Ten thousand sages lost in endless woe,
    For ignorance of what they could not know?--
    That speech betrays at once a bigot's tongue,
    Charge not a God with such outrageous wrong!
    Truly, not I--the partial light men have,
    My creed persuades me, well employ'd, may save;
    While he that scorns the noon-day beam, perverse,
    Shall find the blessing, unimproved, a curse.
    Let heathen worthies, whose exalted mind
    Left sensuality and dross behind,
    Possess, for me, their undisputed lot,
    And take, unenvied, the reward they sought.
    But still in virtue of a Saviour's plea,
    Not blind by choice, but destined not to see.
    Their fortitude and wisdom were a flame
    Celestial, though they knew not whence it came,
    Derived from the same source of light and grace,
    That guides the Christian in his swifter race;
    Their judge was conscience, and her rule their law:
    That rule, pursued with reverence and with awe,
    Led them, however faltering, faint, and slow,
    From what they knew to what they wish'd to know.
    But let not him that shares a brighter day
    Traduce the splendour of a noontide ray,
    Prefer the twilight of a darker time,
    And deem his base stupidity no crime;
    The wretch, who slights the bounty of the skies,
    And sinks, while favour'd with the means to rise,
    Shall find them rated at their full amount,
    The good he scorn'd all carried to account.
      Marshalling all his terrors as he came,
    Thunder, and earthquake, and devouring flame,
    From Sinai's top Jehovah gave the law--
    Life for obedience--death for every flaw.
    When the great Sovereign would his will express,
    He gives a perfect rule, what can he less?
    And guards it with a sanction as severe
    As vengeance can inflict, or sinners fear:
    Else his own glorious rights he would disclaim,
    And man might safely trifle with his name.
    He bids him glow with unremitting love
    To all on earth, and to himself above;
    Condemns the injurious deed, the slanderous tongue,
    The thought that meditates a brother's wrong:
    Brings not alone the more conspicuous part,
    His conduct, to the test, but tries his heart.
      Hark! universal nature shook and groan'd,
    'Twas the last trumpet--see the Judge enthroned:
    Rouse all your courage at your utmost need,
    Now summon every virtue, stand and plead.
    What! silent? Is your boasting heard no more?
    That self-renouncing wisdom, learn'd before,
    Had shed immortal glories on your brow,
    That all your virtues cannot purchase now.
      All joy to the believer! He can speak--
    Trembling yet happy, confident yet meek.
      Since the dear hour that brought me to thy foot
    And cut up all my follies by the root,
    I never trusted in an arm but thine,
    Nor hoped, but in thy righteousness divine:
    My prayers and alms, imperfect and defiled,
    Were but the feeble efforts of a child;
    Howe'er performed, it was their brightest part,
    That they proceeded from a grateful heart:
    Cleansed in thine own all-purifying blood,
    Forgive their evil and accept their good:
    I cast them at thy feet--my only plea
    Is what it was, dependence upon thee:
    While struggling in the vale of tears below,
    That never fail'd, nor shall it fail me now.
      Angelic gratulations rend the skies,
    Pride falls unpitied, never more to rise,
    Humility is crown'd, and Faith receives the prize.

  [Illustration: _J. Gilbert Fecit._      _W. Greatbach sculp._

  EXPOSTULATION.

  "CALL'D THEE AWAY FROM PEACEABLE EMPLOY
  DOMESTIC HAPPINESS AND RURAL JOY
  TO WASTE THY LIFE IN ARMS."]




EXPOSTULATION.

  Tantane, tam patiens, nullo certamine tolli
  Dona sines?

  VIRG.


THE ARGUMENT.

     Expostulation with the Muse weeping for England--Her apparently
     prosperous condition--State of Israel when the prophet wept
     over it--The Babylonian Captivity--When nations decline,
     the evil commences in the Church--State of the Jews in the
     time of our Saviour--Evidences of their having been the most
     favoured of nations--Causes of their downfall--Lesson taught by
     it--Warning to Britain--The hand of Providence to be traced in
     adverse events--England's transgressions--Her vain-glory--Her
     conduct towards India--Abuse of the sacrament--Obduracy against
     repentance--Futility of fasts--Character of the Clergy--The
     poet adverts to the state of the ancient Britons--Beneficial
     influence of the Roman power--England under papal
     supremacy--Favours since bestowed on her by Providence--Reasons
     for gratitude to God and for seeking to secure his favour--With
     that she may defy a world in arms--The poet anticipates little
     effect from his warning.

    Why weeps the muse for England? What appears
    In England's case to move the muse to tears?
    From side to side of her delightful isle
    Is she not clothed with a perpetual smile?
    Can Nature add a charm, or Art confer
    A new-found luxury, not seen in her?
    Where under heaven is pleasure more pursued,
    Or where does cold reflection less intrude?
    Her fields a rich expanse of wavy corn,
    Pour'd out from Plenty's overflowing horn;
    Ambrosial gardens, in which art supplies
    The fervour and the force of Indian skies;
    Her peaceful shores, where busy Commerce waits
    To pour his golden tide through all her gates;
    Whom fiery suns, that scorch the russet spice
    Of eastern groves, and oceans floor'd with ice,
    Forbid in vain to push his daring way
    To darker climes, or climes of brighter day;
    Whom the winds waft where'er the billows roll,
    From the World's girdle to the frozen pole;
    The chariots bounding in her wheel-worn streets,
    Her vaults below, where every vintage meets;
    Her theatres, her revels, and her sports;
    The scenes to which not youth alone resorts,
    But age, in spite of weakness and of pain,
    Still haunts, in hope to dream of youth again;
    All speak her happy: let the muse look round
    From East to West, no sorrow can be found;
    Or only what, in cottages confined,
    Sighs unregarded to the passing wind.
    Then wherefore weep for England? What appears
    In England's case to move the muse to tears?
      The prophet wept for Israel; wish'd his eyes
    Were fountains fed with infinite supplies;
    For Israel dealt in robbery and wrong;
    There were the scorner's and the slanderer's tongue;
    Oaths, used as playthings or convenient tools,
    As interest biass'd knaves, or fashion fools;
    Adultery, neighing at his neighbour's door;
    Oppression labouring hard to grind the poor;
    The partial balance and deceitful weight;
    The treacherous smile, a mask for secret hate;
    Hypocrisy, formality in prayer,
    And the dull service of the lip were there.
    Her women, insolent and self-caress'd,
    By Vanity's unwearied finger dress'd,
    Forgot the blush that virgin fears impart
    To modest cheeks, and borrow'd one from art;
    Were just such trifles, without worth or use,
    As silly pride and idleness produce;
    Curl'd, scented, furbelow'd, and flounced around,
    With feet too delicate to touch the ground,
    They stretch'd the neck, and roll'd the wanton eye,
    And sigh'd for every fool that flutter'd by.
      He saw his people slaves to every lust,
    Lewd, avaricious, arrogant, unjust;
    He heard the wheels of an avenging God
    Groan heavily along the distant road;
    Saw Babylon set wide her two-leaved brass
    To let the military deluge pass;
    Jerusalem a prey, her glory soil'd,
    Her princes captive, and her treasures spoil'd;
    Wept till all Israel heard his bitter cry,
    Stamp'd with his foot, and smote upon his thigh;
    But wept, and stamp'd, and smote his thigh in vain,
    Pleasure is deaf when told of future pain,
    And sounds prophetic are too rough to suit
    Ears long accustom'd to the pleasing lute:
    They scorn'd his inspiration and his theme,
    Pronounc'd him frantic, and his fears a dream;
    With self-indulgence wing'd the fleeting hours,
    Till the foe found them, and down fell the towers.
      Long time Assyria bound them in her chain,
    Till penitence had purged the public stain,
    And Cyrus, with relenting pity moved,
    Return'd them happy to the land they loved;
    There, proof against prosperity, awhile
    They stood the test of her ensnaring smile,
    And had the grace in scenes of peace to show
    The virtue they had learn'd in scenes of woe.
    But man is frail, and can but ill sustain
    A long immunity from grief and pain;
    And, after all the joys that Plenty leads,
    With tiptoe step Vice silently succeeds.
      When he that ruled them with a shepherd's rod,
    In form a man, in dignity a God,
    Came, not expected in that humble guise,
    To sift and search them with unerring eyes,
    He found, conceal'd beneath a fair outside,
    The filth of rottenness and worm of pride;
    Their piety a system of deceit,
    Scripture employ'd to sanctify the cheat;
    The Pharisee the dupe of his own art,
    Self-idolized, and yet a knave at heart.
      When nations are to perish in their sins,
    'Tis in the church the leprosy begins;
    The priest, whose office is, with zeal sincere,
    To watch the fountain and preserve it clear,
    Carelessly nods and sleeps upon the brink,
    While others poison what the flock must drink;
    Or, waking at the call of lust alone,
    Infuses lies and errors of his own:
    His unsuspecting sheep believe it pure;
    And, tainted by the very means of cure,
    Catch from each other a contagious spot,
    The foul forerunner of a general rot.
    Then truth is hush'd, that Heresy may preach;
    And all is trash that reason cannot reach;
    Then God's own image on the soul impress'd
    Becomes a mockery and a standing jest;
    And faith, the root whence only can arise
    The graces of a life that wins the skies,
    Loses at once all value and esteem,
    Pronounced by graybeards a pernicious dream:
    Then Ceremony leads her bigots forth,
    Prepared to fight for shadows of no worth;
    While truths, on which eternal things depend,
    Find not, or hardly find, a single friend:
    As soldiers watch the signal of command,
    They learn to bow, to kneel, to sit, to stand;
    Happy to fill religion's vacant place;
    With hollow form, and gesture, and grimace.
      Such, when the Teacher of his church was there,
    People and priest, the sons of Israel were;
    Stiff in the letter, lax in the design
    And import of their oracles divine;
    Their learning legendary, false, absurd,
    And yet exalted above God's own word;
    They drew a curse from an intended good,
    Puff'd up with gifts they never understood.
    He judged them with as terrible a frown,
    As if not love, but wrath, had brought him down:
    Yet he was gentle as soft summer airs,
    Had grace for others' sins, but none for theirs;
    Through all he spoke a noble plainness ran--
    Rhetoric is artifice, the work of man;
    And tricks and turns, that fancy may devise,
    Are far too mean for Him that rules the skies.
    The astonish'd vulgar trembled while he tore
    The mask from faces never seen before;
    He stripp'd the impostors in the noonday sun,
    Show'd that they follow'd all they seem'd to shun;
    Their prayers made public, their excesses kept
    As private as the chambers where they slept;
    The temple and its holy rites profaned
    By mummeries He that dwelt in it disdain'd;
    Uplifted hands, that at convenient times
    Could act extortion and the worst of crimes,
    Wash'd with a neatness scrupulously nice,
    And free from every taint but that of vice.
    Judgment, however tardy, mends her pace
    When obstinacy once has conquer'd grace.
    They saw distemper heal'd, and life restored,
    In answer to the fiat of his word;
    Confess'd the wonder, and with daring tongue
    Blasphemed the authority from which it sprung.
    They knew, by sure prognostics seen on high,
    The future tone and temper of the sky;
    But, grave dissemblers! could not understand
    That sin let loose speaks punishment at hand.
      Ask now of history's authentic page,
    And call up evidence from every age;
    Display with busy and laborious hand
    The blessings of the most indebted land;
    What nation will you find, whose annals prove
    So rich an interest in Almighty love?
    Where dwell they now, where dwelt in ancient day
    A people planted, water'd, blest, as they?
    Let Egypt's plagues and Canaan's woes proclaim
    The favours pour'd upon the Jewish name;
    Their freedom purchased for them at the cost
    Of all their hard oppressors valued most:
    Their title to a country not their own
    Made sure by prodigies till then unknown;
    For them the states they left made waste and void;
    For them the states to which they went destroy'd;
    A cloud to measure out their march by day,
    By night a fire to cheer the gloomy way;
    That moving signal summoning, when best,
    Their host to move, and, when it stay'd, to rest.
    For them the rocks dissolved into a flood,
    The dews condensed into angelic food,
    Their very garments sacred, old yet new,
    And Time forbid to touch them as he flew;
    Streams, swell'd above the bank, enjoin'd to stand
    While they pass'd through to their appointed land;
    Their leader arm'd with meekness, zeal, and love,
    And graced with clear credentials from above;
    Themselves secured beneath the Almighty wing;
    Their God their captain,[800] lawgiver, and king;
    Crown'd with a thousand victories, and at last
    Lords of the conquer'd soil, there rooted fast,
    In peace possessing what they won by war,
    Their name far publish'd, and revered as far;
    Where will you find a race like theirs, endow'd
    With all that man e'er wish'd, or Heaven bestow'd?
      They, and they only, amongst all mankind,
    Received the transcript of the Eternal Mind:
    Were trusted with his own engraven laws,
    And constituted guardians of his cause;
    Theirs were the prophets, theirs the priestly call,
    And theirs by birth the Saviour of us all.
    In vain the nations, that had seen them rise
    With fierce and envious, yet admiring, eyes,
    Had sought to crush them, guarded as they were
    By power divine and skill that could not err.
    Had they maintain'd allegiance firm and sure,
    And kept the faith immaculate and pure,
    Then the proud eagles of all-conquering Rome
    Had found one city not to be o'ercome;
    And the twelve standards of the tribes unfurl'd
    Had bid defiance to the warring world.
    But grace abused brings forth the foulest deeds,
    As richest soil the most luxuriant weeds.
    Cured of the golden calves, their fathers' sin,
    They set up self, that idol god within;
    View'd a Deliverer with disdain and hate,
    Who left them still a tributary state;
    Seized fast his hand, held out to set them free
    From a worse yoke, and nail'd it to the tree:
    There was the consummation and the crown,
    The flower of Israel's infamy full blown;
    Thence date their sad declension, and their fall,
    Their woes, not yet repeal'd, thence date them all.
      Thus fell the best instructed in her day,
    And the most favour'd land, look where we may.
    Philosophy indeed on Grecian eyes
    Had pour'd the day, and clear'd the Roman skies;
    In other climes perhaps creative art,
    With power surpassing theirs, performed her part;
    Might give more life to marble, or might fill
    The glowing tablets with a juster skill,
    Might shine in fable, and grace idle themes
    With all the embroidery of poetic dreams;
    'Twas theirs alone to dive into the plan
    That truth and mercy had reveal'd to man;
    And, while the world beside, that plan unknown,
    Deified useless wood or senseless stone,
    They breathed in faith their well-directed prayers,
    And the true God, the God of truth, was theirs.
      Their glory faded, and their race dispersed,
    The last of nations now, though once the first,
    They warn and teach the proudest, would they learn
    Keep wisdom, or meet vengeance in your turn:
    If we escaped not, if Heaven spared not us,
    Peel'd, scatter'd, and exterminated thus;
    If vice received her retribution due,
    When we were visited, what hope for you?
    When God arises with an awful frown,
    To punish lust, or pluck presumption down;
    When gifts perverted, or not duly prized,
    Pleasure o'ervalued, and his grace despised,
    Provoke the vengeance of his righteous hand,
    To pour down wrath upon a thankless land:
    He will be found impartially severe,
    Too just to wink, or speak the guilty clear.
      Oh Israel, of all nations most undone!
    Thy diadem displaced, thy sceptre gone;
    Thy temple, once thy glory, fallen and rased,
    And thou a worshipper e'en where thou mayst;
    Thy services, once holy without spot,
    Mere shadows now, their ancient pomp forgot;
    Thy Levites, once a consecrated host,
    No longer Levites, and their lineage lost,
    And thou thyself o'er every country sown,
    With none on earth that thou canst call thine own;
    Cry aloud, thou that sittest in the dust,
    Cry to the proud, the cruel, and unjust;
    Knock at the gates of nations, rouse their fears;
    Say wrath is coming, and the storm appears;
    But raise the shrillest cry in British ears.
      What ails thee, restless as the waves that roar,
    And fling their foam against thy chalky shore?
    Mistress, at least while Providence shall please,
    And trident-bearing queen of the wide seas--
    Why, having kept good faith, and often shown
    Friendship and truth to others, find'st thou none?
    Thou that hast set the persecuted free,
    None interposes now to succour thee.
    Countries indebted to thy power, that shine
    With light derived from thee, would smother thine.
    Thy very children watch for thy disgrace,
    A lawless brood, and curse thee to thy face.
    Thy rulers load thy credit, year by year,
    With sums Peruvian mines could never clear;
    As if, like arches built with skilful hand,
    The more 'twere press'd the firmer it would stand.
      The cry in all thy ships is still the same,
    Speed us away to battle and to fame.
    Thy mariners explore the wild expanse,
    Impatient to descry the flags of France:
    But, though they fight as thine have ever fought,
    Return ashamed without the wreaths they sought.
    Thy senate is a scene of civil jar,
    Chaos of contrarieties at war;
    Where sharp and solid, phlegmatic and light,
    Discordant atoms meet, ferment, and fight;
    Where obstinacy takes his sturdy stand,
    To disconcert what policy has plann'd;
    Where policy is busied all night long
    In setting right what faction has set wrong;
    Where flails of oratory thresh the floor,
    That yields them chaff and dust, and nothing more.
    Thy rack'd inhabitants repine, complain,
    Tax'd till the brow of labour sweats in vain;
    War lays a burden on the reeling state,
    And peace does nothing to relieve the weight;
    Successive loads succeeding broils impose,
    And sighing millions prophesy the close.
      Is adverse Providence, when ponder'd well,
    So dimly writ, or difficult to spell,
    Thou canst not read with readiness and ease
    Providence adverse in events like these?
    Know then that heavenly wisdom on this ball
    Creates, gives birth to, guides, consummates all;
    That, while laborious and quick-thoughted man
    Snuffs up the praise of what he seems to plan,
    He first conceives, then perfects his design,
    As a mere instrument in hands divine:
    Blind to the working of that secret power
    That balances the wings of every hour,
    The busy trifler dreams himself alone,
    Frames many a purpose, and God works his own.
    States thrive or wither as moons wax and wane,
    E'en as his will and his decrees ordain;
    While honour, virtue, piety, bear sway,
    They flourish; and, as these decline, decay:
    In just resentment of his injured laws,
    He pours contempt on them and on their cause;
    Strikes the rough thread of error right athwart
    The web of every scheme they have at heart;
    Bids rottenness invade and bring to dust
    The pillars of support, in which they trust,
    And do his errand of disgrace and shame
    On the chief strength and glory of the frame.
    None ever yet impeded what he wrought,
    None bars him out from his most secret thought;
    Darkness itself before his eye is light,
    And hell's close mischief naked in his sight.
      Stand now and judge thyself--Hast thou incurr'd
    His anger who can waste thee with a word,
    Who poises and proportions sea and land,
    Weighing them in the hollow of his hand,
    And in whose awful sight all nations seem
    As grasshoppers, as dust, a drop, a dream?
    Hast thou (a sacrilege his soul abhors)
    Claim'd all the glory of thy prosperous wars?
    Proud of thy fleets and armies, stolen the gem
    Of his just praise, to lavish it on them?
    Hast thou not learn'd, what thou art often told,
    A truth still sacred, and believed of old,
    That no success attends on spears and swords
    Unblest, and that the battle is the Lord's?
    That courage is his creature; and dismay
    The post, that at his bidding speeds away,
    Ghastly in feature, and his stammering tongue
    With doleful humour and sad presage hung,
    To quell the valour of the stoutest heart,
    And teach the combatant a woman's part?
    That he bids thousands fly when none pursue,
    Saves as he will by many or by few,
    And claims for ever, as his royal right,
    The event and sure decision of the fight?
      Hast thou, though suckled at fair freedom's breast,
    Exported slavery to the conquer'd East?
    Pull'd down the tyrants India served with dread,
    And raised thyself, a greater, in their stead?
    Gone thither arm'd and hungry, return'd full,
    Fed from the richest veins of the Mogul,
    A despot big with power obtain'd by wealth,
    And that obtain'd by rapine and by stealth?
    With Asiatic vices stored thy mind,
    But left their virtues and thine own behind?
    And, having truck'd thy soul, brought home the fee,
    To tempt the poor to sell himself to thee?
      Hast thou by statute shoved from its design,
    The Saviour's feast, his own blest bread and wine,
    And made the symbols of atoning grace
    An office-key, a picklock to a place,
    That infidels may prove their title good
    By an oath dipp'd in sacramental blood?
    A blot that will be still a blot, in spite
    Of all that grave apologists may write;
    And though a bishop toil to cleanse the stain,
    He wipes and scours the silver cup in vain.
    And hast thou sworn on every slight pretence,
    Till perjuries are common as bad pence,
    While thousands, careless of the damning sin
    Kiss the book's outside, who ne'er look within?
      Hast thou, when Heaven has clothed thee with disgrace,
    And, long provoked, repaid thee to thy face,
    (For thou hast known eclipses, and endured
    Dimness and anguish, all thy beams obscured,
    When sin has shed dishonour on thy brow;
    And never of a sabler hue than now,)
    Hast thou, with heart perverse and conscience sear'd,
    Despising all rebuke, still persevered,
    And, having chosen evil, scorn'd the voice
    That cried, Repent!--and gloried in thy choice?
    Thy fastings, when calamity at last
    Suggests the expedient of a yearly fast,
    What mean they? Canst thou dream there is a power
    In lighter diet at a later hour,
    To charm to sleep the threatening of the skies,
    And hide past folly from all-seeing eyes?
    The fast that wins deliverance, and suspends
    The stroke that a vindictive God intends,
    Is to renounce hypocrisy; to draw
    Thy life upon the pattern of the law;
    To war with pleasure, idolized before;
    To vanquish lust, and wear its yoke no more.
    All fasting else, whate'er be the pretence,
    Is wooing mercy by renew'd offence.
      Hast thou within thee sin, that in old time
    Brought fire from heaven, the sex-abusing crime,
    Whose horrid perpetration stamps disgrace,
    Baboons are free from, upon human race?
    Think on the fruitful and well-water'd spot
    That fed the flocks and herds of wealthy Lot,
    Where Paradise seem'd still vouchsafed on earth,
    Burning and scorch'd into perpetual dearth,
    Or, in his words who damn'd the base desire,
    Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire:
    Then nature, injured, scandalized, defiled,
    Unveil'd her blushing cheek, look'd on, and smiled;
    Beheld with joy the lovely scene defac'd,
    And praised the wrath that laid her beauties waste.
      Far be the thought from any verse of mine,
    And farther still the form'd and fix'd design,
    To thrust the charge of deeds that I detest
    Against an innocent unconscious breast;
    The man that dares traduce, because he can
    With safety to himself, is not a man:
    An individual is a sacred mark,
    Not to be pierced in play, or in the dark;
    But public censure speaks a public foe,
    Unless a zeal for virtue guide the blow.
      The priestly brotherhood, devout, sincere,
    From mean self-interest, and ambition clear,
    Their hope in heaven, servility their scorn,
    Prompt to persuade, expostulate, and warn,
    Their wisdom pure, and given them from above,
    Their usefulness ensured by zeal and love,
    As meek as the man Moses, and withal
    As bold as in Agrippa's presence Paul,
    Should fly the world's contaminating touch,
    Holy and unpolluted:--are thine such?
    Except a few with Eli's spirit blest,
    Hophni and Phineas may describe the rest.
      Where shall a teacher look, in days like these,
    For ears and hearts that he can hope to please?
    Look to the poor--the simple and the plain
    Will hear perhaps thy salutary strain:
    Humility is gentle, apt to learn,
    Speak but the word, will listen and return.
    Alas, not so! the poorest of the flock
    Are proud, and set their faces as a rock;
    Denied that earthly opulence they choose,
    God's better gift they scoff at and refuse.
    The rich, the produce of a nobler stem,
    Are more intelligent, at least--try them.
    Oh vain inquiry! they without remorse
    Are altogether gone a devious course;
    Where beckoning pleasure leads them, wildly stray;
    Have burst the bands, and cast the yoke away.
      Now borne upon the wings of truth sublime,
    Review thy dim original and prime.
    This island, spot of unreclaim'd rude earth,
    The cradle that received thee at thy birth,
    Was rock'd by many a rough Norwegian blast,
    And Danish howlings scared thee as they pass'd;
    For thou wast born amid the din of arms,
    And suck'd a breast that panted with alarms.
    While yet thou wast a grovelling, puling chit,
    Thy bones not fashion'd, and thy joints not knit,
    The Roman taught thy stubborn knee to bow,
    Though twice a Cæsar could not bend thee now.
    His victory was that of orient light,
    When the sun's shafts disperse the gloom of night.
    Thy language at this distant moment shows
    How much the country to the conqueror owes;
    Expressive, energetic, and refined,
    It sparkles with the gems he left behind;
    He brought thy land a blessing when he came,
    He found thee savage, and he left thee tame;
    Taught thee to clothe thy pink'd and painted hide,
    And grac'd thy figure with a soldier's pride;
    He sow'd the seeds of order where he went,
    Improv'd thee far beyond his own intent,
    And, while he ruled thee by the sword alone,
    Made thee at last a warrior like his own.
    Religion, if in heavenly truths attired,
    Needs only to be seen to be admired;
    But thine, as dark as witcheries of the night,
    Was form'd to harden hearts and shock the sight;
    Thy druids struck the well-hung harps they bore
    With fingers deeply dyed in human gore;
    And while the victim slowly bled to death,
    Upon the rolling chords rung out his dying breath.
      Who brought the lamp that with awaking beams
    Dispell'd thy gloom, and broke away thy dreams,
    Tradition, now decrepit and worn out,
    Babbler of ancient fables, leaves a doubt:
    But still light reach'd thee; and those gods of thine,
    Woden and Thor, each tottering in his shrine,
    Fell broken and defaced at their own door,
    As Dagon in Philistia long before.
    But Rome with sorceries and magic wand
    Soon raised a cloud that darken'd every land;
    And thine was smother'd in the stench and fog
    Of Tiber's marshes and the papal bog.
    Then priests with bulls and briefs, and shaven crowns,
    And griping fists, and unrelenting frowns,
    Legates and delegates with powers from hell,
    Though heavenly in pretension, fleeced thee well;
    And to this hour, to keep it fresh in mind,
    Some twigs of that old scourge are left behind.[801]
    Thy soldiery, the pope's well managed pack,
    Were train'd beneath his lash, and knew the smack,
    And, when he laid them on the scent of blood,
    Would hunt a Saracen through fire and flood.
    Lavish of life, to win an empty tomb,
    That proved a mint of wealth, a mine to Rome,
    They left their bones beneath unfriendly skies,
    His worthless absolution all the prize.
    Thou wast the veriest slave, in days of yore
    That ever dragg'd a chain or tugg'd an oar;
    Thy monarchs arbitrary, fierce, unjust,
    Themselves the slaves of bigotry or lust,
    Disdain'd thy counsels, only in distress
    Found thee a goodly spunge for power to press.
    Thy chiefs, the lords of many a petty fee,
    Provoked and harass'd, in return plagued thee;
    Call'd thee away from peaceable employ,
    Domestic happiness and rural joy,
    To waste thy life in arms, or lay it down
    In causeless feuds and bickerings of their own.
    Thy parliaments adored, on bended knees,
    The sovereignty they were convened to please;
    Whate'er was ask'd, too timid to resist,
    Complied with, and were graciously dismiss'd;
    And if some Spartan soul a doubt express'd,
    And, blushing at the tameness of the rest,
    Dared to suppose the subject had a choice,
    He was a traitor by the general voice.
    Oh slave! with powers thou didst not dare exert,
    Verse cannot stoop so low as thy desert;
    It shakes the sides of splenetic disdain,
    Thou self-entitled ruler of the main,
    To trace thee to the date, when yon fair sea,
    That clips thy shores, had no such charms for thee;
    When other nations flew from coast to coast,
    And thou hadst neither fleet nor flag to boast.
    Kneel now, and lay thy forehead in the dust;
    Blush if thou canst; not petrified, thou must;
    Act but an honest and a faithful part;
    Compare what then thou wast with what thou art;
    And God's disposing providence confess'd,
    Obduracy itself must yield the rest.--
    Then thou art bound to serve him, and to prove,
    Hour after hour, thy gratitude and love.
      Has he not hid thee and thy favour'd land,
    For ages, safe beneath his sheltering hand,
    Given thee his blessing on the clearest proof,
    Bid nations leagued against thee stand aloof,
    And charged hostility and hate to roar
    Where else they would, but not upon thy shore?
    His power secured thee, when presumptuous Spain
    Baptized her fleet invincible in vain;
    Her gloomy monarch, doubtful and resign'd
    To every pang that racks an anxious mind,
    Ask'd of the waves that broke upon his coast,
    What tidings? and the surge replied--All lost!
    And when the Stuart, leaning on the Scot,
    Then too much fear'd, and now too much forgot,
    Pierced to the very centre of the realm,
    And hoped to seize his abdicated helm,
    'Twas but to prove how quickly, with a frown,
    He that had raised thee could have pluck'd thee down.
    Peculiar is the grace by thee possess'd,
    Thy foes implacable, thy land at rest;
    Thy thunders travel over earth and seas,
    And all at home is pleasure, wealth, and ease.
    'Tis thus, extending his tempestuous arm,
    Thy Maker fills the nations with alarm,
    While his own heaven surveys the troubled scene,
    And feels no change, unshaken and serene.
    Freedom, in other lands scarce known to shine,
    Pours out a flood of splendour upon thine;
    Thou hast as bright an interest in her rays
    As ever Roman had in Rome's best days.
    True freedom is where no restraint is known
    That Scripture, justice, and good sense disown.
    Where only vice and injury are tied,
    And all from shore to shore is free beside.
    Such freedom is--and Windsor's hoary towers
    Stood trembling at the boldness of thy powers,
    That won a nymph on that immortal plain,
    Like her the fabled Phoebus wooed in vain:
    He found the laurel only--happier you
    The unfading laurel, and the virgin too![802]
      Now think, if pleasure have a thought to spare;
    If God himself be not beneath her care;
    If business, constant as the wheels of time,
    Can pause an hour to read a serious rhyme;
    If the new mail thy merchants now receive,
    Or expectation of the next, give leave;
    Oh think, if chargeable with deep arrears
    For such indulgence gilding all thy years,
    How much, though long neglected, shining yet,
    The beams of heavenly truth have swell'd the debt.
    When persecuting zeal made royal sport
    With tortured innocence in Mary's court,
    And Bonner, blithe as shepherd at a wake,
    Enjoyed the show, and danced about the stake,
    The sacred book, its value understood,
    Received the seal of martyrdom in blood.
    Those holy men, so full of truth and grace,
    Seem to reflection of a different race,
    Meek, modest, venerable, wise, sincere,
    In such a cause they could not dare to fear;
    They could not purchase earth with such a prize,
    Or spare a life too short to reach the skies.
    From them to thee conveyed along the tide,
    Their streaming hearts pour'd freely when they died;
    Those truths, which neither use nor years impair,
    Invite thee, woo thee, to the bliss they share.
    What dotage will not vanity maintain?
    What web too weak to catch a modern brain?
    The moles and bats in full assembly find,
    On special search, the keen-eyed eagle blind.
    And did they dream, and art thou wiser now?
    Prove it--if better, I submit and bow.
    Wisdom and goodness are twin-born, one heart
    Must hold both sisters, never seen apart.
    So then--as darkness overspread the deep,
    Ere nature rose from her eternal sleep,
    And this delightful earth, and that fair sky,
    Leap'd out of nothing, call'd by the Most High;
    By such a change thy darkness is made light,
    Thy chaos order, and thy weakness might;
    And He, whose power mere nullity obeys,
    Who found thee nothing, form'd thee for his praise.
    To praise him is to serve him, and fulfil,
    Doing and suffering, his unquestioned will;
    'Tis to believe what men inspired of old,
    Faithful, and faithfully informed, unfold;
    Candid and just, with no false aim in view,
    To take for truth what cannot but be true;
    To learn in God's own school the Christian part,
    And bind the task assigned thee to thine heart:
    Happy the man there seeking and there found;
    Happy the nation where such men abound!
      How shall a verse impress thee? by what name
    Shall I adjure thee not to court thy shame?
    By theirs whose bright example, unimpeached,
    Directs thee to that eminence they reached,
    Heroes and worthies of days past, thy sires?
    Or his, who touch'd their hearts with hallow'd fires?
    Their names, alas! in vain reproach an age,
    Whom all the vanities they scorn'd engage;
    And his, that seraphs tremble at, is hung
    Disgracefully on every trifler's tongue,
    Or serves the champion in forensic war
    To flourish and parade with at the bar.
    Pleasure herself perhaps suggests a plea,
    If interest move thee, to persuade e'en thee;
    By every charm that smiles upon her face,
    By joys possess'd, and joys still held in chase,
    If dear society be worth a thought,
    And if the feast of freedom cloy thee not,
    Reflect that these, and all that seems thine own,
    Held by the tenure of his will alone,
    Like angels in the service of their Lord,
    Remain with thee, or leave thee at his word;
    That gratitude, and temperance in our use
    Of what he gives, unsparing and profuse,
    Secure the favour, and enhance the joy,
    That thankless waste and wild abuse destroy.
    But above all reflect, how cheap soe'er
    Those rights, that millions envy thee, appear,
    And though resolved to risk them, and swim down
    The tide of pleasure, heedless of his frown,
    That blessings truly sacred, and when given
    Mark'd with the signature and stamp of Heaven,
    The word of prophecy, those truths divine,
    Which make that heaven, if thou desire it, thine,
    (Awful alternative! believed, beloved,
    Thy glory, and thy shame if unimproved,)
    Are never long vouchsafed, if push'd aside
    With cold disgust or philosophic pride;
    And that, judicially withdrawn, disgrace,
    Error, and darkness, occupy their place.
      A world is up in arms, and thou, a spot
    Not quickly found, if negligently sought,
    Thy soul as ample as thy bounds are small,
    Endur'st the brunt, and dar'st defy them all;
    And wilt thou join to this bold enterprise
    A bolder still, a contest with the skies?
    Remember, if He guard thee and secure,
    Whoe'er assails thee, thy success is sure;
    But if He leave thee, though the skill and power
    Of nations, sworn to spoil thee and devour,
    Were all collected in thy single arm,
    And thou couldst laugh away the fear of harm,
    That strength would fail, opposed against the push
    And feeble onset of a pigmy rush.
    Say not (and if the thought of such defence
    Should spring within thy bosom, drive it thence)
    What nation amongst all my foes is free
    From crimes as base as any charged on me?
    Their measure fill'd, they too shall pay the debt,
    Which God, though long forborne, will not forget.
    But know that wrath divine, when most severe,
    Makes justice still the guide of his career,
    And will not punish, in one mingled crowd,
    Them without light, and thee without a cloud.
      Muse, hang this harp upon yon aged beech,
    Still murmuring with the solemn truths I teach;
    And, while at intervals a cold blast sings
    Through the dry leaves, and pants upon the strings,
    My soul shall sigh in secret, and lament
    A nation scourged, yet tardy to repent.
    I know the warning song is sung in vain;
    That few will hear, and fewer heed the strain;
    But if a sweeter voice, and one design'd
    A blessing to my country and mankind,
    Reclaim the wandering thousands, and bring home
    A flock so scatter'd and so wont to roam,
    Then place it once again between my knees;
    The sound of truth will then be sure to please;
    And truth alone, where'er my life be cast,
    In scenes of plenty, or the pining waste,
    Shall be my chosen theme, my glory to the last.

  [800] Vide Josh. v. 14.

  [801] Which may be found at Doctor's Commons.

  [802] Alluding to the grant of Magna Charta, which was extorted
  from King John by the barons at Runnymede near Windsor.




HOPE.

  . . . . . doceas iter, et sacra ostia pandas.

  VIRG. Æn. 6.


THE ARGUMENT.

     Human Life--The charms of Nature remain the same though they
     appear different in youth and age--Frivolity of fashionable
     life--Value of life--The works of the Creator evidences
     of his attributes--Nature the handmaid to the purposes
     of grace--Character of Hope--Man naturally stubborn and
     intractable--His conduct in different stations--Death's
     honours--Each man's belief right in his own eyes--Simile
     of Ethelred's hospitality--Mankind quarrel with the Giver
     of eternal life, on account of the terms on which it is
     offered--Opinions on this subject--Spread of the Gospel--The
     Greenland Missions--Contrast of the unconverted and converted
     heathen--Character of Leuconomus--The man of pleasure the
     blindest of bigots--Any hope preferred to that required by
     the Scripture--Human nature opposed to Truth--Apostrophe
     to Truth--Picture of one conscience-smitten--The pardoned
     sinner--Conclusion.

    Ask what is human life--the sage replies,
    With disappointment lowering in his eyes,
    A painful passage o'er a restless flood,
    A vain pursuit of fugitive false good,
    A scene of fancied bliss and heartfelt care,
    Closing at last in darkness and despair.
    The poor, inured to drudgery and distress,
    Act without aim, think little, and feel less,
    And no where, but in feign'd Arcadian scenes,
    Taste happiness, or know what pleasure means.
    Riches are pass'd away from hand to hand,
    As fortune, vice, or folly may command;
    As in a dance the pair that take the lead
    Turn downward, and the lowest pair succeed,
    So shifting and so various is the plan
    By which Heaven rules the mix'd affairs of man;
    Vicissitude wheels round the motley crowd,
    The rich grow poor, the poor become purse-proud;
    Business is labour, and man's weakness such,
    Pleasure is labour too, and tires as much,
    The very sense of it foregoes its use,
    By repetition pall'd, by age obtuse.
    Youth lost in dissipation, we deplore,
    Through life's sad remnant, what no sighs restore;
    Our years, a fruitless race without a prize,
    Too many, yet too few to make us wise.
      Dangling his cane about, and taking snuff,
    Lothario cries, What philosophic stuff--
    O querulous and weak!--whose useless brain
    Once thought of nothing, and now thinks in vain;
    Whose eye reverted weeps o'er all the past,
    Whose prospect shows thee a disheartening waste;
    Would age in thee resign his wint'ry reign,
    And youth invigorate that frame again,
    Renew'd desire would grace with other speech
    Joys always prized, when placed within our reach.
      For lift thy palsied head, shake off the gloom
    That overhangs the borders of thy tomb,
    See nature gay, as when she first began
    With smiles alluring her admirer man;
    She spreads the morning over eastern hills,
    Earth glitters with the drops the night distils;
    The sun, obedient, at her call appears
    To fling his glories o'er the robe she wears;
    Banks clothed with flowers, groves fill'd with sprightly sounds,
    The yellow tilth, green meads, rocks, rising grounds,
    Streams, edged with osiers, fattening every field
    Where'er they flow, now seen and now conceal'd;
    From the blue rim, where skies and mountains meet,
    Down to the very turf beneath thy feet,
    Ten thousand charms, that only fools despise,
    Or pride can look at with indifferent eyes,
    All speak one language, all with one sweet voice
    Cry to her universal realm, Rejoice!
    Man feels the spur of passions and desires,
    And she gives largely more than he requires;
    Not that, his hours devoted all to care,
    Hollow-eyed abstinence, and lean despair,
    The wretch may pine, while to his smell, taste, sight,
    She holds a paradise of rich delight;
    But gently to rebuke his awkward fear,
    To prove that what she gives she gives sincere,
    To banish hesitation, and proclaim
    His happiness her dear, her only, aim.
    'Tis grave philosophy's absurdest dream,
    That Heaven's intentions are not what they seem,
    That only shadows are dispensed below,
    And earth has no reality but woe.
      Thus things terrestrial wear a different hue,
    As youth or age persuades; and neither true.
    So, Flora's wreath through colour'd crystal seen,
    The rose or lily appears blue or green,
    But still the imputed tints are those alone
    The medium represents, and not their own.
      To rise at noon, sit slipshod and undress'd,
    To read the news, or fiddle, as seems best,
    Till half the world comes rattling at his door,
    To fill the dull vacuity till four;
    And, just when evening turns the blue vault gray,
    To spend two hours in dressing for the day;
    To make the sun a bauble without use,
    Save for the fruits his heavenly beams produce;
    Quite to forget, or deem it worth no thought,
    Who bids him shine, or if he shine or not;
    Through mere necessity to close his eyes
    Just when the larks and when the shepherds rise;
    Is such a life, so tediously the same,
    So void of all utility or aim,
    That poor Jonquil, with almost every breath,
    Sighs for his exit, vulgarly called death:
    For he, with all his follies, has a mind
    Not yet so blank, or fashionably blind,
    But now and then perhaps a feeble ray
    Of distant wisdom shoots across his way;
    By which he reads, that life without a plan,
    As useless as the moment it began,
    Serves merely as a soil for discontent
    To thrive in; an incumbrance ere half spent.
    Oh! weariness beyond what asses feel,
    That tread the circuit of the cistern wheel;
    A dull rotation, never at a stay,
    Yesterday's face twin image of to-day;
    While conversation, an exhausted stock,
    Grows drowsy as the clicking of a clock.
    No need, he cries, of gravity stuff'd out
    With academic dignity devout,
    To read wise lectures, vanity the text:
    Proclaim the remedy, ye learned, next;
    For truth self-evident, with pomp impress'd,
    Is vanity surpassing all the rest.
      That remedy, not hid in deeps profound,
    Yet seldom sought where only to be found,
    While passion turns aside from its due scope
    The inquirer's aim, that remedy is Hope.
    Life is his gift, from whom whate'er life needs,
    With every good and perfect gift, proceeds;
    Bestow'd on man, like all that we partake,
    Royally, freely, for his bounty's sake;
    Transient indeed, as is the fleeting hour,
    And yet the seed of an immortal flower;
    Design'd, in honour of his endless love,
    To fill with fragrance his abode above;
    No trifle, howsoever short it seem,
    And, howsoever shadowy, no dream;
    Its value, what no thought can ascertain,
    Nor all an angel's eloquence explain.
    Men deal with life as children with their play,
    Who first misuse, then cast their toys away;
    Live to no sober purpose, and contend
    That their Creator had no serious end.
    When God and man stand opposite in view,
    Man's disappointment must, of course, ensue.
    The just Creator condescends to write,
    In beams of inextinguishable light,
    His names of wisdom, goodness, power, and love,
    On all that blooms below, or shines above;
    To catch the wandering notice of mankind,
    And teach the world, if not perversely blind,
    His gracious attributes, and prove the share
    His offspring hold in his paternal care.
    If, led from earthly things to things divine,
    His creature thwart not his august design,
    Then praise is heard instead of reasoning pride,
    And captious cavil and complaint subside.
    Nature, employ'd in her allotted place,
    Is handmaid to the purposes of grace;
    By good vouchsafed makes known superior good,
    And bliss not seen by blessings understood:
    That bliss, reveal'd in scripture, with a glow
    Bright as the covenant-ensuring bow,
    Fires all his feelings with a noble scorn
    Of sensual evil, and thus Hope is born.
      Hope sets the stamp of vanity on all
    That men have deem'd substantial since the fall,
    Yet has the wondrous virtue to educe
    From emptiness itself a real use;
    And while she takes, as at a father's hand,
    What health and sober appetite demand,
    From fading good derives, with chemic art,
    That lasting happiness, a thankful heart.
    Hope, with uplifted foot, set free from earth,
    Pants for the place of her ethereal birth,
    On steady wings sails through the immense abyss,
    Plucks amaranthine joys from bowers of bliss,
    And crowns the soul, while yet a mourner here,
    With wreaths like those triumphant spirits wear.
    Hope, as an anchor, firm and sure, holds fast
    The Christian vessel, and defies the blast.
    Hope! nothing else can nourish and secure
    His new-born virtues, and preserve him pure.
    Hope! let the wretch, once conscious of the joy,
    Whom now despairing agonies destroy,
    Speak, for he can, and none so well as he,
    What treasures centre, what delights, in thee.
    Had he the gems, the spices, and the land,
    That boasts the treasure, all at his command;
    The fragrant grove, the inestimable mine,
    Were light, when weigh'd against one smile of thine.
      Though clasp'd and cradled in his nurse's arms,
    He shines with all a cherub's artless charms,
    Man is the genuine offspring of revolt,
    Stubborn and sturdy, a wild ass's colt;
    His passions, like the watery stores that sleep
    Beneath the smiling surface of the deep,
    Wait but the lashes of a wintry storm,
    To frown and roar, and shake his feeble form.
    From infancy through childhood's giddy maze,
    Froward at school, and fretful in his plays,
    The puny tyrant burns to subjugate
    The free republic of the whip-gig state.
    If one, his equal in athletic frame,
    Or, more provoking still, of nobler name,
    Dare step across his arbitrary views,
    An Iliad, only not in verse, ensues:
    The little Greeks look trembling at the scales,
    Till the best tongue or heaviest hand prevails.
      Now see him launch'd into the world at large;
    If priest, supinely droning o'er his charge,
    Their fleece his pillow, and his weekly drawl,
    Though short, too long, the price he pays for all.
    If lawyer, loud whatever cause he plead,
    But proudest of the worst, if that succeed.
    Perhaps a grave physician, gathering fees,
    Punctually paid for lengthening out disease;
    No COTTON, whose humanity sheds rays,
    That make superior skill his second praise.
    If arms engage him, he devotes to sport
    His date of life so likely to be short;
    A soldier may be any thing, if brave,
    So may a tradesman, if not quite a knave.
    Such stuff the world is made of; and mankind
    To passion, interest, pleasure, whim, resign'd,
    Insist on, as if each were his own pope,
    Forgiveness, and the privilege of hope;
    But conscience, in some awful silent hour,
    When captivating lusts have lost their power,
    Perhaps when sickness, or some fearful dream,
    Reminds him of religion, hated theme!
    Starts from the down, on which she lately slept,
    And tells of laws despised, at least not kept;
    Shows with a pointing finger, but no noise,
    A pale procession of past sinful joys,
    All witnesses of blessings foully scorn'd,
    And life abused, and not to be suborn'd.
    Mark these, she says; these, summon'd from afar,
    Begin their march to meet thee at the bar;
    There find a Judge inexorably just,
    And perish there, as all presumption must.
      Peace be to those (such peace as earth can give)
    Who live in pleasure, dead e'en while they live;
    Born capable indeed of heavenly truth;
    But down to latest age, from earliest youth,
    Their mind a wilderness through want of care,
    The plough of wisdom never entering there.
    Peace (if insensibility may claim
    A right to the meek honours of her name)
    To men of pedigree, their noble race,
    Emulous always of the nearest place
    To any throne, except the throne of grace.
    Let cottagers and unenlighten'd swains
    Revere the laws they dream that Heaven ordains;
    Resort on Sundays to the house of prayer,
    And ask, and fancy they find, blessings there.
    Themselves, perhaps, when weary they retreat
    To enjoy cool nature in a country seat,
    To exchange the centre of a thousand trades,
    For clumps, and lawns, and temples, and cascades,
    May now and then their velvet cushions take,
    And seem to pray for good example sake;
    Judging, in charity no doubt, the town
    Pious enough, and having need of none.
    Kind souls! to teach their tenantry to prize
    What they themselves, without remorse, despise:
    Nor hope have they, nor fear, of aught to come,
    As well for them had prophecy been dumb;
    They could have held the conduct they pursue,
    Had Paul of Tarsus lived and died a Jew;
    And truth, proposed to reasoners wise as they,
    Is a pearl cast--completely cast away,
      They die.--Death lends them, pleased, and as in sport,
    All the grim honours of his ghastly court.
    Far other paintings grace the chamber now,
    Where late we saw the mimic landscape glow:
    The busy heralds hang the sable scene
    With mournful 'scutcheons, and dim lamps between;
    Proclaim their titles to the crowd around,
    But they that wore them move not at the sound;
    The coronet, placed idly at their head,
    Adds nothing now to the degraded dead,
    And e'en the star, that glitters on the bier,
    Can only say--Nobility lies here.
    Peace to all such--'twere pity to offend,
    By useless censure, whom we cannot mend;
    Life without hope can close but in despair,
    'Twas there we found them, and must leave them there.
      As when two pilgrims in a forest stray,
    Both may be lost, yet each in his own way;
    So fares it with the multitudes beguiled
    In vain opinion's waste and dangerous wild;
    Ten thousand rove the brakes and thorns among,
    Some eastward, and some westward, and all wrong.
    But here, alas! the fatal difference lies,
    Each man's belief is right in his own eyes;
    And he that blames what they have blindly chose
    Incurs resentment for the love he shows.
      Say, botanist, within whose province fall
    The cedar and the hyssop on the wall,
    Of all that deck the lanes, the fields, the bowers,
    What parts the kindred tribes of weeds and flowers?
    Sweet scent, or lovely form, or both combined,
    Distinguish every cultivated kind;
    The want of both denotes a meaner breed,
    And Chloe from her garland picks the weed.
    Thus hopes of every sort, whatever sect
    Esteem them, sow them, rear them, and protect,
    If wild in nature, and not duly found,
    Gethsemane! in thy dear hallow'd ground,
    That cannot bear the blaze of Scripture light,
    Nor cheer the spirit, nor refresh the sight,
    Nor animate the soul to Christian deeds,
    (Oh cast them from thee!) are weeds, arrant weeds.
      Ethelred's house, the centre of six ways,
    Diverging each from each, like equal rays,
    Himself as bountiful as April rains,
    Lord paramount of the surrounding plains,
    Would give relief of bed and board to none,
    But guests that sought it in the appointed One;
    And they might enter at his open door,
    E'en till his spacious hall would hold no more.
    He sent a servant forth by every road,
    To sound his horn and publish it abroad,
    That all might mark--knight, menial, high, and low--
    An ordinance it concern'd them much to know.
    If, after all, some headstrong hardy lout
    Would disobey, though sure to be shut out,
    Could he with reason murmur at his case,
    Himself sole author of his own disgrace?
    No! the decree was just and without flaw;
    And he that made had right to make the law;
    His sovereign power and pleasure unrestrain'd,
    The wrong was his who wrongfully complain'd.
      Yet half mankind maintain a churlish strife
    With him the Donor of eternal life,
    Because the deed, by which his love confirms
    The largess he bestows, prescribes the terms.
    Compliance with his will your lot ensures,
    Accept it only, and the boon is yours.
    And sure it is as kind to smile and give,
    As with a frown to say, Do this, and live.
    Love is not pedlar's trumpery, bought and sold;
    He will give freely, or he will withhold;
    His soul abhors a mercenary thought,
    And him as deeply who abhors it not;
    He stipulates indeed, but merely this,
    That man will freely take an unbought bliss,
    Will trust him for a faithful generous part,
    Nor set a price upon a willing heart.
    Of all the ways that seem to promise fair,
    To place you where his saints his presence share,
    This only can; for this plain cause, express'd
    In terms as plain--himself has shut the rest.
    But oh the strife, the bickering, and debate,
    The tidings of unpurchased heaven create!
    The flirted fan, the bridle, and the toss,
    All speakers, yet all language at a loss.
    From stucco'd walls smart arguments rebound;
    And beaus, adepts in every thing profound,
    Die of disdain, or whistle off the sound.
    Such is the clamour of rooks, daws, and kites,
    The explosion of the levell'd tube excites,
    Where mouldering abbey walls o'erhang the glade,
    And oaks coeval spread a mournful shade,
    The screaming nations, hovering in mid air,
    Loudly resent the stranger's freedom there,
    And seem to warn him never to repeat
    His bold intrusion on their dark retreat.
      Adieu, Vinosa cries, ere yet he sips
    The purple bumper trembling at his lips,
    Adieu to all morality! if grace
    Make works a vain ingredient in the case.
    The Christian hope is--Waiter, draw the cork--
    If I mistake not--Blockhead! with a fork!
    Without good works, whatever some may boast,
    Mere folly and delusion--Sir, your toast.
    My firm persuasion is, at least sometimes,
    That Heaven will weigh man's virtues and his crimes
    With nice attention in a righteous scale,
    And save or damn as these or those prevail.
    I plant my foot upon this ground of trust,
    And silence every fear with--God is just.
    But if perchance, on some dull drizzling day,
    A thought intrude, that says, or seems to say,
    If thus the important cause is to be tried,
    Suppose the beam should dip on the wrong side;
    I soon recover from these needless frights,
    And--God is merciful--sets all to rights.
    Thus between justice, as my prime support,
    And mercy, fled to as the last resort,
    I glide and steal along with heaven in view,
    And,--pardon me, the bottle stands with you.
      I never will believe, the Colonel cries,
    The sanguinary schemes that some devise,
    Who make the good Creator, on their plan,
    A being of less equity than man.
    If appetite, or what divines call lust,
    Which men comply with, e'en because they must,
    Be punish'd with perdition, who is pure?
    Then theirs, no doubt, as well as mine, is sure.
    If sentence of eternal pain belong
    To every sudden slip and transient wrong,
    Then Heaven enjoins the fallible and frail
    A hopeless task, and damns them if they fail.
    My creed, (whatever some creed-makers mean
    By Athanasian nonsense, or Nicene,)
    My creed is, he is safe that does his best,
    And death's a doom sufficient for the rest.
      Right, says an ensign; and for aught I see,
    Your faith and mine substantially agree;
    The best of every man's performance here
    Is to discharge the duties of his sphere.
    A lawyer's dealings should be just and fair,
    Honesty shines with great advantage there.
    Fasting and prayer sit well upon a priest,
    A decent caution and reserve at least.
    A soldier's best is courage in the field,
    With nothing here that wants to be conceal'd;
    Manly deportment, gallant, easy, gay;
    A hand as liberal as the light of day.
    The soldier thus endow'd, who never shrinks,
    Nor closets up his thoughts, whate'er he thinks,
    Who scorns to do an injury by stealth,
    Must go to heaven--and I must drink his health.
    Sir Smug, he cries, (for lowest at the board,
    Just made fifth chaplain of his patron lord,
    His shoulders witnessing by many a shrug
    How much his feelings suffered, sat Sir Smug,)
    Your office is to winnow false from true;
    Come, prophet, drink, and tell us, What think you?
      Sighing and smiling as he takes his glass,
    Which they that woo preferment rarely pass,
    Fallible man, the church-bred youth replies,
    Is still found fallible, however wise;
    And differing judgments serve but to declare,
    That truth lies somewhere, if we knew but where.
    Of all it ever was my lot to read,
    Of critics now alive or long since dead,
    The book of all the world that charm'd me most
    Was,--well-a-day, the title-page was lost;
    The writer well remarks, a heart that knows
    To take with gratitude what Heaven bestows,
    With prudence always ready at our call,
    To guide our use of it, is all in all.
    Doubtless it is. To which, of my own store,
    I superadd a few essentials more;
    But these, excuse the liberty I take,
    I wave just now, for conversation's sake.
    Spoke like an oracle, they all exclaim,
    And add Right Reverend to Smug's honour'd name.
      And yet our lot is given us in a land
    Where busy arts are never at a stand;
    Where science points her telescopic eye,
    Familiar with the wonders of the sky;
    Where bold inquiry, diving out of sight,
    Brings many a precious pearl of truth to light;
    Where nought eludes the persevering quest,
    That fashion, taste, or luxury suggest.
      But above all, in her own light array'd,
    See Mercy's grand apocalypse display'd!
    The sacred book no longer suffers wrong,
    Bound in the fetters of an unknown tongue;
    But speaks with plainness art could never mend,
    What simplest minds can soonest comprehend.
    God gives the word, the preachers throng around,
    Live from his lips, and spread the glorious sound:
    That sound bespeaks salvation on her way,
    The trumpet of a life-restoring day;
    'Tis heard where England's eastern glory shines,
    And in the gulfs of her Cornubian mines.
    And still it spreads. See Germany send forth
    Her sons[803] to pour it on the farthest north:
    Fired with a zeal peculiar, they defy
    The rage and rigour of a polar sky,
    And plant successfully sweet Sharon's rose
    On icy plains, and in eternal snows.
      O blest within the inclosure of your rocks,
    Not herds have ye to boast, nor bleating flocks;
    Nor fertilizing streams your fields divide,
    That show, reversed, the villas on their side;
    No groves have ye; no cheerful sound of bird,
    Or voice of turtle in your land is heard;
    Nor grateful eglantine regales the smell
    Of those that walk at evening where ye dwell;
    But Winter, arm'd with terrors here unknown,
    Sits absolute on his unshaken throne;
    Piles up his stores amidst the frozen waste,
    And bids the mountains he has built stand fast;
    Beckons the legions of his storms away
    From happier scenes, to make your land a prey;
    Proclaims the soil a conquest he has won,
    And scorns to share it with the distant sun.
    --Yet truth is yours, remote, unenvied isle!
    And peace the genuine offspring of her smile;
    The pride of letter'd ignorance that binds
    In chains of error our accomplish'd minds,
    That decks, with all the splendour of the true,
    A false religion, is unknown to you.
    Nature indeed vouchsafes for our delight
    The sweet vicissitudes of day and night;
    Soft airs and genial moisture feed and cheer
    Field, fruit, and flower, and every creature here;
    But brighter beams than his who fires the skies
    Have risen at length on your admiring eyes,
    That shoot into your darkest caves the day,
    From which our nicer optics turn away.
      Here see the encouragement grace gives to vice,
    The dire effect of mercy without price!
    What were they? what some fools are made by art,
    They were by nature, atheists, head and heart.
    The gross idolatry blind heathens teach
    Was too refined for them, beyond their reach.
    Not e'en the glorious sun, though men revere
    The monarch most that seldom will appear,
    And though his beams, that quicken where they shine,
    May claim some right to be esteem'd divine,
    Not e'en the sun, desirable as rare,
    Could bend one knee, engage one votary there;
    They were, what base credulity believes
    True Christians are, dissemblers, drunkards, thieves.
    The full gorged savage, at his nauseous feast,
    Spent half the darkness, and snored out the rest,
    Was one, whom justice, on an equal plan,
    Denouncing death upon the sins of man,
    Might almost have indulged with an escape,
    Chargeable only with a human shape.
      What are they now?--Morality may spare
    Her grave concern, her kind suspicions there;
    The wretch, who once sang wildly, danced, and laugh'd,
    And suck'd in dizzy madness with his draught,
    Has wept a silent flood, reversed his ways,
    Is sober, meek, benevolent, and prays,
    Feeds sparingly, communicates his store,
    Abhors the craft he boasted of before,
    And he that stole has learn'd to steal no more.
    Well spake the prophet, Let the desert sing,
    Where sprang the thorn, the spiry fir shall spring,
    And where unsightly and rank thistles grew,
    Shall grow the myrtle and luxuriant yew.
      Go now, and with important tone demand
    On what foundation virtue is to stand,
    If self-exalting claims be turn'd adrift,
    And grace be grace indeed, and life a gift;
    The poor reclaim'd inhabitant, his eyes
    Glistening at once with pity and surprise,
    Amazed that shadows should obscure the sight
    Of one, whose birth was in a land of light,
    Shall answer, Hope, sweet Hope, has set me free,
    And made all pleasures else mere dross to me.
      These, amidst scenes as waste as if denied
    The common care that waits on all beside,
    Wild as if nature there, void of all good,
    Play'd only gambols in a frantic mood,
    (Yet charge not heavenly skill with having plann'd
    A plaything world, unworthy of his hand;)
    Can see his love, though secret evil lurks
    In all we touch, stamp'd plainly on his works;
    Deem life a blessing with its numerous woes,
    Nor spurn away a gift a God bestows.
    Hard task indeed o'er arctic seas to roam!
    Is hope exotic? grows it not at home?
    Yes, but an object, bright as orient morn,
    May press the eye too closely to be borne;
    A distant virtue we can all confess,
    It hurts our pride, and moves our envy, less.
      Leuconomus (beneath well-sounding Greek
    I slur a name a poet must not speak)
    Stood pilloried on infamy's high stage,
    And bore the pelting scorn of half an age;
    The very butt of slander, and the blot
    For every dart that malice ever shot.
    The man that mention'd him at once dismiss'd
    All mercy from his lips, and sneer'd and hiss'd;
    His crimes were such as Sodom never knew,
    And perjury stood up to swear all true;
    His aim was mischief, and his zeal pretence,
    His speech rebellion against common sense;
    A knave, when tried on honesty's plain rule;
    And when by that of reason, a mere fool;
    The world's best comfort was, his doom was pass'd;
    Die when he might, he must be damn'd at last.
      Now, Truth, perform thine office; waft aside
    The curtain drawn by prejudice and pride,
    Reveal (the man is dead) to wondering eyes
    This more than monster in his proper guise.
    He loved the world that hated him: the tear
    That dropp'd upon his Bible was sincere;
    Assail'd by scandal and the tongue of strife,
    His only answer was a blameless life;
    And he that forged, and he that threw the dart,
    Had each a brother's interest in his heart.
    Paul's love of Christ, and steadiness unbribed,
    Were copied close in him, and well transcribed.
    He followed Paul; his zeal a kindred flame,
    His apostolic charity the same.
    Like him, cross'd cheerfully tempestuous seas,
    Forsaking country, kindred, friends, and ease;
    Like him he labour'd, and like him content
    To bear it, suffered shame where'er he went.
    Blush, calumny! and write upon his tomb,
    If honest eulogy can spare thee room,
    Thy deep repentance of thy thousand lies,
    Which, aim'd at him, have pierced the offended skies;
    And say, Blot out my sin, confess'd, deplored,
    Against thine image, in thy saint, O Lord!
      No blinder bigot, I maintain it still,
    Than he who must have pleasure, come what will:
    He laughs, whatever weapon Truth may draw,
    And deems her sharp artillery mere straw;
    Scripture indeed is plain; but God and he
    On scripture ground are sure to disagree;
    Some wiser rule must teach him how to live,
    Than this his Maker has seen fit to give;
    Supple and flexible as Indian cane,
    To take the bend his appetites ordain;
    Contrived to suit frail nature's crazy case,
    And reconcile his lusts with saving grace.
    By this, with nice precision of design,
    He draws upon life's map a zig-zag line,
    That shows how far 'tis safe to follow sin,
    And where his danger and God's wrath begin.
    By this he forms, as pleased he sports along,
    His well-poised estimate of right and wrong;
    And finds the modish manners of the day,
    Though loose, as harmless as an infant's play.
      Build by whatever plan caprice decrees,
    With what materials, on what ground you please;
    Your hope shall stand unblamed, perhaps admired,
    If not that hope the scripture has required.
    The strange conceits, vain projects, and wild dreams,
    With which hypocrisy for ever teems,
    (Though other follies strike the public eye,
    And raise a laugh) pass unmolested by;
    But if, unblameable in word and thought,
    A MAN arise, a man whom God has taught,
    With all Elijah's dignity of tone,
    And all the love of the beloved John,
    To storm the citadels they build in air,
    And smite the untemper'd wall; 'tis death to spare.
    To sweep away all refuges of lies,
    And place, instead of quirks themselves devise,
    LAMA SABACTHANI before their eyes;
    To prove that without Christ all gain is loss,
    All hope despair, that stands not on his cross;
    Except the few his God may have impress'd,
    A tenfold frenzy seizes all the rest.
      Throughout mankind, the Christian kind at least,
    There dwells a consciousness in every breast,
    That folly ends where genuine hope begins,
    And he that finds his heaven must lose his sins.
    Nature opposes, with her utmost force,
    This riving stroke, this ultimate divorce:
    And, while Religion seems to be her view,
    Hates with a deep sincerity the true:
    For this, of all that ever influenced man,
    Since Abel worshipp'd, or the world began,
    This only spares no lust, admits no plea,
    But makes him, if at all, completely free;
    Sounds forth the signal, as she mounts her car,
    Of an eternal, universal war;
    Rejects all treaty, penetrates all wiles,
    Scorns with the same indifference frowns and smiles;
    Drives through the realms of sin, where riot reels,
    And grinds his crown beneath her burning wheels!
    Hence all that is in man, pride, passion, art,
    Powers of the mind, and feelings of the heart,
    Insensible of truth's almighty charms,
    Starts at her first approach, and sounds to arms!
    While Bigotry, with well dissembled fears,
    His eyes shut fast, his fingers in his ears,
    Mighty to parry and push by God's word
    With senseless noise, his argument the sword,
    Pretends a zeal for godliness and grace,
    And spits abhorrence in the Christian's face.
      Parent of Hope, immortal Truth! make known
    Thy deathless wreaths and triumphs all thine own:
    The silent progress of thy power is such,
    Thy means so feeble, and despised so much,
    That few believe the wonders thou hast wrought,
    And none can teach them but whom thou hast taught.
    Oh see me sworn to serve thee, and command
    A painter's skill into a poet's hand!
    That, while I trembling trace a work divine,
    Fancy may stand aloof from the design,
    And light and shade, and every stroke, be thine.
      If ever thou hast felt another's pain,
    If ever when he sighed hast sighed again,
    If ever on thy eyelid stood the tear
    That pity had engender'd, drop one here.
    This man was happy--had the world's good word,
    And with it every joy it can afford;
    Friendship and love seem'd tenderly at strife,
    Which most should sweeten his untroubled life;
    Politely learn'd, and of a gentle race,
    Good breeding and good sense gave all a grace,
    And whether at the toilette of the fair
    He laugh'd and trifled, made him welcome there,
    Or, if in masculine debate he shared,
    Ensured him mute attention and regard.
    Alas, how changed! Expressive of his mind,
    His eyes are sunk, arms folded, head reclined;
    Those awful syllables, hell, death, and sin,
    Though whisper'd, plainly tell what works within;
    That conscience there performs her proper part,
    And writes a doomsday sentence on his heart!
    Forsaking and forsaken of all friends,
    He now perceives where earthly pleasure ends;
    Hard task! for one who lately knew no care,
    And harder still as learnt beneath despair!
    His hours no longer pass unmark'd away,
    A dark importance saddens every day;
    He hears the notice of the clock, perplex'd,
    And cries, Perhaps eternity strikes next!
    Sweet music is no longer music here,
    And laughter sounds like madness in his ear:
    His grief the world of all her power disarms;
    Wine has no taste, and beauty has no charms:
    God's holy word, once trivial in his view,
    Now by the voice of his experience true,
    Seems, as it is, the fountain whence alone
    Must spring that hope he pants to make his own.
      Now let the bright reverse be known abroad;
    Say man's a worm, and power belongs to God.
    As when a felon, whom his country's laws
    Have justly doom'd for some atrocious cause,
    Expects, in darkness and heart-chilling fears,
    The shameful close of all his misspent years;
    If chance, on heavy pinions slowly borne,
    A tempest usher in the dreaded morn,
    Upon his dungeon walls the lightning play,
    The thunder seems to summon him away;
    The warder at the door his key applies,
    Shoots back the bolt, and all his courage dies:
    If then, just then, all thoughts of mercy lost,
    When Hope, long lingering, at last yields the ghost,
    The sound of pardon pierce his startled ear,
    He drops at once his fetters and his fear;
    A transport glows in all he looks and speaks,
    And the first thankful tears bedew his cheeks.
    Joy, far superior joy, that much outweighs
    The comfort of a few poor added days,
    Invades, possesses, and o'erwhelms the soul
    Of him, whom Hope has with a touch made whole.
    'Tis heaven, all heaven, descending on the wings
    Of the glad legions of the King of kings;
    'Tis more--'tis God diffused through every part,
    'Tis God himself triumphant in his heart.
    O welcome now the sun's once hated light,
    His noonday beams were never half so bright.
    Not kindred minds alone are call'd to employ
    Their hours, their days, in listening to his joy;
    Unconscious nature, all that he surveys,
    Rocks, groves, and streams must join him in his praise.
      These are thy glorious works, eternal Truth,
    The scoff of wither'd age and beardless youth;
    These move the censure and illiberal grin
    Of fools that hate thee and delight in sin:
    But these shall last when night has quench'd the pole,
    And heav'n is all departed as a scroll.
    And when, as justice has long since decreed,
    This earth shall blaze, and a new world succeed,
    Then these thy glorious works, and they who share
    That hope which can alone exclude despair,
    Shall live exempt from weakness and decay,
    The brightest wonders of an endless day.
      Happy the bard (if that fair name belong
    To him that blends no fable with his song)
    Whose lines, uniting, by an honest art,
    The faithful monitor's and poet's part,
    Seek to delight, that they may mend mankind,
    And, while they captivate inform the mind:
    Still happier, if he till a thankful soil,
    And fruit reward his honourable toil:
    But happier far, who comfort those that wait
    To hear plain truth at Judah's hallow'd gate:
    Their language simple, as their manners meek,
    No shining ornaments have they to seek;
    Nor labour they, nor time, nor talents, waste,
    In sorting flowers to suit a fickle taste;
    But, while they speak the wisdom of the skies,
    Which art can only darken and disguise,
    The abundant harvest, recompense divine,
    Repays their work--the gleaning only mine.

  [803] The Moravian missionaries in Greenland.--See Krantz.




CHARITY.

    Qua nihil majus meliusve terris
    Fata donavêre, bonique divi;
    Nec dabunt, quamvis redeant in aurum
            Tempora priscum.

  HOR. lib. iv. Ode 2.


THE ARGUMENT.

     Invocation to Charity--Social ties--Tribute to the humanity of
     Captain Cook--His character contrasted with that of Cortez,
     the conquer of Mexico--Degradation of Spain--Purpose of
     commerce--Gifts of art--The slave-trade and slavery--Slavery
     unnatural and unchristian--The duty of abating the woes
     of that state, and of enlightening the mind of the slave,
     enforced--Apostrophe to Liberty--Charity of Howard--Pursuits of
     philosophy--Reason learns nothing aright without the lamp of
     Revelation--True charity the offspring of divine truth--Supposed
     case of a blind nation and an optician--Portrait of
     Charity--Beauty of the Apostle's definition of it--Alms as the
     means of lulling conscience--Pride and ostentation motives of
     charity--Character of satire--True charity inculcated--Christian
     charity should be universal--Happy effects that would result
     from universal charity.

    Fairest and foremost of the train that wait
    On man's most dignified and happiest state,
    Whether we name thee Charity or Love,
    Chief grace below, and all in all above,
    Prosper (I press thee with a powerful plea)
    A task I venture on, impell'd by thee:
    Oh never seen but in thy blest effects,
    Or felt but in the soul that Heaven selects;
    Who seeks to praise thee, and to make thee known
    To other hearts, must have thee in his own.
    Come, prompt me with benevolent desires,
    Teach me to kindle at thy gentle fires,
    And, though disgraced and slighted, to redeem
    A poet's name, by making thee the theme.
      God, working ever on a social plan,
    By various ties attaches man to man:
    He made at first, though free and unconfined,
    One man the common father of the kind;
    That every tribe, though placed as he sees best,
    Where seas or deserts part them from the rest,
    Differing in language, manners, or in face,
    Might feel themselves allied to all the race.
    When Cook--lamented, and with tears as just
    As ever mingled with heroic dust--
    Steer'd Britain's oak into a world unknown,
    And in his country's glory sought his own,
    Wherever he found man to nature true,
    The rights of man were sacred in his view;
    He soothed with gifts, and greeted with a smile,
    The simple native of the new-found isle;
    He spurn'd the wretch that slighted or withstood
    The tender argument of kindred blood;
    Nor would endure that any should control
    His freeborn brethren of the southern pole.
      But, though some nobler minds a law respect,
    That none shall with impunity neglect,
    In baser souls unnumber'd evils meet,
    To thwart its influence, and its end defeat.
    While Cook is loved for savage lives he saved,
    See Cortez odious for a world enslaved!
    Where wast thou then, sweet Charity? where then,
    Thou tutelary friend of helpless men?
    Wast thou in monkish cells and nunneries found,
    Or building hospitals on English ground?
    No.--Mammon makes the world his legatee
    Through fear, not love; and Heaven abhors the fee.
    Wherever found, (and all men need thy care,)
    Nor age nor infancy could find thee there.
    The hand that slew till it could slay no more
    Was glued to the sword-hilt with Indian gore.
    Their prince, as justly seated on his throne
    As vain imperial Philip on his own,
    Trick'd out of all his royalty by art,
    That stripp'd him bare, and broke his honest heart,
    Died, by the sentence of a shaven priest,
    For scorning what they taught him to detest.
    How dark the veil that intercepts the blaze
    Of Heaven's mysterious purposes and ways!
    God stood not, though he seem'd to stand, aloof;
    And at this hour the conqueror feels the proof:
    The wreath he won drew down an instant curse,
    The fretting plague is in the public purse,
    The canker'd spoil corrodes the pining state,
    Starved by that indolence their mines create.
      Oh could their ancient Incas rise again,
    How would they take up Israel's taunting strain!
    Art thou too fallen, Iberia? Do we see
    The robber and the murderer weak as we?
    Thou, that hast wasted earth, and dared despise
    Alike the wrath and mercy of the skies,
    Thy pomp is in the grave, thy glory laid
    Low in the pits thine avarice has made.
    We come with joy from our eternal rest
    To see the oppressor in his turn oppress'd.
    Art thou the god, the thunder of whose hand
    Roll'd over all our desolated land,
    Shook principalities and kingdoms down,
    And made the mountains tremble at his frown?
    The sword shall light upon thy boasted powers,
    And waste them, as thy sword has wasted ours.
    'Tis thus Omnipotence his law fulfils,
    And vengeance executes what justice wills.
      Again--the band of commerce was designed
    To associate all the branches of mankind;
    And if a boundless plenty be the robe,
    Trade is the golden girdle of the globe.
    Wise to promote whatever end he means,
    God opens fruitful Nature's various scenes:
    Each climate needs what other climes produce,
    And offers something to the general use;
    No land but listens to the common call,
    And in return receives supply from all.
    This genial intercourse, and mutual aid,
    Cheers what were else a universal shade,
    Calls nature from her ivy-mantled den,
    And softens human rock-work into men.
    Ingenious Art, with her expressive face,
    Steps forth to fashion and refine the race;
    Not only fills necessity's demand,
    But overcharges her capacious hand:
    Capricious taste itself can crave no more
    Than she supplies from her abounding store:
    She strikes out all that luxury can ask,
    And gains new vigour at her endless task.
    Hers is the spacious arch, the shapely spire,
    The painter's pencil, and the poet's lyre;
    From her the canvas borrows light and shade,
    And verse, more lasting, hues that never fade.
    She guides the finger o'er the dancing keys,
    Gives difficulty all the grace of ease,
    And pours a torrent of sweet notes around
    Fast as the thirsting ear can drink the sound.
      These are the gifts of art; and art thrives most
    Where Commerce has enrich'd the busy coast;
    He catches all improvements in his flight,
    Spreads foreign wonders in his country's sight,
    Imports what others have invented well,
    And stirs his own to match them, or excel.
    'Tis thus, reciprocating each with each,
    Alternately the nations learn and teach;
    While Providence enjoins to every soul
    A union with the vast terraqueous whole.
      Heaven speed the canvas, gallantly unfurl'd
    To furnish and accommodate a world,
    To give the pole the produce of the sun,
    And knit the unsocial climates into one.
    Soft airs and gentle heavings of the wave
    Impel the fleet, whose errand is to save,
    To succour wasted regions, and replace
    The smile of opulence in sorrow's face.
    Let nothing adverse, nothing unforeseen,
    Impede the bark that ploughs the deep serene,
    Charged with a freight transcending in its worth
    The gems of India, Nature's rarest birth,
    That flies, like Gabriel on his Lord's commands,
    A herald of God's love to pagan lands!
    But ah! what wish can prosper, or what prayer,
    For merchants rich in cargoes of despair,
    Who drive a loathsome traffic, gauge, and span,
    And buy the muscles and the bones of man?
    The tender ties of father, husband, friend,
    All bonds of nature in that moment end;
    And each endures, while yet he draws his breath,
    A stroke as fatal as the scythe of death.
    The sable warrior, frantic with regret
    Of her he loves, and never can forget,
    Loses in tears the far receding shore,
    But not the thought that they must meet no more;
    Deprived of her and freedom at a blow,
    What has he left that he can yet forego?
    Yes, to deep sadness sullenly resign'd,
    He feels his body's bondage in his mind;
    Puts off his generous nature, and, to suit
    His manners with his fate, puts on the brute.
      Oh most degrading of all ills that wait
    On man, a mourner in his best estate!
    All other sorrows virtue may endure,
    And find submission more than half a cure;
    Grief is itself a medicine, and bestow'd
    To improve the fortitude that bears the load;
    To teach the wanderer, as his woes increase,
    The path of wisdom, all whose paths are peace;
    But slavery!--Virtue dreads it as her grave:
    Patience itself is meanness in a slave;
    Or, if the will and sovereignty of God
    Bid suffer it awhile, and kiss the rod,
    Wait for the dawning of a brighter day,
    And snap the chain the moment when you may.
    Nature imprints upon whate'er we see,
    That has a heart and life in it, Be free!
    The beasts are charter'd--neither age nor force
    Can quell the love of freedom in a horse:
    He breaks the cord that held him at the rack;
    And, conscious of an unincumber'd back,
    Snuffs up the morning air, forgets the rein;
    Loose fly his forelock and his ample mane;
    Responsive to the distant neigh he neighs;
    Nor stops, till, overleaping all delays,
    He finds the pasture where his fellows graze.
      Canst thou, and honour'd with a Christian name,
    Buy what is woman-born, and feel no shame?
    Trade in the blood of innocence, and plead
    Expedience as a warrant for the deed?
    So may the wolf, whom famine has made bold
    To quit the forest and invade the fold:
    So may the ruffian, who with ghostly glide,
    Dagger in hand, steals close to your bedside;
    Not he, but his emergence forced the door,
    He found it inconvenient to be poor.
    Has God then given its sweetness to the cane,
    Unless his laws be trampled on--in vain?
    Built a brave world, which cannot yet subsist,
    Unless his right to rule it be dismiss'd?
    Impudent blasphemy! So folly pleads,
    And, avarice being judge, with ease succeeds.
      But grant the plea, and let it stand for just,
    That man make man his prey, because he must;
    Still there is room for pity to abate
    And soothe the sorrows of so sad a state.
    A Briton knows, or if he knows it not,
    The scripture placed within his reach, he ought,
    That souls have no discriminating hue,
    Alike important in their Maker's view;
    That none are free from blemish since the fall,
    And love divine has paid one price for all.
    The wretch that works and weeps without relief
    Has One that notices his silent grief.
    He, from whose hand alone all power proceeds,
    Ranks its abuse among the foulest deeds,
    Considers all injustice with a frown;
    But marks the man that treads his fellow down.
    Begone!--the whip and bell in that hard hand
    Are hateful ensigns of usurp'd command.
    Not Mexico could purchase kings a claim
    To scourge him, weariness his only blame.
    Remember, Heaven has an avenging rod,
    To smite the poor is treason against God!
      Trouble is grudgingly and hardly brook'd,
    While life's sublimest joys are overlook'd:
    We wander o'er a sun-burnt thirsty soil,
    Murmuring and weary of our daily toil,
    Forget to enjoy the palm-tree's offer'd shade,
    Or taste the fountain in the neighbouring glade:
    Else who would lose, that had the power to improve
    The occasion of transmuting fear to love?
    Oh 'tis a godlike privilege to save!
    And he that scorns it is himself a slave.
    Inform his mind; one flash of heavenly day
    Would heal his heart, and melt his chains away.
    "Beauty for ashes" is a gift indeed,
    And slaves, by truth enlarged, are doubly freed.
    Then would he say, submissive at thy feet,
    While gratitude and love made service sweet,
    My dear deliverer out of hopeless night,
    Whose bounty bought me but to give me light,
    I was a bondman on my native plain,
    Sin forged, and ignorance made fast, the chain;
    Thy lips have shed instruction as the dew,
    Taught me what path to shun, and what pursue;
    Farewell my former joys! I sigh no more
    For Africa's once loved, benighted shore;
    Serving a benefactor, I am free;
    At my best home, if not exiled from thee.
      Some men make gain a fountain whence proceeds
    A stream of liberal and heroic deeds;
    The swell of pity, not to be confined
    Within the scanty limits of the mind,
    Disdains the bank, and throws the golden sands,
    A rich deposit, on the bordering lands:
    These have an ear for his paternal call,
    Who makes some rich for the supply of all;
    God's gift with pleasure in his praise employ;
    And THORNTON is familiar with the joy.
      Oh could I worship aught beneath the skies
    That earth has seen, or fancy can devise,
    Thine altar, sacred Liberty, should stand,
    Built by no mercenary vulgar hand,
    With fragrant turf, and flowers as wild and fair
    As ever dress'd a bank, or scented summer air.
    Duly, as ever on the mountain's height
    The peep of morning shed a dawning light,
    Again, when evening in her sober vest
    Drew the grey curtain of the fading west,
    My soul should yield thee willing thanks and praise
    For the chief blessings of my fairest days:
    But that were sacrilege--praise is not thine,
    But his who gave thee, and preserves thee mine:
    Else I would say, and as I spake bid fly
    A captive bird into the boundless sky,
    This triple realm adores thee--thou art come
    From Sparta hither, and art here at home.
    We feel thy force still active, at this hour
    Enjoy immunity from priestly power,
    While conscience, happier than in ancient years,
    Owns no superior but the God she fears.
    Propitious spirit! yet expunge a wrong
    Thy rights have suffer'd, and our land, too long.
    Teach mercy to ten thousand hearts, that share
    The fears and hopes of a commercial care.
    Prisons expect the wicked, and were built
    To bind the lawless, and to punish guilt;
    But shipwreck, earthquake, battle, fire, and flood,
    Are mighty mischiefs, not to be withstood;
    And honest merit stands on slippery ground,
    Where covert guile and artifice abound.
    Let just restraint, for public peace design'd,
    Chain up the wolves and tigers of mankind;
    The foe of virtue has no claim to thee,
    But let insolvent innocence go free.
      Patron of else the most despised of men,
    Accept the tribute of a stranger's pen;
    Verse, like the laurel, its immortal meed,
    Should be the guerdon of a noble deed;
    I may alarm thee, but I fear the shame
    (Charity chosen as my theme and aim)
    I must incur, forgetting HOWARD'S name.
    Blest with all wealth can give thee, to resign
    Joys doubly sweet to feelings quick as thine,
    To quit the bliss thy rural scenes bestow,
    To seek a nobler amidst scenes of woe,
    To traverse seas, range kingdoms, and bring home,
    Not the proud monuments of Greece or Rome,
    But knowledge such as only dungeons teach,
    And only sympathy like thine could reach;
    That grief, sequester'd from the public stage,
    Might smooth her feathers, and enjoy her cage;
    Speaks a divine ambition, and a zeal,
    The boldest patriot might be proud to feel.
    Oh that the voice of clamour and debate,
    That pleads for peace till it disturbs the state,
    Were hush'd in favour of thy generous plea,
    The poor thy clients, and Heaven's smile thy fee!
      Philosophy, that does not dream or stray,
    Walks arm in arm with nature all his way;
    Compasses earth, dives into it, ascends
    Whatever steep inquiry recommends,
    Sees planetary wonders smoothly roll
    Round other systems under her control,
    Drinks wisdom at the milky stream of light,
    That cheers the silent journey of the night,
    And brings at his return a bosom charged
    With rich instruction, and a soul enlarged.
    The treasured sweets of the capacious plan,
    That Heaven spreads wide before the view of man.
    All prompt his pleased pursuit, and to pursue
    Still prompt him, with a pleasure always new;
    He too has a connecting power, and draws
    Man to the centre of the common cause,
    Aiding a dubious and deficient sight
    With a new medium and a purer light.
    All truth is precious, if not all divine;
    And what dilates the powers must needs refine.
    He reads the skies, and, watching every change,
    Provides the faculties an ampler range;
    And wins mankind, as his attempts prevail,
    A prouder station on the general scale.
    But reason still, unless divinely taught,
    Whate'er she learns, learns nothing as she ought;
    The lamp of revelation only shows,
    What human wisdom cannot but oppose,
    That man, in nature's richest mantle clad,
    And graced with all philosophy can add,
    Though fair without, and luminous within
    Is still the progeny and heir of sin.
    Thus taught, down falls the plumage of his pride;
    He feels his need of an unerring guide,
    And knows that falling he shall rise no more,
    Unless the power that bade him stand restore.
    This is indeed philosophy; this known
    Makes wisdom, worthy of the name, his own;
    And without this, whatever he discuss;
    Whether the space between the stars and us;
    Whether he measure earth, compute the sea,
    Weigh sunbeams, carve a fly, or spit a flea;
    The solemn trifler with his boasted skill
    Toils much, and is a solemn trifler still:
    Blind was he born, and his misguided eyes
    Grown dim in trifling studies, blind he dies.
    Self-knowledge truly learn'd of course implies
    The rich possession of a nobler prize;
    For self to self, and God to man, reveal'd,
    (Two themes to nature's eye for ever seal'd,)
    Are taught by rays, that fly with equal pace
    From the same centre of enlightening grace.
    Here stay thy foot; how copious, and how clear,
    The o'erflowing well of Charity springs here!
    Hark! 'tis the music of a thousand rills,
    Some through the groves, some down the sloping hills,
    Winding a secret or an open course,
    And all supplied from an eternal source.
    The ties of nature do but feebly bind,
    And commerce partially reclaims mankind;
    Philosophy, without his heavenly guide,
    May blow up self-conceit, and nourish pride;
    But, while his province is the reasoning part,
    Has still a veil of midnight on his heart:
    'Tis truth divine, exhibited on earth,
    Gives Charity her being and her birth.
      Suppose (when thought is warm, and fancy flows,
    What will not argument sometimes suppose?)
    An isle possessed by creatures of our kind,
    Endued with reason, yet by nature blind.
    Let supposition lend her aid once more,
    And land some grave optician on the shore:
    He claps his lens, if haply they may see,
    Close to the part where vision ought to be;
    But finds that, though his tubes assist the sight,
    They cannot give it, or make darkness light.
    He reads wise lectures, and describes aloud
    A sense they know not to the wondering crowd;
    He talks of light and the prismatic hues,
    As men of depth in erudition use;
    But all he gains for his harangue is--Well,----
    What monstrous lies some travellers will tell!
      The soul, whose sight all-quickening grace renews,
    Takes the resemblance of the good she views,
    As diamonds, stripp'd of their opaque disguise,
    Reflect the noon-day glory of the skies.
    She speaks of Him, her author, guardian, friend,
    Whose love knew no beginning, knows no end,
    In language warm as all that love inspires;
    And, in the glow of her intense desires,
    Pants to communicate her noble fires.
    She sees a world stark blind to what employs
    Her eager thought, and feeds her flowing joys;
    Though wisdom hail them, heedless of her call,
    Flies to save some, and feels a pang for all:
    Herself as weak as her support is strong,
    She feels that frailty she denied so long;
    And, from a knowledge of her own disease,
    Learns to compassionate the sick she sees.
    Here see, acquitted of all vain pretence,
    The reign of genuine Charity commence.
    Though scorn repay her sympathetic tears,
    She still is kind, and still she perseveres;
    The truth she loves a sightless world blaspheme,
    'Tis childish dotage, a delirious dream!
    The danger they discern not they deny;
    Laugh at their only remedy, and die.
    But still a soul thus touch'd can never cease,
    Whoever threatens war, to speak of peace.
    Pure in her aim, and in her temper mild,
    Her wisdom seems the weakness of a child:
    She makes excuses where she might condemn,
    Reviled by those that hate her, prays for them;
    Suspicion lurks not in her artless breast,
    The worst suggested, she believes the best;
    Not soon provoked, however stung and teased,
    And, if perhaps made angry, soon appeased;
    She rather waives than will dispute her right;
    And, injured, makes forgiveness her delight.
      Such was the portrait an apostle drew,
    The bright original was one he knew;
    Heaven held his hand, the likeness must be true.
      When one, that holds communion with the skies,
    Has fill'd his urn where these pure waters rise,
    And once more mingles with us meaner things,
    'Tis e'en as if an angel shook his wings;
    Immortal fragrance fills the circuit wide,
    That tells us whence his treasures are supplied.
    So when a ship, well freighted with the stores
    The sun matures on India's spicy shores,
    Has dropp'd her anchor, and her canvas furl'd,
    In some safe haven of our western world,
    'Twere vain inquiry to what port she went,
    The gale informs us, laden with the scent.
      Some seek, when queasy conscience has its qualms,
    To lull the painful malady with alms;
    But charity not feign'd intends alone
    Another's good--theirs centres in their own;
    And, too short-lived to reach the realms of peace,
    Must cease for ever when the poor shall cease.
    Flavia, most tender of her own good name,
    Is rather careless of her sister's fame:
    Her superfluity the poor supplies,
    But, if she touch a character, it dies.
    The seeming virtue weigh'd against the vice,
    She deems all safe, for she has paid the price:
    No charity but alms aught values she,
    Except in porcelain on her mantel-tree.
    How many deeds, with which the world has rung,
    From pride, in league with ignorance, have sprung!
    But God o'errules all human follies still,
    And bends the tough materials to his will.
    A conflagration, or a wintry flood,
    Has left some hundreds without home or food:
    Extravagance and avarice shall subscribe,
    While fame and self-complacence are the bribe.
    The brief proclaim'd, it visits every pew,
    But first the squire's, a compliment but due:
    With slow deliberation he unties
    His glittering purse, that envy of all eyes!
    And, while the clerk just puzzles out the psalm,
    Slides guinea behind guinea in his palm;
    Till finding, what he might have found before,
    A smaller piece amidst the precious store,
    Pinch'd close between his finger and his thumb,
    He half exhibits, and then drops the sum.
    Gold, to be sure!--Throughout the town 'tis told
    How the good squire gives never less than gold.
    From motives such as his, though not the best,
    Springs in due time supply for the distress'd;
    Not less effectual than what love bestows,
    Except that office clips it as it goes.
      But lest I seem to sin against a friend,
    And wound the grace I mean to recommend,
    (Though vice derided with a just design
    Implies no trespass against love divine,)
    Once more I would adopt the graver style,
    A teacher should be sparing of his smile.
    Unless a love of virtue light the flame,
    Satire is, more than those he brands, to blame:
    He hides behind a magisterial air
    His own offences, and strips others bare;
    Affects indeed a most humane concern,
    That men, if gently tutor'd, will not learn;
    That mulish folly, not to be reclaim'd
    By softer methods, must be made ashamed;
    But (I might instance in St. Patrick's dean)
    Too often rails to gratify his spleen.
    Most satirists are indeed a public scourge;
    Their mildest physic is a farrier's purge;
    Their acrid temper turns, as soon as stirr'd,
    The milk of their good purpose all to curd.
    Their zeal begotten, as their works rehearse,
    By lean despair upon an empty purse,
    The wild assassins start into the street,
    Prepared to poniard whomsoe'er they meet.
    No skill in swordmanship, however just,
    Can be secure against a madman's thrust;
    And even virtue, so unfairly match'd,
    Although immortal, may be prick'd or scratch'd.
    When scandal has new minted an old lie,
    Or tax'd invention for a fresh supply,
    'Tis call'd a satire, and the world appears
    Gathering around it with erected ears:
    A thousand names are toss'd into the crowd;
    Some whisper'd softly, and some twang'd aloud,
    Just as the sapience of an author's brain
    Suggests it safe or dangerous to be plain.
    Strange! how the frequent interjected dash
    Quickens a market, and helps off the trash;
    The important letters that include the rest,
    Serve as a key to those that are suppress'd;
    Conjecture gripes the victims in his paw,
    The world is charm'd, and Scrib escapes the law.
    So, when the cold damp shades of night prevail,
    Worms may be caught by either head or tail;
    Forcibly drawn from many a close recess,
    They meet with little pity, no redress;
    Plung'd in the stream, they lodge upon the mud,
    Food for the famish'd rovers of the flood.
      All zeal for a reform, that gives offence
    To peace and charity, is mere pretence:
    A bold remark; but which, if well applied,
    Would humble many a towering poet's pride.
    Perhaps the man was in a sportive fit,
    And had no other play-place for his wit;
    Perhaps, enchanted with the love of fame,
    He sought the jewel in his neighbour's shame;
    Perhaps--whatever end he might pursue,
    The cause of virtue could not be his view.
    At every stroke wit flashes in our eyes;
    The turns are quick, the polish'd points surprise,
    But shine with cruel and tremendous charms,
    That, while they please, possess us with alarms;
    So have I seen, (and hasten'd to the sight
    On all the wings of holiday delight,)
    Where stands that monument of ancient power,
    Named with emphatic dignity, the Tower,
    Guns, halberts, swords, and pistols, great and small,
    In starry forms disposed upon the wall:
    We wonder, as we gazing stand below,
    That brass and steel should make so fine a show;
    But, though we praise the exact designer's skill,
    Account them implements of mischief still.
      No works shall find acceptance in that day,
    When all disguises shall be rent away,
    That square not truly with the scripture plan,
    Nor spring from love to God, or love to man.
    As he ordains things sordid in their birth
    To be resolved into their parent earth;
    And, though the soul shall seek superior orbs,
    Whate'er this world produces, it absorbs;
    So self starts nothing, but what tends apace
    Home to the goal, where it began the race.
    Such as our motive is our aim must be;
    If this be servile, that can ne'er be free:
    If self employ us, whatsoe'er is wrought,
    We glorify that self, not Him we ought;
    Such virtues had need prove their own reward,
    The Judge of all men owes them no regard.
    True Charity, a plant divinely nursed,
    Fed by the love from which it rose at first,
    Thrives against hope, and, in the rudest scene,
    Storms but enliven its unfading green;
    Exuberant is the shadow it supplies,
    Its fruit on earth, its growth above the skies.
    To look at Him, who form'd us and redeem'd,
    So glorious now, though once so disesteem'd;
    To see a God stretch forth his human hand,
    To uphold the boundless scenes of his command;
    To recollect that, in a form like ours,
    He bruised beneath his feet the infernal powers,
    Captivity led captive, rose to claim
    The wreath he won so dearly in our name;
    That, throned above all height, he condescends
    To call the few that trust in him his friends;
    That, in the heaven of heavens, that space he deems
    Too scanty for the exertion of his beams,
    And shines, as if impatient to bestow
    Life and a kingdom upon worms below;
    That sight imparts a never-dying flame,
    Though feeble in degree, in kind the same.
    Like him the soul, thus kindled from above,
    Spreads wide her arms of universal love;
    And, still enlarged as she receives the grace,
    Includes creation in her close embrace.
    Behold a Christian!--and without the fires
    The Founder of that name alone inspires,
    Though all accomplishment, all knowledge meet,
    To make the shining prodigy complete,
    Whoever boasts that name--behold a cheat!
    Were love, in these the world's last doting years,
    As frequent as the want of it appears,
    The churches warm'd, they would no longer hold
    Such frozen figures, stiff as they are cold;
    Relenting forms would lose their power, or cease;
    And e'en the dipp'd and sprinkled live in peace:
    Each heart would quit its prison in the breast,
    And flow in free communion with the rest.
    The statesman, skill'd in projects dark and deep,
    Might burn his useless Machiavel, and sleep:
    His budget, often fill'd, yet always poor,
    Might swing at ease behind his study door,
    No longer prey upon our annual rents,
    Or scare the nation with its big contents:
    Disbanded legions freely might depart,
    And slaying man would cease to be an art.
    No learned disputants would take the field,
    Sure not to conquer, and sure not to yield;
    Both sides deceived, if rightly understood,
    Pelting each other for the public good.
    Did Charity prevail, the press would prove
    A vehicle of virtue, truth, and love;
    And I might spare myself the pains to show
    What few can learn, and all suppose they know.
      Thus have I sought to grace a serious lay
    With many a wild, indeed, but flowery spray,
    In hopes to gain, what else I must have lost,
    The attention pleasure has so much engross'd.
    But if unhappily deceived I dream,
    And prove too weak for so divine a theme,
    Let Charity forgive me a mistake,
    That zeal, not vanity, has chanced to make,
    And spare the poet for his subject's sake.




CONVERSATION.

    Nam neque me tantum venientis sibilus austri,
    Nec percussa juvant fluctu tam litora, nec quæ
    Saxosas inter decurrunt flumina valles.

  VIRG. Ecl. 5.


THE ARGUMENT.

  In conversation much depends on culture--Its results frequently
  insignificant--Indecent language and oaths reprobated--The
  author's dislike of the clash of arguments--The
  noisy wrangler--Dubius an example of indecision--The
  positive pronounce without hesitation--The point of honour
  condemned--Duelling with fists instead of weapons
  proposed--Effect of long tales--The retailer of prodigies
  and lies--Qualities of a judicious tale--Smoking condemned--The
  emphatic speaker--The perfumed beau--The
  grave coxcomb--Sickness made a topic of conversation--Picture
  of a fretful temper--The bashful speaker--An
  English company--The sportsman--Influence of fashion
  on conversation--Converse of the two disciples going to
  Emmaus--Delights of religious conversation--Age mellows
  the speech--True piety often branded as fanatic frenzy--Pleasure
  of communion with the good--Conversation
  should be unconstrained--Persons who make the Bible
  their companion, charged with hypocrisy by the world--The
  charge repelled--The poet sarcastically surmises that
  his censure of the world may proceed from ignorance of its
  reformed manners--An apology for digression--Religion
  purifies and enriches conversation.

    Though nature weigh our talents, and dispense
    To every man his modicum of sense,
    And Conversation in its better part
    May be esteem'd a gift, and not an art,
    Yet much depends, as in the tiller's toil,
    On culture, and the sowing of the soil.
    Words learn'd by rote a parrot may rehearse,
    But talking is not always to converse;
    Not more distinct from harmony divine,
    The constant creaking of a country sign.
    As alphabets in ivory employ,
    Hour after hour, the yet unletter'd boy,
    Sorting and puzzling with a deal of glee
    Those seeds of science call'd his A B C;
    So language in the mouths of the adult,
    Witness its insignificant result,
    Too often proves an implement of play,
    A toy to sport with, and pass time away.
    Collect at evening what the day brought forth,
    Compress the sum into its solid worth,
    And if it weigh the importance of a fly,
    The scales are false, or algebra a lie.
    Sacred interpreter of human thought,
    How few respect or use thee as they ought!
    But all shall give account of every wrong,
    Who dare dishonour or defile the tongue;
    Who prostitute it in the cause of vice,
    Or sell their glory at a market-price;
    Who vote for hire, or point it with lampoon,
    The dear-bought placeman, and the cheap buffoon.
      There is a prurience in the speech of some,
    Wrath stays him, or else God would strike them dumb:
    His wise forbearance has their end in view,
    They fill their measure, and receive their due.
    The heathen lawgivers of ancient days,
    Names almost worthy of a Christian's praise,
    Would drive them forth from the resort of men,
    And shut up every satyr in his den.
    Oh come not ye near innocence and truth,
    Ye worms that eat into the bud of youth!
    Infectious as impure, your blighting power
    Taints in its rudiments the promised flower;
    Its odour perish'd and its charming hue,
    Thenceforth 'tis hateful, for it smells of you.
    Not e'en the vigorous and headlong rage
    Of adolescence, or a firmer age,
    Affords a plea allowable or just
    For making speech the pamperer of lust;
    But when the breath of age commits the fault
    'Tis nauseous as the vapour of a vault.
    So wither'd stumps disgrace the sylvan scene,
    No longer fruitful, and no longer green;
    The sapless wood, divested of the bark,
    Grows fungous, and takes fire at every spark.
      Oaths terminate, as Paul observes, all strife--
    Some men have surely then a peaceful life!
    Whatever subject occupy discourse,
    The feats of Vestris, or the naval force,
    Asseveration blustering in your face
    Makes contradiction such a hopeless case:
    In every tale they tell, or false or true,
    Well known, or such as no man ever knew,
    They fix attention, heedless of your pain,
    With oaths like rivets forced into the brain;
    And e'en when sober truth prevails throughout,
    They swear it, till affirmance breeds a doubt.
    A Persian, humble servant of the sun,
    Who, though devout, yet bigotry had none,
    Hearing a lawyer, grave in his address,
    With adjurations every word impress,
    Supposed the man a bishop, or at least,
    God's name so much upon his lips, a priest;
    Bow'd at the close with all his graceful airs,
    And begg'd an interest in his frequent prayers.
      Go, quit the rank to which ye stood preferr'd,
    Henceforth associate in one common herd;
    Religion, virtue, reason, common sense,
    Pronounce your human form a false pretence:
    A mere disguise, in which a devil lurks,
    Who yet betrays his secret by his works.
      Ye powers who rule the tongue, if such there are,
    And make colloquial happiness your care,
    Preserve me from the thing I dread and hate,
    A duel in the form of a debate.
    The clash of arguments and jar of words,
    Worse than the mortal brunt of rival swords,
    Decide no question with their tedious length,
    For opposition gives opinion strength,
    Divert the champions prodigal of breath,
    And put the peaceably disposed to death.
    O thwart me not, Sir Soph, at every turn,
    Nor carp at every flaw you may discern;
    Though syllogisms hang not on my tongue,
    I am not surely always in the wrong;
    'Tis hard if all is false that I advance,
    A fool must now and then be right by chance.
    Not that all freedom of dissent I blame;
    No--there I grant the privilege I claim.
    A disputable point is no man's ground;
    Rove where you please, 'tis common all around.
    Discourse may want an animated--No,
    To brush the surface, and to make it flow;
    But still remember, if you mean to please,
    To press your point with modesty and ease.
    The mark, at which my juster aim I take,
    Is contradiction for its own dear sake.
    Set your opinion at whatever pitch,
    Knots and impediments make something hitch;
    Adopt his own, 'tis equally in vain,
    Your thread of argument is snapp'd again;
    The wrangler, rather than accord with you,
    Will judge himself deceived, and prove it too.
    Vociferated logic kills me quite,
    A noisy man is always in the right,
    I twirl my thumbs, fall back into my chair,
    Fix on the wainscot a distressful stare,
    And, when I hope his blunders are all out,
    Reply discreetly--To be sure--no doubt!
      DUBIUS is such a scrupulous good man--
    Yes--you may catch him tripping, if you can.
    He would not, with a peremptory tone,
    Assert the nose upon his face his own;
    With hesitation admirably slow,
    He humbly hopes--presumes--it may be so.
    His evidence, if he were call'd by law
    To swear to some enormity he saw,
    For want of prominence and just relief,
    Would hang an honest man and save a thief.
    Through constant dread of giving truth offence,
    He ties up all his hearers in suspense;
    Knows what he knows as if he knew it not;
    What he remembers seems to have forgot;
    His sole opinion, whatsoe'er befall,
    Centring at last in having none at all.
    Yet, though he tease and balk your listening ear,
    He makes one useful point exceeding clear;
    Howe'er ingenious on his darling theme
    A sceptic in philosophy may seem,
    Reduced to practice, his beloved rule
    Would only prove him a consummate fool;
    Useless in him alike both brain and speech,
    Fate having placed all truth above his reach,
    His ambiguities his total sum,
    He might as well be blind, and deaf, and dumb.
      Where men of judgment creep and feel their way,
    The positive pronounce without dismay;
    Their want of light and intellect supplied
    By sparks absurdity strikes out of pride.
    Without the means of knowing right from wrong,
    They always are decisive, clear, and strong.
    Where others toil with philosophic force,
    Their nimble nonsense takes a shorter course;
    Flings at your head conviction in the lump,
    And gains remote conclusions at a jump:
    Their own defect, invisible to them,
    Seen in another, they at once condemn;
    And, though self-idolised in every case,
    Hate their own likeness in a brother's face.
    The cause is plain, and not to be denied,
    The proud are always most provoked by pride.
    Few competitions but engender spite;
    And those the most, where neither has a right.
      The point of honour has been deem'd of use,
    To teach good manners, and to curb abuse:
    Admit it true, the consequence is clear,
    Our polish'd manners are a mask we wear,
    And at the bottom barbarous still and rude;
    We are restrain'd indeed, but not subdued.
    The very remedy, however sure,
    Springs from the mischief it intends to cure,
    And savage in its principle appears,
    Tried, as it should be, by the fruit it bears.
    'Tis hard, indeed, if nothing will defend
    Mankind from quarrels but their fatal end;
    That now and then a hero must decease,
    That the surviving world may live in peace.
    Perhaps at last close scrutiny may show
    The practice dastardly, and mean, and low;
    That men engage in it compell'd by force;
    And fear, not courage, is its proper source.
    The fear of tyrant custom, and the fear
    Lest fops should censure us, and fools should sneer.
    At least to trample on our Maker's laws,
    And hazard life for any or no cause,
    To rush into a fix'd eternal state
    Out of the very flames of rage and hate,
    Or send another shivering to the bar
    With all the guilt of such unnatural war,
    Whatever use may urge, or honour plead,
    On reason's verdict is a madman's deed.
    Am I to set my life upon a throw,
    Because a bear is rude and surly? No--
    A moral, sensible, and well-bred man
    Will not affront me, and no other can.
    Were I empower'd to regulate the lists,
    They should encounter with well loaded fists;
    A Trojan combat would be something new,
    Let DARES beat ENTELLUS black and blue;
    Then each might show, to his admiring friends,
    In honourable bumps his rich amends,
    And carry, in contusions of his skull,
    A satisfactory receipt in full.
      A story, in which native humour reigns,
    Is often useful, always entertains:
    A graver fact, enlisted on your side,
    May furnish illustration, well applied;
    But sedentary weavers of long tales
    Give me the fidgets, and my patience fails.
    'Tis the most asinine employ on earth,
    To hear them tell of parentage and birth,
    And echo conversations dull and dry,
    Embellish'd with--He said,--and, So said I.
    At every interview their route the same,
    The repetition makes attention lame:
    We bustle up with unsuccessful speed,
    And in the saddest part cry--Droll indeed!
    The path of narrative with care pursue,
    Still making probability your clue;
    On all the vestiges of truth attend,
    And let them guide you to a decent end.
    Of all ambitious man may entertain,
    The worst that can invade a sickly brain,
    Is that which angles hourly for surprise,
    And baits its hook with prodigies and lies.
    Credulous infancy, or age as weak,
    Are fittest auditors for such to seek,
    Who to please others will themselves disgrace,
    Yet please not, but affront you to your face,
    A great retailer of this curious ware,
    Having unloaded and made many stare,
    Can this be true?--an arch observer cries;
    Yes (rather moved), I saw it with these eyes!
    Sir! I believe it on that ground alone;
    I could not, had I seen it with my own.
      A tale should be judicious, clear, succinct;
    The language plain, the incidents well linked;
    Tell not as new what everybody knows,
    And, new or old, still hasten to a close;
    There, centring in a focus round and neat,
    Let all your rays of information meet.
    What neither yields us profit nor delight
    Is like a nurse's lullaby at night;
    Guy Earl of Warwick and fair Eleanore,
    Or giant-killing Jack, would please me more.
      The pipe, with solemn interposing puff,
    Makes half a sentence at a time enough;
    The dozing sages drop the drowsy strain,
    Then pause, and puff--and speak, and pause again.
    Such often, like the tube they so admire,
    Important triflers! have more smoke than fire.
    Pernicious weed! whose scent the fair annoys,
    Unfriendly to society's chief joys,
    Thy worst effect is banishing for hours
    The sex whose presence civilizes ours;
    Thou art indeed the drug a gardener wants
    To poison vermin that infest his plants;
    But are we so to wit and beauty blind,
    As to despise the glory of our kind,
    And show the softest minds and fairest forms
    As little mercy as he grubs and worms?
    They dare not wait the riotous abuse
    Thy thirst-creating steams at length produce,
    When wine has given indecent language birth,
    And forced the floodgates of licentious mirth;
    For seaborn Venus her attachment shows
    Still to that element from which she rose,
    And, with a quiet which no fumes disturb,
    Sips meek infusions of a milder herb.
      The emphatic speaker dearly loves to oppose,
    In contact inconvenient, nose to nose,
    As if the gnomon on his neighbour's phiz,
    Touch'd with the magnet, had attracted his.
    His whisper'd theme, dilated and at large,
    Proves after all a wind-gun's airy charge,
    An extract of his diary--no more,
    A tasteless journal of the day before.
    He walk'd abroad, o'ertaken in the rain,
    Call'd on a friend, drank tea, stepp'd home again,
    Resumed his purpose, had a world of talk
    With one he stumbled on, and lost his walk.
    I interrupt him with a sudden bow,
    Adieu, dear sir! lest you should lose it now.
      I cannot talk with civet in the room,
    A fine puss gentleman that's all perfume;
    The sight's enough--no need to smell a beau--
    Who thrusts his head into a raree-show?
    His odoriferous attempts to please
    Perhaps might prosper with a swarm of bees;
    But we that make no honey, though we sting,
    Poets, are sometimes apt to maul the thing.
    'Tis wrong to bring into a mixed resort,
    What makes some sick, and others _à-la-mort_,
    An argument of cogence, we may say,
    Why such a one should keep himself away.
      A graver coxcomb we may sometimes see,
    Quite as absurd, though not so light as he:
    A shallow brain behind a serious mask,
    An oracle within an empty cask,
    The solemn fop; significant and budge;
    A fool with judges, amongst fools a judge.
    He says but little, and that little said
    Owes all its weight, like loaded dice, to lead.
    His wit invites you by his looks to come,
    But when you knock it never is at home:
    'Tis like a parcel sent you by the stage,
    Some handsome present, as your hopes presage;
    'Tis heavy, bulky, and bids fair to prove
    An absent friend's fidelity and love,
    But when unpack'd your disappointment groans
    To find it stuff'd with brickbats, earth, and stones.
      Some men employ their health, an ugly trick,
    In making known how oft they have been sick,
    And give us, in recitals of disease,
    A doctor's trouble, but without the fees;
    Relate how many weeks they kept their bed,
    How an emetic or cathartic sped;
    Nothing is slightly touch'd, much less forgot,
    Nose, ears and eyes, seem present on the spot.
    Now the distemper, spite of draught or pill,
    Victorious seemed, and now the doctor's skill;
    And now--alas for unforeseen mishaps!
    They put on a damp nightcap and relapse;
    They thought they must have died, they were so bad:
    Their peevish hearers almost wish they had.
      Some fretful tempers wince at every touch,
    You always do too little or too much:
    You speak with life, in hopes to entertain,
    Your elevated voice goes through the brain;
    You fall at once into a lower key,
    That's worse--the drone-pipe of an humble bee.
    The southern sash admits too strong a light,
    You rise and drop the curtain--now 'tis night.
    He shakes with cold--you stir the fire and strive
    To make a blaze--that's roasting him alive.
    Serve him with venison, and he wishes fish;
    With sole--that's just the sort he would not wish.
    He takes what he at first professed to loathe,
    And in due time feeds heartily on both;
    Yet still, o'erclouded with a constant frown,
    He does not swallow, but he gulps it down.
    Your hope to please him vain on every plan,
    Himself should work that wonder if he can--
    Alas! his efforts double his distress,
    He likes yours little, and his own still less.
    Thus always teasing others, always teased,
    His only pleasure is to be displeased.
      I pity bashful men, who feel the pain
    Of fancied scorn and undeserved disdain,
    And bear the marks upon a blushing face
    Of needless shame and self-imposed disgrace.
    Our sensibilities are so acute,
    The fear of being silent makes us mute.
    We sometimes think we could a speech produce
    Much to the purpose, if our tongues were loose;
    But, being tried, it dies upon the lip,
    Faint as a chicken's note that has the pip:
    Our wasted oil unprofitably burns,
    Like hidden lamps in old sepulchral urns.
    Few Frenchmen of this evil have complain'd;
    It seems as if we Britons were ordained,
    By way of wholesome curb upon our pride,
    To fear each other, fearing none beside.
    The cause perhaps inquiry may descry,
    Self-searching with an introverted eye,
    Conceal'd within an unsuspected part
    The vainest corner of our own vain heart:
    For ever aiming at the world's esteem,
    Our self-importance ruins its own scheme;
    In other eyes our talents rarely shown,
    Become at length so splendid in our own,
    We dare not risk them into public view,
    Lest they miscarry of what seems their due.
    True modesty is a discerning grace,
    And only blushes in the proper place;
    But counterfeit is blind, and skulks through fear,
    Where 'tis a shame to be ashamed to appear:
    Humility the parent of the first,
    The last by vanity produced and nursed.
    The circle form'd, we sit in silent state,
    Like figures drawn upon a dial-plate;
    Yes, ma'am, and No, ma'am, utter'd softly, show
    Every five minutes how the minutes go;
    Each individual, suffering a constraint
    Poetry may, but colours cannot, paint;
    And, if in close committee on the sky,
    Reports it hot or cold, or wet or dry;
    And finds a changing clime a happy source
    Of wise reflection and well-timed discourse.
    We next inquire, but softly and by stealth,
    Like conservators of the public health,
    Of epidemic throats, if such there are,
    And coughs, and rheums, and phthisic, and catarrh.
    That theme exhausted, a wide chasm ensues,
    Fill'd up at last with interesting news,
    Who danc'd with whom, and who are like to wed,
    And who is hang'd, and who is brought to bed:
    But fear to call a more important cause,
    As if 'twere treason against English laws.
    The visit paid, with ecstacy we come,
    As from a seven years' transportation, home,
    And there resume an unembarrass'd brow,
    Recovering what we lost, we know not how,
    The faculties that seem'd reduced to nought,
    Expression and the privilege of thought.
      The reeking, roaring hero of the chase,
    I give him over as a desperate case.
    Physicians write in hopes to work a cure,
    Never, if honest ones, when death is sure;
    And though the fox he follows may be tamed,
    A mere fox-follower never is reclaim'd.
    Some farrier should prescribe his proper course,
    Whose only fit companion is his horse,
    Or if, deserving of a better doom,
    The noble beast judge otherwise, his groom.
    Yet e'en the rogue that serves him, though he stand
    To take his honour's orders, cap in hand,
    Prefers his fellow grooms with much good sense,
    Their skill a truth, his master's a pretence.
    If neither horse nor groom affect the 'squire,
    Where can at last his jockeyship retire?
    Oh, to the club, the scene of savage joys,
    The school of coarse good fellowship and noise;
    There, in the sweet society of those
    Whose friendship from his boyish years he chose,
    Let him improve his talent if he can,
    Till none but beasts acknowledge him a man.
      Man's heart had been impenetrably seal'd,
    Like theirs that cleave the flood or graze the field,
    Had not his Maker's all-bestowing hand
    Given him a soul, and bade him understand;
    The reasoning power vouchsafed, of course inferr'd
    The power to clothe that reason with his word;
    For all is perfect that God works on earth,
    And he that gives conception aids the birth.
    If this be plain, 'tis plainly understood,
    What uses of his boon the Giver would.
    The mind despatch'd upon her busy toil,
    Should range where Providence has bless'd the soil;
    Visiting every flower with labour meet,
    And gathering all her treasures sweet by sweet,
    She should imbue the tongue with what she sips,
    And shed the balmy blessing on the lips,
    That good diffused may more abundant grow,
    And speech may praise the power that bids it flow.
    Will the sweet warbler of the livelong night,
    That fills the listening lover with delight,
    Forget his harmony, with rapture heard,
    To learn the twittering of a meaner bird?
    Or make the parrot's mimicry his choice,
    That odious libel on a human voice?
    No--nature, unsophisticate by man,
    Starts not aside from her Creator's plan;
    The melody, that was at first design'd
    To cheer the rude forefathers of mankind,
    Is note for note delivered in our ears,
    In the last scene of her six thousand years.
    Yet Fashion, leader of a chattering train,
    Whom man, for his own hurt, permits to reign,
    Who shifts and changes all things but his shape,
    And would degrade her votary to an ape,
    The fruitful parent of abuse and wrong,
    Holds a usurp'd dominion o'er his tongue;
    There sits and prompts him with his own disgrace,
    Prescribes the theme, the tone, and the grimace,
    And, when accomplish'd in her wayward school,
    Calls gentleman whom she has made a fool.
    'Tis an unalterable fix'd decree,
    That none could frame or ratify but she,
    That heaven and hell, and righteousness and sin,
    Snares in his path, and foes that lurk within,
    God and his attributes, (a field of day
    Where 'tis an angel's happiness to stray,)
    Fruits of his love and wonders of his might,
    Be never named in ears esteem'd polite;
    That he who dares, when she forbids, be grave,
    Shall stand proscribed, a madman or a knave,
    A close designer not to be believed,
    Or, if excused that charge, at least deceived.
    Oh folly worthy of the nurse's lap,
    Give it the breast, or stop its mouth with pap!
    Is it incredible, or can it seem
    A dream to any except those that dream,
    That man should love his Maker, and that fire,
    Warming his heart, should at his lips transpire?
    Know then, and modestly let fall your eyes,
    And veil your daring crest that braves the skies;
    That air of insolence affronts your God,
    You need his pardon, and provoke his rod:
    Now, in a posture that becomes you more
    Than that heroic strut assumed before,
    Know, your arrears with every hour accrue
    For mercy shown, while wrath is justly due.
    The time is short, and there are souls on earth,
    Though future pain may serve for present mirth,
    Acquainted with the woes that fear or shame,
    By fashion taught, forbade them once to name,
    And, having felt the pangs you deem a jest,
    Have proved them truths too big to be express'd.
    Go seek on revelation's hallow'd ground,
    Sure to succeed, the remedy they found;
    Touched by that power that you have dared to mock,
    That makes seas stable, and dissolves the rock,
    Your heart shall yield a life-renewing stream,
    That fools, as you have done, shall call a dream.
      It happen'd on a solemn eventide,
    Soon after He that was our surety died,
    Two bosom friends, each pensively inclined,
    The scene of all those sorrows left behind,
    Sought their own village, busied as they went
    In musings worthy of the great event:
    They spake of him they loved, of him whose life,
    Though blameless, had incurr'd perpetual strife,
    Whose deeds had left, in spite of hostile arts,
    A deep memorial graven on their hearts.
    The recollection, like a vein of ore,
    The farther traced, enrich'd them still the more;
    They thought him, and they justly thought him, one
    Sent to do more than he appear'd to have done;
    To exalt a people, and to place them high
    Above all else, and wonder'd he should die.
    Ere yet they brought their journey to an end,
    A stranger join'd them, courteous as a friend,
    And ask'd them, with a kind engaging air,
    What their affliction was, and begg'd a share.
    Inform'd, he gather'd up the broken thread,
    And, truth and wisdom gracing all he said,
    Explain'd, illustrated, and search'd so well
    The tender theme on which they chose to dwell,
    That, reaching home, the night, they said, is near,
    We must not now be parted, sojourn here--
    The new acquaintance soon became a guest,
    And made so welcome at their simple feast,
    He bless'd the bread, but vanish'd at the word,
    And left them both exclaiming, 'Twas the Lord!
    Did not our hearts feel all he deign'd to say,
    Did they not burn within us by the way?
      Now theirs was converse, such as it behoves
    Man to maintain, and such as God approves:
    Their views indeed were indistinct and dim,
    But yet successful, being aim'd at him.
    Christ and his character their only scope,
    Their object, and their subject, and their hope,
    They felt what it became them much to feel,
    And, wanting him to loose the sacred seal,
    Found him as prompt as their desire was true,
    To spread the new-born glories in their view.
    Well--what are ages and the lapse of time
    Match'd against truths, as lasting as sublime?
    Can length of years on God himself exact?
    Or make that fiction which was once a fact?
    No--marble and recording brass decay,
    And, like the graver's memory, pass away;
    The works of man inherit, as is just,
    Their author's frailty, and return to dust:
    But truth divine for ever stands secure,
    Its head is guarded as its base is sure;
    Fix'd in the rolling flood of endless years,
    The pillar of the eternal plan appears,
    The raving storm and dashing wave defies,
    Built by that Architect who built the skies.
    Hearts may be found, that harbour at this hour
    That love of Christ, and all its quickening power;
    And lips unstained by folly or by strife,
    Whose wisdom, drawn from the deep well of life,
    Tastes of its healthful origin, and flows
    A Jordan for the ablution of our woes.
    O days of heaven, and nights of equal praise,
    Serene and peaceful as those heavenly days,
    When souls drawn upwards in communion sweet
    Enjoy the stillness of some close retreat,
    Discourse, as if released and safe at home,
    Of dangers past, and wonders yet to come,
    And spread the sacred treasures of the breast
    Upon the lap of covenanted rest!
      What, always dreaming over heavenly things,
    Like angel-heads in stone with pigeon-wings?
    Canting and whining out all day the word,
    And half the night? fanatic and absurd!
    Mine be the friend less frequent in his prayers,
    Who makes no bustle with his soul's affairs,
    Whose wit can brighten up a wint'ry day,
    And chase the splenetic dull hours away;
    Content on earth in earthly things to shine,
    Who waits for heaven ere he becomes divine,
    Leaves saints to enjoy those altitudes they teach,
    And plucks the fruit placed more within his reach.
      Well spoken, advocate of sin and shame,
    Known by thy bleating, Ignorance thy name.
    Is sparkling wit the world's exclusive right?
    The fix'd fee-simple of the vain and light?
    Can hopes of heaven, bright prospects of an hour,
    That come to waft us out of sorrow's power,
    Obscure or quench a faculty that finds
    Its happiest soil in the serenest minds?
    Religion curbs indeed its wanton play,
    And brings the trifler under rigorous sway,
    But gives it usefulness unknown before,
    And purifying, makes it shine the more.
    A Christian's wit is inoffensive light,
    A beam that aids, but never grieves the sight;
    Vigorous in age as in the flush of youth;
    'Tis always active on the side of truth;
    Temperance and peace ensure its healthful state,
    And make it brightest at its latest date.
    Oh I have seen (nor hope perhaps in vain,
    Ere life go down, to see such sights again)
    A veteran warrior in the Christian field,
    Who never saw the sword he could not wield;
    Grave without dulness, learned without pride,
    Exact, yet not precise, though meek, keen-eyed;
    A man that would have foil'd at their own play
    A dozen would-be's of the modern day;
    Who, when occasion justified its use,
    Had wit as bright as ready to produce,
    Could fetch from records of an earlier age,
    Or from philosophy's enlighten'd page,
    His rich materials, and regale your ear
    With strains it was a privilege to hear:
    Yet above all his luxury supreme,
    And his chief glory, was the gospel theme;
    There he was copious as old Greece or Rome,
    His happy eloquence seem'd there at home,
    Ambitious not to shine or to excel,
    But to treat justly what he loved so well.
      It moves me more perhaps than folly ought,
    When some green heads, as void of wit as thought,
    Suppose themselves monopolists of sense,
    And wiser men's ability pretence.
    Though time will wear us, and we must grow old,
    Such men are not forgot as soon as cold,
    Their fragrant memory will outlast their tomb,
    Embalm'd for ever in its own perfume.
    And to say truth, though in its early prime,
    And when unstain'd with any grosser crime,
    Youth has a sprightliness and fire to boast,
    That in the valley of decline are lost,
    And virtue with peculiar charms appears,
    Crown'd with the garland of life's blooming years;
    Yet age, by long experience well inform'd,
    Well read, well temper'd, with religion warm'd,
    That fire abated which impels rash youth,
    Proud of his speed, to overshoot the truth,
    As time improves the grape's authentic juice,
    Mellows and makes the speech more fit for use,
    And claims a reverence in its shortening day,
    That 'tis an honour and a joy to pay.
    The fruits of age, less fair, are yet more sound,
    Than those a brighter season pours around;
    And, like the stores autumnal suns mature,
    Through wintry rigours unimpair'd endure.
      What is fanatic frenzy, scorn'd so much,
    And dreaded more than a contagious touch?
    I grant it dangerous, and approve your fear,
    That fire is catching, if you draw too near;
    But sage observers oft mistake the flame,
    And give true piety that odious name.
    To tremble (as the creature of an hour
    Ought at the view of an almighty power)
    Before his presence, at whose awful throne
    All tremble in all worlds, except our own,
    To supplicate his mercy, love his ways,
    And prize them above pleasure, wealth, or praise,
    Though common sense, allow'd a casting voice,
    And free from bias, must approve the choice,
    Convicts a man fanatic in the extreme,
    And wild as madness in the world's esteem.
    But that disease, when soberly defined,
    Is the false fire of an o'erheated mind;
    It views the truth with a distorted eye,
    And either warps or lays it useless by;
    'Tis narrow, selfish, arrogant, and draws
    Its sordid nourishment from man's applause;
    And, while at heart sin unrelinquish'd lies,
    Presumes itself chief favourite of the skies.
    'Tis such a light as putrefaction breeds
    In fly-blown flesh, whereon the maggot feeds,
    Shines in the dark, but, usher'd into day,
    The stench remains, the lustre dies away.
      True bliss, if man may reach it, is composed
    Of hearts in union mutually disclosed;
    And, farewell else all hope of pure delight,
    Those hearts should be reclaim'd, renew'd, upright.
    Bad men, profaning friendship's hallow'd name,
    Form, in its stead, a covenant of shame.
    A dark confederacy against the laws
    Of virtue, and religion's glorious cause:
    They build each other up with dreadful skill,
    As bastions set point-blank against God's will;
    Enlarge and fortify the dread redoubt,
    Deeply resolved to shut a Saviour out;
    Call legions up from hell to back the deed;
    And, cursed with conquest, finally succeed.
    But souls, that carry on a blest exchange
    Of joys they meet with in their heavenly range,
    And with a fearless confidence make known
    The sorrows sympathy esteems its own,
    Daily derive increasing light and force
    From such communion in their pleasant course,
    Feel less the journey's roughness and its length,
    Meet their opposers with united strength,
    And, one in heart, in interest, and design,
    Gird up each other to the race divine.
      But Conversation, choose what theme we may,
    And chiefly when religion leads the way,
    Should flow, like waters after summer showers,
    Not as if raised by mere mechanic powers.
    The Christian, in whose soul, though now distress'd,
    Lives the dear thought of joys he once possess'd,
    When all his glowing language issued forth
    With God's deep stamp upon its current worth,
    Will speak without disguise, and must impart,
    Sad as it is, his undissembling heart,
    Abhors constraint, and dares not feign a zeal,
    Or seem to boast a fire, he does not feel.
    The song of Sion is a tasteless thing,
    Unless, when rising on a joyful wing,
    The soul can mix with the celestial bands,
    And give the strain the compass it demands.
      Strange tidings these to tell a world, who treat
    All but their own experience as deceit!
    Will they believe, though credulous enough
    To swallow much upon much weaker proof,
    That there are blest inhabitants of earth,
    Partakers of a new ethereal birth,
    Their hopes, desires, and purposes estranged
    From things terrestrial, and divinely changed,
    Their very language of a kind that speaks
    The soul's sure interest in the good she seeks,
    Who deal with scripture, its importance felt,
    As Tully with philosophy once dealt,
    And, in the silent watches of the night,
    And through the scenes of toil-renewing light,
    The social walk, or solitary ride,
    Keep still the dear companion at their side?
    No--shame upon a self-disgracing age,
    God's work may serve an ape upon a stage
    With such a jest as fill'd with hellish glee
    Certain invisibles as shrewd as he;
    But veneration or respect finds none,
    Save from the subjects of that work alone.
    The World grown old her deep discernment shows,
    Claps spectacles on her sagacious nose,
    Peruses closely the true Christian's face,
    And finds it a mere mask of sly grimace;
    Usurps God's office, lays his bosom bare,
    And finds hypocrisy close lurking there;
    And, serving God herself through mere constraint,
    Concludes his unfeign'd love of him a feint.
    And yet, God knows, look human nature through,
    (And in due time the world shall know it too)
    That since the flowers of Eden felt the blast,
    That after man's defection laid all waste,
    Sincerity towards the heart-searching God
    Has made the new-born creature her abode,
    Nor shall be found in unregenerate souls
    Till the last fire burn all between the poles.
    Sincerity! why 'tis his only pride,
    Weak and imperfect in all grace beside,
    He knows that God demands his heart entire,
    And gives him all his just demands require.
    Without it, his pretensions were as vain
    As, having it, he deems the world's disdain;
    That great defect would cost him not alone
    Man's favourable judgment but his own;
    His birthright shaken, and no longer clear
    Than while his conduct proves his heart sincere.
    Retort the charge, and let the world be told
    She boasts a confidence she does not hold;
    That, conscious of her crimes, she feels instead
    A cold misgiving and a killing dread:
    That while in health the ground of her support
    Is madly to forget that life is short;
    That sick she trembles, knowing she must die,
    Her hope presumption, and her faith a lie;
    That while she dotes and dreams that she believes,
    She mocks her Maker, and herself deceives,
    Her utmost reach, historical assent,
    The doctrines warp'd to what they never meant;
    That truth itself is in her head as dull
    And useless as a candle in a skull,
    And all her love of God a groundless claim,
    A trick upon the canvas, painted flame.
    Tell her again, the sneer upon her face,
    And all her censures of the work of grace,
    Are insincere, meant only to conceal
    A dread she would not, yet is forced to feel;
    That in her heart the Christian she reveres,
    And, while she seems to scorn him, only fears.
      A poet does not work by square or line,
    As smiths and joiners perfect a design;
    At least we moderns, our attention less,
    Beyond the example of our sires digress,
    And claim a right to scamper and run wide,
    Wherever chance, caprice, or fancy guide.
    The world and I fortuitously met;
    I owed a trifle, and have paid the debt;
    She did me wrong, I recompensed the deed,
    And, having struck the balance, now proceed.
    Perhaps, however, as some years have pass'd
    Since she and I conversed together last,
    And I have lived recluse in rural shades,
    Which seldom a distinct report pervades,
    Great changes and new manners have occurr'd,
    And blest reforms that I have never heard,
    And she may now be as discreet and wise,
    As once absurd in all discerning eyes.
    Sobriety perhaps may now be found
    Where once intoxication press'd the ground;
    The subtle and injurious may be just,
    And he grown chaste that was the slave of lust;
    Arts once esteem'd may be with shame dismiss'd;
    Charity may relax the miser's fist;
    The gamester may have cast his cards away,
    Forgot to curse, and only kneel to pray.
    It has indeed been told me (with what weight,
    How credibly, 'tis hard for me to state,)
    That fables old, that seem'd for ever mute,
    Revived, are hastening into fresh repute,
    And gods and goddesses, discarded long,
    Like useless lumber or a stroller's song,
    Are bringing into vogue their heathen train,
    And Jupiter bids fair to rule again;
    That certain feasts are instituted now,
    Where Venus hears the lover's tender vow;
    That all Olympus through the country roves,
    To consecrate our few remaining groves,
    And Echo learns politely to repeat
    The praise of names for ages obsolete;
    That having proved the weakness, it should seem,
    Of revelation's ineffectual beam,
    To bring the passions under sober sway,
    And give the moral springs their proper play,
    They mean to try what may at last be done,
    By stout substantial gods of wood and stone,
    And whether Roman rites may not produce
    The virtues of old Rome for English use.
    May such success attend the pious plan,
    May Mercury once more embellish man,
    Grace him again with long forgotten arts,
    Reclaim his taste, and brighten up his parts,
    Make him athletic as in days of old,
    Learn'd at the bar, in the palæstra bold,
    Divest the rougher sex of female airs,
    And teach the softer not to copy theirs:
    The change shall please, nor shall it matter aught,
    Who works the wonder, if it be but wrought.
    'Tis time, however, if the case stands thus,
    For us plain folks, and all who side with us,
    To build our altar, confident and bold,
    And say, as stern Elijah said of old,
    The strife now stands upon a fair award,
    If Israel's Lord be God, then serve the Lord:
    If he be silent, faith is all a whim,
    Then Baal is the God, and worship him.
      Digression is so much in modern use,
    Thought is so rare, and fancy so profuse,
    Some never seem so wide of their intent,
    As when returning to the theme they meant;
    As mendicants, whose business is to roam,
    Make every parish but their own their home.
    Though such continual zigzags in a book,
    Such drunken reelings have an awkward look,
    And I had rather creep to what is true,
    Than rove and stagger with no mark in view;
    Yet to consult a little, seem'd no crime,
    The freakish humour of the present time:
    But now to gather up what seems dispersed,
    And touch the subject I design'd at first,
    May prove, though much beside the rules of art,
    Best for the public, and my wisest part.
    And first, let no man charge me, that I mean
    To clothe in sable every social scene,
    And give good company a face severe,
    As if they met around a father's bier;
    For tell some men that, pleasure all their bent,
    And laughter all their work, is life misspent,
    Their wisdom bursts into this sage reply,
    Then mirth is sin, and we should always cry.
    To find the medium asks some share of wit,
    And therefore 'tis a mark fools never hit.
    But though life's valley be a vale of tears,
    A brighter scene beyond that vale appears,
    Whose glory, with a light that never fades,
    Shoots between scatter'd rocks and opening shades,
    And, while it shows the land the soul desires,
    The language of the land she seeks inspires.
    Thus touch'd, the tongue receives a sacred cure
    Of all that was absurd, profane, impure;
    Held within modest bounds, the tide of speech
    Pursues the course that truth and nature teach;
    No longer labours merely to produce
    The pomp of sound, or tinkle without use:
    Where'er it winds, the salutary stream,
    Sprightly and fresh, enriches every theme,
    While all the happy man possess'd before,
    The gift of nature, or the classic store,
    Is made subservient to the grand design,
    For which Heaven form'd the faculty divine.
    So, should an idiot, while at large he strays,
    Find the sweet lyre on which an artist plays,
    With rash and awkward force the chords he shakes,
    And grins with wonder at the jar he makes;
    But let the wise and well-instructed hand
    Once take the shell beneath his just command,
    In gentle sounds it seems as it complain'd
    Of the rude injuries it late sustain'd,
    Till, tuned at length to some immortal song,
    It sounds Jehovah's name, and pours his praise along.




RETIREMENT.

  ...... studiis florens ignobilis otî.

  VIRG. Georg. lib. iv.


THE ARGUMENT.

     The busy universally desirous of retirement--Important purpose
     for which this desire was given to man--Musing on the works
     of the creation, a happy employment--The service of God not
     incompatible, however, with a life of business--Human life;
     its pursuits--Various motives for seeking retirement--The
     poet's delight in the study of nature--The lover's fondness
     for retirement--The hypochondriac--Melancholy, a malady
     that claims most compassion, receives the least--Sufferings
     of the melancholy man--The statesman's retirement--His new
     mode of life and company--Soon weary of retirement, he
     returns to his former pursuits--Citizens' villas--Fashion of
     frequenting watering-places--The ocean--The spendthrift in
     forced retirement--The sportsman ostler--The management of
     leisure a difficult task--Man will be summoned to account for
     the employment of life--Books and friends requisite for the
     man of leisure; and divine communion to fill the remaining
     void--Religion not adverse to innocent pleasures--The poet
     concludes with reference to his own pursuit.

    Hackney'd in business, wearied at that oar,
    Which thousands, once fast chain'd to, quit no more,
    But which, when life at ebb runs weak and low,
    All wish, or seem to wish, they could forego;
    The statesman, lawyer, merchant, man of trade,
    Pants for the refuge of some rural shade,
    Where, all his long anxieties forgot
    Amid the charms of a sequester'd spot,
    Or recollected only to gild o'er,
    And add a smile to what was sweet before,
    He may possess the joys he thinks he sees,
    Lay his old age upon the lap of ease,
    Improve the remnant of his wasted span,
    And, having lived a trifler, die a man.
    Thus conscience pleads her cause within the breast,
    Though long rebell'd against, not yet suppress'd,
    And calls a creature form'd for God alone,
    For Heaven's high purposes, and not his own,
    Calls him away from selfish ends and aims,
    From what debilitates and what inflames,
    From cities humming with a restless crowd,
    Sordid as active, ignorant as loud,
    Whose highest praise is that they live in vain,
    The dupes of pleasure, or the slaves of gain,
    Where works of man are cluster'd close around,
    And works of God are hardly to be found,
    To regions where, in spite of sin and woe,
    Traces of Eden are still seen below,
    Where mountain, river, forest, field, and grove,
    Remind him of his Maker's power and love.
    'Tis well if, look'd for at so late a day,
    In the last scene of such a senseless play,
    True wisdom will attend his feeble call,
    And grace his action ere the curtain fall.
    Souls, that have long despised their heavenly birth,
    Their wishes all impregnated with earth,
    For threescore years employ'd with ceaseless care
    In catching smoke and feeding upon air,
    Conversant only with the ways of men,
    Rarely redeem the short remaining ten.
    Inveterate habits choke the unfruitful heart,
    Their fibres penetrate its tenderest part,
    And, draining its nutritious powers to feed
    Their noxious growth, starve every better seed.
      Happy, if full of days--but happier far,
    If, ere we yet discern life's evening star,
    Sick of the service of a world, that feeds
    Its patient drudges with dry chaff and weeds,
    We can escape from custom's idiot sway,
    To serve the sovereign we were born to obey.
    Then sweet to muse upon his skill display'd
    (Infinite skill) in all that he has made!
    To trace in nature's most minute design
    The signature and stamp of power divine,
    Contrivance intricate, express'd with ease,
    Where unassisted sight no beauty sees,
    The shapely limb and lubricated joint,
    Within the small dimensions of a point,
    Muscle and nerve miraculously spun,
    His mighty work, who speaks and it is done,
    The invisible in things scarce seen reveal'd,
    To whom an atom is an ample field:
    To wonder at a thousand insect forms,
    These hatch'd, and those resuscitated worms,
    New life ordain'd and brighter scenes to share,
    Once prone on earth, now buoyant upon air,
    Whose shape would make them, had they bulk and size,
    More hideous foes than fancy can devise;
    With helmet-heads and dragon-scales adorn'd,
    The mighty myriads, now securely scorn'd,
    Would mock the majesty of man's high birth,
    Despise his bulwarks, and unpeople earth:
    Then with a glance of fancy to survey,
    Far as the faculty can stretch away,
    Ten thousand rivers pour'd at his command,
    From urns that never fail, through every land;
    These like a deluge with impetuous force,
    Those winding modestly a silent course;
    The cloud-surmounting Alps, the fruitful vales;
    Seas, on which every nation spreads her sails;
    The sun, a world whence other worlds drink light,
    The crescent moon, the diadem of night:
    Stars countless, each in his appointed place,
    Fast anchor'd in the deep abyss of space--
    At such a sight to catch the poet's flame,
    And with a rapture like his own exclaim
    These are thy glorious works, thou Source of Good,
    How dimly seen, how faintly understood!
    Thine, and upheld by thy paternal care,
    This universal frame, thus wondrous fair;
    Thy power divine, and bounty beyond thought,
    Adored and praised in all that thou hast wrought.
    Absorbed in that immensity I see,
    I shrink abased, and yet aspire to thee;
    Instruct me, guide me to that heavenly day
    Thy words more clearly than thy works display,
    That, while thy truths my grosser thoughts refine,
    I may resemble thee, and call thee mine.
      O blest proficiency! surpassing all
    That men erroneously their glory call,
    The recompence that arts or arms can yield,
    The bar, the senate, or the tented field.
    Compared with this sublimest life below,
    Ye kings and rulers, what have courts to show?
    Thus studied, used, and consecrated thus,
    On earth what is, seems form'd indeed for us;
    Not as the plaything of a froward child,
    Fretful unless diverted and beguiled,
    Much less to feed and fan the fatal fires
    Of pride, ambition, or impure desires,
    But as a scale, by which the soul ascends
    From mighty means to more important ends,
    Securely, though by steps but rarely trod,
    Mounts from inferior beings up to God,
    And sees, by no fallacious light or dim,
    Earth made for man, and man himself for him.
      Not that I mean to approve, or would enforce,
    A superstitious and monastic course:
    Truth is not local, God alike pervades
    And fills the world of traffic and the shades,
    And may be fear'd amidst the busiest scenes,
    Or scorn'd where business never intervenes.
    But, 'tis not easy with a mind like ours,
    Conscious of weakness in its noblest powers,
    And in a world where, other ills apart,
    The roving eye misleads the careless heart,
    To limit thought, by nature prone to stray
    Wherever freakish fancy points the way;
    To bid the pleadings of self-love be still,
    Resign our own and seek our Maker's will;
    To spread the page of scripture, and compare
    Our conduct with the laws engraven there;
    To measure all that passes in the breast,
    Faithfully, fairly, by that sacred test;
    To dive into the secret deeps within,
    To spare no passion and no favourite sin,
    And search the themes, important above all,
    Ourselves, and our recovery from our fall.
    But leisure, silence, and a mind released
    From anxious thoughts how wealth may be increased,
    How to secure, in some propitious hour,
    The point of interest or the post of power,
    A soul serene, and equally retired
    From objects too much dreaded or desired,
    Safe from the clamours of perverse dispute,
    At least are friendly to the great pursuit.
      Opening the map of God's extensive plan,
    We find a little isle, this life of man;
    Eternity's unknown expanse appears
    Circling around and limiting his years.
    The busy race examine and explore
    Each creek and cavern of the dangerous shore,
    With care collect what in their eyes excels,
    Some shining pebbles, and some weeds and shells,
    Thus laden, dream that they are rich and great,
    And happiest he that groans beneath his weight.
    The waves o'ertake them in their serious play,
    And every hour sweeps multitudes away;
    They shriek and sink, survivors start and weep,
    Pursue their sport, and follow to the deep.
    A few forsake the throng; with lifted eyes
    Ask wealth of Heaven, and gain a real prize,
    Truth, wisdom, grace, and peace like that above,
    Seal'd with his signet, whom they serve and love;
    Scorn'd by the rest, with patient hope they wait
    A kind release from their imperfect state,
    And unregretted are soon snatch'd away
    From scenes of sorrow into glorious day.
      Nor these alone prefer a life recluse,
    Who seek retirement for its proper use;
    The love of change, that lives in every breast,
    Genius, and temper, and desire of rest,
    Discordant motives in one centre meet,
    And each inclines its votary to retreat.
    Some minds by nature are averse to noise,
    And hate the tumult half the world enjoys,
    The lure of avarice, or the pompous prize
    That courts display before ambitious eyes;
    The fruits that hang on pleasure's flowery stem,
    Whate'er enchants them, are no snares to them.
    To them the deep recess of dusky groves,
    Or forest, where the deer securely roves,
    The fall of waters, and the song of birds,
    And hills that echo to the distant herds,
    Are luxuries excelling all the glare
    The world can boast, and her chief favourites share.
    With eager step, and carelessly array'd,
    For such a cause the poet seeks the shade,
    From all he sees he catches new delight,
    Pleased Fancy claps her pinions at the sight,
    The rising or the setting orb of day,
    The clouds that flit, or slowly float away,
    Nature in all the various shapes she wears,
    Frowning in storms, or breathing gentle airs,
    The snowy robe her wintry state assumes,
    Her summer heats, her fruits, and her perfumes,
    All, all alike transport the glowing bard,
    Success in rhyme his glory and reward.
    O Nature! whose Elysian scenes disclose
    His bright perfections at whose word they rose,
    Next to that power who form'd thee, and sustains,
    Be thou the great inspirer of my strains.
    Still, as I touch the lyre, do thou expand
    Thy genuine charms, and guide an artless hand,
    That I may catch a fire but rarely known,
    Give useful light, though I should miss renown,
    And, poring on thy page, whose every line
    Bears proof of an intelligence divine,
    May feel a heart enrich'd by what it pays,
    That builds its glory on its Maker's praise.
    Woe to the man whose wit disclaims its use,
    Glittering in vain, or only to seduce,
    Who studies nature with a wanton eye,
    Admires the work, but slips the lesson by;
    His hours of leisure and recess employs
    In drawing pictures of forbidden joys,
    Retires to blazon his own worthless name,
    Or shoot the careless with a surer aim.
      The lover too shuns business and alarms,
    Tender idolater of absent charms.
    Saints offer nothing in their warmest prayers
    That he devotes not with a zeal like theirs;
    'Tis consecration of his heart, soul, time,
    And every thought that wanders is a crime.
    In sighs he worships his supremely fair,
    And weeps a sad libation in despair;
    Adores a creature, and, devout in vain,
    Wins in return an answer of disdain.
    As woodbine weds the plant within her reach,
    Rough elm, or smooth-grain'd ash, or glossy beech,
    In spiral rings ascends the trunk, and lays
    Her golden tassels on the leafy sprays,
    But does a mischief while she lends a grace,
    Straightening its growth by such a strict embrace;
    So love, that clings around the noblest minds
    Forbids the advancement of the soul he binds;
    The suitor's air indeed he soon improves,
    And forms it to the taste of her he loves,
    Teaches his eyes a language, and no less
    Refines his speech, and fashions his address;
    But farewell promises of happier fruits,
    Manly designs, and learning's grave pursuits;
    Girt with a chain he cannot wish to break,
    His only bliss is sorrow for her sake;
    Who will may pant for glory and excel,
    Her smile his aim, all higher aims farewell!
    Thyrsis, Alexis, or whatever name
    May least offend against so pure a flame,
    Though sage advice of friends the most sincere
    Sounds harshly in so delicate an ear,
    And lovers, of all creatures, tame or wild,
    Can least brook management, however mild,
    Yet let a poet (poetry disarms
    The fiercest animals with magic charms)
    Risk an intrusion on thy pensive mood,
    And woo and win thee to thy proper good.
    Pastoral images and still retreats,
    Umbrageous walks and solitary seats,
    Sweet birds in concert with harmonious streams,
    Soft airs, nocturnal vigils, and day-dreams,
    Are all enchantments in a case like thine,
    Conspire against thy peace with one design,
    Soothe thee to make thee but a surer prey,
    And feed the fire that wastes thy powers away.
    Up--God has formed thee with a wiser view,
    Not to be led in chains, but to subdue;
    Calls thee to cope with enemies, and first
    Points out a conflict with thyself, the worst.
    Woman indeed, a gift he would bestow
    When he design'd a Paradise below,
    The richest earthly boon his hands afford,
    Deserves to be beloved, but not adored.
    Post away swiftly to more actives scenes,
    Collect the scatter'd truth that study gleans,
    Mix with the world, but with its wiser part,
    No longer give an image all thine heart;
    Its empire is not hers, nor is it thine,
    'Tis God's just claim, prerogative divine.
      Virtuous and faithful HEBERDEN, whose skill
    Attempts no task it cannot well fulfil,
    Gives melancholy up to nature's care,
    And sends the patient into purer air.
    Look were he comes--in this embower'd alcove
    Stand close conceal'd, and see a statue move:
    Lips busy, and eyes fix'd, foot falling slow,
    Arms hanging idly down, hands clasp'd below,
    Interpret to the marking eye distress,
    Such as its symptoms can alone express.
    That tongue is silent now; that silent tongue
    Could argue once, could jest, or join the song,
    Could give advice, could censure or commend,
    Or charm the sorrows of a drooping friend.
    Renounced alike its office and its sport,
    Its brisker and its graver strains fall short;
    Both fail beneath a fever's secret sway,
    And like a summer-brook are past away.
    This is a sight for pity to peruse,
    Till she resemble faintly what she views,
    Till sympathy contract a kindred pain,
    Pierced with the woes that she laments in vain.
    This, of all maladies that man infest,
    Claims most compassion, and receives the least:
    Job felt it, when he groan'd beneath the rod
    And the barb'd arrows of a frowning God;
    And such emollients as his friends could spare,
    Friends such as his for modern Jobs prepare.
    Blest, rather curst, with hearts that never feel,
    Kept snug in caskets of close-hammer'd steel,
    With mouths made only to grin wide and eat,
    And minds that deem derided pain a treat,
    With limbs of British oak, and nerves of wire,
    And wit that puppet prompters might inspire,
    Their sovereign nostrum is a clumsy joke
    On pangs enforced with God's severest stroke.
    But, with a soul that ever felt the sting
    Of sorrow, sorrow is a sacred thing:
    Not to molest, or irritate, or raise
    A laugh at his expense, is slender praise;
    He that has not usurp'd the name of man
    Does all, and deems too little all, he can,
    To assuage the throbbings of the fester'd part,
    And staunch the bleedings of a broken heart.
    'Tis not, as heads that never ache suppose,
    Forgery of fancy, and a dream of woes;
    Man is a harp, whose chords elude the sight,
    Each yielding harmony disposed aright;
    The screws reversed (a task which if he please
    God in a moment executes with ease),
    Ten thousand thousand strings at once go loose,
    Lost, till he tune them, all their power and use.
    Then neither heathy wilds, nor scenes as fair
    As ever recompensed the peasant's care,
    Nor soft declivities with tufted hills,
    Nor view of waters turning busy mills,
    Parks in which art preceptress nature weds,
    Nor gardens interspersed with flowery beds,
    Nor gales, that catch the scent of blooming groves,
    And waft it to the mourner as he roves,
    Can call up life into his faded eye,
    That passes all he sees unheeded by;
    No wounds like those a wounded spirit feels,
    No cure for such, till God who makes them heals.
    And thou, sad sufferer under nameless ill
    That yields not to the touch of human skill,
    Improve the kind occasion, understand
    A Father's frown, and kiss his chastening hand.
    To thee the day-spring, and the blaze of noon,
    The purple evening and resplendent moon,
    The stars that, sprinkled o'er the vault of night,
    Seem drops descending in a shower of light,
    Shine not, or undesired and hated shine,
    Seen through the medium of a cloud like thine:
    Yet seek him, in his favour life is found,
    All bliss beside--a shadow or a sound:
    Then heaven, eclipsed so long, and this dull earth,
    Shall seem to start into a second birth;
    Nature, assuming a more lovely face,
    Borrowing a beauty from the works of grace,
    Shall be despised and overlook'd no more,
    Shall fill thee with delights unfelt before,
    Impart to things inanimate a voice,
    And bid her mountains and her hills rejoice;
    The sound shall run along the winding vales,
    And thou enjoy an Eden ere it fails.
      Ye groves, (the statesman at his desk exclaims,
    Sick of a thousand disappointed aims,)
    My patrimonial treasure and my pride,
    Beneath your shades your grey possessor hide,
    Receive me, languishing for that repose
    The servant of the public never knows.
    Ye saw me once (ah, those regretted days,
    When boyish innocence was all my praise!)
    Hour after hour delightfully allot
    To studies then familiar, since forgot,
    And cultivate a taste for ancient song,
    Catching its ardour as I mused along;
    Nor seldom, as propitious Heaven might send,
    What once I valued and could boast, a friend,
    Were witnesses how cordially I press'd
    His undissembling virtue to my breast;
    Receive me now, not uncorrupt as then
    Nor guiltless of corrupting other men,
    But versed in arts that, while they seem to stay
    A falling empire, hasten its decay.
    To the fair haven of my native home,
    The wreck of what I was, fatigued, I come;
    For once I can approve the patriot's voice,
    And make the course he recommends my choice:
    We meet at last in one sincere desire,
    His wish and mine both prompt me to retire.
    'Tis done--he steps into the welcome chaise,
    Lolls at his ease behind four handsome bays,
    That whirl away from business and debate
    The disencumber'd Atlas of the state.
    Ask not the boy, who, when the breeze of morn
    First shakes the glittering drops from every thorn,
    Unfolds his flock, then under bank or bush
    Sits linking cherry-stones, or platting rush,
    How fair is Freedom?--he was always free:
    To carve his rustic name upon a tree,
    To snare the mole, or with ill-fashion'd hook
    To draw the incautious minnow from the brook,
    Are life's prime pleasures in his simple view,
    His flock the chief concern he ever knew;
    She shines but little in his heedless eyes,
    The good we never miss we rarely prize:
    But ask the noble drudge in state affairs,
    Escaped from office and its constant cares,
    What charms he sees in Freedom's smile express'd,
    In freedom lost so long, now repossess'd;
    The tongue whose strains were cogent as commands,
    Revered at home, and felt in foreign lands,
    Shall own itself a stammerer in that cause,
    Or plead its silence as its best applause.
    He knows indeed that, whether dress'd or rude,
    Wild without art, or artfully subdued,
    Nature in every form inspires delight,
    But never mark'd her with so just a sight.
    Her hedge-row shrubs, a variegated store,
    With woodbine and wild roses mantled o'er,
    Green balks and furrow'd lands, the stream that spreads
    Its cooling vapour o'er the dewy meads,
    Downs, that almost escape the inquiring eye,
    That melt and fade into the distant sky,
    Beauties he lately slighted as he pass'd,
    Seem all created since he travell'd last.
    Master of all the enjoyments he design'd,
    No rough annoyance rankling in his mind,
    What early philosophic hours he keeps,
    How regular his meals, how sound he sleeps!
    Not sounder he that on the mainmast head,
    While morning kindles with a windy red,
    Begins a long look-out for distant land,
    Nor quits till evening watch his giddy stand,
    Then, swift descending with a seaman's haste,
    Slips to his hammock, and forgets the blast.
    He chooses company, but not the squire's,
    Whose wit is rudeness, whose good breeding tires;
    Nor yet the parson's, who would gladly come,
    Obsequious when abroad, though proud at home;
    Nor can he much affect the neighbouring peer,
    Whose toe of emulation treads too near;
    But wisely seeks a more convenient friend,
    With whom, dismissing forms, he may unbend.
    A man, whom marks of condescending grace
    Teach, while they flatter him, his proper place;
    Who comes when call'd, and at a word withdraws,
    Speaks with reserve, and listens with applause;
    Some plain mechanic, who, without pretence
    To birth or wit, nor gives nor takes offence;
    On whom he rests well pleased his weary powers,
    And talks and laughs away his vacant hours.
    The tide of life, swift always in its course,
    May run in cities with a brisker force,
    But no where with a current so serene,
    Or half so clear, as in the rural scene.
    Yet how fallacious is all earthly bliss,
    What obvious truths the wisest heads may miss;
    Some pleasures live a month, and some a year,
    But short the date of all we gather here;
    No happiness is felt, except the true,
    That does not charm thee more for being new.
    This observation, as it chanced, not made,
    Or, if the thought occurr'd, not duly weigh'd,
    He sighs--for after all by slow degrees
    The spot he loved has lost the power to please;
    To cross his ambling pony day by day
    Seems at the best but dreaming life away;
    The prospect, such as might enchant despair,
    He views it not, or sees no beauty there;
    With aching heart, and discontented looks,
    Returns at noon to billiards or to books,
    But feels, while grasping at his faded joys,
    A secret thirst of his renounced employs.
    He chides the tardiness of every post,
    Pants to be told of battles won or lost,
    Blames his own indolence, observes, though late,
    'Tis criminal to leave a sinking state,
    Flies to the levee, and, received with grace,
    Kneels, kisses hands, and shines again in place.
      Suburban villas, highway-side retreats,
    That dread the encroachment of our growing streets,
    Tight boxes, neatly sash'd, and in a blaze
    With all a July sun's collected rays,
    Delight the citizen, who, gasping there,
    Breathes clouds of dust, and calls it country air.
    O sweet retirement, who would balk the thought
    That could afford retirement, or could not?
    'Tis such an easy walk, so smooth and straight,
    The second milestone fronts the garden gate;
    A step if fair, and, if a shower approach,
    You find safe shelter in the next stage-coach.
    There, prison'd in a parlour snug and small,
    Like bottled wasps upon a southern wall,
    The man of business and his friends compress'd
    Forget their labours, and yet find no rest;
    But still 'tis rural--trees are to be seen
    From every window, and the fields are green;
    Ducks paddle in the pond before the door,
    And what could a remoter scene show more?
    A sense of elegance we rarely find
    The portion of a mean or vulgar mind,
    And ignorance of better things makes man,
    Who cannot much, rejoice in what he can;
    And he, that deems his leisure well bestow'd
    In contemplation of a turnpike-road,
    Is occupied as well, employs his hours
    As wisely, and as much improves his powers,
    As he that slumbers in pavilions graced
    With all the charms of an accomplish'd taste.
    Yet hence, alas! insolvencies; and hence
    The unpitied victim of ill-judged expense,
    From all his wearisome engagements freed,
    Shakes hands with business, and retires indeed.
      Your prudent grandmammas, ye modern belles,
    Content with Bristol, Bath, and Tunbridge Wells,
    When health required it, would consent to roam,
    Else more attach'd to pleasures found at home;
    But now alike, gay widow, virgin, wife,
    Ingenious to diversify dull life,
    In coaches, chaises, caravans, and hoys,
    Fly to the coast for daily, nightly joys,
    And all, impatient of dry land, agree
    With one consent to rush into the sea.
    Ocean exhibits, fathomless and broad,
    Much of the power and majesty of God.
    He swathes about the swelling of the deep,
    That shines and rests, as infants smile and sleep;
    Vast as it is, it answers as it flows
    The breathings of the lightest air that blows;
    Curling and whitening over all the waste,
    The rising waves obey the increasing blast,
    Abrupt and horrid as the tempest roars,
    Thunder and flash upon the stedfast shores,
    Till he that rides the whirlwind checks the rein,
    Then all the world of waters sleeps again.
    Nereids or Dryads, as the fashion leads,
    Now in the floods, now panting in the meads,
    Votaries of pleasure still, where'er she dwells,
    Near barren rocks, in palaces, or cells,
    O grant a poet leave to recommend
    (A poet fond of nature, and your friend)
    Her slighted works to your admiring view;
    Her works must needs excel, who fashion'd you.
    Would ye, when rambling in your morning ride,
    With some unmeaning coxcomb at your side,
    Condemn the prattler for his idle pains,
    To waste unheard the music of his strains,
    And, deaf to all the impertinence of tongue,
    That, while it courts, affronts and does you wrong,
    Mark well the finish'd plan without a fault,
    The seas globose and huge, the o'er-arching vault,
    Earth's millions daily fed, a world employ'd
    In gathering plenty yet to be enjoy'd,
    Till gratitude grew vocal in the praise
    Of God, beneficent in all his ways;
    Graced with such wisdom, how would beauty shine!
    Ye want but that to seem indeed divine.
      Anticipated rents and bills unpaid,
    Force many a shining youth into the shade,
    Not to redeem his time, but his estate,
    And play the fool, but at a cheaper rate.
    There, hid in loathed obscurity, removed
    From pleasures left, but never more beloved,
    He just endures, and with a sickly spleen
    Sighs o'er the beauties of the charming scene.
    Nature indeed looks prettily, in rhyme;
    Streams tinkle sweetly in poetic chime:
    The warblings of the blackbird, clear and strong,
    Are musical enough in Thomson's song;
    And Cobham's groves, and Windsor's green retreats,
    When Pope describes them, have a thousand sweets;
    He likes the country, but in truth must own,
    Most likes it when he studies it in town.
      Poor Jack--no matter who--for when I blame,
    I pity, and must therefore sink the name,
    Lived in his saddle, loved the chase, the course,
    And always, ere he mounted, kiss'd his horse.
    The estate, his sires had own'd in ancient years,
    Was quickly distanced, match'd against a peer's.
    Jack vanish'd, was regretted, and forgot;
    'Tis wild good-nature's never failing lot.
    At length, when all had long supposed him dead,
    By cold submersion, razor, rope, or lead,
    My lord, alighting at his usual place,
    The Crown, took notice of an ostler's face.
    Jack knew his friend, but hoped in that disguise
    He might escape the most observing eyes,
    And whistling, as if unconcern'd and gay,
    Curried his nag and looked another way;
    Convinced at last, upon a nearer view,
    'Twas he, the same, the very Jack he knew,
    O'erwhelm'd at once with wonder, grief, and joy,
    He press'd him much to quit his base employ;
    His countenance, his purse, his heart, his hand,
    Influence and power, were all at his command:
    Peers are not always generous as well bred,
    But Granby was, meant truly what he said.
    Jack bow'd, and was obliged--confess'd 'twas strange,
    That so retired he should not wish a change,
    But knew no medium between guzzling beer,
    And his old stint--three thousand pounds a year.
      Thus some retire to nourish hopeless woe;
    Some seeking happiness not found below;
    Some to comply with humour, and a mind
    To social scenes by nature disinclined;
    Some sway'd by fashion, some by deep disgust;
    Some self-impoverish'd, and because they must;
    But few, that court Retirement, are aware
    Of half the toils they must encounter there.
      Lucrative offices are seldom lost
    For want of powers proportion'd to the post:
    Give e'en a dunce the employment he desires,
    And he soon finds the talents it requires;
    A business with an income at its heels
    Furnishes always oil for its own wheels.
    But in his arduous enterprise to close
    His active years with indolent repose,
    He finds the labours of that state exceed
    His utmost faculties, severe indeed.
    'Tis easy to resign a toilsome place,
    But not to manage leisure with a grace;
    Absence of occupation is not rest,
    A mind quite vacant is a mind distress'd.
    The veteran steed, excused his task at length,
    In kind compassion of his failing strength,
    And turn'd into the park or mead to graze,
    Exempt from future service all his days,
    There feels a pleasure perfect in its kind,
    Ranges at liberty, and snuffs the wind:
    But when his lord would quit the busy road,
    To taste a joy like that he has bestow'd,
    He proves, less happy than his favour'd brute,
    A life of ease a difficult pursuit.
    Thought, to the man that never thinks, may seem
    As natural as when asleep to dream;
    But reveries (for human minds will act)
    Specious in show, impossible in fact,
    Those flimsy webs, that break as soon as wrought,
    Attain not to the dignity of thought:
    Nor yet the swarms that occupy the brain,
    Where dreams of dress, intrigue, and pleasure reign;
    Nor such as useless conversation breeds,
    Or lust engenders, and indulgence feeds.
    Whence, and what are we? to what end ordain'd?
    What means the drama by the world sustain'd?
    Business or vain amusement, care or mirth,
    Divide the frail inhabitants of earth.
    Is duty a mere sport, or an employ?
    Life an entrusted talent, or a toy?
    Is there, as reason, conscience, Scripture say,
    Cause to provide for a great future day,
    When, earth's assign'd duration at an end,
    Man shall be summon'd and the dead attend?
    The trumpet--will it sound? the curtain rise?
    And show the august tribunal of the skies,
    Where no prevarication shall avail,
    Where eloquence and artifice shall fail,
    The pride of arrogant distinctions fall,
    And conscience and our conduct judge us all?
    Pardon me, ye that give the midnight oil
    To learned cares or philosophic toil,
    Though I revere your honourable names,
    Your useful labours, and important aims,
    And hold the world indebted to your aid,
    Enrich'd with the discoveries ye have made;
    Yet let me stand excused, if I esteem
    A mind employ'd on so sublime a theme,
    Pushing her bold inquiry to the date
    And outline of the present transient state,
    And, after poising her adventurous wings,
    Settling at last upon eternal things,
    Far more intelligent, and better taught
    The strenuous use of profitable thought,
    Than ye, when happiest, and enlighten'd most,
    And highest in renown, can justly boast.
      A mind unnerved, or indisposed to bear
    The weight of subjects worthiest of her care,
    Whatever hopes a change of scene inspires,
    Must change her nature, or in vain retires.
    An idler is a watch that wants both hands;
    As useless if it goes as when it stands.
    Books, therefore, not the scandal of the shelves,
    In which lewd sensualists print out themselves;
    Nor those, in which the stage gives vice a blow,
    With what success let modern manners show;
    Nor his who, for the bane of thousands born,
    Built God a church, and laugh'd his word to scorn,
    Skilful alike to seem devout and just,
    And stab religion with a sly side-thrust;
    Nor those of learn'd philologists, who chase
    A panting syllable through time and space
    Start it at home, and hunt it in the dark,
    To Gaul, to Greece, and into Noah's ark;
    But such as learning, without false pretence,
    The friend of truth, the associate of sound sense,
    And such as, in the zeal of good design,
    Strong judgment labouring in the scripture mine,
    All such as manly and great souls produce,
    Worthy to live, and of eternal use:
    Behold in these what leisure hours demand,
    Amusement and true knowledge hand in hand.
    Luxury gives the mind a childish cast,
    And, while she polishes, perverts the taste;
    Habits of close attention, thinking heads,
    Become more rare as dissipation spreads,
    Till authors hear at length one general cry,
    Tickle and entertain us, or we die.
    The loud demand, from year to year the same,
    Beggars invention, and makes fancy lame;
    Till farce itself, most mournfully jejune,
    Calls for the kind assistance of a tune;
    And novels (witness every month's review)
    Belie their name, and offer nothing new.
    The mind, relaxing into needful sport,
    Should turn to writers of an abler sort,
    Whose wit well managed, and whose classic style,
    Give truth a lustre, and make wisdom smile.
    Friends, (for I cannot stint, as some have done,
    Too rigid in my view, that name to one;
    Though one, I grant it, in the generous breast
    Will stand advanced a step above the rest;
    Flowers by that name promiscuously we call,
    But one, the rose, the regent of them all,)--
    Friends, not adopted with a schoolboy's haste,
    But chosen with a nice discerning taste,
    Well born, well disciplined, who, placed apart
    From vulgar minds, have honour much at heart,
    And, though the world may think the ingredients odd,
    The love of virtue, and the fear of God!
    Such friends prevent what else would soon succeed,
    A temper rustic as the life we lead,
    And keep the polish of the manners clean,
    As theirs who bustle in the busiest scene;
    For solitude, however some may rave,
    Seeming a sanctuary, proves a grave,
    A sepulchre, in which the living lie,
    Where all good qualities grow sick and die.
    I praise the Frenchman,[804] his remark was shrewd,
    How sweet, how passing sweet is solitude!
    But grant me still a friend in my retreat,
    Whom I may whisper--Solitude is sweet.
    Yet neither these delights, nor aught beside,
    That appetite can ask, or wealth provide,
    Can save us always from a tedious day,
    Or shine the dulness of still life away;
    Divine communion, carefully enjoy'd,
    Or sought with energy, must fill the void.
    Oh sacred art! to which alone life owes
    Its happiest seasons, and a peaceful close,
    Scorn'd in a world, indebted to that scorn
    For evils daily felt and hardly borne,
    Not knowing thee, we reap, with bleeding hands,
    Flowers of rank odour upon thorny lands,
    And, while experience cautions us in vain,
    Grasp seeming happiness, and find it pain.
    Despondence, self-deserted in her grief,
    Lost by abandoning her own relief,
    Murmuring and ungrateful discontent,
    That scorns afflictions mercifully meant,
    Those humours, tart as wines upon the fret,
    Which idleness and weariness beget;
    These, and a thousand plagues that haunt the breast,
    Fond of the phantom of an earthly rest,
    Divine communion chases, as the day
    Drives to their dens the obedient beasts of prey.
    See Judah's promised king, bereft of all,
    Driven out an exile from the face of Saul,
    To distant caves the lonely wanderer flies,
    To seek that peace a tyrant's frown denies.
    Hear the sweet accents of his tuneful voice,
    Hear him, o'erwhelm'd with sorrow, yet rejoice;
    No womanish or wailing grief has part,
    No, not a moment, in his royal heart;
    'Tis manly music, such as martyrs make,
    Suffering with gladness for a Saviour's sake.
    His soul exults, hope animates his lays,
    The sense of mercy kindles into praise,
    And wilds, familiar with a lion's roar,
    Ring with ecstatic sounds unheard before:
    'Tis love like his that can alone defeat
    The foes of man, or make a desert sweet.
      Religion does not censure or exclude
    Unnumber'd pleasures harmlessly pursued;
    To study culture, and with artful toil
    To meliorate and tame the stubborn soil;
    To give dissimilar yet fruitful lands
    The grain, or herb, or plant that each demands;
    To cherish virtue in an humble state,
    And share the joys your bounty may create;
    To mark the matchless workings of the power
    That shuts within its seed the future flower,
    Bids these in elegance of form excel,
    In colour these, and those delight the smell,
    Sends Nature forth the daughter of the skies,
    To dance on earth, and charm all human eyes;
    To teach the canvas innocent deceit,
    Or lay the landscape on the snowy sheet--
    These, these are arts pursued without a crime,
    That leave no stain upon the wing of time.
      Me poetry (or, rather, notes that aim
    Feebly and vainly at poetic fame)
    Employs, shut out from more important views,
    Fast by the banks of the slow-winding Ouse;
    Content if, thus sequester'd, I may raise
    A monitor's, though not a poet's, praise,
    And, while I teach an art too little known,
    To close life wisely, may not waste my own.

  [804] Bruyère.




THE TASK. BOOK I.

THE SOFA.


ADVERTISEMENT.

The history of the following production is briefly this: A lady,
fond of blank verse, demanded a poem of that kind from the author,
and gave him the Sofa for a subject. He obeyed; and having much
leisure, connected another subject with it; and, pursuing the train
of thought to which his situation and turn of mind led him, brought
forth at length, instead of the trifle which he at first intended, a
serious affair--a volume.

In the poem on the subject of Education he would be very sorry
to stand suspected of having aimed his censure at any particular
school. His objections are such as naturally apply themselves to
schools in general. If there were not, as for the most part there
is, wilful neglect in those who manage them, and an omission even of
such discipline as they are susceptible of, the objects are yet too
numerous for minute attention; and the aching hearts of ten thousand
parents, mourning under the bitterest of all disappointments, attest
the truth of the allegation. His quarrel therefore is with the
mischief at large, and not with any particular instance of it.


THE ARGUMENT.

     Historical deduction of seats, from the stool to the sofa--A
     schoolboy's ramble--A walk in the country--The scene
     described--Rural sounds as well as sights delightful--Another
     walk--Mistake concerning the charms of solitude
     corrected--Colonnades commended--Alcove, and the view from
     it--The wilderness--The Grove--The Thresher--The necessity and
     the benefits of exercise--The works of nature superior to, and
     in some instances inimitable by, art--The wearisomeness of
     what is commonly called a life of pleasure--Change of scene
     sometimes expedient--A common described, and the character of
     crazy Kate introduced--Gipsies--The blessings of civilized
     life--That state most favourable to virtue--The South Sea
     islanders compassionated, but chiefly Omai--His present state of
     mind supposed--Civilized life friendly to virtue, but not great
     cities--Great cities, and London in particular, allowed their
     due praise, but censured--Fête champêtre--The book concludes
     with a reflection on the effects of dissipation and effeminacy
     upon our public measures.

    I Sing the Sofa. I who lately sang
    Truth, Hope, and Charity,[805] and touch'd with awe
    The solemn chords, and with a trembling hand,
    Escaped with pain from that adventurous flight,
    Now seek repose upon an humbler theme;
    The theme though humble, yet august and proud
    The occasion--for the Fair commands the song.
      Time was, when clothing sumptuous or for use,
    Save their own painted skins, our sires had none.
    As yet black breeches were not; satin smooth,
    Or velvet soft, or plush with shaggy pile:
    The hardy chief upon the rugged rock,
    Wash'd by the sea, or on the gravelly bank
    Thrown up by wintry torrents roaring loud,
    Fearless of wrong, reposed his weary strength.
    Those barbarous ages past, succeeded next
    The birthday of Invention; weak at first,
    Dull in design, and clumsy to perform.
    Joint-stools were then created; on three legs
    Upborne they stood. Three legs upholding firm
    A massy slab, in fashion square or round.
    On such a stool immortal Alfred sat,
    And sway'd the sceptre of his infant realms:
    And such in ancient halls and mansions drear
    May still be seen; but perforated sore,
    And drill'd in holes, the solid oak is found,
    By worms voracious eating through and through.
      At length a generation more refined
    Improv'd the simple plan; made three legs four,
    Gave them a twisted form vermicular,
    And o'er the seat, with plenteous wadding stuff'd,
    Induced a splendid cover, green and blue,
    Yellow and red, of tapestry richly wrought
    And woven close, or needlework sublime.
    There might ye see the piony spread wide,
    The full blown rose, the shepherd and his lass,
    Lapdog and lambkin with black staring eyes,
    And parrots with twin cherries in their beak.
      Now came the cane from India, smooth and bright
    With Nature's varnish, sever'd into stripes
    That interlaced each other, these supplied
    Of texture firm a lattice work, that braced
    The new machine, and it became a chair.
    But restless was the chair; the back erect
    Distress'd the weary loins, that felt no ease;
    The slippery seat betray'd the sliding part
    That press'd it, and the feet hung dangling down,
    Anxious in vain to find the distant floor.
    These for the rich; the rest, whom Fate had placed
    In modest mediocrity, content
    With base materials, sat on well tann'd hides,
    Obdurate and unyielding, glassy smooth,
    With here and there a tuft of crimson yarn,
    Or scarlet crewel, in the cushion fix'd,
    If cushion might be call'd, what harder seem'd
    Than the firm oak of which the frame was form'd.
    No want of timber then was felt or fear'd
    In Albion's happy isle. The lumber stood
    Ponderous and fix'd by its own massy weight.
    But elbows still were wanting; these, some say,
    An alderman of Cripplegate contrived;
    And some inscribe the invention to a priest,
    Burly and big, and studious of his ease.
    But, rude at first, and not with easy slope
    Receding wide, they pressed against the ribs,
    And bruised the side; and, elevated high,
    Taught the raised shoulders to invade the ears.
    Long time elapsed or e'er our rugged sires
    Complain'd, though incommodiously pent in,
    And ill at ease behind. The ladies first
    'Gan murmur, as became the softer sex.
    Ingenious Fancy, never better pleased
    Than when employed to accommodate the fair,
    Heard the sweet moan with pity, and devised
    The soft settee; one elbow at each end,
    And in the midst an elbow it received,
    United yet divided, twain at once.
    So sit two kings of Brentford on one throne;
    And so two citizens, who take the air,
    Close pack'd, and smiling, in a chaise and one.
    But relaxation of the languid frame,
    By soft recumbency of outstretch'd limbs,
    Was bliss reserved for happier days. So slow
    The growth of what is excellent; so hard
    To attain perfection in this nether world.
    Thus first Necessity invented stools,
    Convenience next suggested elbow-chairs,
    And Luxury the accomplish'd SOFA last.
      The nurse sleeps sweetly, hired to watch the sick,
    Whom snoring she disturbs. As sweetly he
    Who quits the coach-box at the midnight hour,
    To sleep within the carriage more secure,
    His legs depending at the open door.
    Sweet sleep enjoys the curate in his desk,
    The tedious rector drawling o'er his head;
    And sweet the clerk below. But neither sleep
    Of lazy nurse, who snores the sick man dead,
    Nor his who quits the box at midnight hour,
    To slumber in the carriage more secure,
    Nor sleep enjoyed by curate in his desk,
    Nor yet the dozings of the clerk, are sweet,
    Compared with the repose the Sofa yields.
      Oh may I live exempted (while I live
    Guiltless of pampered appetite obscene)
    From pangs arthritic, that infest the toe
    Of libertine Excess! The Sofa suits
    The gouty limb, 'tis true; but gouty limb,
    Though on a Sofa, may I never feel:
    For I have loved the rural walk through lanes
    Of grassy swarth, close cropp'd by nibbling sheep,
    And skirted thick with intertexture firm
    Of thorny boughs; have loved the rural walk
    O'er hills, through valleys, and by rivers' brink,
    E'er since a truant boy I pass'd my bounds
    To enjoy a ramble on the banks of Thames;
    And still remember, nor without regret
    Of hours that sorrow since has much endear'd,
    How oft, my slice of pocket store consumed,
    Still hungering, pennyless, and far from home,
    I fed on scarlet hips and stony haws,
    Or blushing crabs, or berries, that emboss
    The bramble, black as jet, or sloes austere.
    Hard fare! but such as boyish appetite
    Disdains not; nor the palate, undepraved
    By culinary arts, unsavoury deems.
    No Sofa then awaited my return;
    Nor Sofa then I needed. Youth repairs
    His wasted spirits quickly, by long toil
    Incurring short fatigue; and though our years,
    As life declines, speed rapidly away,
    And not a year but pilfers as he goes
    Some youthful grace, that age would gladly keep;
    A tooth or auburn lock, and by degrees
    Their length and colour from the locks they spare;
    The elastic spring of an unwearied foot,
    That mounts the stile with ease, or leaps the fence,
    That play of lungs, inhaling and again
    Respiring freely the fresh air, that makes
    Swift pace or steep ascent no toil to me,
    Mine have not pilfer'd yet; nor yet impair'd
    My relish of fair prospect; scenes that soothed
    Or charm'd me young, no longer young, I find
    Still soothing, and of power to charm me still.
    And witness, dear companion of my walks,
    Whose arm this twentieth winter I perceive
    Fast lock'd in mine, with pleasure such as love,
    Confirm'd by long experience of thy worth,
    And well-tried virtues, could alone inspire--
    Witness a joy that thou hast doubled long.
    Thou know'st my praise of nature most sincere,
    And that my raptures are not conjured up
    To serve occasions of poetic pomp,
    But genuine, and art partner of them all.
    How oft upon yon eminence our pace
    Has slacken'd to a pause, and we have borne
    The ruffling wind, scarce conscious that it blew,
    While Admiration, feeding at the eye,
    And still unsated, dwelt upon the scene.
    Thence with what pleasure have we just discern'd
    The distant plough slow moving, and beside
    His labouring team, that swerv'd not from the track,
    The sturdy swain diminish'd to a boy!
    Here Ouse, slow winding through a level plain
    Of spacious meads, with cattle sprinkled o'er,
    Conducts the eye along his sinuous course
    Delighted. There, fast rooted in their bank,
    Stand, never overlook'd, our favourite elms,
    That screen the herdsman's solitary hut;
    While far beyond, and overthwart the stream,
    That, as with molten glass, inlays the vale,
    The sloping land recedes into the clouds;
    Displaying on its varied side the grace
    Of hedge-row beauties numberless, square tower,
    Tall spire, from which the sound of cheerful bells
    Just undulates upon the listening ear,
    Groves, heaths, and smoking villages, remote.
    Scenes must be beautiful which, daily view'd,
    Please daily, and whose novelty survives
    Long knowledge and the scrutiny of years--
    Praise justly due to those that I describe.
      Nor rural sights alone, but rural sounds,
    Exhilarate the spirit, and restore
    The tone of languid Nature. Mighty winds,
    That sweep the skirt of some far-spreading wood
    Of ancient growth, make music not unlike
    The dash of Ocean on his winding shore,
    And lull the spirit while they fill the mind;
    Unnumber'd branches waving in the blast,
    And all their leaves fast fluttering, all at once.
    Nor less composure waits upon the roar
    Of distant floods, or on the softer voice
    Of neighbouring fountain, or of rills that slip
    Through the cleft rock, and, chiming as they fall
    Upon loose pebbles, lose themselves at length
    In matted grass, that with a livelier green
    Betrays the secret of their silent course.
    Nature inanimate employs sweet sounds,
    But animated nature sweeter still,
    To soothe and satisfy the human ear.
    Ten thousand warblers cheer the day, and one
    The livelong night: nor these alone, whose notes
    Nice-finger'd Art must emulate in vain,
    But cawing rooks, and kites that swim sublime
    In still-repeated circles, screaming loud,
    The jay, the pie, and e'en the boding owl,
    That hails the rising moon, have charms for me.
    Sounds inharmonious in themselves and harsh,
    Yet heard in scenes where peace for ever reigns,
    And only there, please highly for their sake.
      Peace to the artist, whose ingenious thought
    Devised the weather-house, that useful toy!
    Fearless of humid air and gathering rains,
    Forth steps the man--an emblem of myself!
    More delicate his timorous mate retires.
    When Winter soaks the fields, and female feet,
    Too weak to struggle with tenacious clay,
    Or ford the rivulets, are best at home,
    The task of new discoveries falls on me.
    At such a season, and with such a charge,
    Once went I forth; and found, till then unknown,
    A cottage, whither oft we since repair:
    'Tis perched upon the green hill top, but close
    Environ'd with a ring of branching elms,
    That overhang the thatch, itself unseen
    Peeps at the vale below; so thick beset
    With foliage of such dark redundant growth,
    I call'd the low-roof'd lodge the _peasant's nest_.
    And, hidden as it is, and far remote
    From such unpleasing sounds as haunt the ear
    In village or in town, the bay of curs
    Incessant, clinking hammers, grinding wheels,
    And infants clamorous whether pleased or pain'd,
    Oft have I wish'd the peaceful covert mine.
    Here, I have said, at least I should possess
    The poet's treasure, silence, and indulge
    The dreams of fancy, tranquil and secure.
    Vain thought! the dweller in that still retreat
    Dearly obtains the refuge it affords.
    Its elevated site forbids the wretch
    To drink sweet waters of the crystal well;
    He dips his bowl into the weedy ditch,
    And, heavy laden, brings his beverage home,
    Far fetch'd and little worth; nor seldom waits,
    Dependent on the baker's punctual call,
    To hear his creaking panniers at the door,
    Angry and sad, and his last crust consumed.
    So farewell envy of the peasant's nest!
    If solitude make scant the means of life,
    Society for me!--thou seeming sweet,
    Be still a pleasing object in my view;
    My visit still, but never mine abode.
      Not distant far, a length of colonnade
    Invites us. Monument of ancient taste,
    Now scorn'd, but worthy of a better fate.
    Our fathers knew the value of a screen
    From sultry suns; and, in their shaded walks
    And long protracted bowers, enjoyed at noon
    The gloom and coolness of declining day.
    We bear our shades about us; self-deprived
    Of other screen, the thin umbrella spread,
    And range an Indian waste without a tree.
    Thanks to Benevolus,[806] he spares me yet
    These chestnuts ranged in corresponding lines;
    And, though himself so polished, still reprieves
    The obsolete prolixity of shade.
      Descending now,--but cautious, lest too fast,--
    A sudden steep upon a rustic bridge,
    We pass a gulf, in which the willows dip
    Their pendent boughs, stooping as if to drink.
    Hence, ankle-deep in moss and flowery thyme,
    We mount again, and feel at every step
    Our foot half sunk in hillocks green and soft,
    Raised by the mole, the miner of the soil.
    He, not unlike the great ones of mankind,
    Disfigures earth: and, plotting in the dark,
    Toils much to earn a monumental pile,
    That may record the mischiefs he has done.
      The summit gain'd, behold the proud alcove
    That crowns it! yet not all its pride secures
    The grand retreat from injuries impress'd
    By rural carvers, who with knives deface
    The panels, leaving an obscure, rude name,
    In characters uncouth, and spelt amiss.
    So strong the zeal to immortalize himself
    Beats in the breast of man, that e'en a few,
    Few transient years, won from the abyss abhorr'd
    Of blank oblivion, seem a glorious prize,
    And even to a clown. Now roves the eye;
    And, posted on this speculative height,
    Exults in its command. The sheepfold here
    Pours out its fleecy tenants o'er the glebe.
    At first, progressive as a stream, they seek
    The middle field; but, scatter'd by degrees,
    Each to his choice, soon whiten all the land.
    There from the sun-burnt hay-field homeward creeps
    The loaded wain; while, lighten'd of its charge,
    The wain that meets it passes swiftly by;
    The boorish driver leaning o'er his team
    Vociferous and impatient of delay.
    Nor less attractive is the woodland scene,
    Diversified with trees of every growth,
    Alike, yet various. Here the grey smooth trunks
    Of ash, or lime, or beech, distinctly shine,
    Within the twilight of their distant shades;
    There, lost behind a rising ground, the wood
    Seems sunk, and shorten'd to its topmost boughs.
    No tree in all the grove but has its charms,
    Though each its hue peculiar; paler some,
    And of a wannish grey; the willow such,
    And poplar, that with silver lines his leaf,
    And ash far stretching his umbrageous arm;
    Of deeper green the elm; and deeper still,
    Lord of the woods, the long surviving oak.
    Some glossy-leaved, and shining in the sun,
    The maple, and the beech of oily nuts
    Prolific, and the lime at dewy eve
    Diffusing odours: nor unnoted pass
    The sycamore, capricious in attire,
    Now green, now tawny, and, ere autumn yet
    Have changed the woods, in scarlet honours bright.
    O'er these, but far beyond (a spacious map
    Of hill and valley interposed between),
    The Ouse, dividing the well water'd land,
    Now glitters in the sun, and now retires,
    As bashful, yet impatient to be seen.
      Hence the declivity is sharp and short,
    And such the re-ascent; between them weeps
    A little naiad her impoverish'd urn
    All summer long, which winter fills again.
    The folded gates would bar my progress now,
    But that the lord[806] enclosed demesne,
    Communicative of the good he owns,
    Admits me to a share: the guiltless eye
    Commits no wrong, nor wastes what it enjoys.
    Refreshing change! where now the blazing sun?
    By short transition we have lost his glare,
    And stepp'd at once into a cooler clime.
    Ye fallen avenues! once more I mourn
    Your fate unmerited, once more rejoice
    That yet a remnant of your race survives.
    How airy and how light the graceful arch,
    Yet awful as the consecrated roof
    Re-echoing pious anthems! while beneath
    The chequer'd earth seems restless as a flood
    Brush'd by the wind. So sportive is the light
    Shot through the boughs, it dances as they dance,
    Shadow and sunshine intermingling quick,
    And darkening and enlightening, as the leaves
    Play wanton, every moment, every spot.
      And now, with nerves new braced and spirits cheer'd,
    We tread the wilderness, whose well roll'd walks,
    With curvature of slow and easy sweep--
    Deception innocent--give ample space
    To narrow bounds. The grove receives us next;
    Between the upright shafts of whose tall elms
    We may discern the thresher at his task.
    Thump after thump resounds the constant flail,
    That seems to swing uncertain, and yet falls
    Full on the destined ear. Wide flies the chaff;
    The rustling straw sends up a frequent mist
    Of atoms, sparkling in the noonday beam.
    Come hither, ye that press your beds of down
    And sleep not; see him sweating o'er his bread
    Before he eats it.--'Tis the primal curse,
    But soften'd into mercy; made the pledge
    Of cheerful days, and nights without a groan.
      By ceaseless action all that is subsists.
    Constant rotation of the unwearied wheel
    That Nature rides upon maintains her health,
    Her beauty, her fertility. She dreads
    An instant's pause, and lives but while she moves.
    Its own revolvency upholds the world.
    Winds from all quarters agitate the air,
    And fit the limpid element for use,
    Else noxious: oceans, rivers, lakes, and streams,
    All feel the freshening impulse, and are cleansed
    By restless undulation: e'en the oak
    Thrives by the rude concussion of the storm:
    He seems indeed indignant, and to feel
    The impression of the blast with proud disdain,
    Frowning, as if in his unconscious arm
    He held the thunder: but the monarch owes
    His firm stability to what he scorns--
    More fix'd below, the more disturb'd above.
    The law, by which all creatures else are bound,
    Binds man, the lord of all. Himself derives
    No mean advantage from a kindred cause,
    From strenuous toil his hours of sweetest ease.
    The sedentary stretch their lazy length
    When custom bids, but no refreshment find,
    For none they need: the languid eye, the cheek
    Deserted of its bloom, the flaccid, shrunk,
    And wither'd muscle, and the vapid soul,
    Reproach their owner with that love of rest
    To which he forfeits e'en the rest he loves.
    Not such the alert and active. Measure life
    By its true worth, the comforts it affords,
    And theirs alone seems worthy of the name.
    Good health, and, its associate in the most,
    Good temper: spirits prompt to undertake,
    And not soon spent, though in an arduous task;
    The powers of fancy and strong thought are theirs;
    E'en age itself seems privileged in them,
    With clear exemption from its own defects.
    A sparkling eye beneath a wrinkled front
    The veteran shows, and, gracing a grey beard
    With youthful smiles, descends toward the grave
    Sprightly, and old almost without decay.
      Like a coy maiden, Ease, when courted most,
    Farthest retires--an idol, at whose shrine
    Who oftenest sacrifice are favour'd least.
    The love of Nature and the scenes she draws
    Is Nature's dictate. Strange! there should be found,
    Who, self-imprison'd in their proud saloons,
    Renounce the odours of the open field
    For the unscented fictions of the loom;
    Who, satisfied with only pencil'd scenes,
    Prefer to the performance of a God
    The inferior wonders of an artist's hand!
    Lovely indeed the mimic works of Art;
    But Nature's works far lovelier. I admire,
    None more admires, the painter's magic skill,
    Who shows me that which I shall never see,
    Conveys a distant country into mine,
    And throws Italian light on English walls.
    But imitative strokes can do no more
    Than please the eye--sweet Nature every sense.
    The air salubrious of her lofty hills,
    The cheering fragrance of her dewy vales,
    And music of her woods--no works of man
    May rival these; these all bespeak a power
    Peculiar, and exclusively her own.
    Beneath the open sky she spreads the feast;
    'Tis free to all--'tis every day renew'd;
    Who scorns it starves deservedly at home.
    He does not scorn it, who, imprison'd long
    In some unwholesome dungeon, and a prey
    To sallow sickness, which the vapours, dank
    And clammy, of his dark abode have bred,
    Escapes at last to liberty and light:
    His cheek recovers soon its healthful hue;
    His eye relumines its extinguish'd fires;
    He walks, he leaps, he runs--is wing'd with joy,
    And riots in the sweets of every breeze.
    He does not scorn it, who has long endured
    A fever's agonies, and fed on drugs.
    Nor yet the mariner, his blood inflamed
    With acrid salts; his very heart athirst
    To gaze at Nature in her green array,
    Upon the ship's tall side he stands, possess'd
    With visions prompted by intense desire:
    Fair fields appear below, such as he left
    Far distant, such as he would die to find--
    He seeks them headlong, and is seen no more.
      The spleen is seldom felt where Flora reigns;
    The lowering eye, the petulance, the frown,
    And sullen sadness, that o'ershade, distort,
    And mar the face of beauty, when no cause
    For such immeasurable woe appears,
    These Flora banishes, and gives the fair
    Sweet smiles, and bloom less transient than her own.
    It is the constant revolution, stale
    And tasteless, of the same repeated joys,
    That palls and satiates, and makes languid life
    A pedlar's pack, that bows the bearer down.
    Health suffers, and the spirits ebb; the heart
    Recoils from its own choice--at the full feast
    Is famish'd--finds no music in the song,
    No smartness in the jest; and wonders why.
    Yet thousands still desire to journey on,
    Though halt, and weary of the path they tread.
    The paralytic, who can hold her cards,
    But cannot play them, borrows a friend's hand
    To deal and shuffle, to divide and sort
    Her mingled suits and sequences; and sits,
    Spectatress both and spectacle, a sad
    And silent cipher, while her proxy plays.
    Others are dragg'd into the crowded room
    Between supporters; and, once seated, sits,
    Through downright inability to rise,
    Till the stout bearers lift the corpse again.
    These speak a loud memento. Yet e'en these
    Themselves love life, and cling to it, as he
    That overhangs a torrent to a twig.
    They love it, and yet loathe it; fear to die,
    Yet scorn the purposes for which they live.
    Then wherefore not renounce them? No--the dread,
    The slavish dread of solitude, that breeds
    Reflection and remorse, the fear of shame,
    And their inveterate habits, all forbid.
      Whom call we gay? That honour has been long
    The boast of mere pretenders to the name.
    The innocent are gay--the lark is gay,
    That dries his feathers, saturate with dew,
    Beneath the rosy cloud, while yet the beams
    Of dayspring overshoot his humble nest.
    The peasant too, a witness of his song,
    Himself a songster, is as gay as he.
    But save me from the gaiety of those
    Whose headaches nail them to a noon-day bed;
    And save me too from theirs whose haggard eyes
    Flash desperation, and betray their pangs
    For property stripp'd off by cruel chance;
    From gaiety, that fills the bones with pain,
    The mouth with blasphemy, the heart with woe.
      The earth was made so various, that the mind
    Of desultory man, studious of change,
    And pleased with novelty, might be indulged.
    Prospects, however lovely, may be seen
    Till half their beauties fade; the weary sight,
    Too well acquainted with their smiles, slides off
    Fastidious, seeking less familiar scenes.
    Then snug enclosures in the shelter'd vale,
    Where frequent hedges intercept the eye,
    Delight us; happy to renounce awhile,
    Not senseless of its charms, what still we love,
    That such short absence may endear it more.
    Then forests, or the savage rock, may please,
    That hides the sea-mew in his hollow clefts
    Above the reach of man. His hoary head,
    Conspicuous many a league, the mariner,
    Bound homeward, and in hope already there,
    Greets with three cheers exulting. At his waist
    A girdle of half-wither'd shrubs he shows,
    And at his feet the baffled billows die.
    The common, overgrown with fern, and rough
    With prickly gorse, that, shapeless and deform'd,
    And dangerous to the touch, has yet its bloom,
    And decks itself with ornaments of gold,
    Yields no unpleasing ramble; there the turf
    Smells fresh, and, rich in odoriferous herbs
    And fungous fruits of earth, regales the sense
    With luxury of unexpected sweets.
      There often wanders one, whom better days
    Saw better clad, in cloak of satin trimm'd
    With lace, and hat with splendid riband bound.
    A serving maid was she, and fell in love
    With one who left her, went to sea, and died.
    Her fancy follow'd him through foaming waves
    To distant shores; and she would sit and weep
    At what a sailor suffers; fancy too,
    Delusive most where warmest wishes are,
    Would oft anticipate his glad return,
    And dream of transports she was not to know.
    She heard the doleful tidings of his death--
    And never smiled again! and now she roams
    The dreary waste; there spends the livelong day,
    And there, unless when charity forbids,
    The livelong night. A tatter'd apron hides,
    Worn as a cloak, and hardly hides, a gown
    More tatter'd still; and both but ill conceal
    A bosom heaved with never-ceasing sighs.
    She begs an idle pin of all she meets,
    And hoards them in her sleeve; but needful food,
    Though press'd with hunger oft, or comelier clothes,
    Though pinch'd with cold, asks never.--Kate is crazed!
      I see a column of slow-rising smoke
    O'ertop the lofty wood that skirts the wild.
    A vagabond and useless tribe there eat
    Their miserable meal. A kettle, slung
    Between two poles upon a stick transverse,
    Receives the morsel--flesh obscene of dog,
    Or vermin, or at best of cock purloin'd
    From his accustom'd perch. Hard-faring race!
    They pick their fuel out of every hedge,
    Which, kindled with dry leaves, just saves unquench'd
    The spark of life. The sportive wind blows wide
    Their fluttering rags, and shows a tawny skin,
    The vellum of the pedigree they claim.
    Great skill have they in palmistry, and more
    To conjure clean away the gold they touch,
    Conveying worthless dross into its place;
    Loud when they beg, dumb only when they steal.
    Strange! that a creature rational, and cast
    In human mould, should brutalize by choice
    His nature; and, though capable of arts,
    By which the world might profit, and himself,
    Self-banish'd from society, prefer
    Such squalid sloth to honourable toil!
    Yet even these, though, feigning sickness oft,
    They swathe the forehead, drag the limping limb,
    And vex their flesh with artificial sores,
    Can change their whine into a mirthful note
    When safe occasion offers; and with dance,
    And music of the bladder and the bag,
    Beguile their woes, and make the woods resound.
    Such health and gaiety of heart enjoy
    The houseless rovers of the sylvan world;
    And, breathing wholesome air, and wandering much,
    Need other physic none to heal the effects
    Of loathsome diet, penury, and cold.
      Blest he, though undistinguish'd from the crowd
    By wealth or dignity, who dwells secure,
    Where man, by nature fierce, has laid aside
    His fierceness, having learnt, though slow to learn,
    The manners and the arts of civil life.
    His wants indeed are many; but supply
    Is obvious, placed within the easy reach
    Of temperate wishes and industrious hands.
    Here virtue thrives as in her proper soil;
    Not rude and surly, and beset with thorns,
    And terrible to sight, as when she springs
    (If e'er she spring spontaneous) in remote
    And barbarous climes, where violence prevails,
    And strength is lord of all; but gentle, kind,
    By culture tamed, by liberty refresh'd,
    And all her fruits by radiant truth matured.
    War and the chase engross the savage whole,
    War follow'd for revenge, or to supplant
    The envied tenants of some happier spot:
    The chase for sustenance, precarious trust!
    His hard condition with severe constraint
    Binds all his faculties, forbids all growth
    Of wisdom, proves a school, in which he learns
    Sly circumvention, unrelenting hate,
    Mean self-attachment, and scarce aught beside.
    Thus fare the shivering natives of the north,
    And thus the rangers of the western world,
    Where it advances far into the deep,
    Towards the antarctic. E'en the favour'd isles,
    So lately found, although the constant sun
    Cheer all their seasons with a grateful smile,
    Can boast but little virtue; and, inert
    Through plenty, lose in morals what they gain
    In manners--victims of luxurious ease.
    These therefore I can pity, placed remote
    From all that science traces, art invents,
    Or inspiration teaches; and enclosed
    In boundless oceans, never to be pass'd
    By navigators uninform'd as they,
    Or plough'd perhaps by British bark again:
    But, far beyond the rest, and with most cause,
    Thee, gentle savage![807] whom no love of thee
    Or thine, but curiosity, perhaps,
    Or else vain-glory, prompted us to draw
    Forth from thy native bowers, to show thee here
    With what superior skill we can abuse
    The gifts of Providence, and squander life.
    The dream is past; and thou hast found again
    Thy cocoas and bananas, palms and yams,
    And homestall thatch'd with leaves. But hast thou found
    Their former charms? And, having seen our state,
    Our palaces, our ladies, and our pomp
    Of equipage, our gardens and our sports,
    And heard our music; are thy simple friends,
    Thy simple fare, and all thy plain delights
    As dear to thee as once? And have thy joys
    Lost nothing by comparison with ours?
    Rude as thou art (for we return'd thee rude
    And ignorant, except of outward show),
    I cannot think thee yet so dull of heart
    And spiritless as never to regret
    Sweets tasted here, and left as soon as known.
    Methinks I see thee straying on the beach,
    And asking of the surge that bathes thy foot,
    If ever it has wash'd our distant shore.
    I see thee weep, and thine are honest tears,
    A patriot's for his country: thou art sad
    At thought of her forlorn and abject state,
    From which no power of thine can raise her up.
    Thus fancy paints thee, and though apt to err,
    Perhaps errs little when she paints thee thus.
    She tells me, too, that duly every morn
    Thou climb'st the mountain top, with eager eye
    Exploring far and wide the watery waste
    For sight of ship from England. Every speck
    Seen in the dim horizon turns thee pale
    With conflict of contending hopes and fears.
    But comes at last the dull and dusky eve,
    And sends thee to thy cabin, well prepared
    To dream all night of what the day denied.
    Alas! expect it not. We found no bait
    To tempt us in thy country. Doing good,
    Disinterested good, is not our trade.
    We travel far, 'tis true, but not for nought;
    And must be bribed to compass earth again
    By other hopes and richer fruits than yours.
      But though true worth and virtue in the mild
    And genial soil of cultivated life
    Thrive most, and may perhaps thrive only there,
    Yet not in cities oft: in proud, and gay,
    And gain-devoted cities. Thither flow,
    As to a common and most noisome sewer,
    The dregs and feculence of every land.
    In cities foul example on most minds
    Begets its likeness. Rank abundance breeds,
    In gross and pamper'd cities, sloth, and lust,
    And wantonness, and gluttonous excess.
    In cities vice is hidden with most ease,
    Or seen with least reproach; and virtue, taught
    By frequent lapse, can hope no triumph there
    Beyond the achievement of successful flight.
    I do confess them nurseries of the arts,
    In which they flourish most; where, in the beams
    Of warm encouragement, and in the eye
    Of public note, they reach their perfect size.
    Such London is, by taste and wealth proclaim'd
    The fairest capital of all the world:
    By riot and incontinence the worst.
    There touch'd by Reynolds, a dull blank becomes
    A lucid mirror, in which Nature sees
    All her reflected features. Bacon there
    Gives more than female beauty to a stone,
    And Chatham's eloquence to marble lips.
    Nor does the chisel occupy alone
    The powers of sculpture, but the style as much;
    Each province of her art her equal care.
    With nice incision of her guided steel
    She ploughs a brazen field, and clothes a soil
    So sterile with what charms soe'er she will,
    The richest scenery and the loveliest forms.
    Where finds Philosophy her eagle eye,
    With which she gazes at yon burning disk
    Undazzled, and detects and counts his spots?
    In London: where her implements exact,
    With which she calculates, computes, and scans
    All distance, motion, magnitude, and now
    Measures an atom, and now girds a world?
    In London. Where has commerce such a mart,
    So rich, so throng'd, so drain'd, and so supplied,
    As London--opulent, enlarged, and still
    Increasing London? Babylon of old
    Not more the glory of the earth than she,
    A more accomplish'd world's chief glory now.
      She has her praise. Now mark a spot or two,
    That so much beauty would do well to purge;
    And show this queen of cities, that so fair
    May yet be foul; so witty, yet not wise.
    It is not seemly, nor of good report,
    That she is slack in discipline; more prompt
    To avenge than to prevent the breach of law:
    That she is rigid in denouncing death
    On petty robbers, and indulges life
    And liberty, and ofttimes honour too,
    To peculators of the public gold:
    That thieves at home must hang; but he, that puts
    Into his over-gorged and bloated purse
    The wealth of Indian provinces, escapes.
    Nor is it well, nor can it come to good,
    That, through profane and infidel contempt
    Of holy writ, she has presumed to annul
    And abrogate, as roundly as she may,
    The total ordinance and will of God;
    Advancing Fashion to the post of Truth,
    And centring all authority in modes
    And customs of her own, till sabbath rites
    Have dwindled into unrespected forms,
    And knees and hassocks are well-nigh divorced.
      God made the country, and man made the town,
    What wonder then that health and virtue, gifts
    That can alone make sweet the bitter draught
    That life holds out to all, should most abound
    And least be threaten'd in the fields and groves?
    Possess ye, therefore, ye who, borne about
    In chariots and sedans, know no fatigue
    But that of idleness, and taste no scenes
    But such as art contrives, possess ye still
    Your element; there only can ye shine;
    There only minds like yours can do no harm.
    Our groves were planted to console at noon
    The pensive wanderer in their shades. At eve
    The moonbeam, sliding softly in between
    The sleeping leaves, is all the light they wish,
    Birds warbling all the music. We can spare
    The splendour of your lamps; they but eclipse
    Our softer satellite. Your songs confound
    Our more harmonious notes; the thrush departs
    Scared, and the offended nightingale is mute.
    There is a public mischief in your mirth;
    It plagues your country. Folly such as yours,
    Graced with a sword, and worthier of a fan,
    Has made, what enemies could ne'er have done,
    Our arch of empire, stedfast but for you,
    A mutilated structure, soon to fall.

  [805] See Poems.

  [806] John Courtney Throckmorton, Esq. of Weston Underwood.

  [807] Omai.

  [Illustration: THE TIME PIECE.

  "HE STABLISHES THE STRONG, RESTORES THE WEAK, RECLAIMS THE
  WANDERER, BINDS THE BROKEN HEART"]




BOOK II.

THE TIME-PIECE.


THE ARGUMENT.

     Reflections suggested by the conclusion of the former
     book--Peace among the nations recommended on the ground of their
     common fellowship in sorrow--Prodigies enumerated--Sicilian
     earthquakes--Man rendered obnoxious to these calamities by
     sin--God the agent in them--The philosophy that stops at
     secondary causes reproved--Our own late miscarriages accounted
     for--Satirical notice taken of our trips to Fontainbleau--But
     the pulpit, not satire, the proper engine of reformation--The
     reverend advertiser of engraved sermons--Petit-maître
     parson--The good preacher--Picture of a theatrical
     clerical coxcomb--Story-tellers and jesters in the pulpit
     reproved--Apostrophe to popular applause--Retailers of ancient
     philosophy expostulated with--Sum of the whole matter--Effects
     of sacerdotal mismanagement on the laity--Their folly and
     extravagance--The mischiefs of profusion--Profusion itself, with
     all its consequent evils, ascribed, as to its principal cause,
     to the want of discipline in the universities.

    Oh for a lodge in some vast wilderness,
    Some boundless contiguity of shade,
    Where rumour of oppression and deceit,
    Of unsuccessful or successful war,
    Might never reach me more! My ear is pain'd,
    My soul is sick, with every day's report
    Of wrong and outrage with which earth is fill'd.
    There is no flesh in man's obdurate heart,
    It does not feel for man; the natural bond
    Of brotherhood is sever'd as the flax
    That falls asunder at the touch of fire.
    He finds his fellow guilty of a skin
    Not colour'd like his own; and, having power
    To enforce the wrong, for such a worthy cause
    Dooms and devotes him as his lawful prey.
    Lands intersected by a narrow frith
    Abhor each other. Mountains interposed
    Make enemies of nations, who had else
    Like kindred drops been mingled into one.
    Thus man devotes his brother, and destroys;
    And, worse than all, and most to be deplored,
    As human nature's broadest, foulest blot,
    Chains him, and tasks him, and exacts his sweat
    With stripes, that Mercy, with a bleeding heart,
    Weeps when she sees inflicted on a beast.
    Then what is man? And what man, seeing this,
    And having human feelings, does not blush,
    And hang his head, to think himself a man?
    I would not have a slave to till my ground,
    To carry me, to fan me while I sleep,
    And tremble when I wake, for all the wealth
    That sinews bought and sold have ever earn'd.
    No: dear as freedom is, and in my heart's
    Just estimation prized above all price,
    I had much rather be myself the slave,
    And wear the bonds, than fasten them on him.
    We have no slaves at home:--then why abroad?
    And they themselves, once ferried o'er the wave
    That parts us, are emancipate and loosed.
    Slaves cannot breathe in England; if their lungs
    Receive our air, that moment they are free;
    They touch our country, and their shackles fall.
    That's noble, and bespeaks a nation proud
    And jealous of the blessing. Spread it then,
    And let it circulate through every vein
    Of all your empire; that where Britain's power
    Is felt, mankind may feel her mercy too.
      Sure there is need of social intercourse,
    Benevolence, and peace, and mutual aid,
    Between the nations in a world that seems
    To toll the death-bell of its own decease,
    And by the voice of all its elements
    To preach the general doom.[808] When were the winds
    Let slip with such a warrant to destroy?
    When did the waves so haughtily o'erleap
    Their ancient barriers, deluging the dry?
    Fires from beneath, and meteors[809] from above,
    Portentous, unexampled, unexplain'd,
    Have kindled beacons in the skies; and the old
    And crazy earth has had her shaking fits
    More frequent, and foregone her usual rest.
    Is it a time to wrangle, when the props
    And pillars of our planet seem to fail,
    And Nature[810] with a dim and sickly eye
    To wait the close of all? But grant her end
    More distant, and that prophecy demands
    A longer respite, unaccomplished yet;
    Still they are frowning signals, and bespeak
    Displeasure in his breast who smites the earth
    Or heals it, makes it languish or rejoice.
    And 'tis but seemly, that, where all deserve
    And stand exposed by common peccancy
    To what no few have felt, there should be peace,
    And brethren in calamity should love.
      Alas for Sicily! rude fragments now
    Lie scatter'd where the shapely column stood.
    Her palaces are dust. In all her streets
    The voice of singing and the sprightly chord
    Are silent. Revelry, and dance, and show
    Suffer a syncope and solemn pause;
    While God performs upon the trembling stage
    Of his own works the dreadful part alone.
    How does the earth receive him?--with what signs
    Of gratulation and delight her King?
    Pours she not all her choicest fruits abroad,
    Her sweetest flowers, her aromatic gums,
    Disclosing Paradise where'er he treads?
    She quakes at his approach. Her hollow womb
    Conceiving thunders, through a thousand deeps
    And fiery caverns, roars beneath his foot.
    The hills move lightly, and the mountains smoke,
    For he has touch'd them. From the extremest point
    Of elevation down into the abyss
    His wrath is busy, and his frown is felt.
    The rocks fall headlong, and the valleys rise,
    The rivers die into offensive pools,
    And, charged with putrid verdure, breathe a gross
    And mortal nuisance into all the air,
    What solid was, by transformation strange,
    Grows fluid; and the fix'd and rooted earth,
    Tormented into billows, heaves and swells,
    Or with a vortiginous and hideous whirl
    Sucks down its prey insatiable. Immense
    The tumult and the overthrow, the pangs
    And agonies of human and of brute
    Multitudes, fugitive on every side,
    And fugitive in vain. The sylvan scene
    Migrates uplifted; and with all its soil
    Alighting in far distant fields, finds out
    A new possessor, and survives the change.
    Ocean has caught the frenzy, and, upwrought
    To an enormous and o'erbearing height,
    Not by a mighty wind, but by that Voice
    Which winds and waves obey, invades the shore
    Resistless. Never such a sudden flood,
    Upridged so high, and sent on such a charge,
    Possess'd an inland scene. Where now the throng
    That press'd the beach, and, hasty to depart,
    Look'd to the sea for safety? They are gone,
    Gone with the refluent wave into the deep--
    A prince with half his people! Ancient towers,
    And roofs embattled high, the gloomy scenes
    Where beauty oft and letter'd worth consume
    Life in the unproductive shades of death,
    Fall prone: the pale inhabitants come forth,
    And, happy in their unforeseen release
    From all the rigours of restraint, enjoy
    The terrors of the day that sets them free.
    Who then, that has thee, would not hold thee fast,
    Freedom! whom they that lose thee so regret,
    That e'en a judgment, making way for thee,
    Seems in their eyes a mercy for thy sake.
      Such evil sin hath wrought; and such a flame
    Kindled in heaven, that it burns down to earth,
    And, in the furious inquest that it makes
    On God's behalf, lays waste his fairest works.
    The very elements, though each be meant
    The minister of man, to serve his wants,
    Conspire against him. With his breath he draws
    A plague into his blood; and cannot use
    Life's necessary means, but he must die.
    Storms rise to o'erwhelm him: or if stormy winds
    Rise not, the waters of the deep shall rise,
    And, needing none assistance of the storm,
    Shall roll themselves ashore, and reach him there.
    The earth shall shake him out of all his holds,
    Or make his house his grave: nor so content,
    Shall counterfeit the motions of the flood,
    And drown him in her dry and dusty gulfs.
    What then!--were they the wicked above all,
    And we the righteous, whose fast-anchor'd isle
    Moved not, while theirs was rock'd, like a light skiff,
    The sport of every wave? No: none are clear,
    And none than we more guilty. But, where all
    Stand chargeable with guilt, and to the shafts
    Of wrath obnoxious, God may choose his mark:
    May punish, if he please, the less, to warn
    The more malignant. If he spared not them,
    Tremble and be amazed at thine escape,
    Far guiltier England, lest he spare not thee!
      Happy the man who sees a God employ'd
    In all the good and ill that chequer life!
    Resolving all events, with their effects
    And manifold results, into the will
    And arbitration wise of the Supreme.
    Did not his eye rule all things, and intend
    The least of our concerns (since from the least
    The greatest oft originate;) could chance
    Find place in his dominion, or dispose
    One lawless particle to thwart his plan;
    Then God might be surprised, and unforeseen
    Contingence might alarm him, and disturb
    The smooth and equal course of his affairs.
    This truth Philosophy, though eagle-eyed
    In nature's tendencies, oft overlooks;
    And, having found his instrument, forgets,
    Or disregards, or, more presumptuous still,
    Denies the power that wields it. God proclaims
    His hot displeasure against foolish men,
    That live an atheist life: involves the heaven
    In tempests; quits his grasp upon the winds,
    And gives them all their fury; bids a plague
    Kindle a fiery boil upon the skin,
    And putrefy the breath of blooming Health.
    He calls for Famine, and the meagre fiend
    Blows mildew from between his shrivell'd lips,
    And taints the golden ear. He springs his mines,
    And desolates a nation at a blast.
    Forth steps the spruce philosopher, and tells
    Of homogeneal and discordant springs
    And principles; of causes, how they work
    By necessary laws their sure effects;
    Of action and re-action. He has found
    The source of the disease that nature feels,
    And bids the world take heart and banish fear.
    Thou fool! will thy discovery of the cause
    Suspend the effect, or heal it? Has not God
    Still wrought by means since first he made the world?
    And did he not of old employ his means
    To drown it? What is his creation less
    Than a capacious reservoir of means
    Form'd for his use, and ready at his will?
    Go, dress thine eyes with eye-salve; ask of him,
    Or ask of whomsoever he has taught;
    And learn, though late, the genuine cause of all.
      England, with all thy faults, I love thee still--
    My country! and, while yet a nook is left
    Where English minds and manners may be found,
    Shall be constrain'd to love thee. Though thy clime
    Be fickle, and thy year most part deform'd
    With dripping rains, or wither'd by a frost,
    I would not yet exchange thy sullen skies,
    And fields without a flower, for warmer France
    With all her vines; nor for Ausonia's groves
    Of golden fruitage, and her myrtle bowers.
    To shake thy senate, and from heights sublime
    Of patriot eloquence to flash down fire
    Upon thy foes, was never meant my task:
    But I can feel thy fortunes, and partake
    Thy joys and sorrows, with as true a heart
    As any thunderer there. And I can feel
    Thy follies too; and with a just disdain
    Frown at effeminates, whose very looks
    Reflect dishonour on the land I love.
    How, in the name of soldiership and sense,
    Should England prosper, when such things, as smooth
    And tender as a girl, all essenced o'er
    With odours, and as profligate as sweet;
    Who sell their laurel for a myrtle wreath,
    And love when they should fight; when such as these
    Presume to lay their hand upon the ark
    Of her magnificent and awful cause?
    Time was when it was praise and boast enough
    In every clime, and travel where we might,
    That we were born her children. Praise enough
    To fill the ambition of a private man,
    That Chatham's language was his mother tongue,
    And Wolfe's great name compatriot with his own.
    Farewell those honours, and farewell with them
    The hope of such hereafter! They have fallen
    Each in his field of glory; one in arms,
    And one in council--Wolfe upon the lap
    Of smiling Victory that moment won,
    And Chatham heart-sick of his country's shame!
    They made us many soldiers. Chatham, still
    Consulting England's happiness at home,
    Secured it by an unforgiving frown,
    If any wrong'd her. Wolfe, where'er he fought,
    Put so much of his heart into his act,
    That his example had a magnet's force,
    And all were swift to follow whom all loved.
    Those suns are set. Oh rise some other such!
    Or all that we have left is empty talk
    Of old achievements and despair of new.
      Now hoist the sail, and let the streamers float
    Upon the wanton breezes. Strew the deck
    With lavender, and sprinkle liquid sweets,
    That no rude savour maritime invade
    The nose of nice nobility! Breathe soft,
    Ye clarionets; and softer still, ye flutes;
    That winds and waters, lull'd by magic sounds,
    May bear us smoothly to the Gallic shore!
    True, we have lost an empire--let it pass.
    True; we may thank the perfidy of France,
    That pick'd the jewel out of England's crown,
    With all the cunning of an envious shrew.
    And let that pass--'twas but a trick of state!
    A brave man knows no malice, but at once
    Forgets in peace the injuries of war,
    And gives his direst foe a friend's embrace.
    And, shamed as we have been, to the very beard
    Braved and defied, and in our own sea proved
    Too weak for those decisive blows that once
    Ensured us mastery there, we yet retain
    Some small pre-eminence; we justly boast
    At least superior jockeyship, and claim
    The honours of the turf as all our own!
    Go then, well worthy of the praise ye seek,
    And show the shame ye might conceal at home
    In foreign eyes!--be grooms and win the plate,
    Where once your nobler fathers won a crown!--
    'Tis generous to communicate your skill
    To those that need it! Folly is soon learn'd:
    And under such preceptors who can fail!
      There is a pleasure in poetic pains
    Which only poets know. The shifts and turns,
    The expedients and inventions multiform,
    To which the mind resorts, in chase of terms
    Though apt, yet coy, and difficult to win--
    To arrest the fleeting images that fill
    The mirror of the mind, and hold them fast,
    And force them sit till he has pencil'd off
    A faithful likeness of the forms he views:
    Then to dispose his copies with such art,
    That each may find its most propitious light,
    And shine by situation, hardly less
    Than by the labour and the skill it cost;
    Are occupations of the poet's mind
    So pleasing, and that steal away the thought
    With such address from themes of sad import,
    That, lost in his own musings, happy man!
    He feels the anxieties of life, denied
    Their wonted entertainment, all retire.
    Such joys has he that sings. But ah! not such,
    Or seldom such, the hearers of his song.
    Fastidious, or else listless, or perhaps
    Aware of nothing arduous in a task
    They never undertook, they little note
    His dangers or escapes, and haply find
    Their least amusement where he found the most.
    But is amusement all? Studious of song,
    And yet ambitious not to sing in vain,
    I would not trifle merely, though the world
    Be loudest in their praise who do no more.
    Yet what can satire, whether grave or gay?
    It may correct a foible, may chastise
    The freaks of fashion, regulate the dress,
    Retrench a sword-blade, or displace a patch;
    But where are its sublimer trophies found?
    What vice has it subdued? whose heart reclaim'd
    By rigour? or whom laugh'd into reform?
    Alas! Leviathan is not so tamed:
    Laugh'd at, he laughs again; and, stricken hard,
    Turns to the stroke his adamantine scales,
    That fear no discipline of human hands.
      The pulpit, therefore (and I name it fill'd
    With solemn awe, that bids me well beware
    With what intent I touch that holy thing)--
    The pulpit (when the satirist has at last,
    Strutting and vapouring in an empty school,
    Spent all his force, and made no proselyte)--
    I say the pulpit (in the sober use
    Of its legitimate, peculiar powers)
    Must stand acknowledged, while the world shall stand,
    The most important and effectual guard,
    Support, and ornament of Virtue's cause.
    There stands the messenger of truth: there stands
    The legate of the skies!--His theme divine,
    His office sacred, his credentials clear.
    By him the violated law speaks out
    Its thunders; and by him, in strains as sweet
    As angels use, the Gospel whispers peace.
    He 'stablishes the strong, restores the weak,
    Reclaims the wanderer, binds the broken heart,
    And, arm'd himself in panoply complete
    Of heavenly temper, furnishes with arms
    Bright as his own, and trains, by every rule
    Of holy discipline, to glorious war,
    The sacramental host of God's elect!
    Are all such teachers?--would to heaven all were!
    But hark--the doctor's voice!--fast wedged between
    Two empirics he stands, and with swoll'n cheeks
    Inspires the news, his trumpet. Keener far
    Than all invective is his bold harangue,
    While through that public organ of report
    He hails the clergy; and, defying shame,
    Announces to the world his own and theirs!
    He teaches those to read, whom schools dismiss'd,
    And colleges, untaught; sells accent, tone,
    And emphasis in score, and gives to prayer
    The adagio and andante it demands.
    He grinds divinity of other days
    Down into modern use; transforms old print
    To zigzag manuscript, and cheats the eyes
    Of gallery critics by a thousand arts.
    Are there who purchase of the doctor's ware?
    Oh, name it not in Gath!--it cannot be,
    That grave and learned clerks should need such aid.
    He doubtless is in sport, and does but droll,
    Assuming thus a rank unknown before--
    Grand caterer and drynurse of the church!
      I venerate the man whose heart is warm,
    Whose hands are pure, whose doctrine and whose life,
    Coincident, exhibit lucid proof
    That he is honest in the sacred cause,
    To such I render more than mere respect,
    Whose actions say that they respect themselves,
    But loose in morals, and in manners vain,
    In conversation frivolous, in dress
    Extreme, at once rapacious and profuse;
    Frequent in park with lady at his side,
    Ambling and prattling scandal as he goes;
    But rare at home, and never at his books,
    Or with his pen, save when he scrawls a card;
    Constant at routs, familiar with a round
    Of ladyships--a stranger to the poor;
    Ambitious of preferment for its gold,
    And well prepared, by ignorance and sloth,
    By infidelity and love of world,
    To make God's work a sinecure; a slave
    To his own pleasures and his patron's pride:
    From such apostles, O ye mitred heads,
    Preserve the church! and lay not careless hands
    On skulls that cannot teach, and will not learn.
      Would I describe a preacher, such as Paul,
    Were he on earth, would hear, approve, and own--
    Paul should himself direct me. I would trace
    His master strokes, and draw from his design.
    I would express him simple, grave, sincere;
    In doctrine uncorrupt; in language plain,
    And plain in manner; decent, solemn, chaste,
    And natural in gesture; much impress'd
    Himself, as conscious of his awful charge,
    And anxious mainly that the flock he feeds
    May feel it too; affectionate in look,
    And tender in address, as well becomes
    A messenger of grace to guilty men.
    Behold the picture! Is it like?--Like whom?
    The things that mount the rostrum with a skip,
    And then skip down again; pronounce a text;
    Cry--hem; and reading what they never wrote,
    Just fifteen minutes, huddle up their work,
    And with a well-bred whisper close the scene!
      In man or woman, but far most in man,
    And most of all in man that ministers
    And serves the altar, in my soul I loathe
    All affectation. 'Tis my perfect scorn;
    Object of my implacable disgust.
    What! will a man play tricks? will he indulge
    A silly fond conceit of his fair form,
    And just proportion, fashionable mien,
    And pretty face, in presence of his God?
    Or will he seek to dazzle me with tropes,
    As with the diamond on his lily hand,
    And play his brilliant parts before my eyes,
    When I am hungry for the bread of life?
    He mocks his Maker, prostitutes and shames
    His noble office, and, instead of truth,
    Displaying his own beauty, starves his flock!
    Therefore, avaunt all attitude, and stare,
    And start theatric, practised at the glass!
    I seek divine simplicity in him
    Who handles things divine; and all besides,
    Though learn'd with labour, and though much admired
    By curious eyes and judgments ill inform'd,
    To me is odious as the nasal twang
    Heard at conventicle, where worthy men,
    Misled by custom, strain celestial themes
    Through the press'd nostril, spectacle-bestrid.
    Some, decent in demeanour while they preach,
    That task perform'd, relapse into themselves;
    And, having spoken wisely, at the close
    Grow wanton, and give proof to every eye,
    Whoe'er was edified, themselves were not!
    Forth comes the pocket mirror.--First we stroke
    An eyebrow; next compose a straggling lock;
    Then with an air most gracefully perform'd
    Fall back into our seat, extend an arm,
    And lay it at its ease with gentle care,
    With handkerchief in hand depending low:
    The better hand more busy gives the nose
    Its bergamot, or aids the indebted eye
    With opera glass, to watch the moving scene,
    And recognise the slow-retiring fair.--
    Now this is fulsome; and offends me more
    Than in a churchman slovenly neglect
    And rustic coarseness would. A heavenly mind
    May be indifferent to her house of clay,
    And slight the hovel as beneath her care;
    But how a body so fantastic, trim,
    And quaint, in its deportment and attire,
    Can lodge a heavenly mind--demands a doubt.
      He that negotiates between God and man,
    As God's ambassador, the grand concerns
    Of judgment and of mercy, should beware
    Of lightness in his speech. 'Tis pitiful
    To court a grin, when you should woo a soul;
    To break a jest, when pity would inspire
    Pathetic exhortation; and to address
    The skittish fancy with facetious tales,
    When sent with God's commission to the heart!
    So did not Paul. Direct me to a quip
    Or merry turn in all he ever wrote,
    And I consent you take it for your text,
    Your only one, till sides and benches fail.
    No: he was serious in a serious cause,
    And understood too well the weighty terms
    That he had taken in charge. He would not stoop
    To conquer those by jocular exploits
    Whom truth and soberness assail'd in vain.
      O popular applause! what heart of man
    Is proof against thy sweet seducing charms?
    The wisest and the best feel urgent need
    Of all their caution in thy gentlest gales;
    But, swell'd into a gust--who then, alas!
    With all his canvas set, and inexpert,
    And therefore heedless, can withstand thy power?
    Praise, from the rivell'd lips of toothless, bald
    Decrepitude, and in the looks of lean
    And craving Poverty, and in the bow
    Respectful of the smutch'd artificer,
    Is oft too welcome, and may much disturb
    The bias of the purpose. How much more,
    Pour'd forth by beauty splendid and polite,
    In language soft as Adoration breathes?
    Ah, spare your idol! think him human still.
    Charms he may have, but he has frailties too!
    Dote not too much, nor spoil what ye admire.
      All truth is from the sempiternal source
    Of light divine. But Egypt, Greece, and Rome
    Drew from the stream below. More favour'd, we
    Drink, when we choose it, at the fountain-head.
    To them it flow'd much mingled and defiled
    With hurtful error, prejudice, and dreams
    Illusive of philosophy, so call'd,
    But falsely. Sages after sages strove
    In vain to filter off a crystal draught
    Pure from the lees, which often more enhanced
    The thirst than slaked it, and not seldom bred
    Intoxication and delirium wild.
    In vain they push'd inquiry to the birth
    And spring-time of the world; ask'd, Whence is man?
    Why form'd at all? and wherefore as he is?
    Where must he find his Maker? with what rites
    Adore him? Will he hear, accept, and bless?
    Or does he sit regardless of his works?
    Has man within him an immortal seed?
    Or does the tomb take all? If he survive
    His ashes, where? and in what weal or woe?
    Knots worthy of solution, which alone
    A Deity could solve. Their answers, vague
    And all at random, fabulous and dark,
    Left them as dark themselves. Their rules of life,
    Defective and unsanction'd, proved too weak
    To bind the roving appetite, and lead
    Blind nature to a God not yet reveal'd.
    'Tis Revelation satisfies all doubts,
    Explains all mysteries, except her own,
    And so illuminates the path of life
    That fools discover it, and stray no more.
    Now tell me, dignified and sapient sir,
    My man of morals, nurtured in the shades
    Of Academus--is this false or true?
    Is Christ the abler teacher, or the schools?
    If Christ, then why resort at every turn
    To Athens or to Rome, for wisdom short
    Of man's occasions, when in him reside
    Grace, knowledge, comfort--an unfathom'd store?
    How oft, when Paul has served us with a text,
    Has Epictetus, Plato, Tully preach'd!
    Men that, if now alive, would sit content
    And humble learners of a Saviour's worth,
    Preach it who might. Such was their love of truth,
    Their thirst of knowledge, and their candour too!
      And thus it is.--The pastor, either vain
    By nature, or by flattery made so, taught
    To gaze at his own splendour, and to exalt
    Absurdly, not his office, but himself;
    Or unenlighten'd, and too proud to learn;
    Or vicious, and not therefore apt to teach;
    Perverting often, by the stress of lewd
    And loose example, whom he should instruct;
    Exposes, and holds up to broad disgrace
    The noblest function, and discredits much
    The brightest truths that man has ever seen.
    For ghostly counsel--if it either fall
    Below the exigence, or be not back'd
    With show of love, at least with hopeful proof
    Of some sincerity on the giver's part;
    Or be dishonour'd in the exterior form
    And mode of its conveyance by such tricks,
    As move derision, or by foppish airs
    And histrionic mummery, that let down
    The pulpit to the level of the stage--
    Drops from the lips a disregarded thing.
    The weak perhaps are moved, but are not taught,
    While prejudice in men of stronger minds
    Takes deeper root, confirm'd by what they see.
    A relaxation of religion's hold
    Upon the roving and untutor'd heart
    Soon follows, and, the curb of conscience snapp'd,
    The laity run wild.--But do they now?
    Note their extravagance, and be convinced.
      As nations, ignorant of God, contrive
    A wooden one, so we, no longer taught
    By monitors that mother church supplies,
    Now make our own. Posterity will ask
    (If e'er posterity see verse of mine)
    Some fifty or a hundred lustrums hence,
    What was a monitor in George's days?
    My very gentle reader, yet unborn,
    Of whom I needs must augur better things,
    Since Heaven would sure grow weary of a world
    Productive only of a race like ours,
    A monitor is wood--plank shaven thin.
    We wear it at our backs. There, closely braced
    And neatly fitted, it compresses hard
    The prominent and most unsightly bones,
    And binds the shoulders flat. We prove its use
    Sovereign and most effectual to secure
    A form, not now gymnastic as of yore,
    From rickets and distortion, else our lot.
    But, thus admonish'd, we can walk erect--
    One proof at least of manhood! while the friend
    Sticks close, a Mentor worthy of his charge.
    Our habits, costlier than Lucullus wore,
    And by caprice as multiplied as his,
    Just please us while the fashion is at full,
    But change with every moon. The sycophant
    Who waits to dress us arbitrates their date;
    Surveys his fair reversion with keen eye;
    Finds one ill made, another obsolete,
    This fits not nicely, that is ill conceived;
    And, making prize of all that he condemns,
    With our expenditure defrays his own.
    Variety's the very spice of life,
    That gives it all its flavour. We have run
    Through every change that Fancy, at the loom
    Exhausted, has had genius to supply;
    And, studious of mutation still, discard
    A real elegance, a little used,
    For monstrous novelty and strange disguise.
    We sacrifice to dress, till household joys
    And comforts cease. Dress drains our cellar dry
    And keeps our larder lean; puts out our fires;
    And introduces hunger, frost, and woe,
    Where peace and hospitality might reign.
    What man that lives, and that knows how to live,
    Would fail to exhibit at the public shows
    A form as splendid as the proudest there,
    Though appetite raise outcries at the cost?
    A man of the town dines late, but soon enough,
    With reasonable forecast and despatch,
    To ensure a side-box station at half-price.
    You think, perhaps, so delicate his dress,
    His daily fare as delicate. Alas!
    He picks clean teeth, and, busy as he seems
    With an old tavern quill, is hungry yet!
    The rout is Folly's circle, which she draws
    With magic wand. So potent is the spell,
    That none, decoy'd into that fatal ring,
    Unless by Heaven's peculiar grace, escape.
    There we grow early grey, but never wise;
    There form connexions, but acquire no friend;
    Solicit pleasure, hopeless of success;
    Waste youth in occupations only fit
    For second childhood, and devote old age
    To sports which only childhood could excuse.
    There they are happiest who dissemble best
    Their weariness; and they the most polite
    Who squander time and treasure with a smile,
    Though at their own destruction. She that asks
    Her dear five hundred friends contemns them all,
    And hates their coming. They (what can they less?)
    Make just reprisals; and, with cringe and shrug,
    And bow obsequious, hide their hate of her.
    All catch the frenzy, downward from her grace,
    Whose flambeaux flash against the morning skies,
    And gild our chamber ceilings as they pass,
    To her, who, frugal only that her thrift
    May feed excesses she can ill afford,
    Is hackney'd home unlackey'd; who, in haste
    Alighting, turns the key in her own door,
    And, at the watchman's lantern borrowing light
    Finds a cold bed her only comfort left.
    Wives beggar husbands, husbands starve their wives,
    On Fortune's velvet altar offering up
    Their last poor pittance--Fortune, most severe
    Of goddesses yet known, and costlier far
    Than all that held their routs in Juno's heaven.--
    So fare we in this prison-house, the world;
    And 'tis a fearful spectacle to see
    So many maniacs dancing in their chains.
    They gaze upon the links that hold them fast
    With eyes of anguish, execrate their lot,
    Then shake them in despair, and dance again!
      Now basket up the family of plagues
    That waste our vitals; peculation, sale
    Of honour, perjury, corruption, frauds
    By forgery, by subterfuge of law,
    By tricks and lies as numerous and as keen
    As the necessities their authors feel;
    Then cast them, closely bundled, every brat
    At the right door. Profusion is the sire.
    Profusion unrestrain'd, with all that's base
    In character, has litter'd all the land,
    And bred, within the memory of no few,
    A priesthood such as Baal's was of old,
    A people such as never was till now.
    It is a hungry vice:--it eats up all
    That gives society its beauty, strength,
    Convenience, and security, and use:
    Makes men mere vermin, worthy to be trapp'd
    And gibbeted, as fast as catchpole claws
    Can seize the slippery prey: unties the knot
    Of union, and converts the sacred band,
    That holds mankind together, to a scourge.
    Profusion, deluging a state with lusts
    Of grossest nature and of worst effects,
    Prepares it for its ruin: hardens, blinds,
    And warps the consciences of public men,
    Till they can laugh at Virtue; mock the fools
    That trust them; and in the end disclose a face
    That would have shock'd Credulity herself,
    Unmask'd, vouchsafing this their sole excuse--
    Since all alike are selfish, why not they?
    This does Profusion, and the accursed cause
    Of such deep mischief has itself a cause.
      In colleges and halls, in ancient days,
    When learning, virtue, piety, and truth
    Were precious and inculcated with care,
    There dwelt a sage call'd Discipline. His head,
    Not yet by time completely silver'd o'er,
    Bespoke him past the bounds of freakish youth,
    But strong for service still, and unimpair'd.
    His eye was meek and gentle, and a smile
    Play'd on his lips; and in his speech was heard
    Paternal sweetness, dignity, and love.
    The occupation dearest to his heart
    Was to encourage goodness. He would stroke
    The head of modest and ingenuous worth,
    That blush'd at its own praise; and press the youth
    Close to his side that pleased him. Learning grew
    Beneath his care a thriving vigorous plant;
    The mind was well-inform'd, the passions held
    Subordinate, and diligence was choice.
    If e'er it chanced, as sometimes chance it must,
    That one among so many overleap'd
    The limits of control, his gentle eye
    Grew stern, and darted a severe rebuke:
    His frown was full of terror, and his voice
    Shook the delinquent with such fits of awe
    As left him not, till penitence had won
    Lost favour back again, and closed the breach.
    But Discipline, a faithful servant long,
    Declined at length into the vale of years:
    A palsy struck his arm; his sparkling eye
    Was quench'd in rheums of age; his voice, unstrung,
    Grew tremulous, and moved derision more
    Than reverence in perverse rebellious youth.
    So colleges and halls neglected much
    Their good old friend; and Discipline at length,
    O'erlook'd and unemploy'd, fell sick, and died.
    Then Study languish'd, Emulation slept,
    And Virtue fled. The schools became a scene
    Of solemn farce, where ignorance in stilts,
    His cap well lined with logic not his own,
    With parrot tongue perform'd the scholar's part,
    Proceeding soon a graduated dunce.
    Then Compromise had place, and Scrutiny
    Became stone blind; Precedence went in truck,
    And he was competent whose purse was so.
    A dissolution of all bonds ensued;
    The curbs invented for the mulish mouth
    Of headstrong youth were broken; bars and bolts
    Grew rusty by disuse; and massy gates
    Forgot their office, opening with a touch;
    Till gowns at length are found mere masquerade,
    The tassell'd cap and the spruce band a jest,
    A mockery of the world! What need of these
    For gamesters, jockeys, brothellers impure,
    Spendthrifts, and booted sportsmen, oftener seen
    With belted waist and pointers at their heels
    Than in the bounds of duty? What was learn'd,
    If aught was learned in childhood, is forgot;
    And such expense as pinches parents blue,
    And mortifies the liberal hand of love,
    Is squander'd in pursuit of idle sports
    And vicious pleasures; buys the boy a name
    That sits a stigma on his father's house,
    And cleaves through life inseparably close
    To him that wears it. What can after-games
    Of riper joys, and commerce with the world,
    The lewd vain world, that must receive him soon,
    Add to such erudition, thus acquired,
    Where science and where virtue are profess'd?
    They may confirm his habits, rivet fast
    His folly, but to spoil him is a task
    That bids defiance to the united powers
    Of fashion, dissipation, taverns, stews.
    Now blame we most the nurslings or the nurse?
    The children, crook'd, and twisted, and deform'd,
    Through want of care; or her, whose winking eye
    And slumbering oscitancy mars the brood?
    The nurse, no doubt. Regardless of her charge,
    She needs herself correction; needs to learn
    That it is dangerous sporting with the world,
    With things so sacred as a nation's trust,
    The nurture of her youth, her dearest pledge.
      All are not such. I had a brother once--
    Peace to the memory of a man of worth,
    A man of letters, and of manners too!
    Of manners sweet as Virtue always wears,
    When gay good-nature dresses her in smiles.
    He graced a college,[811] in which order yet
    Was sacred; and was honour'd, loved, and wept
    By more than one, themselves conspicuous there.
    Some minds are temper'd happily, and mix'd
    With such ingredients of good sense and taste
    Of what is excellent in man, they thirst
    With such a zeal to be what they approve,
    That no restraints can circumscribe them more
    Than they themselves by choice, for wisdom's sake.
    Nor can example hurt them; what they see
    Of vice in others but enhancing more
    The charms of virtue in their just esteem.
    If such escape contagion, and emerge
    Pure from so foul a pool to shine abroad,
    And give the world their talents and themselves,
    Small thanks to those, whose negligence or sloth
    Exposed their inexperience to the snare,
    And left them to an undirected choice.
      See then the quiver broken and decay'd,
    In which are kept our arrows! Rusting there
    In wild disorder, and unfit for use,
    What wonder, if, discharged into the world,
    They shame their shooters with a random flight,
    Their points obtuse, and feathers drunk with wine!
    Well may the church wage unsuccessful war,
    With such artillery arm'd. Vice parries wide
    The undreaded volley with a sword of straw,
    And stands an impudent and fearless mark.
      Have we not track'd the felon home, and found
    His birthplace and his dam? The country mourns,
    Mourns because every plague that can infest
    Society, and that saps and worms the base
    Of the edifice that Policy has raised,
    Swarms in all quarters; meets the eye, the ear,
    And suffocates the breath at every turn.
    Profusion breeds them; and the cause itself
    Of that calamitous mischief has been found:
    Found too where most offensive, in the skirts
    Of the robed pedagogue! Else let the arraign'd
    Stand up unconscious, and refute the charge.
    So when the Jewish leader stretch'd his arm,
    And waved his rod divine, a race obscene,
    Spawn'd in the muddy beds of Nile, came forth,
    Polluting Egypt: gardens, fields, and plains
    Were cover'd with the pest; the streets were fill'd;
    The croaking nuisance lurk'd in every nook;
    Nor palaces, nor even chambers, 'scaped;
    And the land stank--so numerous was the fry.

  [808] Alluding to the calamities in Jamaica.

  [809] August 18, 1783.

  [810] Alluding to the fog that covered both Europe and Asia
  during the whole summer of 1783.

  [811] Benet College, Cambridge.


BOOK III.

THE GARDEN.


THE ARGUMENT.

     Self-recollection and reproof--Address to domestic
     happiness--Some account of myself--The vanity of many of
     their pursuits who are reputed wise--Justification of my
     censures--Divine illumination necessary to the most expert
     philosopher--The question, What is truth? answered by other
     questions--Domestic happiness addressed again--Few lovers of
     the country--My tame hare--Occupations of a retired gentleman
     in his garden--Pruning--Framing--Greenhouse--Sowing of
     flower seeds--The country preferable to the town even in the
     winter--Reasons why it is deserted at that season--Ruinous
     effects of gaming, and of expensive improvement--Book concludes
     with an apostrophe to the metropolis.

    As one who, long in thickets and in brakes
    Entangled, winds now this way and now that
    His devious course uncertain, seeking home;
    Or, having long in miry ways been foil'd,
    And sore discomfited, from slough to slough
    Plunging, and half despairing of escape;
    If chance at length he finds a greensward smooth
    And faithful to the foot, his spirits rise,
    He chirrups brisk his ear-erecting steed,
    And winds his way with pleasure and with ease;
    So I, designing other themes, and call'd
    To adorn the Sofa with eulogium due,
    To tell its slumbers, and to paint its dreams,
    Have rambled wide. In country, city, seat
    Of academic fame (howe'er deserved,)
    Long held, and scarcely disengaged at last.
    But now with pleasant pace a cleanlier road
    I mean to tread. I feel myself at large,
    Courageous, and refresh'd for future toil,
    If toil awaits me, or if dangers new.
      Since pulpits fail, and sounding boards reflect
    Most part an empty ineffectual sound,
    What chance that I, to fame so little known,
    Nor conversant with men or manners much,
    Should speak to purpose, or with better hope
    Crack the satiric thong? 'Twere wiser far
    For me, enamour'd of sequester'd scenes,
    And charm'd with rural beauty, to repose,
    Where chance may throw me, beneath elm or vine,
    My languid limbs, when summer sears the plains;
    Or, when rough winter rages, on the soft
    And shelter'd Sofa, while the nitrous air
    Feeds a blue flame, and makes a cheerful hearth;
    There, undisturb'd by Folly, and apprised
    How great the danger of disturbing her,
    To muse in silence, or at least confine
    Remarks that gall so many to the few,
    My partners in retreat. Disgust conceal'd
    Is ofttimes proof of wisdom, when the fault
    Is obstinate, and cure beyond our reach.
      Domestic Happiness, thou only bliss
    Of Paradise that has survived the fall!
    Though few now taste thee unimpair'd and pure,
    Or tasting long enjoy thee! too infirm,
    Or too incautious, to preserve thy sweets
    Unmix'd with drops of bitter, which neglect
    Or temper sheds into thy crystal cup;
    Thou art the nurse of Virtue, in thine arms
    She smiles, appearing, as in truth she is,
    Heaven-born, and destined to the skies again.
    Thou art not known where Pleasure is adored,
    That reeling goddess with the zoneless waist
    And wandering eyes, still leaning on the arm
    Of Novelty, her fickle, frail support;
    For thou art meek and constant, hating change,
    And finding in the calm of truth-tried love
    Joys that her stormy raptures never yield.
    Forsaking thee, what shipwreck have we made
    Of honour, dignity, and fair renown!
    Till prostitution elbows us aside
    In all our crowded streets; and senates seem
    Convened for purposes of empire less
    Than to release the adultress from her bond.
    The adultress! what a theme for angry verse!
    What provocation to the indignant heart,
    That feels for injur'd love! but I disdain
    The nauseous task, to paint her as she is,
    Cruel, abandon'd, glorying in her shame!
    No:--let her pass, and, charioted along
    In guilty splendour, shake the public ways;
    The frequency of crimes has washed them white;
    And verse of mine shall never brand the wretch,
    Whom matrons now, of character unsmirch'd,
    And chaste themselves, are not ashamed to own.
    Virtue and vice had boundaries in old time,
    Not to be pass'd: and she, that had renounced
    Her sex's honour, was renounced herself
    By all that prized it; not for prudery's sake,
    But dignity's, resentful of the wrong.
    'Twas hard perhaps on here and there a waif,
    Desirous to return, and not received;
    But was a wholesome rigour in the main,
    And taught the unblemish'd to preserve with care
    That purity, whose loss was loss of all.
    Men too were nice in honour in those days,
    And judged offenders well. Then he that sharp'd,
    And pocketed a prize by fraud obtain'd,
    Was mark'd and shunn'd as odious. He that sold
    His country, or was slack when she required
    His every nerve in action and at stretch,
    Paid, with the blood that he had basely spared,
    The price of his default. But now--yes, now
    We are become so candid and so fair,
    So liberal in construction, and so rich
    In Christian charity, (good-natured age!)
    That they are safe, sinners of either sex,
    Transgress what laws they may. Well dress'd, well bred,
    Well equipaged, is ticket good enough
    To pass us readily through every door.
    Hypocrisy, detest her as we may,
    (And no man's hatred ever wrong'd her yet,)
    May claim this merit still--that she admits
    The worth of what she mimics with such care,
    And thus gives virtue indirect applause;
    But she has burnt her mask, not needed here,
    Where Vice has such allowance, that her shifts
    And specious semblances have lost their use.
      I was a stricken deer, that left the herd
    Long since: with many an arrow deep infix'd
    My panting side was charged, when I withdrew,
    To seek a tranquil death in distant shades.
    There was I found by One who had himself
    Been hurt by the archers. In his side he bore,
    And in his hands and feet, the cruel scars.
    With gentle force soliciting the darts,
    He drew them forth, and heal'd, and bade me live.
    Since then, with few associates, in remote
    And silent woods I wander, far from those
    My former partners of the peopled scene;
    With few associates, and not wishing more.
    Here much I ruminate, as much I may,
    With other views of men and manners now
    Than once, and others of a life to come.
    I see that all are wanderers, gone astray
    Each in his own delusions; they are lost
    In chace of fancied happiness still woo'd
    And never won. Dream after dream ensues;
    And still they dream that they shall still succeed;
    And still are disappointed. Rings the world
    With the vain stir. I sum up half mankind,
    And add two-thirds of the remaining half,
    And find the total of their hopes and fears
    Dreams, empty dreams. The million flit as gay
    As if created only like the fly,
    That spreads his motley wings in the eye of noon,
    To sport their season, and be seen no more.
    The rest are sober dreamers, grave and wise,
    And pregnant with discoveries new and rare.
    Some write a narrative of wars, and feats
    Of heroes little known; and call the rant
    A history: describe the man, of whom
    His own coevals took but little note;
    And paint his person, character, and views,
    As they had known him from his mother's womb.
    They disentangle from the puzzled skein,
    In which obscurity has wrapp'd them up,
    The threads of politic and shrewd design,
    That ran through all his purposes, and charge
    His mind with meanings that he never had,
    Or having, kept conceal'd. Some drill and bore
    The solid earth, and from the strata there
    Extract a register, by which we learn,
    That he who made it, and reveal'd its date
    To Moses, was mistaken in its age.
    Some, more acute, and more industrious still,
    Contrive creation; travel nature up
    To the sharp peak of her sublimest height,
    And tell us whence the stars; why some are fix'd,
    And planetary some; what gave them first
    Rotation, from what fountain flow'd their light.
    Great contest follows, and much learned dust
    Involves the combatants; each claiming truth,
    And truth disclaiming both. And thus they spend
    The little wick of life's poor shallow lamp
    In playing tricks with nature, giving laws
    To distant worlds, and trifling in their own.
    Is't not a pity, now, that tickling rheums
    Should ever tease the lungs and blear the sight
    Of oracles like these? Great pity too,
    That, having wielded the elements, and built
    A thousand systems, each in his own way,
    They should go out in fume, and be forgot?
    Ah! what is life thus spent? and what are they
    But frantic who thus spend it? all for smoke--
    Eternity for bubbles proves at last
    A senseless bargain. When I see such games
    Play'd by the creatures of a Power who swears
    That he will judge the earth, and call the fool
    To a sharp reckoning that has lived in vain;
    And when I weigh this seeming wisdom well,
    And prove it in the infallible result
    So hollow and so false--I feel my heart
    Dissolve in pity, and account the learn'd,
    If this be learning, most of all deceived.
    Great crimes alarm the conscience, but it sleeps
    While thoughtful man is plausibly amused.
    Defend me therefore, common sense, say I,
    From reveries so airy, from the toil
    Of dropping buckets into empty wells,
    And growing old in drawing nothing up!
      'Twere well, says one sage erudite, profound,
    Terribly arch'd and aquiline his nose,
    And overbuilt with most impending brows,--
    'Twere well, could you permit the world to live
    As the world pleases: what's the world to you?
    Much. I was born of woman, and drew milk
    As sweet as charity from human breasts.
    I think, articulate, I laugh and weep,
    And exercise all functions of a man.
    How then should I and any man that lives
    Be strangers to each other? Pierce my vein,
    Take of the crimson stream meandering there,
    And catechise it well: apply thy glass,
    Search it, and prove now if it be not blood
    Congenial with thine own: and, if it be,
    What edge of subtlety canst thou suppose
    Keen enough, wise and skilful as thou art,
    To cut the link of brotherhood, by which
    One common Maker bound me to the kind?
    True; I am no proficient, I confess,
    In arts like yours. I cannot call the swift
    And perilous lightnings from the angry clouds,
    And bid them hide themselves in earth beneath;
    I cannot analyse the air, nor catch
    The parallax of yonder luminous point,
    That seems half quench'd in the immense abyss:
    Such powers I boast not--neither can I rest
    A silent witness of the headlong rage,
    Or heedless folly by which thousands die,
    Bone of my bone, and kindred souls to mine.
      God never meant that man should scale the heavens
    By strides of human wisdom. In his works,
    Though wondrous, he commands us in his word
    To seek him rather, where his mercy shines.
    The mind indeed, enlighten'd from above,
    Views him in all; ascribes to the grand cause
    The grand effect; acknowledges with joy
    His manner, and with rapture tastes his style.
    But never yet did philosophic tube,
    That brings the planets home into the eye
    Of Observation, and discovers, else
    Not visible, his family of worlds,
    Discover him that rules them; such a veil
    Hangs over mortal eyes, blind from the birth,
    And dark in things divine. Full often too
    Our wayward intellect, the more we learn
    Of nature, overlooks her Author more;
    From instrumental causes proud to draw
    Conclusions retrograde and mad mistake.
    But if his word once teach us, shoot a ray
    Through all the heart's dark chambers, and reveal
    Truths undiscern'd but by that holy light,
    Then all is plain. Philosophy, baptized
    In the pure fountain of eternal love,
    Has eyes indeed; and, viewing all she sees
    As meant to indicate a God to man,
    Gives him his praise, and forfeits not her own.
    Learning has borne such fruit in other days
    On all her branches: piety has found
    Friends in the friends of science, and true prayer
    Has flow'd from lips wet with Castalian dews.
    Such was thy wisdom, Newton, child-like sage!
    Sagacious reader of the works of God,
    And his word sagacious. Such, too, thine,
    Milton, whose genius had angelic wings,
    And fed on manna! And such thine, in whom
    Our British Themis gloried with just cause,
    Immortal Hale! for deep discernment praised,
    And sound integrity, not more than famed
    For sanctity of manners undefiled.
      All flesh is grass, and all its glory fades
    Like the fair flower dishevell'd in the wind;
    Riches have wings, and grandeur is a dream.
    The man we celebrate must find a tomb,
    And we that worship him ignoble graves.
    Nothing is proof against the general curse
    Of vanity, that seizes all below.
    The only amaranthine flower on earth
    Is virtue; the only lasting treasure, truth.
    But what is truth? 'Twas Pilate's question put
    To Truth itself, that deign'd him no reply.
    And wherefore? will not God impart his light
    To them that ask it?--Freely--'tis his joy,
    His glory, and his nature to impart.
    But to the proud, uncandid, insincere,
    Or negligent inquirer, not a spark.
    What's that which brings contempt upon a book,
    And him who writes it, though the style be neat,
    The method clear, and argument exact?
    That makes a minister in holy things
    The joy of many and the dread of more,
    His name a theme for praise and for reproach?--
    That, while it gives us worth in God's account,
    Depreciates and undoes us in our own?
    What pearl is it that rich men cannot buy,
    That learning is too proud to gather up;
    But which the poor, and the despised of all,
    Seek and obtain, and often find unsought?
    Tell me--and I will tell thee what is truth.
      O friendly to the best pursuits of man,
    Friendly to thought, to virtue, and to peace,
    Domestic life in rural pleasure pass'd!
    Few know thy value, and few taste thy sweets;
    Though many boast thy favours, and affect
    To understand and choose thee for their own.
    But foolish man foregoes his proper bliss,
    E'en as his first progenitor, and quits,
    Though placed in Paradise (for earth has still
    Some traces of her youthful beauty left,)
    Substantial happiness for transient joy.
    Scenes form'd for contemplation, and to nurse
    The growing seeds of wisdom; that suggest,
    By every pleasing image they present,
    Reflections such as meliorate the heart,
    Compose the passions, and exalt the mind;
    Scenes such as these 'tis his supreme delight
    To fill with riot, and defile with blood.
    Should some contagion, kind to the poor brutes
    We persecute, annihilate the tribes
    That draw the sportsman over hill and dale,
    Fearless and rapt away from all his cares;
    Should never game-fowl hatch her eggs again,
    Nor baited hook deceive the fish's eye;
    Could pageantry and dance, and feast and song,
    Be quell'd in all our summer months' retreat;
    How many self-deluded nymphs and swains,
    Who dream they have a taste for fields and groves,
    Would find them hideous nurseries of the spleen,
    And crowd the roads, impatient for the town!
    They love the country, and none else, who seek
    For their own sake its silence and its shade.
    Delights which who would leave, that has a heart
    Susceptible of pity, or a mind
    Cultured and capable of sober thought,
    For all the savage din of the swift pack,
    And clamours of the field?--Detested sport,
    That owes its pleasures to another's pain;
    That feeds upon the sobs and dying shrieks
    Of harmless nature, dumb, but yet endued
    With eloquence, that agonies inspire
    Of silent tears and heart-distending sighs?
    Vain tears, alas! and sighs that never find
    A corresponding tone in jovial souls!
    Well--one at least is safe. One shelter'd hare
    Has never heard the sanguinary yell
    Of cruel man, exulting in her woes.
    Innocent partner of my peaceful home,
    Whom ten long years' experience of my care
    Has made at last familiar; she has lost
    Much of her vigilant instinctive dread,
    Not needful here, beneath a roof like mine.
    Yes--thou mayest eat thy bread, and lick the hand
    That feeds thee; thou mayest frolic on the floor
    At evening, and at night retire secure
    To thy straw couch, and slumber unalarm'd;
    For I have gained thy confidence, have pledged
    All that is human in me to protect
    Thine unsuspecting gratitude and love.
    If I survive thee, I will dig thy grave;
    And, when I place thee in it, sighing say,
    "I knew at least one hare that had a friend."
      How various his employments whom the world
    Calls idle; and who justly in return
    Esteems that busy world an idler too!
    Friends, books, a garden, and perhaps his pen,
    Delightful industry enjoy'd at home,
    And Nature, in her cultivated trim
    Dress'd to his taste, inviting him abroad--
    Can he want occupation who has these?
    Will he be idle who has much to enjoy?
    Me, therefore, studious of laborious ease,
    Not slothful, happy to deceive the time,
    Not waste it, and aware that human life
    Is but a loan to be repaid with use,
    When He shall call his debtors to account,
    From whom are all our blessings, business finds
    E'en here: while sedulous I seek to improve,
    At least neglect not, or leave unemploy'd,
    The mind He gave me; driving it, though slack
    Too oft, and much impeded in its work,
    By causes not to be divulged in vain,
    To its just point--the service of mankind.
    He, that attends to his interior self,
    That has a heart, and keeps it; has a mind
    That hungers, and supplies it; and who seeks
    A social, not a dissipated life,
    Has business; feels himself engaged to achieve
    No unimportant, though a silent, task.
    A life all turbulence and noise may seem
    To him that leads it wise, and to be praised;
    But wisdom is a pearl with most success
    Sought in still water and beneath clear skies.
    He that is ever occupied in storms,
    Or dives not for it, or brings up instead,
    Vainly industrious, a disgraceful prize.
      The morning finds the self-sequestered man
    Fresh for his task, intend what task he may.
    Whether inclement seasons recommend
    His warm but simple home, where he enjoys
    With her who shares his pleasures and his heart,
    Sweet converse, sipping calm the fragrant lymph
    Which neatly she prepares; then to his book
    Well chosen, and not sullenly perused
    In selfish silence, but imparted oft,
    As aught occurs, that she may smile to hear,
    Or turn to nourishment, digested well.
    Or if the garden, with its many cares,
    All well repaid, demand him, he attends
    The welcome call, conscious how much the hand
    Of lubbard Labour needs his watchful eye,
    Oft loitering lazily, if not o'erseen,
    Or misapplying his unskilful strength.
    Nor does he govern only or direct,
    But much performs himself. No works, indeed,
    That ask robust, tough sinews, bred to toil,
    Servile employ; but such as may amuse,
    Not tire, demanding rather skill than force.
    Proud of his well-spread walls, he views his trees,
    That meet, no barren interval between,
    With pleasure more than e'en their fruits afford;
    Which, save himself who trains them, none can feel.
    These therefore are his own peculiar charge;
    No meaner hand may discipline the shoots,
    None but his steel approach them. What is weak,
    Distemper'd, or has lost prolific powers,
    Impair'd by age, his unrelenting hand
    Dooms to the knife: nor does he spare the soft
    And succulent, that feeds its giant growth,
    But barren, at the expense of neighbouring twigs
    Less ostentatious, and yet studded thick
    With hopeful gems. The rest, no portion left
    That may disgrace his art, or disappoint
    Large expectation, he disposes neat
    At measured distances, that air and sun,
    Admitted freely, may afford their aid,
    And ventilate and warm the swelling buds.
    Hence Summer has her riches, Autumn hence,
    And hence e'en Winter fills his wither'd hand
    With blushing fruits, and plenty not his own.[812]
    Fair recompense of labour well bestow'd,
    And wise precaution; which a clime so rude
    Makes needful still, whose Spring is but the child
    Of churlish Winter, in her froward moods
    Discovering much the temper of her sire.
    For oft, as if in her the stream of mild
    Maternal nature had reversed its course,
    She brings her infants forth with many smiles;
    But, once delivered, kills them with a frown.
    He therefore, timely warn'd himself, supplies
    Her want of care, screening and keeping warm
    The plenteous bloom, that no rough blast may sweep
    His garlands from the boughs. Again, as oft
    As the sun peeps, and vernal airs breathe mild,
    The fence withdrawn, he gives them every beam,
    And spreads his hopes before the blaze of day.
      To raise the prickly and green-coated gourd,
    So grateful to the palate, and when rare
    So coveted, else base and disesteem'd--
    Food for the vulgar merely--is an art
    That toiling ages have but just matured,
    And at this moment unassay'd in song.
    Yet gnats have had, and frogs and mice, long since,
    Their eulogy; those sang the Mantuan bard;
    And these the Grecian, in ennobling strains;
    And in thy numbers, Phillips, shines for aye,
    The solitary shilling. Pardon then,
    Ye sage dispensers of poetic fame,
    The ambition of one meaner far, whose powers,
    Presuming an attempt not less sublime,
    Pant for the praise of dressing to the taste
    Of critic appetite no sordid fare,
    A cucumber, while costly yet and scarce.
      The stable yields a stercoraceous heap,
    Impregnated with quick fermenting salts,
    And potent to resist the freezing blast:
    For, ere the beech and elm have cast their leaf
    Deciduous, when now November dark
    Checks vegetation in the torpid plant
    Exposed to his cold breath, the task begins.
    Warily therefore, and with prudent heed,
    He seeks a favour'd spot; that where he builds
    The agglomerated pile his frame may front
    The sun's meridian disk, and at the back
    Enjoy close shelter, wall, or reeds, or hedge
    Impervious to the wind. First he bids spread
    Dry fern or litter'd hay, that may imbibe
    The ascending damps; then leisurely impose,
    And lightly, shaking it with agile hand
    From the full fork, the saturated straw.
    What longest binds the closest forms secure
    The shapely side, that as it rises takes,
    By just degrees, an overhanging breadth,
    Sheltering the base with its projected eaves;
    The uplifted frame, compact at every joint,
    And overlaid with clear translucent glass,
    He settles next upon the sloping mount,
    Whose sharp declivity shoots off secure
    From the dash'd pane the deluge as it falls.
    He shuts it close, and the first labour ends.
    Thrice must the voluble and restless earth
    Spin round upon her axle, ere the warmth,
    Slow gathering in the midst, through the square mass
    Diffused, attain the surface: when, behold!
    A pestilent and most corrosive steam,
    Like a gross fog Boeotian, rising fast,
    And fast condensed upon the dewy sash,
    Asks egress; which obtain'd, the overcharged
    And drench'd conservatory breathes abroad,
    In volumes wheeling slow, the vapour dank;
    And, purified, rejoices to have lost
    Its foul inhabitant. But to assuage
    The impatient fervour, which it first conceives
    Within its reeking bosom, threatening death
    To his young hopes, requires discreet delay.
    Experience, slow preceptress, teaching oft
    The way to glory by miscarriage foul,
    Must prompt him, and admonish how to catch
    The auspicious moment, when the temper'd heat,
    Friendly to vital motion, may afford
    Soft fomentation, and invite the seed.
    The seed, selected wisely, plump, and smooth,
    And glossy, he commits to pots of size
    Diminutive, well fill'd with well prepared
    And fruitful soil, that has been treasured long,
    And drunk no moisture from the dripping clouds.
    These on the warm and genial earth, that hides
    The smoking manure, and o'erspreads it all,
    He places lightly, and, as time subdues
    The rage of fermentation, plunges deep
    In the soft medium, till they stand immersed.
    Then rise the tender germs, upstarting quick,
    And spreading wide their spongy lobes; at first
    Pale, wan, and livid; but assuming soon,
    If fann'd by balmy and nutritious air,
    Strain'd through the friendly mats, a vivid green.
    Two leaves produced, two rough indented leaves,
    Cautious he pinches from the second stalk
    A pimple, that portends a future sprout,
    And interdicts its growth. Thence straight succeed
    The branches, sturdy to his utmost wish;
    Prolific all, and harbingers of more.
    The crowded roots demand enlargement now,
    And transplantation in an ampler space.
    Indulged in what they wish, they soon supply
    Large foliage, overshadowing golden flowers,
    Blown on the summit of the apparent fruit.
    These have their sexes; and when summer shines,
    The bee transports the fertilizing meal
    From flower to flower, and e'en the breathing air
    Wafts the rich prize to its appointed use.
    Not so when winter scowls. Assistant Art
    Then acts in Nature's office, brings to pass
    The glad espousals, and ensures the crop.
      Grudge not, ye rich, (since Luxury must have
    His dainties, and the World's more numerous half
    Lives by contriving delicates for you,)
    Grudge not the cost. Ye little know the cares,
    The vigilance, the labour, and the skill,
    That day and night are exercised, and hang
    Upon the ticklish balance of suspense,
    That ye may garnish your profuse regales
    With summer fruits brought forth by wintry suns.
    Ten thousand dangers lie in wait to thwart
    The process. Heat, and cold, and wind, and steam,
    Moisture, and drought, mice, worms, and swarming flies,
    Minute as dust, and numberless, oft work
    Dire disappointment, that admits no cure,
    And which no care can obviate. It were long,
    Too long, to tell the expedients and the shifts
    Which he that fights a season so severe
    Devises, while he guards his tender trust;
    And oft at last in vain. The learn'd and wise
    Sarcastic would exclaim, and judge the song
    Cold as its theme, and like its theme the fruit
    Of too much labour, worthless when produced.
      Who loves a garden loves a greenhouse too.
    Unconscious of a less propitious clime,
    There blooms exotic beauty, warm and snug,
    While the winds whistle, and the snows descend.
    The spiry myrtle with unwithering leaf
    Shines there, and flourishes. The golden boast
    Of Portugal and western India there,
    The ruddier orange, and the paler lime,
    Peep through their polish'd foliage at the storm,
    And seem to smile at what they need not fear.
    The amomum there with intermingling flowers
    And cherries hangs her twigs. Geranium boasts
    Her crimson honours; and the spangled beau,
    Ficoides, glitters bright the winter long.
    All plants, of every leaf that can endure
    The winter's frown, if screen'd from his shrewd bite,
    Live there, and prosper. Those Ausonia claims,
    Levantine regions these; the Azores send
    Their jessamine, her jessamine remote
    Caffraria: foreigners from many lands,
    They form one social shade, as if convened
    By magic summons of the Orphean lyre.
    Yet just arrangement, rarely brought to pass
    But by a master's hand, disposing well
    The gay diversities of leaf and flower,
    Must lend its aid to illustrate all their charms,
    And dress the regular yet various scene.
    Plant behind plant aspiring, in the van
    The dwarfish, in the rear retired, but still
    Sublime above the rest, the statelier stand.
    So once were ranged the sons of ancient Rome,
    A noble show! while Roscius trod the stage;
    And so, while Garrick, as renown'd as he,
    The sons of Albion; fearing each to lose
    Some note of Nature's music from his lips,
    And covetous of Shakspeare's beauty, seen
    In every flash of his far beaming eye.
    Nor taste alone and well contrived display
    Suffice to give the marshall'd ranks the grace
    Of their complete effect. Much yet remains
    Unsung, and many cares are yet behind,
    And more laborious; cares on which depends
    Their vigour, injured soon, not soon restored.
    The soil must be renew'd, which often wash'd
    Loses its treasure of salubrious salts,
    And disappoints the roots; the slender roots
    Close interwoven, where they meet the vase,
    Must smooth be shorn away; the sapless branch
    Must fly before the knife; the wither'd leaf
    Must be detach'd, and where it strews the floor
    Swept with a woman's neatness, breeding else
    Contagion, and disseminating death.
    Discharge but these kind offices (and who
    Would spare, that loves them, offices like these?)
    Well they reward the toil. The sight is pleased,
    The scent regaled, each odoriferous leaf,
    Each opening blossom freely breathes abroad
    Its gratitude, and thanks him with its sweets.
      So manifold, all pleasing in their kind,
    All healthful, are the employs of rural life,
    Reiterated as the wheel of time
    Runs round; still ending and beginning still.
    Nor are these all. To deck the shapely knoll,
    That softly swell'd and gaily dress'd appears
    A flowery island, from the dark green lawn
    Emerging, must be deem'd a labour due
    To no mean hand, and asks the touch of taste.
    Here also grateful mixture of well match'd
    And sorted hues, (each giving each relief,
    And by contrasted beauty shining more,)
    Is needful. Strength may wield the ponderous spade,
    May turn the clod, and wheel the compost home;
    But elegance, chief grace the garden shows,
    And most attractive, is the fair result
    Of thought; the creature of a polish'd mind.
    Without it all is gothic as the scene
    To which the insipid citizen resorts
    Near yonder heath; where Industry misspent,
    But proud of his uncouth ill chosen task,
    Has made a heaven on earth; with suns and moons
    Of close ramm'd stones has charged the encumber'd soil,
    And fairly laid the zodiac in the dust.
    He therefore, who would see his flowers disposed
    Sightly and in just order, ere he gives
    The beds the trusted treasure of their seeds,
    Forecasts the future whole; that when the scene
    Shall break into its preconceived display,
    Each for itself, and all as with one voice
    Conspiring, may attest his bright design.
    Nor even then, dismissing as perform'd
    His pleasant work, may he suppose it done.
    Few self-supported flowers endure the wind
    Uninjured, but expect the upholding aid
    Of the smooth shaven prop, and, neatly tied,
    Are wedded thus, like beauty to old age,
    For interest sake, the living to the dead.
    Some clothe the soil that feeds them, far diffused
    And lowly creeping, modest and yet fair,
    Like virtue, thriving most where little seen;
    Some, more aspiring, catch the neighbour shrub
    With clasping tendrils, and invest his branch,
    Else unadorn'd, with many a gay festoon
    And fragrant chaplet, recompensing well
    The strength they borrow with the grace they lend.
    All hate the rank society of weeds,
    Noisome, and ever greedy to exhaust
    The impoverish'd earth; an overbearing race,
    That, like the multitude made faction-mad,
    Disturb good order, and degrade true worth.
      O blest seclusion from a jarring world,
    Which he, thus occupied, enjoys! Retreat
    Cannot indeed to guilty man restore
    Lost innocence, or cancel follies past;
    But it has peace, and much secures the mind
    From all assaults of evil; proving still
    A faithful barrier, not o'erleap'd with ease
    By vicious Custom, raging uncontroll'd
    Abroad, and desolating public life.
    When fierce temptation, seconded within
    By traitor Appetite, and arm'd with darts
    Temper'd in Hell, invades the throbbing breast,
    To combat may be glorious, and success
    Perhaps may crown us; but to fly is safe.
    Had I the choice of sublunary good,
    What could I wish, that I possess not here?
    Health, leisure, means to improve it, friendship, peace,
    No loose or wanton, though a wandering, muse,
    And constant occupation without care.
    Thus blest I draw a picture of that bliss;
    Hopeless indeed, that dissipated minds,
    And profligate abusers of a world
    Created fair so much in vain for them,
    Should seek the guiltless joys that I describe.
    Allured by my report: but sure no less
    That self-condemn'd they must neglect the prize,
    And what they will not taste must yet approve.
    What we admire we praise; and, when we praise,
    Advance it into notice, that, its worth
    Acknowledged, others may admire it too.
    I therefore recommend, though at the risk
    Of popular disgust, yet boldly still,
    The cause of piety and sacred truth,
    And virtue, and those scenes which God ordain'd
    Should best secure them and promote them most,
    Scenes that I love, and with regret perceive
    Forsaken, or through folly not enjoy'd.
    Pure is the nymph, though liberal of her smiles,
    And chaste, though unconfined, whom I extol.
    Not as the prince in Shushan, when he call'd,
    Vain-glorious of her charms, his Vashti forth,
    To grace the full pavilion, His design
    Was but to boast his own peculiar good,
    Which all might view with envy, none partake.
    My charmer is not mine alone; my sweets,
    And she that sweetens all my bitters too,
    Nature, enchanting Nature, in whose form
    And lineaments divine I trace a hand
    That errs not, and finds raptures still renew'd,
    Is free to all men--universal prize.
    Strange that so fair a creature should yet want
    Admirers, and be destined to divide
    With meaner objects e'en the few she finds!
    Stripp'd of her ornaments, her leaves, and flowers,
    She loses all her influence. Cities then
    Attract us, and neglected Nature pines,
    Abandon'd, as unworthy of our love.
    But are not wholesome airs, though unperfumed
    By roses; and clear suns, though scarcely felt;
    And groves, if unharmonious, yet secure
    From clamour, and whose very silence charms;
    To be preferr'd to smoke, to the eclipse
    That metropolitan volcanoes make,
    Whose Stygian throats breathe darkness all day long;
    And to the stir of Commerce, driving slow,
    And thundering loud, with his ten thousand wheels?
    They would be, were not madness in the head,
    And folly in the heart; were England now
    What England was, plain, hospitable, kind,
    And undebauch'd. But we have bid farewell
    To all the virtues of those better days,
    And all their honest pleasures. Mansions once
    Knew their own masters; and laborious hinds,
    Who had survived the father, serv'd the son.
    Now the legitimate and rightful lord
    Is but a transient guest, newly arrived,
    And soon to be supplanted. He that saw
    His patrimonial timber cast its leaf
    Sells the last scantling, and transfers the price
    To some shrewd sharper, ere it buds again.
    Estates are landscapes, gazed upon awhile,
    Then advertised, and auctioneer'd away.
    The country starves, and they that feed the o'ercharged
    And surfeited lewd town with her fair dues,
    By a just judgment strip and starve themselves.
    The wings, that waft our riches out of sight,
    Grow on the gamester's elbows; and the alert
    And nimble motion of those restless joints,
    That never tire, soon fans them all away.
    Improvement too, the idol of the age,
    Is fed with many a victim. Lo, he comes!
    The omnipotent magician, Brown, appears!
    Down falls the venerable pile, the abode
    Of our forefathers--a grave whisker'd race,
    But tasteless. Springs a palace in its stead,
    But in a distant spot; where more exposed
    It may enjoy the advantage of the north,
    And aguish east, till time shall have transform'd
    Those naked acres to a sheltering grove.
    He speaks. The lake in front becomes a lawn;
    Woods vanish, hills subside, and valleys rise;
    And streams, as if created for his use,
    Pursue the track of his directing wand,
    Sinuous or straight, now rapid and now slow,
    Now murmuring soft, now roaring in cascades--
    E'en as he bids! The enraptured owner smiles.
    'Tis finish'd, and yet, finish'd as it seems,
    Still wants a grace, the loveliest it could show,
    A mine to satisfy the enormous cost.
    Drain'd to the last poor item of his wealth,
    He sighs, departs, and leaves the accomplish'd plan,
    That he has touch'd, retouch'd, many a long day
    Labour'd, and many a night pursued in dreams,
    Just when it meets his hopes, and proves the heaven
    He wanted, for a wealthier to enjoy!
    And now perhaps the glorious hour is come
    When, having no stake left, no pledge to endear
    Her interests, or that gives her sacred cause
    A moment's operation on his love,
    He burns with most intense and flagrant zeal,
    To serve his country. Ministerial grace
    Deals him out money from the public chest;
    Or, if that mine be shut, some private purse
    Supplies his need with a usurious loan,
    To be refunded duly, when his vote
    Well managed shall have earn'd its worthy price.
    O innocent, compared with arts like these,
    Crape, and cock'd pistol, and the whistling ball
    Sent through the traveller's temples? He that finds
    One drop of Heaven's sweet mercy in his cup,
    Can dig, beg, rot, and perish, well content,
    So he may wrap himself in honest rags
    At his last gasp; but could not for a world
    Fish up his dirty and dependent bread
    From pools and ditches of the commonwealth,
    Sordid and sickening at his own success.
      Ambition, avarice, penury incurr'd
    By endless riot, vanity, the lust
    Of pleasure and variety, despatch,
    As duly as the swallows disappear,
    The world of wandering knights and squires to town.
    London engulfs them all! The shark is there,
    And the shark's prey; the spendthrift, and the leech
    That sucks him; there the sycophant, and he
    Who, with bareheaded and obsequious bows,
    Begs a warm office, doom'd to a cold jail
    And groat per diem, if his patron frown.
    The levee swarms, as if in golden pomp
    Were character'd on every statesman's door,
    "BATTER'D AND BANKRUPT FORTUNES MENDED HERE."
    These are the charms that sully and eclipse
    The charms of nature. 'Tis the cruel gripe
    That lean hard-handed Poverty inflicts,
    The hope of better things, the chance to win,
    The wish to shine, the thirst to be amused,
    That at the sound of Winter's hoary wing
    Unpeople all our counties of such herds
    Of fluttering, loitering, cringing, begging, loose,
    And wanton vagrants, as make London, vast
    And boundless as it is, a crowded coop.
      O thou, resort and mart of all the earth,
    Chequer'd with all complexions of mankind,
    And spotted with all crimes; in whom I see
    Much that I love, and more that I admire,
    And all that I abhor; thou freckled fair,
    That pleasest and yet shock'st me, I can laugh,
    And I can weep, can hope, and can despond,
    Feel wrath and pity, when I think on thee!
    Ten righteous would have saved a city once,
    And thou hast many righteous.--Well for thee--
    That salt preserves thee; more corrupted else,
    And therefore more obnoxious, at this hour,
    Than Sodom in her day had power to be,
    For whom God heard his Abraham plead in vain.

  [812] Miraturque novos fructus et non sua poma.--_Virg._


BOOK IV.

THE WINTER EVENING.


THE ARGUMENT.

     The post comes in--The newspaper is read--The world contemplated
     at a distance--Address to winter--The rural amusements of a
     winter evening compared with the fashionable ones--Address
     to evening--A brown study--Fall of snow in the evening--The
     wagoner--A poor family piece--The rural thief--Public
     houses--The multitude of them censured--The farmer's daughter:
     what she was; what she is--The simplicity of country manners
     almost lost--Causes of the change--Desertion of the country by
     the rich--Neglect of magistrates--The militia principally in
     fault--The new recruit and his transformation--Reflection on
     bodies corporate--The love of rural objects natural to all, and
     never to be totally extinguished.

    Hark! 'tis the twanging horn o'er yonder bridge,
    That with its wearisome but needful length
    Bestrides the wintry flood, in which the moon
    Sees her unwrinkled face reflected bright;--
    He comes, the herald of a noisy world,
    With spatter'd boots, strapp'd waist, and frozen locks;
    News from all nations lumbering at his back.
    True to his charge, the close-pack'd load behind,
    Yet, careless what he brings, his one concern
    Is to conduct it to the destined inn;
    And, having dropp'd the expected bag, pass on.
    He whistles as he goes, light-hearted wretch,
    Cold and yet cheerful: messenger of grief
    Perhaps to thousands, and of joy to some;
    To him indifferent whether grief or joy.
    Houses in ashes, and the fall of stocks,
    Births, deaths, and marriages, epistles wet
    With tears, that trickled down the writer's cheeks
    Fast as the periods from his fluent quill,
    Or charged with amorous sighs of absent swains,
    Or nymphs responsive, equally affect
    His horse and him, unconscious of them all.
    But O the important budget! usher'd in
    With such heart-shaking music, who can say
    What are its tidings? have our troops awaked?
    Or do they still, as if with opium drugg'd
    Snore to the murmurs of the Atlantic wave?
    Is India free? and does she wear her plumed
    And jewell'd turban with a smile of peace,
    Or do we grind her still? The grand debate,
    The popular harangue, the tart reply,
    The logic, and the wisdom, and the wit,
    And the loud laugh--I long to know them all;
    I burn to set the imprison'd wranglers free,
    And give them voice and utterance once again.
      Now stir the fire, and close the shutters fast,
    Let fall the curtains, wheel the sofa round,
    And, while the bubbling and loud hissing urn
    Throws up a steamy column, and the cups,
    That cheer but not inebriate, wait on each,
    So let us welcome peaceful evening in.
    Not such his evening, who with shining face
    Sweats in the crowded theatre, and, squeezed
    And bored with elbow points through both his sides,
    Outscolds the ranting actor on the stage:
    Nor his, who patient stands till his feet throb,
    And his head thumps, to feed upon the breath
    Of patriots, bursting with heroic rage,
    Or placemen, all tranquillity and smiles.
    This folio of four pages, happy work!
    Which not e'en critics criticise; that holds
    Inquisitive attention, while I read,
    Fast bound in chains of silence, which the fair,
    Though eloquent themselves, yet fear to break;
    What is it but a map of busy life,
    Its fluctuations, and its vast concerns?
    Here runs the mountainous and craggy ridge
    That tempts Ambition. On the summit see
    The seals of office glitter in his eyes;
    He climbs, he pants, he grasps them! At his heels,
    Close at his heels, a demagogue ascends,
    And with a dextrous jerk soon twists him down,
    And wins them, but to lose them in his turn.
    Here rills of oily eloquence, in soft
    Meanders, lubricate the course they take;
    The modest speaker is ashamed and grieved
    To engross a moment's notice; and yet begs,
    Begs a propitious ear for his poor thoughts,
    However trivial all that he conceives.
    Sweet bashfulness! it claims at least this praise;
    The dearth of information and good sense,
    That it foretells us, always comes to pass.
    Cataracts of declamation thunder here;
    There forests of no meaning spread the page,
    In which all comprehension wanders lost;
    While fields of pleasantry amuse us there
    With merry descants on a nation's woes.
    The rest appears a wilderness of strange
    But gay confusion; roses for the cheeks
    And lilies for the brows of faded age,
    Teeth for the toothless, ringlets for the bald,
    Heaven, earth, and ocean, plunder'd of their sweets,
    Nectareous essences, Olympian dews,
    Sermons, and city feasts, and favourite airs,
    Æthereal journeys, submarine exploits,
    And Katerfelto, with his hair on end
    At his own wonders, wondering for his bread.
      'Tis pleasant, through the loopholes of retreat,
    To peep at such a world; to see the stir
    Of the great Babel, and not feel the crowd;
    To hear the roar she sends through all her gates
    At a safe distance, where the dying sound
    Falls a soft murmur on the uninjured ear.
    Thus sitting, and surveying thus at ease
    The globe and its concerns, I seem advanced
    To some secure and more than mortal height,
    That liberates and exempts me from them all.
    It turns submitted to my view, turns round
    With all its generations; I behold
    The tumult and am still. The sound of war
    Has lost its terrors ere it reaches me;
    Grieves, but alarms me not. I mourn the pride
    And avarice that make man a wolf to man;
    Hear the faint echo of those brazen throats,
    By which he speaks the language of his heart,
    And sigh, but never tremble at the sound.
    He travels and expatiates, as the bee
    From flower to flower, so he from land to land;
    The manners, customs, policy of all
    Pay contribution to the store he gleans;
    He sucks intelligence in every clime,
    And spreads the honey of his deep research
    At his return--a rich repast for me.
    He travels, and I too. I tread his deck,
    Ascend his topmast, through his peering eyes
    Discover countries, with a kindred heart
    Suffer his woes, and share in his escapes;
    While fancy, like the finger of a clock,
    Runs the great circuit, and is still at home.
      O Winter, ruler of the inverted year,
    Thy scatter'd hair with sleet like ashes fill'd,
    Thy breath congeal'd upon thy lips, thy cheeks
    Fringed with a beard made white with other snows
    Than those of age, thy forehead wrapp'd in clouds,
    A leafless branch thy sceptre, and thy throne
    A sliding car, indebted to no wheels,
    But urg'd by storms along its slippery way,
    I love thee, all unlovely as thou seem'st,
    And dreaded as thou art! Thou hold'st the sun
    A prisoner in the yet undawning east,
    Shortening his journey between morn and noon,
    And hurrying him, impatient of his stay,
    Down to the rosy west; but kindly still
    Compensating his loss with added hours
    Of social converse and instructive ease,
    And gathering, at short notice, in one group
    The family dispersed, and fixing thought,
    Not less dispersed by daylight and its cares.
    I crown thee king of intimate delights,
    Fireside enjoyments, homeborn happiness,
    And all the comforts that the lowly roof
    Of undisturb'd Retirement, and the hours
    Of long uninterrupted evening know.
    No rattling wheels stop short before these gates;
    No powder'd pert proficient in the art
    Of sounding an alarm assaults these doors
    Till the street rings; no stationary steeds
    Cough their own knell, while, heedless of the sound,
    The silent circle fan themselves, and quake:
    But here the needle plies its busy task,
    The pattern grows, the well-depicted flower,
    Wrought patiently into the snowy lawn,
    Unfolds its bosom; buds, and leaves, and sprigs,
    And curling tendrils, gracefully disposed,
    Follow the nimble finger of the fair;
    A wreath, that cannot fade, of flowers that blow
    With most success when all besides decay.
    The poet's or historian's page by one
    Made vocal for the amusement of the rest;
    The sprightly lyre, whose treasure of sweet sounds
    The touch from many a trembling chord shakes out;
    And the clear voice, symphonious, yet distinct,
    And in the charming strife triumphant still,
    Beguile the night, and set a keener edge
    On female industry: the threaded steel
    Flies swiftly, and unfelt the task proceeds.
    The volume closed, the customary rites
    Of the last meal commence. A Roman meal,
    Such as the mistress of the world once found
    Delicious, when her patriots of high note,
    Perhaps by moonlight, at their humble doors,
    And under an old oak's domestic shade,
    Enjoy'd, spare feast! a radish and an egg!
    Discourse ensues, not trivial, yet not dull,
    Nor such as with a frown forbids the play
    Of fancy, or proscribes the sound of mirth:
    Nor do we madly, like an impious world,
    Who deem religion frenzy, and the God
    That made them an intruder on their joys,
    Start at his awful name, or deem his praise
    A jarring note. Themes of a graver tone,
    Exciting oft our gratitude and love,
    While we retrace with Memory's pointing wand,
    That calls the past to our exact review,
    The dangers we have 'scaped, the broken snare,
    The disappointed foe, deliverance found
    Unlook'd for, life preserved, and peace restored,
    Fruits of omnipotent eternal love.
    O evenings worthy of the gods! exclaim'd
    The Sabine bard. O evenings, I reply,
    More to be prized and coveted than yours,
    As more illumined, and with nobler truths,
    That I, and mine, and those we love, enjoy.
      Is Winter hideous in a garb like this?
    Needs he the tragic fur, the smoke of lamps,
    The pent-up breath of an unsavoury throng,
    To thaw him into feeling; or the smart
    And snappish dialogue, that flippant wits
    Call comedy, to prompt him with a smile?
    The self-complacent actor, when he views
    (Stealing a sidelong glance at a full house)
    The slope of faces from the floor to the roof
    (As if one master spring controll'd them all,)
    Relax'd into a universal grin,
    Sees not a countenance there that speaks of joy
    Half so refined or so sincere as ours.
    Cards were superfluous here, with all the tricks
    That idleness has ever yet contrived
    To fill the void of an unfurnish'd brain,
    To palliate dullness, and give time a shove.
    Time, as he passes us, has a dove's wing,
    Unsoil'd, and swift, and of a silken sound;
    But the World's Time is Time in masquerade!
    Theirs, should I paint him, has his pinions fledged
    With motley plumes; and, where the peacock shows
    His azure eyes, is tinctur'd black and red
    With spots quadrangular of diamond form,
    Ensanguined hearts, clubs typical of strife,
    And spades, the emblem of untimely graves.
    What should be, and what was an hour-glass once,
    Becomes a dice-box, and a billiard mace
    Well does the work of his destructive scythe.
    Thus deck'd, he charms a world whom Fashion blinds
    To his true worth, most pleased when idle most;
    Whose only happy are their wasted hours.
    E'en misses, at whose age their mothers wore
    The backstring and the bib, assume the dress
    Of womanhood, fit pupils in the school
    Of card-devoted Time, and, night by night
    Placed at some vacant corner of the board,
    Learn every trick, and soon play all the game.
    But truce with censure. Roving as I rove,
    Where shall I find an end, or how proceed?
    As he that travels far oft turns aside,
    To view some rugged rock or mouldering tower,
    Which seen delights him not; then, coming home,
    Describes and prints it, that the world may know
    How far he went for what was nothing worth;
    So I, with brush in hand and pallet spread,
    With colours mix'd for a far different use,
    Paint cards, and dolls, and every idle thing
    That Fancy finds in her excursive flights.
      Come, Evening, once again, season of peace;
    Return, sweet Evening, and continue long!
    Methinks I see thee in the streaky west,
    With matron step slow moving, while the Night
    Treads on thy sweeping train; one hand employ'd
    In letting fall the curtain of repose
    On bird and beast, the other charged for man
    With sweet oblivion of the cares of day:
    Not sumptuously adorn'd, not needing aid,
    Like homely featured Night, of clustering gems;
    A star or two, just twinkling on thy brow,
    Suffices thee; save that the moon is thine
    No less than hers, not worn indeed on high
    With ostentatious pageantry, but set
    With modest grandeur in thy purple zone,
    Resplendent less, but of an ampler round.
    Come then, and thou shalt find thy votary calm,
    Or make me so. Composure is thy gift:
    And, whether I devote thy gentle hours
    To books, to music, or the poet's toil;
    To weaving nets for bird-alluring fruit;
    Or twining silken threads round ivory reels,
    When they command whom man was born to please;
    I slight thee not, but make thee welcome still
      Just when our drawing-rooms begin to blaze
    With lights, by clear reflection multiplied
    From many a mirror, in which he of Gath,
    Goliath, might have seen his giant bulk
    Whole without stooping, towering crest and all,
    My pleasures too begin. But me perhaps
    The glowing hearth may satisfy awhile
    With faint illumination, that uplifts
    The shadows to the ceiling, there by fits
    Dancing uncouthly to the quivering flame.
    Not undelightful is an hour to me
    So spent in parlour twilight: such a gloom
    Suits well the thoughtful or unthinking mind,
    The mind contemplative, with some new theme
    Pregnant, or indisposed alike to all.
    Laugh ye, who boast your more mercurial powers,
    That never felt a stupor, know no pause,
    Nor need one; I am conscious, and confess,
    Fearless, a soul that does not always think.
    Me oft has Fancy ludicrous and wild
    Soothed with a waking dream of houses, towers,
    Trees, churches, and strange visages, express'd
    In the red cinders, while with poring eye
    I gazed, myself creating what I saw.
    Nor less amused, have I quiescent watch'd
    The sooty films that play upon the bars,
    Pendulous and foreboding, in the view
    Of superstition, prophesying still,
    Though still deceived, some stranger's near approach.
    'Tis thus the understanding takes repose
    In indolent vacuity of thought,
    And sleeps and is refresh'd. Meanwhile the face
    Conceals the mood lethargic with a mask
    Of deep deliberation, as the man
    Were task'd to his full strength, absorb'd and lost.
    Thus oft, reclined at ease, I lose an hour
    At evening, till at length the freezing blast,
    That sweeps the bolted shutter, summons home
    The recollected powers; and, snapping short
    The glassy threads with which the fancy weaves
    Her brittle toils, restores me to myself.
    How calm is my recess; and how the frost,
    Raging abroad, and the rough wind endear
    The silence and the warmth enjoy'd within!
    I saw the woods and fields at close of day
    A variegated show; the meadows green,
    Though faded; and the lands, where lately waved,
    The golden harvest, of a mellow brown,
    Upturn'd so lately by the forceful share.
    I saw far off the weedy fallows smile
    With verdure not unprofitable, grazed
    By flocks, fast feeding, and selecting each
    His favourite herb; while all the leafless groves,
    That skirt the horizon, wore a sable hue,
    Scarce noticed in the kindred dusk of eve.
    To-morrow brings a change, a total change!
    Which even now, though silently perform'd,
    And slowly, and by most unfelt, the face
    Of universal nature undergoes.
    Fast falls a fleecy shower: the downy flakes
    Descending, and with never ceasing lapse,
    Softly alighting upon all below,
    Assimilate all objects. Earth receives
    Gladly the thickening mantle; and the green
    And tender blade, that fear'd the chilling blast,
    Escapes unhurt beneath so warm a veil.
      In such a world, so thorny, and where none
    Finds happiness unblighted; or, if found,
    Without some thistly sorrow at its side;
    It seems the part of wisdom, and no sin
    Against the law of love, to measure lots
    With less distinguished than ourselves; that thus
    We may with patience bear our moderate ills,
    And sympathize with others suffering more.
    Ill fares the traveller now, and he that stalks
    In ponderous boots beside his reeking team.
    The wain goes heavily, impeded sore
    By congregated loads, adhering close
    To the clogg'd wheels; and in its sluggish pace
    Noiseless appears a moving hill of snow.
    The toiling steeds expand the nostril wide,
    While every breath, by respiration strong
    Forced downward, is consolidated soon
    Upon their jutting chests. He, form'd to bear
    The pelting brunt of the tempestuous night,
    With half-shut eyes, and pucker'd cheeks, and teeth
    Presented bare against the storm, plods on.
    One hand secures his hat, save when with both
    He brandishes his pliant length of whip,
    Resounding oft, and never heard in vain.
    O happy; and, in my account, denied
    That sensibility of pain with which
    Refinement is endued, thrice happy thou!
    Thy frame, robust and hardy, feels indeed
    The piercing cold, but feels it unimpair'd.
    The learned finger never need explore
    Thy vigorous pulse; and the unhealthful east,
    That breathes the spleen, and searches every bone
    Of the infirm, is wholesome air to thee.
    Thy days roll on exempt from household care;
    Thy wagon is thy wife, and the poor beasts,
    That drag the dull companion to and fro,
    Thine helpless charge, dependent on thy care.
    Ah, treat them kindly! rude as thou appear'st,
    Yet show that thou hast mercy! which the great,
    With needless hurry whirl'd from place to place,
    Humane as they would seem, not always show.
      Poor, yet industrious, modest, quiet, neat,
    Such claim compassion in a night like this,
    And have a friend in every feeling heart.
    Warm'd, while it lasts, by labour all day long
    They brave the season, and yet find at eve,
    Ill clad, and fed but sparely, time to cool.
    The frugal housewife trembles when she lights
    Her scanty stock of brushwood, blazing clear,
    But dying soon, like all terrestrial joys.
    The few small embers left she nurses well;
    And, while her infant race, with outspread hands,
    And crowded knees, sit cowering o'er the sparks,
    Retires, content to quake, so they be warm'd.
    The man feels least, as more inured than she
    To winter, and the current in his veins
    More briskly moved by his severer toil;
    Yet he too finds his own distress in theirs.
    The taper soon extinguish'd, which I saw
    Dangled along at the cold finger's end
    Just when the day declined; and the brown loaf
    Lodged on the shelf, half eaten without sauce
    Of savoury cheese, or butter, costlier still;
    Sleep seems their only refuge: for, alas,
    Where penury is felt the thought is chained,
    And sweet colloquial pleasures are but few!
    With all this thrift they thrive not. All the care,
    Ingenious Parsimony takes, but just
    Saves the small inventory, bed, and stool,
    Skillet, and old carved chest, from public sale.
    They live, and live without extorted alms
    From grudging hands; but other boast have none
    To soothe their honest pride, that scorns to beg,
    Nor comfort else, but in their mutual love.
    I praise you much, ye meek and patient pair,
    For ye are worthy; choosing rather far
    A dry but independent crust, hard earn'd,
    And eaten with a sigh, than to endure
    The rugged frowns and insolent rebuffs
    Of knaves in office, partial in the work
    Of distribution; liberal of their aid
    To clamorous importunity in rags,
    But ofttimes deaf to suppliants, who would blush
    To wear a tatter'd garb however coarse,
    Whom famine cannot reconcile to filth:
    These ask with painful shyness, and, refused
    Because deserving, silently retire!
    But be ye of good courage! Time itself
    Shall much befriend you. Time shall give increase;
    And all your numerous progeny, well train'd,
    But helpless, in few years shall find their hands,
    And labour too. Meanwhile ye shall not want
    What, conscious of your virtues, we can spare,
    Nor what a wealthier than ourselves may send.
    I mean the man who, when the distant poor
    Need help, denies them nothing but his name.
      But poverty with most, who whimper forth
    Their long complaints, is self-inflicted woe;
    The effect of laziness or sottish waste.
    Now goes the nightly thief prowling abroad
    For plunder; much solicitous how best
    He may compensate for a day of sloth
    By works of darkness and nocturnal wrong.
    Woe to the gardener's pale, the farmer's hedge,
    Plash'd neatly, and secured with driven stakes
    Deep in the loamy bank. Uptorn by strength,
    Resistless in so bad a cause, but lame
    To better deeds, he bundles up the spoil,
    An ass's burden, and, when laden most
    And heaviest, light of foot steals fast away,
    Nor does the boarded hovel better guard
    The well-stack'd pile of riven logs and roots
    From his pernicious force. Nor will he leave
    Unwrench'd the door, however well secured,
    Where Chanticleer amidst his harem sleeps
    In unsuspecting pomp. Twitch'd from the perch,
    He gives the princely bird, with all his wives,
    To his voracious bag, struggling in vain,
    And loudly wondering at the sudden change.
    Nor this to feed his own. 'Twere some excuse,
    Did pity of their sufferings warp aside
    His principle, and tempt him into sin
    For their support, so destitute. But they
    Neglected pine at home; themselves, as more
    Exposed than others, with less scruple made
    His victims, robb'd of their defenceless all.
    Cruel is all he does. 'Tis quenchless thirst
    Of ruinous ebriety that prompts
    His every action, and imbrutes the man.
    O for a law to noose the villain's neck
    Who starves his own; who persecutes the blood
    He gave them in his children's veins, and hates
    And wrongs the woman he has sworn to love!
      Pass where we may, through city or through town,
    Village, or hamlet, of this merry land,
    Though lean and beggar'd, every twentieth pace
    Conducts the unguarded nose to such a whiff
    Of stale debauch, forth issuing from the styes
    That law has licensed, as makes temperance reel.
    There sit, involved and lost in curling clouds
    Of Indian fume, and guzzling deep, the boor,
    The lackey, and the groom: the craftsman there
    Takes a Lethean leave of all his toil;
    Smith, cobbler, joiner, he that plies the shears,
    And he that kneads the dough; all loud alike,
    All learned, and all drunk! the fiddle screams
    Plaintive and piteous, as it wept and wailed
    Its wasted tones and harmony unheard:
    Fierce the dispute, whate'er the theme; while she,
    Fell Discord, arbitress of such debate,
    Perch'd on the sign-post, holds with even hand
    Her undecisive scales. In this she lays
    A weight of ignorance; in that, of pride;
    And smiles delighted with the eternal poise.
    Dire is the frequent curse, and its twin sound,
    The cheek distending oath, not to be praised
    As ornamental, musical, polite,
    Like those which modern senators employ,
    Whose oath is rhetoric, and who swear for fame!
    Behold the schools in which plebeian minds,
    Once simple, are initiated in arts,
    Which some may practise with politer grace,
    But none with readier skill!--'tis here they learn
    The road that leads from competence and peace
    To indigence and rapine; till at last
    Society, grown weary of the load,
    Shakes her encumber'd lap, and casts them out.
    But censure profits little: vain the attempt
    To advertise in verse a public pest,
    That, like the filth with which the peasant feeds
    His hungry acres, stinks, and is of use.
    The excise is fatten'd with the rich result
    Of all this riot; and ten thousand casks,
    For ever dribbling out their base contents,
    Touch'd by the Midas finger of the state,
    Bleed gold for ministers to sport away.
    Drink, and be mad then; 'tis your country bids!
    Gloriously drunk, obey the important call!
    Her cause demands the assistance of your throats;--
    Ye all can swallow, and she asks no more.
      Would I had fallen upon those happier days,
    That poets celebrate; those golden times,
    And those Arcadian scenes, that Maro sings,
    And Sidney, warbler of poetic prose.
    Nymphs were Dianas then, and swains had hearts
    That felt their virtues: Innocence, it seems,
    From courts dismiss'd, found shelter in the groves;
    The footsteps of Simplicity, impress'd
    Upon the yielding herbage (so they sing)
    Then were not all effaced: then speech profane
    And manners profligate were rarely found,
    Observed as prodigies, and soon reclaim'd.
    Vain wish! those days were never: airy dreams
    Sat for the picture: and the poet's hand,
    Imparting substance to an empty shade,
    Imposed a gay delirium for a truth.
    Grant it:--I still must envy them an age
    That favour'd such a dream; in days like these
    Impossible, when Virtue is so scarce,
    That to suppose a scene where she presides,
    Is tramontane, and stumbles all belief.
    No: we are polish'd now! The rural lass,
    Whom once her virgin modesty and grace,
    Her artless manners, and her neat attire,
    So dignified, that she was hardly less
    Than the fair shepherdess of old romance,
    Is seen no more. The character is lost!
    Her head, adorn'd with lappets pinn'd aloft,
    And ribands streaming gay, superbly raised,
    And magnified beyond all human size,
    Indebted to some smart wig-weaver's hand
    For more than half the tresses it sustains;
    Her elbows ruffled, and her tottering form
    Ill propp'd upon French heels; she might be deem'd
    (But that the basket dangling on her arm
    Interprets her more truly) of a rank
    Too proud for dairy work, or sale of eggs.
    Expect her soon with footboy at her heels,
    No longer blushing for her awkward load,
    Her train and her umbrella all her care!
      The town has tinged the country; and the stain
    Appears a spot upon a vestal's robe,
    The worse for what it soils. The fashion runs
    Down into scenes still rural; but, alas!
    Scenes rarely graced with rural manners now!
    Time was when in the pastoral retreat
    The unguarded door was safe; men did not watch
    To invade another's right, or guard their own.
    Then sleep was undisturb'd by fear, unscared
    By drunken howlings; and the chilling tale
    Of midnight murder was a wonder heard
    With doubtful credit, told to frighten babes.
    But farewell now to unsuspicious nights,
    And slumbers unalarm'd! Now, ere you sleep,
    See that your polish'd arms be prim'd with care,
    And drop the night bolt;--ruffians are abroad;
    And the first 'larum of the cock's shrill throat
    May prove a trumpet, summoning your ear
    To horrid sounds of hostile feet within.
    E'en daylight has its dangers; and the walk
    Through pathless wastes and woods, unconscious once
    Of other tenants than melodious birds,
    Or harmless flocks, is hazardous and bold.
    Lamented change! to which full many a cause
    Inveterate, hopeless of a cure, conspires.
    The course of human things from good to ill,
    From ill to worse, is fatal, never fails.
    Increase of power begets increase of wealth;
    Wealth luxury, and luxury excess;
    Excess, the scrofulous and itchy plague,
    That seizes first the opulent, descends
    To the next rank contagious, and in time
    Taints downwarn all the graduated scale
    Of order, from the chariot to the plough.
    The rich, and they that have an arm to check
    The licence of the lowest in degree,
    Desert their office; and themselves, intent
    On pleasure, haunt the capital, and thus
    To all the violence of lawless hands
    Resign the scenes their presence might protect.
    Authority herself not seldom sleeps,
    Though resident, and witness of the wrong.
    The plump convivial parson often bears
    The magisterial sword in vain, and lays
    His reverence and his worship both to rest
    On the same cushion of habitual sloth.
    Perhaps timidity restrains his arm;
    When he should strike he trembles, and sets free,
    Himself enslaved by terror of the band,
    The audacious convict, whom he dares not bind.
    Perhaps, though by profession ghostly pure,
    He too may have his vice, and sometimes prove
    Less dainty than becomes his grave outside
    In lucrative concerns. Examine well
    His milk-white hand; the palm is hardly clean--
    But here and there an ugly smutch appears.
    Foh! 'twas a bribe that left it: he has touch'd
    Corruption! Whoso seeks an audit here
    Propitious, pays his tribute, game or fish,
    Wildfowl or venison, and his errand speeds.
      But faster far, and more than all the rest,
    A noble cause, which none, who bears a spark
    Of public virtue, ever wish'd removed,
    Works the deplored and mischievous effect.
    'Tis universal soldiership has stabb'd
    The heart of merit in the meaner class.
    Arms, through the vanity and brainless rage
    Of those that bear them, in whatever cause,
    Seem most at variance with all moral good,
    And incompatible with serious thought.
    The clown, the child of nature, without guile,
    Blest with an infant's ignorance of all
    But his own simple pleasures; now and then
    A wrestling match, a foot-race, or a fair;
    Is balloted, and trembles at the news:
    Sheepish he doffs his hat, and mumbling swears
    A bible-oath to be whate'er they please,
    To do he knows not what. The task perform'd,
    That instant he becomes the serjeant's care,
    His pupil, and his torment, and his jest.
    His awkward gait, his introverted toes,
    Bent knees, round shoulders, and dejected looks,
    Procure him many a curse. By slow degrees
    Unapt to learn, and form'd of stubborn stuff,
    He yet by slow degrees puts off himself,
    Grows conscious of a change, and likes it well:
    He stands erect; his slouch becomes a walk;
    He steps right onward, martial in his air,
    His form, and movement; is as smart above
    As meal and larded locks can make him; wears
    His hat, or his plumed helmet, with a grace;
    And, his three years of heroship expired,
    Returns indignant to the slighted plough.
    He hates the field, in which no fife or drum
    Attends him; drives his cattle to a march;
    And sighs for the smart comrades he has left.
    'Twere well if his exterior change were all--
    But with his clumsy port the wretch has lost
    His ignorance and harmless manners too.
    To swear, to game, to drink; to show at home,
    By lewdness, idleness, and sabbath breach,
    The great proficiency he made abroad;
    To astonish and to grieve his gazing friends;
    To break some maiden's and his mother's heart;
    To be a pest where he was useful once;
    Are his sole aim, and all his glory now.
      Man in society is like a flower
    Blown in its native bed: 'tis there alone
    His faculties, expanded in full bloom,
    Shine out; there only reach their proper use.
    But man, associated and leagued with man
    By regal warrant, or self-join'd by bond
    For interest sake, or swarming into clans
    Beneath one head for purposes of war,
    Like flowers selected from the rest, and bound
    And bundled close to fill some crowded vase,
    Fades rapidly, and, by compression marr'd,
    Contracts defilement not to be endured.
    Hence charter'd boroughs are such public plagues;
    And burghers, men immaculate perhaps
    In all their private functions, once combined,
    Become a loathsome body, only fit
    For dissolution, hurtful to the main.
    Hence merchants, unimpeachable of sin
    Against the charities of domestic life,
    Incorporated, seem at once to lose
    Their nature; and, disclaiming all regard
    For mercy and the common rights of man,
    Build factories with blood, conducting trade
    At the sword's point, and dyeing the white robe
    Of innocent commercial Justice red.
    Hence too the field of glory, as the world
    Misdeems it, dazzled by its bright array,
    With all its majesty of thundering pomp,
    Enchanting music and immortal wreaths,
    Is but a school, where thoughtlessness is taught
    On principle, where foppery atones
    For folly, gallantry for every vice.
      But slighted as it is, and by the great
    Abandon'd, and, which still I more regret,
    Infected with the manners and the modes
    It knew not once, the country wins me still.
    I never framed a wish, or form'd a plan,
    That flatter'd me with hopes of earthly bliss,
    But there I laid the scene. There early stray'd
    My fancy, ere yet liberty of choice
    Had found me, or the hope of being free.
    My very dreams were rural; rural too
    The firstborn efforts of my youthful muse,
    Sportive, and jingling her poetic bells
    Ere yet her ear was mistress of their powers.
    No bard could please me but whose lyre was tuned
    To Nature's praises. Heroes and their feats
    Fatigued me, never weary of the pipe
    Of Tityrus, assembling, as he sang,
    The rustic throng beneath his favorite beech.
    Then Milton had indeed a poet's charms:
    New to my taste, his Paradise surpass'd
    The struggling efforts of my boyish tongue
    To speak its excellence. I danced for joy.
    I marvell'd much that, at so ripe an age
    As twice seven years, his beauties had then first
    Engaged my wonder; and admiring still,
    And still admiring, with regret supposed
    The joy half lost, because not sooner found.
    There too, enamour'd of the life I loved,
    Pathetic in its praise, in its pursuit
    Determined, and possessing it at last,
    With transports, such as favour'd lovers feel,
    I studied, prized, and wish'd that I had known
    Ingenious Cowley! and, though now reclaim'd
    By modern lights from an erroneous taste,
    I cannot but lament thy splendid wit
    Entangled in the cobwebs of the schools.
    I still revere thee, courtly though retired;
    Though stretch'd at ease in Chertsey's silent bowers,
    Not unemploy'd; and finding rich amends
    For a lost world in solitude and verse.
    'Tis born with all: the love of Nature's works
    Is an ingredient in the compound man,
    Infused at the creation of the kind.
    And, though the Almighty Maker has throughout
    Discriminated each from each, by strokes
    And touches of his hand, with so much art
    Diversified, that two were never found
    Twins at all points--yet this obtains in all,
    That all discern a beauty in his works,
    And all can taste them: minds that have been form'd
    And tutor'd, with a relish more exact,
    But none without some relish, none unmoved.
    It is a flame that dies not even there
    Where nothing feeds it: neither business, crowds,
    Nor habits of luxurious city life,
    Whatever else they smother of true worth
    In human bosoms, quench it or abate.
    The villas with which London stands begirt
    Like a swarth Indian with his belt of beads
    Prove it. A breath of unadulterate air,
    The glimpse of a green pasture, how they cheer
    The citizen, and brace his languid frame!
    E'en in the stifling bosom of the town
    A garden, in which nothing thrives, has charms
    That soothe the rich possessor; much consoled,
    That here and there some sprigs of mournful mint,
    Of nightshade, or valerian, grace the well
    He cultivates. These serve him with a hint
    That nature lives; that sight-refreshing green
    Is still the livery she delights to wear,
    Though sickly samples of the exuberant whole.
    What are the casements lined with creeping herbs,
    The prouder sashes fronted with a range
    Of orange, myrtle, or the fragrant weed,
    The Frenchman's darling?[813] are they not all proofs
    That man, immured in cities, still retains
    His inborn inextinguishable thirst
    Of rural scenes, compensating his loss
    By supplemental shifts, the best he may
    The most unfurnish'd with the means of life,
    And they that never pass their brick-wall bounds,
    To range the fields and treat their lungs with air,
    Yet feel the burning instinct: over head
    Suspend their crazy boxes, planted thick,
    And water'd duly. There the pitcher stands,
    A fragment, and the spoutless teapot there;
    Sad witnesses how close-pent man regrets
    The country, with what ardour he contrives
    A peep at Nature, when he can no more.
      Hail, therefore, patroness of health and ease,
    And contemplation, heart-consoling joys,
    And harmless pleasures, in the throng'd abode
    Of multitudes unknown! hail, rural life!
    Address himself who will to the pursuit
    Of honours, or emolument, or fame;
    I shall not add myself to such a chase,
    Thwart his attempts, or envy his success.
    Some must be great. Great offices will have
    Great talents. And God gives to every man
    The virtue, temper, understanding, taste,
    That lifts him into life, and lets him fall
    Just in the niche he was ordain'd to fill.
    To the deliverer of an injured land
    He gives a tongue to enlarge upon, a heart
    To feel, and courage to redress her wrongs;
    To monarchs dignity; to judges sense;
    To artists ingenuity and skill;
    To me an unambitious mind, content
    In the low vale of life, that early felt
    A wish for ease and leisure, and ere long
    Found here that leisure and that ease I wish'd.

  [813] Mignonette.


BOOK V.

THE WINTER MORNING WALK.


THE ARGUMENT.

     A frosty morning--The foddering of cattle--The woodman and his
     dog--The poultry--Whimsical effects of frost at a waterfall--The
     Empress of Russia's palace of ice--Amusements of monarchs--War,
     one of them--Wars, whence--And whence monarchy--The evils of
     it--English and French loyalty contrasted--The Bastille, and
     a prisoner there--Liberty the chief recommendation of this
     country--Modern patriotism questionable, and why--The perishable
     nature of the best human institutions--Spiritual liberty not
     perishable--The slavish state of man by nature--Deliver him,
     Deist, if you can--Grace must do it--The respective merits of
     patriots and martyrs stated--Their different treatment--Happy
     freedom of the man whom grace makes free--His relish of the
     works of God--Address to the Creator.

    'Tis morning; and the sun, with ruddy orb
    Ascending, fires the horizon; while the clouds,
    That crowd away before the driving wind,
    More ardent as the disk emerges more,
    Resemble most some city in a blaze,
    Seen through the leafless wood. His slanting ray
    Slides ineffectual down the snowy vale,
    And, tinging all with his own rosy hue,
    From every herb and every spiry blade
    Stretches a length of shadow o'er the field.
    Mine, spindling into longitude immense,
    In spite of gravity, and sage remark
    That I myself am but a fleeting shade,
    Provokes me to a smile. With eye askance
    I view the muscular proportion'd limb
    Transform'd to a lean shank. The shapeless pair
    As they design'd to mock me, at my side
    Take step for step; and, as I near approach
    The cottage, walk along the plaster'd wall,
    Preposterous sight! the legs without the man.
    The verdure of the plain lies buried deep
    Beneath the dazzling deluge; and the bents
    And coarser grass, upspearing o'er the rest,
    Of late unsightly and unseen, now shine
    Conspicuous, and in bright apparel clad,
    And fledged with icy feathers, nod superb.
    The cattle mourn in corners, where the fence
    Screens them, and seem half petrified to sleep
    In unrecumbent sadness. There they wait
    Their wonted fodder; not like hungering man,
    Fretful if unsupplied; but silent, meek,
    And patient of the slow-paced swain's delay.
    He from the stack carves out the accustom'd load,
    Deep plunging, and again deep plunging oft,
    His broad keen knife into the solid mass:
    Smooth as a wall the upright remnant stands,
    With such undeviating and even force
    He severs it away: no needless care,
    Lest storms should overset the leaning pile
    Deciduous, or its own unbalanced weight.
    Forth goes the woodman, leaving unconcern'd
    The cheerful haunts of man; to wield the axe
    And drive the wedge in yonder forest drear,
    From morn to eve his solitary task.
    Shaggy, and lean, and shrewd, with pointed ears
    And tail cropp'd short, half lurcher and half cur,
    His dog attends him. Close behind his heel
    Now creeps he slow; and now, with many a frisk
    Wide scampering, snatches up the driften snow
    With ivory teeth, or ploughs it with his snout;
    Then shakes his powder'd coat, and barks for joy.
    Heedless of all his pranks, the sturdy churl
    Moves right toward the mark; nor stops for aught,
    But now and then with pressure of his thumb
    To adjust the fragrant charge of a short tube,
    That fumes beneath his nose: the trailing cloud
    Streams far behind him, scenting all the air.
    Now from the roost, or from the neighbouring pale,
    Where, diligent to catch the first fair gleam
    Of smiling day, they gossip'd side by side,
    Come trooping at the housewife's well-known call
    The feather'd tribes domestic. Half on wing,
    And half on foot, they brush the fleecy flood,
    Conscious, and fearful of too deep a plunge.
    The sparrows peep, and quit the sheltering eaves,
    To seize the fair occasion: well they eye
    The scatter'd grain, and thievishly resolved
    To escape the impending famine, often scared
    As oft return, a pert voracious kind.
    Clean riddance quickly made, one only care
    Remains to each, the search of sunny nook,
    Or shed impervious to the blast. Resign'd
    To sad necessity, the cock foregoes
    His wonted strut; and, wading at their head
    With well-consider'd steps, seems to resent
    His alter'd gait and stateliness retrench'd.
    How find the myriads, that in summer cheer
    The hills and valleys with their ceaseless songs,
    Due sustenance, or where subsist they now?
    Earth yields them nought: the imprison'd worm is safe
    Beneath the frozen clod; all seeds of herbs
    Lie cover'd close; and berry-bearing thorns,
    That feed the thrush, (whatever some suppose,)
    Afford the smaller minstrels no supply.
    The long protracted rigour of the year
    Thins all their numerous flocks. In chinks and holes
    Ten thousand seek an unmolested end,
    As instinct prompts; self-buried ere they die.
    The very rooks and daws forsake the fields,
    Where neither grub, nor root, nor earth-nut, now
    Repays their labour more; and, perch'd aloft
    By the way-side, or stalking in the path,
    Lean pensioners upon the traveller's track,
    Pick up their nauseous dole, though sweet to them,
    Of voided pulse or half-digested grain.
    The streams are lost amid the splendid blank,
    O'erwhelming all distinction. On the flood,
    Indurated and fix'd, the snowy weight
    Lies undissolved; while silently beneath,
    And unperceived, the current steals away.
    Not so where, scornful of a check, it leaps
    The mill-dam, dashes on the restless wheel,
    And wantons in the pebbly gulf below:
    No frost can bind it there; its utmost force
    Can but arrest the light and smoky mist
    That in its fall the liquid sheet throws wide.
    And see where it has hung the embroider'd banks
    With forms so various, that no powers of art,
    The pencil or the pen, may trace the scene!
    Here glittering turrets rise, upbearing high
    (Fantastic misarrangement!) on the roof
    Large growth of what may seem the sparkling trees
    And shrubs of fairy land. The crystal drops
    That trickle down the branches, fast congeal'd,
    Shoot into pillars of pellucid length,
    And prop the pile they but adorn'd before.
    Here grotto within grotto safe defies
    The sunbeam; there, embossed and fretted wild,
    The growing wonder takes a thousand shapes
    Capricious, in which fancy seeks in vain
    The likeness of some object seen before.
    Thus Nature works as if to mock at Art,
    And in defiance of her rival powers;
    By these fortuitous and random strokes
    Performing such inimitable feats
    As she with all her rules can never reach.
    Less worthy of applause, though more admired,
    Because a novelty, the work of man,
    Imperial mistress of the fur-clad Russ!
    Thy most magnificent and mighty freak,
    The wonder of the North. No forest fell
    When thou wouldst build; no quarry sent its stores
    To enrich thy walls: but thou didst hew the floods,
    And make thy marble of the glassy wave.
    In such a palace Aristæus found
    Cyrene, when he bore the plaintive tale
    Of his lost bees to her maternal ear:
    In such a palace Poetry might place
    The armoury of Winter; where his troops,
    The gloomy clouds, find weapons, arrowy sleet,
    Skin-piercing volley, blossom-bruising hail,
    And snow, that often blinds the traveller's course,
    And wraps him in an unexpected tomb.
    Silently as a dream the fabric rose;
    No sound of hammer or of saw was there.
    Ice upon ice, the well-adjusted parts
    Were soon conjoin'd; nor other cement ask'd
    Than water interfused to make them one.
    Lamps gracefully disposed, and of all hues,
    Illumined every side; a watery light
    Gleam'd through the clear transparency, that seem'd
    Another moon new risen, or meteor fallen
    From heaven to earth, of lambent flame serene.
    So stood the brittle prodigy; though smooth
    And slippery the materials, yet frost-bound
    Firm as a rock. Nor wanted aught within,
    That royal residence might well befit,
    For grandeur or for use. Long wavy wreaths
    Of flowers, that fear'd no enemy but warmth,
    Blush'd on the panels. Mirror needed none
    Where all was vitreous; but in order due
    Convivial table and commodious seat
    (What seem'd at least commodious seat) were there;
    Sofa, and couch, and high-built throne august.
    The same lubricity was found in all,
    And all was moist to the warm touch; a scene
    Of evanescent glory, once a stream,
    And soon to slide into a stream again.
    Alas! 'twas but a mortifying stroke
    Of undesign'd severity, that glanced
    (Made by a monarch) on her own estate,
    On human grandeur and the courts of kings.
    'Twas transient in its nature, as in show
    'Twas durable; as worthless, as it seem'd
    Intrinsically precious; to the foot
    Treacherous and false; it smiled, and it was cold.
      Great princes have great playthings. Some have play'd
    At hewing mountains into men, and some
    At building human wonders mountain high.
    Some have amused the dull sad years of life
    (Life spent in indolence, and therefore sad)
    With schemes of monumental fame; and sought
    By pyramids and mausolean pomp,
    Short-lived themselves, to immortalize their bones.
    Some seek diversion in the tented field,
    And make the sorrows of mankind their sport.
    But war's a game which, were their subjects wise,
    Kings would not play at. Nations would do well
    To extort their truncheons from the puny hands
    Of heroes, whose infirm and baby minds
    Are gratified with mischief, and who spoil,
    Because men suffer it, their toy, the World.
      When Babel was confounded, and the great
    Confederacy of projectors wild and vain
    Was split into diversity of tongues,
    Then, as a shepherd separates his flock,
    These to the upland, to the valley those,
    God drave asunder, and assign'd their lot
    To all the nations. Ample was the boon
    He gave them, in its distribution fair
    And equal; and he bade them dwell in peace.
    Peace was awhile their care: they plough'd, and sow'd,
    And reap'd their plenty without grudge or strife,
    But violence can never longer sleep
    Than human passions please. In every heart
    Are sown the sparks that kindle fiery war;
    Occasion needs but fan them, and they blaze.
    Cain had already shed a brother's blood;
    The deluge wash'd it out; but left unquench'd
    The seeds of murder in the breast of man.
    Soon by a righteous judgment in the line
    Of his descending progeny was found
    The first artificer of death; the shrewd
    Contriver, who first sweated at the forge,
    And forced the blunt and yet unbloodied steel
    To a keen edge, and made it bright for war.
    Him, Tubal named, the Vulcan of old times,
    The sword and falchion their inventor claim;
    And the first smith was the first murderer's son.
    His art survived the waters; and ere long,
    When man was multiplied and spread abroad
    In tribes and clans, and had begun to call
    These meadows and that range of hills his own,
    The tasted sweets of property begat
    Desire of more; and industry in some,
    To improve and cultivate their just demesne,
    Made others covet what they saw so fair.
    Thus war began on earth; these fought for spoil,
    And those in self-defence. Savage at first
    The onset, and irregular. At length
    One eminent above the rest for strength,
    For stratagem, or courage, or for all,
    Was chosen leader; him they served in war,
    And him in peace, for sake of warlike deeds,
    Reverenced no less. Who could with him compare?
    Or who so worthy to control themselves,
    As he, whose prowess had subdued their foes?
    Thus war, affording field for the display
    Of virtue, made one chief, whom times of peace,
    Which have their exigencies too, and call
    For skill in government, at length made king.
    King was a name too proud for man to wear
    With modesty and meekness; and the crown,
    So dazzling in their eyes who set it on,
    Was sure to intoxicate the brows it bound.
    It is the abject property of most,
    That, being parcel of the common mass,
    And destitute of means to raise themselves,
    They sink, and settle lower than they need.
    They know not what it is to feel within
    A comprehensive faculty, that grasps
    Great purposes with ease, that turns and wields,
    Almost without an effort, plans too vast
    For their conception, which they cannot move.
    Conscious of impotence, they soon grow drunk
    With gazing, when they see an able man
    Step forth to notice; and, besotted thus,
    Build him a pedestal, and say, "Stand there,
    And be our admiration and our praise."
    They roll themselves before him in the dust,
    Then most deserving in their own account
    When most extravagant in his applause,
    As if exalting him they raised themselves.
    Thus by degrees, self-cheated of their sound
    And sober judgment, that he is but man,
    They demi-deify and fume him so,
    That in due season he forgets it too.
    Inflated and astrut with self-conceit,
    He gulps the windy diet; and, ere long,
    Adopting their mistake, profoundly thinks
    The world was made in vain, if not for him.
    Thenceforth they are his cattle: drudges, born
    To bear his burdens, drawing in his gears,
    And sweating in his service, his caprice
    Becomes the soul that animates them all.
    He deems a thousand, or ten thousand lives,
    Spent in the purchase of renown for him,
    An easy reckoning; and they think the same.
    Thus kings were first invented, and thus kings
    Were burnish'd into heroes, and became
    The arbiters of this terraqueous swamp;
    Storks among frogs, that have but croak'd and died.
    Strange, that such folly, as lifts bloated man
    To eminence, fit only for a god,
    Should ever drivel out of human lips,
    E'en in the cradled weakness of the world!
    Still stranger much, that, when at length mankind
    Had reach'd the sinewy firmness of their youth,
    And could discriminate and argue well
    On subjects more mysterious, they were yet
    Babes in the cause of freedom, and should fear
    And quake before the gods themselves had made.
    But above measure strange, that neither proof
    Of sad experience, nor examples set
    By some, whose patriot virtue has prevail'd,
    Can even now, when they are grown mature
    In wisdom, and with philosophic deeds
    Familiar, serve to emancipate the rest!
    Such dupes are men to custom, and so prone
    To reverence what is ancient, and can plead
    A course of long observance for its use,
    That even servitude, the worst of ills,
    Because deliver'd down from sire to son,
    Is kept and guarded as a sacred thing!
    But is it fit, or can it bear the shock
    Of rational discussion, that a man,
    Compounded and made up like other men
    Of elements tumultuous, in whom lust
    And folly in as ample measure meet,
    As in the bosoms of the slaves he rules,
    Should be a despot absolute, and boast
    Himself the only freeman of his land?
    Should, when he pleases, and on whom he will,
    Wage war, with any or with no pretence
    Of provocation given, or wrong sustain'd,
    And force the beggarly last doit, by means
    That his own humour dictates, from the clutch
    Of poverty, that thus he may procure
    His thousands, weary of penurious life,
    A splendid opportunity to die?
    Say ye, who (with less prudence than of old
    Jotham ascribed to his assembled trees
    In politic convention) put your trust
    In the shadow of a bramble, and, reclined
    In fancied peace beneath his dangerous branch,
    Rejoice in him, and celebrate his sway,
    Where find ye passive fortitude? Whence springs
    Your self-denying zeal, that holds it good
    To stroke the prickly grievance, and to hang
    His thorns with streamers of continual praise?
    We too are friends to loyalty. We love
    The king who loves the law, respects his bounds,
    And reigns content within them: him we serve
    Freely and with delight, who leaves us free:
    But, recollecting still that he is man,
    We trust him not too far. King though he be,
    And king in England too, he may be weak,
    And vain enough to be ambitious still;
    May exercise amiss his proper powers,
    Or covet more than freemen choose to grant:
    Beyond that mark is treason. He is ours,
    To administer, to guard, to adorn the state,
    But not to warp or change it. We are his,
    To serve him nobly in the common cause,
    True to the death, but not to be his slaves.
    Mark now the difference, ye that boast your love
    Of kings, between your loyalty and ours.
    We love the man, the paltry pageant you:
    We the chief patron of the commonwealth,
    You the regardless author of its woes:
    We for the sake of liberty a king,
    You chains and bondage for a tyrant's sake.
    Our love is principle, and has its root
    In reason, is judicious, manly, free;
    Yours, a blind instinct, crouches to the rod,
    And licks the foot that treads it in the dust.
    Were kingship as true treasure as it seems,
    Sterling, and worthy of a wise man's wish,
    I would not be a king to be beloved
    Causeless, and daub'd with undiscerning praise,
    Where love is mere attachment to the throne,
    Not to the man who fills it as he ought.
      Whose freedom is by sufferance, and at will
    Of a superior, he is never free.
    Who lives, and is not weary of a life
    Exposed to manacles, deserves them well.
    The state that strives for liberty, though foil'd,
    And forced to abandon what she bravely sought,
    Deserves at least applause for her attempt,
    And pity for her loss. But that's a cause
    Not often unsuccessful: power usurp'd
    Is weakness when opposed; conscious of wrong,
    'Tis pusillanimous and prone to flight.
    But slaves that once conceive the glowing thought
    Of freedom, in that hope itself possess
    All that the contest calls for; spirit, strength,
    The scorn of danger, and united hearts;
    The surest presage of the good they seek.[814]
      Then shame to manhood, and opprobrious more
    To France than all her losses and defeats,
    Old or of later date, by sea or land,
    Her house of bondage, worse than that of old
    Which God avenged on Pharaoh--the Bastille.
    Ye horrid towers, the abode of broken hearts;
    Ye dungeons, and ye cages of despair,
    That monarchs have supplied from age to age
    With music, such as suits their sovereign ears,
    The sighs and groans of miserable men!
    There's not an English heart that would not leap
    To hear that ye were fallen at last; to know
    That e'en our enemies, so oft employ'd
    In forging chains for us, themselves were free.
    For he who values Liberty confines
    His zeal for her predominance within
    No narrow bounds; her cause engages him
    Wherever pleaded. 'Tis the cause of man.
    There dwell the most forlorn of human kind,
    Immured though unaccused, condemn'd untried,
    Cruelly spared, and hopeless of escape!
    There, like the visionary emblem seen
    By him of Babylon, life stands a stump,
    And, filleted about with hoops of brass,
    Still lives, though all his pleasant boughs are gone,
    To count the hour-bell, and expect no change;
    And ever, as the sullen sound is heard,
    Still to reflect, that, though a joyless note
    To him whose moments all have one dull pace,
    Ten thousand rovers in the world at large
    Account it music; that it summons some
    To theatre, or jocund feast, or ball:
    The wearied hireling finds it a release
    From labour; and the lover, who has chid
    Its long delay, feels every welcome stroke
    Upon his heart-strings, trembling with delight--
    To fly for refuge from distracting thought
    To such amusements as ingenious woe
    Contrives, hard shifting, and without her tools--
    To read engraven on the mouldy walls,
    In staggering types, his predecessor's tale,
    A sad memorial, and subjoin his own--
    To turn purveyor to an overgorged
    And bloated spider, till the pamper'd pest
    Is made familiar, watches his approach,
    Comes at his call, and serves him for a friend--
    To wear out time in numbering to and fro
    The studs that thick emboss his iron door;
    Then downward and then upward, then aslant,
    And then alternate; with a sickly hope
    By dint of change to give his tasteless task
    Some relish; till the sum, exactly found
    In all directions, he begins again.--
    Oh comfortless existence! hemm'd around
    With woes, which who that suffers would not kneel
    And beg for exile, or the pangs of death?
    That man should thus encroach on fellow man,
    Abridge him of his just and native rights,
    Eradicate him, tear him from his hold
    Upon the endearments of domestic life
    And social, nip his fruitfulness and use,
    And doom him for perhaps a heedless word
    To barrenness, and solitude, and tears,
    Moves indignation, makes the name of king
    (Of king whom such prerogative can please)
    As dreadful as the Manichean god,
    Adored through fear, strong only to destroy.
      'Tis liberty alone that gives the flower
    Of fleeting life its lustre and perfume;
    And we are weeds without it. All constraint,
    Except what wisdom lays on evil men,
    Is evil; hurts the faculties, impedes
    Their progress in the road of science; blinds
    The eyesight of Discovery; and begets,
    In those that suffer it, a sordid mind
    Bestial, a meagre intellect, unfit
    To be the tenant of man's noble form.
    Thee therefore still, blameworthy as thou art,
    With all thy loss of empire, and though squeezed
    By public exigence, till annual food
    Fails for the craving hunger of the state,
    Thee I account still happy, and the chief
    Among the nations, seeing thou art free:
    My native nook of earth! Thy clime is rude,
    Replete with vapours, and disposes much
    All hearts to sadness, and none more than mine:
    Thine unadulterate manners are less soft
    And plausible than social life requires,
    And thou hast need of discipline and art
    To give thee what politer France receives,
    From nature's bounty--that humane address
    And sweetness, without which no pleasure is
    In converse, either starved by cold reserve,
    Or flush'd with fierce dispute, a senseless brawl.
    Yet being free I love thee: for the sake
    Of that one feature can be well content,
    Disgraced as thou hast been, poor as thou art,
    To seek no sublunary rest beside.
    But once enslaved, farewell! I could endure
    Chains nowhere patiently; and chains at home,
    Where I am free by birthright, not at all.
    Then what were left of roughness in the grain
    Of British natures, wanting its excuse
    That it belongs to freemen, would disgust
    And shock me. I should then with double pain
    Feel all the rigour of thy fickle clime;
    And, if I must bewail the blessing lost,
    For which our Hampdens and our Sidneys bled,
    I would at least bewail it under skies
    Milder, among a people less austere;
    In scenes which, having never known me free,
    Would not reproach me with the loss I felt.
    Do I forebode impossible events,
    And tremble at vain dreams? Heaven grant I may!
    But the age of virtuous politics is past,
    And we are deep in that of cold pretence.
    Patriots are grown too shrewd to be sincere,
    And we too wise to trust them. He that takes
    Deep in his soft credulity the stamp
    Design'd by loud declaimers on the part
    Of liberty, themselves the slaves of lust,
    Incurs derision for his easy faith
    And lack of knowledge, and with cause enough:
    For when was public virtue to be found
    Where private was not? Can he love the whole
    Who loves no part? He be a nation's friend
    Who is, in truth, the friend of no man there?
    Can he be strenuous in his country's cause
    Who slights the charities for whose dear sake
    That country, if at all, must be beloved?
      'Tis therefore sober and good men are sad
    For England's glory, seeing it wax pale
    And sickly, while her champions wear their hearts
    So loose to private duty, that no brain,
    Healthful and undisturb'd by factious fumes,
    Can dream them trusty to the general weal.
    Such were not they of old, whose temper'd blades
    Dispersed the shackles of usurp'd control,
    And hew'd them link from link; then Albion's sons
    Were sons indeed; they felt a filial heart
    Beat high within them at a mother's wrongs;
    And, shining each in his domestic sphere,
    Shone brighter still, once call'd to public view,
    'Tis therefore many, whose sequester'd lot
    Forbids their interference, looking on,
    Anticipate perforce some dire event;
    And, seeing the old castle of the state,
    That promised once more firmness, so assail'd
    That all its tempest-beaten turrets shake,
    Stand motionless expectants of its fall.
    All has its date below; the fatal hour
    Was register'd in heaven ere time began.
    We turn to dust, and all our mightiest works
    Die too: the deep foundations that we lay,
    Time ploughs them up, and not a trace remains.
    We build with what we deem eternal rock:
    A distant age asks where the fabric stood;
    And in the dust, sifted and search'd in vain,
    The undiscoverable secret sleeps.
      But there is yet a liberty, unsung
    By poets, and by senators unpraised,
    Which monarchs cannot grant, nor all the powers
    Of earth and hell confederate take away:
    A liberty which persecution, fraud,
    Oppression, prisons, have no power to bind:
    Which whoso tastes can be enslaved no more.
    'Tis liberty of heart, derived from Heaven,
    Bought with His blood who gave it to mankind,
    And seal'd with the same token. It is held
    By charter, and that charter sanction'd sure
    By the unimpeachable and awful oath
    And promise of a God. His other gifts
    All bear the royal stamp that speaks them his,
    And are august; but this transcends them all.
    His other works, the visible display
    Of all-creating energy and might,
    Are grand, no doubt, and worthy of the word
    That, finding an interminable space
    Unoccupied, has fill'd the void so well,
    And made so sparkling what was dark before.
    But these are not his glory. Man, 'tis true,
    Smit with the beauty of so fair a scene,
    Might well suppose the Artificer divine
    Meant it eternal, had he not himself
    Pronounced it transient, glorious as it is,
    And, still designing a more glorious far,
    Doom'd it as insufficient for his praise.
    These, therefore, are occasional, and pass;
    Form'd for the confutation of the fool,
    Whose lying heart disputes against a God;
    That office served, they must be swept away.
    Not so the labours of his love: they shine
    In other heavens than these that we behold,
    And fade not. There is paradise that fears
    No forfeiture, and of its fruits he sends
    Large prelibation oft to saints below.
    Of these the first in order, and the pledge
    And confident assurance of the rest,
    Is liberty: a flight into his arms,
    Ere yet mortality's fine threads give way,
    A clear escape from tyrannizing lust,
    And full immunity from penal woe.
      Chains are the portion of revolted man,
    Stripes, and a dungeon; and his body serves
    The triple purpose. In that sickly, foul,
    Opprobrious residence he finds them all.
    Propense his heart to idols, he is held
    In silly dotage on created things,
    Careless of their Creator. And that low
    And sordid gravitation of his powers
    To a vile clod so draws him, with such force
    Resistless from the centre he should seek,
    That he at last forgets it. All his hopes
    Tend downward; his ambition is to sink,
    To reach a depth profounder still, and still
    Profounder, in the fathomless abyss
    Of folly, plunging in pursuit of death.
    But, ere he gain the comfortless repose
    He seeks, and acquiescence of his soul,
    In heaven-renouncing exile, he endures--
    What does he not, from lusts opposed in vain,
    And self-reproaching conscience? He foresees
    The fatal issue to his health, fame, peace,
    Fortune and dignity; the loss of all
    That can ennoble man, and make frail life,
    Short as it is, supportable. Still worse,
    Far worse than all the plagues, with which his sins
    Infect his happiest moments, he forebodes
    Ages of hopeless misery. Future death,
    And death still future. Not a hasty stroke,
    Like that which sends him to the dusty grave;
    But unrepealable enduring death.
    Scripture is still a trumpet to his fears:
    What none can prove a forgery may be true;
    What none but bad men wish exploded must.
    That scruple checks him. Riot is not loud
    Nor drunk enough to drown it. In the midst
    Of laughter his compunctions are sincere;
    And he abhors the jest by which he shines.
    Remorse begets reform. His master-lust
    Falls first before his resolute rebuke,
    And seems dethroned and vanquish'd. Peace ensues,
    But spurious and short-lived; the puny child
    Of self-congratulating pride, begot
    On fancied innocence. Again he falls,
    And fights again; but finds his best essay
    A presage ominous, portending still
    Its own dishonour by a worse relapse.
    Till Nature, unavailing Nature, foil'd
    So oft, and wearied in the vain attempt,
    Scoffs at her own performance. Reason now
    Takes part with appetite, and pleads the cause
    Perversely, which of late she so condemn'd;
    With shallow shifts and old devices, worn
    And tatter'd in the service of debauch,
    Covering his shame from his offended sight.
      "Hath God indeed given appetites to man,
    And stored the earth so plenteously with means
    To gratify the hunger of his wish;
    And doth he reprobate, and will he damn
    The use of his own bounty? making first
    So frail a kind, and then enacting laws
    So strict, that less than perfect must despair?
    Falsehood! which whoso but suspects of truth
    Dishonours God, and makes a slave of man.
    Do they themselves, who undertake for hire
    The teacher's office, and dispense at large
    Their weekly dole of edifying strains,
    Attend to their own music? have they faith
    In what, with such solemnity of tone
    And gesture, they propound to our belief?
    Nay--conduct hath the loudest tongue. The voice
    Is but an instrument, on which the priest
    May play what tune he pleases. In the deed,
    The unequivocal, authentic deed,
    We find sound argument, we read the heart."
      Such reasonings (if that name must needs belong
    To excuses in which reason has no part)
    Serve to compose a spirit well inclined
    To live on terms of amity with vice,
    And sin without disturbance. Often urged,
    (As often as libidinous discourse
    Exhausted, he resorts to solemn themes
    Of theological and grave import)
    They gain at last his unreserved assent;
    Till, harden'd his heart's temper in the forge
    Of lust, and on the anvil of despair,
    He slights the strokes of conscience. Nothing moves
    Or nothing much, his constancy in ill;
    Vain tampering has but foster'd his disease;
    'Tis desperate, and he sleeps the sleep of death.
    Haste now, philosopher, and set him free.
    Charm the deaf serpent wisely. Make him hear
    Of rectitude and fitness, moral truth
    How lovely, and the moral sense how sure,
    Consulted and obeyed, to guide his steps
    Directly to the first and only fair.
    Spare not in such a cause. Spend all the powers
    Of rant and rhapsody in virtue's praise:
    Be most sublimely good, verbosely grand,
    And with poetic trappings grace thy prose,
    Till it outmantle all the pride of verse.--
    Ah, tinkling cymbal, and high-sounding brass,
    Smitten in vain! such music cannot charm
    The eclipse that intercepts truth's heavenly beam,
    And chills and darkens a wide wandering soul.
    The STILL SMALL VOICE is wanted. He must speak,
    Whose word leaps forth at once to its effect;
    Who calls for things that are not, and they come.
      Grace makes the slave a freeman. 'Tis a change
    That turns to ridicule the turgid speech
    And stately tone of moralists, who boast,
    As if, like him of fabulous renown,
    They had indeed ability to smooth
    The shag of savage nature, and were each
    An Orpheus, and omnipotent in song.
    But transformation of apostate man
    From fool to wise, from earthly to divine,
    Is work for Him that made him. He alone,
    And He by means in philosophic eyes
    Trivial and worthy of disdain, achieves
    The wonder; humanizing what is brute
    In the lost kind, extracting from the lips
    Of asps their venom, overpowering strength
    By weakness, and hostility by love.
      Patriots have toil'd, and in their country's cause
    Bled nobly; and their deeds, as they deserve,
    Receive proud recompence. We give in charge
    Their names to the sweet lyre. The historic muse,
    Proud of the treasure, marches with it down
    To latest times; and Sculpture, in her turn,
    Gives bond in stone and ever-during brass
    To guard them, and to immortalize her trust:
    But fairer wreaths are due, though never paid,
    To those who, posted at the shrine of Truth,
    Have fallen in her defence. A patriot's blood,
    Well spent in such a strife, may earn indeed,
    And for a time ensure to his loved land,
    The sweets of liberty and equal laws;
    But martyrs struggle for a brighter prize,
    And win it with more pain. Their blood is shed
    In confirmation of the noblest claim--
    Our claim to feed upon immortal truth,
    To walk with God, to be divinely free,
    To soar, and to anticipate the skies.
    Yet few remember them. They lived unknown
    Till Persecution dragg'd them into fame,
    And chased them up to heaven. Their ashes flew
    --No marble tells us whither. With their names
    No bard embalms and sanctifies his song:
    And history, so warm on meaner themes,
    Is cold on this. She execrates indeed
    The tyranny that doom'd them to the fire,
    But gives the glorious sufferers little praise.[815]
      He is the freeman whom the truth makes free,
    And all are slaves beside. There's not a chain
    That hellish foes, confederate for his harm,
    Can wind around him, but he casts it off
    With as much ease as Samson his green withes.
    He looks abroad into the varied field
    Of nature, and, though poor perhaps, compared
    With those whose mansions glitter in his sight,
    Calls the delightful scenery all his own.
    His are the mountains, and the valleys his,
    And all the resplendent rivers. His to enjoy
    With a propriety that none can feel,
    But who, with filial confidence inspired,
    Can lift to heaven an unpresumptuous eye,
    And smiling say--"My Father made them all!"
    Are they not his by a peculiar right,
    And by an emphasis of interest his,
    Whose eye they fill with tears of holy joy,
    Whose heart with praise, and whose exalted mind
    With worthy thoughts of that unwearied love
    That plann'd, and built, and still upholds a world
    So clothed with beauty for rebellious man?
    Yes--ye may fill your garners, ye that reap
    The loaded soil, and ye may waste much good
    In senseless riot; but ye will not find,
    In feast or in the chase, in song or dance,
    A liberty like his who, unimpeach'd
    Of usurpation, and to no man's wrong,
    Appropriates nature as his Father's work,
    And has a richer use of yours than you.
    He is indeed a freeman. Free by birth
    Of no mean city; plann'd or ere the hills
    Were built, the fountains open'd, or the sea
    With all his roaring multitude of waves.
    His freedom is the same in every state;
    And no condition of this changeful life,
    So manifold in cares, whose every day
    Brings its own evil with it, makes it less:
    For he has wings that neither sickness, pain,
    Nor penury, can cripple or confine.
    No nook so narrow but he spreads them there
    With ease, and is at large. The oppressor holds
    His body bound; but knows not what a range
    His spirit takes, unconscious of a chain;
    And that to bind him is a vain attempt,
    Whom God delights in, and in whom he dwells.
      Acquaint thyself with God, if thou wouldst taste
    His works. Admitted once to his embrace,
    Thou shalt perceive that thou wast blind before;
    Thine eye shall be instructed; and thine heart,
    Made pure, shall relish, with divine delight
    'Till then unfelt, what hands divine have wrought.
    Brutes graze the mountain-top, with faces prone,
    And eyes intent upon the scanty herb
    It yields them; or, recumbent on its brow,
    Ruminate heedless of the scene outspread
    Beneath, beyond, and stretching far away
    From inland regions to the distant main.
    Man views it, and admires; but rests content
    With what he views. The landscape has his praise,
    But not its Author. Unconcern'd who form'd
    The paradise he sees, he finds it such,
    And, such well pleased to find it, asks no more.
    Not so the mind that has been touch'd from Heaven,
    And in the school of sacred wisdom taught
    To read his wonders, in whose thought the world,
    Fair as it is, existed ere it was.
    Not for its own sake merely, but for his
    Much more who fashion'd it, he gives it praise;
    Praise that, from earth resulting, as it ought,
    To earth's acknowledged sovereign, finds at once
    Its only just proprietor in Him.
    The soul that sees him or receives sublimed
    New faculties, or learns at least to employ
    More worthily the powers she own'd before,
    Discerns in all things what, with stupid gaze
    Of ignorance, till then she overlook'd,
    A ray of heavenly light, gilding all forms
    Terrestrial in the vast and the minute;
    The unambiguous footsteps of the God,
    Who gives its lustre to an insect's wing,
    And wheels his throne upon the rolling worlds.
    Much conversant with Heaven, she often holds
    With those fair ministers of light to man,
    That fill the skies nightly with silent pomp,
    Sweet conference. Inquires what strains were they
    With which Heaven rang, when every star, in haste
    To gratulate the new-created earth,
    Sent forth a voice, and all the sons of God
    Shouted for joy.--"Tell me, ye shining hosts,
    That navigate a sea that knows no storms,
    Beneath a vault unsullied with a cloud,
    If from your elevation, whence ye view
    Distinctly scenes invisible to man,
    And systems, of whose birth no tidings yet
    Have reach'd this nether world, ye spy a race
    Favour'd as ours; transgressors from the womb,
    And hasting to a grave, yet doom'd to rise,
    And to possess a brighter heaven than yours?
    As one who long detain'd on foreign shores
    Pants to return, and when he sees afar
    His country's weather-bleach'd and batter'd rocks,
    From the green wave emerging, darts an eye
    Radiant with joy towards the happy land;
    So I with animated hopes behold,
    And many an aching wish, your beamy fires,
    That show like beacons in the blue abyss,
    Ordain'd to guide the embodied spirit home
    From toilsome life to never-ending rest.
    Love kindles as I gaze. I feel desires
    That give assurance of their own success,
    And that, infused from Heaven, must thither tend."
      So reads he nature, whom the lamp of truth
    Illuminates. Thy lamp, mysterious Word!
    Which whoso sees no longer wanders lost,
    With intellects bemazed in endless doubt,
    But runs the road of wisdom. Thou hast built,
    With means that were not till by thee employ'd,
    Worlds that had never been hadst thou in strength
    Been less, or less benevolent than strong.
    They are thy witnesses, who speak thy power
    And goodness infinite, but speak in ears
    That hear not, or receive not their report.
    In vain thy creatures testify of thee,
    Till thou proclaim thyself. Theirs is indeed
    A teaching voice; but 'tis the praise of thine
    That whom it teaches it makes prompt to learn,
    And with the boon gives talents for its use.
    Till thou art heard, imaginations vain
    Possess the heart, and fables false as hell,
    Yet, deem'd oracular, lure down to death
    The uninform'd and heedless souls of men.
    We give to chance, blind chance, ourselves as blind,
    The glory of thy work; which yet appears
    Perfect and unimpeachable of blame,
    Challenging human scrutiny, and proved
    Then skilful most when most severely judged.
    But chance is not; or is not where thou reign'st;
    Thy providence forbids that fickle power
    (If power she be that works but to confound)
    To mix her wild vagaries with thy laws.
    Yet thus we dote, refusing while we can
    Instruction, and inventing to ourselves
    Gods such as guilt makes welcome; gods that sleep,
    Or disregard our follies, or that sit
    Amused spectators of this bustling stage.
    Thee we reject, unable to abide
    Thy purity, till pure as thou art pure;
    Made such by thee, we love thee for that cause,
    For which we shunn'd and hated thee before.
    Then we are free. Then liberty, like day,
    Breaks on the soul, and by a flash from heaven
    Fires all the faculties with glorious joy.
    A voice is heard that mortal ears hear not,
    Till thou hast touch'd them; 'tis the voice of song,
    A loud Hosanna sent from all thy works;
    Which he that hears it with a shout repeats,
    And adds his rapture to the general praise.
    In that blest moment Nature, throwing wide
    Her veil opaque, discloses with a smile
    The author of her beauties, who, retired
    Behind his own creation, works unseen
    By the impure, and hears his power denied.
    Thou art the source and centre of all minds,
    Their only point of rest, eternal Word!
    From thee departing they are lost, and rove
    At random without honour, hope, or peace.
    From thee is all that soothes the life of man,
    His high endeavour, and his glad success,
    His strength to suffer, and his will to serve.

    But, O thou bounteous Giver of all good,
    Thou art of all thy gifts thyself the crown!
    Give what thou canst, without thee we are poor;
    And with thee rich, take what thou wilt away.

  [814] The author hopes that he shall not be censured for
  unnecessary warmth upon so interesting a subject. He is aware
  that it is become almost fashionable to stigmatize such
  sentiments as no better than empty declamation; but it is an ill
  symptom, and peculiar to modern times.

  [815] See Hume.

  [Illustration: _J. Gilbert fecit._ _W. Greatbach sculp._

  THE WINTER'S WALK AT NOON.

                        "WHO GIVES HIS NOON
  TO MISS, THE MERCER'S PLAGUE, FROM SHOP TO SHOP
  WANDERING AND LITTERING WITH UNFOLDED SILKS."]




  BOOK VI.

  THE WINTER WALK AT NOON.


  THE ARGUMENT.

     Bells at a distance--Their effect--A fine noon in winter--A
     sheltered walk--Meditation better than books--Our familiarity
     with the course of nature makes it appear less wonderful
     than it is--The transformation that spring effects in a
     shrubbery described--A mistake concerning the course of nature
     corrected--God maintains it by an unremitted act--The amusements
     fashionable at this hour of the day reproved--Animals happy, a
     delightful sight--Origin of cruelty to animals--That it is a
     great crime proved from scripture--That proof illustrated by a
     tale--A line drawn between the lawful and unlawful destruction
     of them--Their good and useful properties insisted on--Apology
     for the encomiums bestowed by the author on animals--Instances
     of man's extravagant praise of man--The groans of the creation
     shall have an end--A view taken of the restoration of all
     things--An invocation and an invitation of Him who shall bring
     it to pass--The retired man vindicated from the charge of
     uselessness--Conclusion.

    There is in souls a sympathy with sounds;
    And as the mind is pitch'd the ear is pleased
    With melting airs, or martial, brisk, or grave:
    Some chord in unison with what we hear
    Is touch'd within us, and the heart replies.
    How soft the music of those village bells,
    Falling at intervals upon the ear
    In cadence sweet, now dying all away,
    Now pealing loud again, and louder still,
    Clear and sonorous, as the gale comes on!
    With easy force it opens all the cells
    Where Memory slept. Wherever I have heard
    A kindred melody, the scene recurs,
    And with it all its pleasures and its pains.
    Such comprehensive views the spirit takes,
    That in a few short moments I retrace
    (As in a map the voyager his course)
    The windings of my way through many years.
    Short as in retrospect the journey seems,
    It seem'd not always short; the rugged path,
    And prospect oft so dreary and forlorn,
    Moved many a sigh at its disheartening length.
    Yet, feeling present evils, while the past
    Faintly impress the mind, or not at all,
    How readily we wish time spent revoked,
    That we might try the ground again, where once
    (Through inexperience, as we now perceive)
    We miss'd that happiness we might have found!
    Some friend is gone, perhaps his son's best friend,
    A father, whose authority, in show
    When most severe, and mustering all its force,
    Was but the graver countenance of love:
    Whose favour, like the clouds of spring, might lower,
    And utter now and then an awful voice,
    But had a blessing in its darkest frown,
    Threatening at once and nourishing the plant.
    We loved, but not enough, the gentle hand
    That rear'd us. At a thoughtless age, allured
    By every gilded folly, we renounced
    His sheltering side, and wilfully forewent
    That converse, which we now in vain regret,
    How gladly would the man recall to life
    The boy's neglected sire! a mother too,
    That softer friend, perhaps more gladly still,
    Might he demand them at the gates of death.
    Sorrow has, since they went, subdued and tamed
    The playful humour; he could now endure
    (Himself grown sober in the vale of tears)
    And feel a parent's presence no restraint.
    But not to understand a treasure's worth
    Till time has stolen away the slighted good,
    Is cause of half the poverty we feel,
    And makes the world the wilderness it is.
    The few that pray at all pray oft amiss,
    And, seeking grace to improve the prize they hold,
    Would urge a wiser suit than asking more.
      The night was winter in his roughest mood;
    The morning sharp and clear. But now at noon
    Upon the southern side of the slant hills,
    And where the woods fence off the northern blast,
    The season smiles, resigning all its rage,
    And has the warmth of May. The vault is blue
    Without a cloud, and white without a speck
    The dazzling splendour of the scene below.
    Again the harmony comes o'er the vale;
    And through the trees I view the embattled tower
    Whence all the music. I again perceive
    The soothing influence of the wafted strains,
    And settle in soft musings as I tread
    The walk, still verdant, under oaks and elms,
    Whose outspread branches overarch the glade.
    The roof, though moveable through all its length
    As the wind sways it, has yet well sufficed,
    And, intercepting in their silent fall
    The frequent flakes, has kept a path for me.
    No noise is here, or none that hinders thought.
    The redbreast warbles still, but is content
    With slender notes, and more than half suppress'd:
    Pleased with his solitude, and flitting light
    From spray to spray, where'er he rests he shakes
    From many a twig the pendent drops of ice,
    That tinkle in the wither'd leaves below.
    Stillness, accompanied with sounds so soft,
    Charms more than silence. Meditation here
    May think down hours to moments. Here the heart
    May give a useful lesson to the head,
    And Learning wiser grow without his books.
    Knowledge and Wisdom, far from being one,
    Have ofttimes no connexion. Knowledge dwells
    In heads replete with thoughts of other men;
    Wisdom in minds attentive to their own.
    Knowledge, a rude unprofitable mass,
    The mere materials with which Wisdom builds,
    Till smooth'd, and squared, and fitted to its place,
    Does but encumber whom it seems to enrich.
    Knowledge is proud that he has learn'd so much;
    Wisdom is humble that he knows no more.
    Books are not seldom talismans and spells,
    By which the magic art of shrewder wits
    Holds an unthinking multitude enthrall'd.
    Some to the fascination of a name
    Surrender judgment hoodwink'd. Some the style
    Infatuates, and through labyrinth and wilds
    Of error leads them, by a tune entranced.
    While sloth seduces more, too weak to bear
    The insupportable fatigue of thought,
    And swallowing therefore without pause or choice
    The total grist unsifted, husks and all.
    But trees, and rivulets whose rapid course
    Defies the check of winter, haunts of deer,
    And sheepwalks populous with bleating lambs,
    And lanes, in which the primrose ere her time
    Peeps through the moss that clothes the hawthorn root,
    Deceive no student. Wisdom there, and truth,
    Not shy, as in the world, and to be won
    By slow solicitation, seize at once
    The roving thought, and fix it on themselves.
      What prodigies can power divine perform
    More grand than it produces year by year,
    And all in sight of inattentive man?
    Familiar with the effect, we slight the cause,
    And, in the constancy of nature's course,
    The regular return of genial months,
    And renovation of a faded world,
    See nought to wonder at. Should God again,
    As once in Gibeon, interrupt the race
    Of the undeviating and punctual sun,
    How would the world admire! but speaks it less
    An agency divine, to make him know
    His moment when to sink and when to rise,
    Age after age, than to arrest his course?
    All we behold is miracle; but, seen
    So duly, all is miracle in vain.
    Where now the vital energy that moved,
    While summer was, the pure and subtle lymph
    Through the imperceptible meandering veins
    Of leaf and flower? It sleeps; and the icy touch
    Of unprolific winter has impress'd
    A cold stagnation on the intestine tide.
    But let the months go round, a few short months,
    And all shall be restored. These naked shoots,
    Barren as lances, among which the wind
    Makes wintry music, sighing as it goes,
    Shall put their graceful foliage on again,
    And, more aspiring, and with ampler spread,
    Shall boast new charms, and more than they have lost.
    Then each, in its peculiar honours clad,
    Shall publish, even to the distant eye,
    Its family and tribe. Laburnum, rich
    In streaming gold; syringa, ivory pure;
    The scentless and the scented rose; this red,
    And of an humbler growth, the other[816] tall,
    And throwing up into the darkest gloom
    Of neighbouring cypress, or more sable yew,
    Her silver globes, light as the foamy surf
    That the wind severs from the broken wave;
    The lilac, various in array, now white,
    Now sanguine, and her beauteous head now set
    With purple spikes pyramidal, as if,
    Studious of ornament, yet unresolved
    Which hue she most approved, she chose them all:
    Copious of flowers the woodbine, pale and wan,
    But well compensating her sickly looks
    With never-cloying odours, early and late;
    Hypericum all bloom, so thick a swarm
    Of flowers, like flies clothing her slender rods,
    That scarce a leaf appears; mezereon too,
    Though leafless, well attired, and thick beset
    With blushing wreaths, investing every spray;
    Althæa with the purple eye; the broom,
    Yellow and bright, as bullion unalloy'd,
    Her blossoms; and luxuriant above all
    The jasmine, throwing wide her elegant sweets,
    The deep dark green of whose unvarnish'd leaf
    Makes more conspicuous, and illumines more
    The bright profusion of her scatter'd stars.--
    These have been, and these shall be in their day;
    And all this uniform, uncolour'd scene
    Shall be dismantled of its fleecy load,
    And flush into variety again.
    From dearth to plenty, and from death to life,
    Is Nature's progress, when she lectures man
    In heavenly truth; evincing, as she makes
    The grand transition, that there lives and works
    A soul in all things, and that soul is God.
    The beauties of the wilderness are his,
    That make so gay the solitary place,
    Where no eye sees them. And the fairer forms,
    That cultivation glories in, are his.
    He sets the bright procession on its way,
    And marshals all the order of the year;
    He marks the bounds which Winter may not pass,
    And blunts his pointed fury; in its case,
    Russet and rude, folds up the tender germ,
    Uninjured, with inimitable art;
    And, ere one flowery season fades and dies,
    Designs the blooming wonders of the next.
      Some say that, in the origin of things,
    When all creation started into birth,
    The infant elements received a law,
    From which they swerve not since; that under force
    Of that controlling ordinance they move,
    And need not his immediate hand, who first
    Prescribed their course, to regulate it now.
    Thus dream they, and contrive to save a God
    The incumbrance of his own concerns, and spare
    The great Artificer of all that moves
    The stress of a continual act, the pain
    Of unremitted vigilance and care,
    As too laborious and severe a task.
    So man, the moth, is not afraid, it seems,
    To span omnipotence, and measure might,
    That knows no measure, by the scanty rule
    And standard of his own, that is to-day,
    And is not ere to-morrow's sun go down.
    But how should matter occupy a charge,
    Dull as it is, and satisfy a law
    So vast in its demands, unless impell'd
    To ceaseless service by a ceaseless force,
    And under pressure of some conscious cause?
    The Lord of all, himself through all diffused,
    Sustains and is the life of all that lives.
    Nature is but a name for an effect,
    Whose cause is God. He feeds the secret fire,
    By which the mighty process is maintain'd,
    Who sleeps not, is not weary; in whose sight
    Slow circling ages are as transient days;
    Whose work is without labour; whose designs
    No flaw deforms, no difficulty thwarts;
    And whose beneficence no charge exhausts.
    Him blind antiquity profaned, not served,
    With self-taught rites, and under various names,
    Female and male, Pomona, Pales, Pan,
    And Flora, and Vertumnus; peopling earth
    With tutelary goddesses and gods
    That were not; and commending as they would
    To each some province, garden, field, or grove.
    But all are under one. One spirit, His
    Who wore the platted thorns with bleeding brows,
    Rules universal nature. Not a flower
    But shows some touch, in freckle, streak, or stain,
    Of his unrivall'd pencil. He inspires
    Their balmy odours, and imparts their hues,
    And bathes their eyes with nectar, and includes,
    In grains as countless as the seaside sands,
    The forms with which he sprinkles all the earth.
    Happy who walks with him! whom what he finds
    Of flavour or of scent in fruit or flower,
    Or what he views of beautiful or grand
    In nature, from the broad majestic oak
    To the green blade that twinkles in the sun,
    Prompts with remembrance of a present God.
    His presence, who made all so fair, perceived
    Makes all still fairer. As with him no scene
    Is dreary, so with him all seasons please.
    Though winter had been none, had man been true,
    And earth be punish'd for its tenant's sake,
    Yet not in vengeance; as this smiling sky,
    So soon succeeding such an angry night,
    And these dissolving snows, and this clear stream
    Recovering fast its liquid music, prove.
      Who then, that has a mind well strung and tuned
    To contemplation, and within his reach
    A scene so friendly to his favourite task,
    Would waste attention at the chequer'd board,
    His host of wooden warriors to and fro
    Marching and countermarching, with an eye
    As fix'd as marble, with a forehead ridged
    And furrow'd into storms, and with a hand
    Trembling, as if eternity were hung
    In balance on his conduct of a pin?
    Nor envies he aught more their idle sport,
    Who pant with application misapplied
    To trivial joys, and pushing ivory balls,
    Across a velvet level, feel a joy
    Akin to rapture, when the bauble finds
    Its destined goal of difficult access.
    Nor deems he wiser him, who gives his noon
    To miss, the mercer's plague, from shop to shop
    Wandering, and littering with unfolded silks
    The polish'd counter, and approving none,
    Or promising with smiles to call again.
    Nor him who, by his vanity seduced,
    And soothed into a dream that he discerns
    The difference of a Guido from a daub,
    Frequents the crowded auction: station'd there
    As duly as the Langford of the show,
    With glass at eye, and catalogue in hand,
    And tongue accomplish'd in the fulsome cant
    And pedantry that coxcombs learn with ease:
    Oft as the price-deciding hammer falls,
    He notes it in his book, then raps his box,
    Swears 'tis a bargain, rails at his hard fate
    That he has let it pass--but never bids.
      Here unmolested, through whatever sign
    The sun proceeds, I wander. Neither mist,
    Nor freezing sky nor sultry, checking me,
    Nor stranger intermeddling with my joy.
    E'en in the spring and playtime of the year,
    That calls the unwonted villager abroad
    With all her little ones, a sportive train,
    To gather kingcups in the yellow mead,
    And prink their hair with daisies, or to pick
    A cheap but wholesome salad from the brook,
    These shades are all my own. The timorous hare,
    Grown so familiar with her frequent guest,
    Scarce shuns me; and the stockdove unalarm'd
    Sits cooing in the pine-tree, nor suspends
    His long love-ditty for my near approach.
    Drawn from his refuge in some lonely elm,
    That age or injury has hollow'd deep,
    Where, on his bed of wool and matted leaves,
    He has outslept the winter, ventures forth
    To frisk awhile, and bask in the warm sun,
    The squirrel, flippant, pert, and full of play:
    He sees me, and at once, swift as a bird,
    Ascends the neighbouring beech; there whisks his brush,
    And perks his ears, and stamps, and cries aloud,
    With all the prettiness of feign'd alarm,
    And anger insignificantly fierce.
      The heart is hard in nature, and unfit
    For human fellowship, as being void
    Of sympathy, and therefore dead alike
    To love and friendship both, that is not pleased
    With sight of animals enjoying life,
    Nor feels their happiness augment his own.
    The bounding fawn, that darts across the glade
    When none pursues, through mere delight of heart,
    And spirits buoyant with excess of glee;
    The horse as wanton, and almost as fleet,
    That skims the spacious meadow at full speed,
    Then stops and snorts, and, throwing high his heels,
    Starts to the voluntary race again;
    The very kine that gambol at high noon,
    The total herd receiving first from one
    That leads the dance a summons to be gay,
    Though wild their strange vagaries, and uncouth
    Their efforts, yet resolved with one consent
    To give such act and utterance as they may
    To ecstacy too big to be suppress'd--
    These, and a thousand images of bliss,
    With which kind Nature graces every scene,
    Where cruel man defeats not her design,
    Impart to the benevolent, who wish
    All that are capable of pleasure pleased,
    A far superior happiness to theirs,
    The comfort of a reasonable joy.
      Man scarce had risen, obedient to His call
    Who form'd him from the dust, his future grave,
    When he was crown'd as never king was since.
    God set the diadem upon his head,
    And angel choirs attended. Wondering stood
    The new-made monarch, while before him pass'd,
    All happy, and all perfect in their kind,
    The creatures, summon'd from their various haunts
    To see their sovereign, and confess his sway.
    Vast was his empire, absolute his power,
    Or bounded only by a law, whose force
    'Twas his sublimest privilege to feel
    And own, the law of universal love.
    He ruled with meekness, they obey'd with joy;
    No cruel purpose lurk'd within his heart,
    And no distrust of his intent in theirs.
    So Eden was a scene of harmless sport,
    Where kindness on his part, who ruled the whole,
    Begat a tranquil confidence in all,
    And fear as yet was not, nor cause for fear.
    But sin marr'd all; and the revolt of man,
    That source of evils not exhausted yet,
    Was punish'd with revolt of his from him.
    Garden of God, how terrible the change
    Thy groves and lawns then witness'd! Every heart,
    Each animal, of every name, conceived
    A jealousy and an instinctive fear,
    And, conscious of some danger, either fled
    Precipitate the loathed abode of man,
    Or growl'd defiance in such angry sort,
    As taught him too to tremble in his turn.
    Thus harmony and family accord
    Were driven from Paradise; and in that hour
    The seeds of cruelty, that since have swell'd
    To such gigantic and enormous growth,
    Were sown in human nature's fruitful soil.
    Hence date the persecution and the pain
    That man inflicts on all inferior kinds,
    Regardless of their plaints. To make him sport,
    To gratify the frenzy of his wrath,
    Or his base gluttony, are causes good
    And just in his account, why bird and beast
    Should suffer torture, and the streams be dyed
    With blood of their inhabitants impaled.
    Earth groans beneath the burden of a war
    Waged with defenceless innocence, while he,
    Not satisfied to prey on all around,
    Adds tenfold bitterness to death by pangs
    Needless, and first torments ere he devours.
    Now happiest they that occupy the scenes
    The most remote from his abhorr'd resort,
    Whom once, as delegate of God on earth,
    They fear'd, and as his perfect image loved.
    The wilderness is theirs, with all its caves,
    Its hollow glens, its thickets, and its plains,
    Unvisited by man. There they are free,
    And howl and roar as likes them, uncontroll'd;
    Nor ask his leave to slumber or to play.
    Woe to the tyrant, if he dare intrude
    Within the confines of their wild domain:
    The lion tells him--I am monarch here!
    And, if he spare him, spares him on the terms
    Of royal mercy, and through generous scorn
    To rend a victim trembling at his foot.
    In measure, as by force of instinct drawn,
    Or by necessity constrain'd, they live
    Dependent upon man; those in his fields,
    These at his crib, and some beneath his roof;
    They prove too often at how dear a rate
    He sells protection. Witness at his foot
    The spaniel dying for some venial fault,
    Under dissection of the knotted scourge;
    Witness the patient ox, with stripes and yells
    Driven to the slaughter, goaded, as he runs,
    To madness; while the savage at his heels
    Laughs at the frantic sufferer's fury, spent
    Upon the guiltless passenger o'erthrown.
    He too is witness, noblest of the train
    That wait on man, the flight-performing horse:
    With unsuspecting readiness he takes
    His murderer on his back, and, push'd all day,
    With bleeding sides and flanks that heave for life,
    To the far distant goal, arrives and dies.
    So little mercy shows who needs so much!
    Does law, so jealous in the cause of man,
    Denounce no doom on the delinquent? None.
    He lives, and o'er his brimming beaker boasts
    (As if barbarity were high desert)
    The inglorious feat, and clamorous in praise
    Of the poor brute, seems wisely to suppose
    The honours of his matchless horse his own.
    But many a crime deem'd innocent on earth
    Is register'd in heaven; and these no doubt
    Have each their record, with a curse annex'd.
    Man may dismiss compassion from his heart,
    But God will never. When he charged the Jew
    To assist his foe's down-fallen beast to rise;
    And when the bush-exploring boy that seized
    The young, to let the parent bird go free;
    Proved he not plainly that his meaner works
    Are yet his care, and have an interest all,
    All, in the universal Father's love?
    On Noah, and in him on all mankind,
    The charter was conferr'd, by which we hold
    The flesh of animals in fee, and claim
    O'er all we feed on power of life and death.
    But read the instrument, and mark it well:
    The oppression of a tyrannous control
    Can find no warrant there. Feed then, and yield
    Thanks for thy food. Carnivorous, through sin,
    Feed on the slain, but spare the living brute!
      The Governor of all, himself to all
    So bountiful, in whose attentive ear
    The unfledged raven and the lion's whelp
    Plead not in vain for pity on the pangs
    Of hunger unassuaged, has interposed,
    Not seldom, his avenging arm, to smite
    The injurious trampler upon Nature's law,
    That claims forbearance even for a brute.
    He hates the hardness of a Balaam's heart;
    And, prophet as he was, he might not strike
    The blameless animal, without rebuke,
    On which he rode. Her opportune offence
    Saved him, or the unrelenting seer had died.
    He sees that human equity is slack
    To interfere, though in so just a cause;
    And makes the task his own. Inspiring dumb
    And helpless victims with a sense so keen
    Of injury, with such knowledge of their strength,
    And such sagacity to take revenge,
    That oft the beast has seem'd to judge the man.
    An ancient, not a legendary tale,
    By one of sound intelligence rehearsed,
    (If such who plead for Providence may seem
    In modern eyes,) shall make the doctrine clear.
      Where England, stretch'd towards the setting sun,
    Narrow and long, o'erlooks the western wave,
    Dwelt young Misagathus; a scorner he
    Of God and goodness, atheist in ostent,
    Vicious in act, in temper savage-fierce.
    He journey'd; and his chance was as he went
    To join a traveller, of far different note,
    Evander, famed for piety, for years
    Deserving honour, but for wisdom more.
    Fame had not left the venerable man
    A stranger to the manners of the youth,
    Whose face too was familiar to his view.
    Their way was on the margin of the land,
    O'er the green summit of the rocks, whose base
    Beats back the roaring surge, scarce heard so high.
    The charity that warm'd his heart was moved
    At sight of the man monster. With a smile
    Gentle, and affable, and full of grace,
    As fearful of offending whom he wish'd
    Much to persuade, he plied his ear with truths
    Not harshly thunder'd forth, or rudely press'd,
    But, like his purpose, gracious, kind, and sweet.
    "And dost thou dream," the impenetrable man
    Exclaimed, "that me the lullabies of age,
    And fantasies of dotards such as thou,
    Can cheat, or move a moment's fear in me?
    Mark now the proof I give thee, that the brave
    Need no such aids as superstition lends,
    To steel their hearts against the dread of death."
    He spoke, and to the precipice at hand
    Push'd with a madman's fury. Fancy shrinks,
    And the blood thrills and curdles at the thought
    Of such a gulf as he design'd his grave.
    But though the felon on his back could dare
    The dreadful leap, more rational, his steed
    Declined the death, and wheeling swiftly round,
    Or e'er his hoof had press'd the crumbling verge,
    Baffled his rider, saved against his will.
    The frenzy of the brain may be redress'd
    By medicine well applied, but without grace
    The heart's insanity admits no cure.
    Enraged the more by what might have reform'd
    His horrible intent, again he sought
    Destruction, with a zeal to be destroy'd,
    With sounding whip, and rowels dyed in blood.
    But still in vain. The Providence, that meant
    A longer date to the far nobler beast,
    Spared yet again the ignobler for his sake.
    And now, his prowess proved, and his sincere
    Incurable obduracy evinced,
    His rage grew cool; and pleased perhaps to have earn'd
    So cheaply the renown of that attempt,
    With looks of some complacence he resumed
    His road, deriding much the blank amaze
    Of good Evander, still where he was left
    Fix'd motionless, and petrified with dread.
    So on they fared. Discourse on other themes
    Ensuing seem'd to obliterate the past;
    And tamer far for so much fury shown,
    (As is the course of rash and fiery men,)
    The rude companion smiled, as if transform'd.
    But 'twas a transient calm. A storm was near,
    An unsuspected storm. His hour was come.
    The impious challenger of power divine
    Was now to learn that Heaven, though slow to wrath,
    Is never with impunity defied.
    His horse, as he had caught his master's mood,
    Snorting, and starting into sudden rage,
    Unbidden, and not now to be controll'd,
    Rush'd to the cliff, and, having reach'd it, stood.
    At once the shock unseated him: he flew
    Sheer o'er the craggy barrier; and, immersed
    Deep in the flood, found, when he sought it not,
    The death he had deserved, and died alone.
    So God wrought double justice; made the fool
    The victim of his own tremendous choice,
    And taught a brute the way to safe revenge.
      I would not enter on my list of friends
    (Though graced with polish'd manners and fine sense,
    Yet wanting sensibility) the man
    Who needlessly sets foot upon a worm.
    An inadvertent step may crush the snail
    That crawls at evening in the public path:
    But he that has humanity, forewarn'd,
    Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.
    The creeping vermin, loathesome to the sight,
    And charged perhaps with venom, that intrudes,
    A visitor unwelcome, into scenes
    Sacred to neatness and repose, the alcove,
    The chamber, or refectory, may die:
    A necessary act incurs no blame.
    Not so when, held within their proper bounds,
    And guiltless of offence, they range the air,
    Or take their pastime in the spacious field:
    There they are privileged; and he that hunts
    Or harms them there is guilty of a wrong,
    Disturbs the economy of Nature's realm,
    Who, when she form'd, design'd them an abode.
    The sum is this. If man's convenience, health,
    Or safety interfere, his rights and claims
    Are paramount, and must extinguish theirs.
    Else they are all--the meanest things that are,
    As free to live, and to enjoy that life,
    As God was free to form them at the first,
    Who in his sovereign wisdom made them all.
    Ye therefore, who love mercy, teach your sons
    To love it too. The spring-time of our years
    Is soon dishonour'd and defiled in most
    By budding ills, that ask a prudent hand
    To check them. But, alas! none sooner shoots,
    If unrestrained, into luxuriant growth,
    Than cruelty, most devilish of them all.
    Mercy to him that shows it is the rule
    And righteous limitation of its act,
    By which Heaven moves in pardoning guilty man;
    And he that shows none, being ripe in years,
    And conscious of the outrage he commits,
    Shall seek it, and not find it, in his turn.
      Distinguish'd much by reason, and still more
    By our capacity of grace divine,
    From creatures that exist but for our sake,
    Which, having served us, perish, we are held
    Accountable; and God, some future day,
    Will reckon with us roundly for the abuse
    Of what he deems no mean or trivial trust.
    Superior as we are, they yet depend
    Not more on human help than we on theirs.
    Their strength, or speed, or vigilance, were given
    In aid of our defects. In some are found
    Such teachable and apprehensive parts,
    That man's attainments in his own concerns,
    Match'd with the expertness of the brutes in theirs,
    Are ofttimes vanquish'd and thrown far behind.
    Some show that nice sagacity of smell,
    And read with such discernment, in the port
    And figure of the man, his secret aim,
    That ofttimes we owe our safety to a skill
    We could not teach, and must despair to learn.
    But learn we might, if not too proud to stoop
    To quadruped instructors, many a good
    And useful quality, and virtue too,
    Rarely exemplified among ourselves--
    Attachment never to be wean'd or changed
    By any change of fortune; proof alike
    Against unkindness, absence, and neglect;
    Fidelity, that neither bribe nor threat
    Can move or warp; and gratitude for small
    And trivial favours, lasting as the life
    And glistening even in the dying eye.
      Man praises man. Desert in arts or arms
    Wins public honour; and ten thousand sit
    Patiently present at a sacred song,
    Commemoration-mad; content to hear
    (O wonderful effect of music's power!)
    Messiah's eulogy for Handel's sake.
    But less, methinks, than sacrilege might serve--
    (For was it less, what heathen would have dared
    To strip Jove's statue of his oaken wreath,
    And hang it up in honour of a man?)
    Much less might serve, when all that we design
    Is but to gratify an itching ear,
    And give the day to a musician's praise.
    Remember Handel? Who, that was not born
    Deaf as the dead to harmony, forgets,
    Or can, the more than Homer of his age?
    Yes--we remember him; and while we praise
    A talent so divine, remember too
    That His most holy book, from whom it came,
    Was never meant, was never used before,
    To buckram out the memory of a man.
    But hush!--the muse perhaps is too severe;
    And, with a gravity beyond the size
    And measure of the offence, rebukes a deed
    Less impious than absurd, and owing more
    To want of judgment than to wrong design.
    So in the chapel of old Ely House,
    When wandering Charles, who meant to be the third,
    Had fled from William, and the news was fresh,
    The simple clerk, but loyal, did announce,
    And eke did rear right merrily, two staves,
    Sung to the praise and glory of King George!
    --Man praises man; and Garrick's memory next,
    When time hath somewhat mellow'd it, and made
    The idol of our worship while he lived
    The god of our idolatry once more,
    Shall have its altar; and the world shall go
    In pilgrimage to bow before his shrine.
    The theatre, too small, shall suffocate
    Its squeezed contents, and more than it admits
    Shall sigh at their exclusion, and return
    Ungratified: for there some noble lord
    Shall stuff his shoulders with king Richard's bunch,
    Or wrap himself in Hamlet's inky cloak,
    And strut, and storm, and straddle, stamp, and stare,
    To show the world how Garrick did not act--
    For Garrick was a worshipper himself;
    He drew the liturgy, and framed the rites
    And solemn ceremonial of the day,
    And call'd the world to worship on the banks
    Of Avon, famed in song. Ah, pleasant proof
    That piety has still in human hearts
    Some place, a spark or two not yet extinct.
    The mulberry-tree was hung with blooming wreaths;
    The mulberry-tree stood centre of the dance;
    The mulberry-tree was hymn'd with dulcet airs;
    And from his touchwood trunk the mulberry-tree
    Supplied such relics as devotion holds
    Still sacred, and preserves with pious care.
    So 'twas a hallow'd time: decorum reign'd,
    And mirth without offence. No few return'd,
    Doubtless much edified, and all refresh'd.
    --Man praises man. The rabble, all alive,
    From tippling benches, cellars, stalls, and styes,
    Swarm in the streets. The statesman of the day,
    A pompous and slow-moving pageant, comes.
    Some shout him, and some hang upon his car,
    To gaze in his eyes, and bless him. Maidens wave
    Their kerchiefs, and old women weep for joy;
    While others, not so satisfied, unhorse
    The gilded equipage, and turning loose
    His steeds, usurp a place they well deserve.
    Why? what has charm'd them? Hath he saved the state?
    No. Doth he purpose its salvation? No.
    Enchanting novelty, that moon at full,
    That finds out every crevice of the head
    That is not sound and perfect, hath in theirs
    Wrought this disturbance. But the wane is near
    And his own cattle must suffice him soon.
    Thus idly do we waste the breath of praise,
    And dedicate a tribute, in its use
    And just direction sacred, to a thing
    Doom'd to the dust, or lodged already there.
    Encomium in old time was poet's work;
    But poets, having lavishly long since
    Exhausted all materials of the art,
    The task now falls into the public hand;
    And I, contented with an humble theme,
    Have pour'd my stream of panegyric down
    The vale of Nature, where it creeps and winds
    Among her lovely works with a secure
    And unambitious course, reflecting clear,
    If not the virtues, yet the worth, of brutes.
    And I am recompensed, and deem the toils
    Of poetry not lost, if verse of mine
    May stand between an animal and woe,
    And teach one tyrant pity for his drudge.
      The groans of Nature in this nether world,
    Which heaven has heard for ages, have an end.
    Foretold by prophets, and by poets sung,
    Whose fire was kindled at the prophets' lamp,
    The time of rest, the promised sabbath, comes.
    Six thousand years of sorrow have well nigh
    Fulfill'd their tardy and disastrous course
    Over a sinful world; and what remains
    Of this tempestuous state of human things
    Is merely as the working of a sea
    Before a calm, that rocks itself to rest:
    For He, whose car the winds are, and the clouds
    The dust that waits upon his sultry march,
    When sin hath moved him, and his wrath is hot,
    Shall visit earth in mercy; shall descend
    Propitious in his chariot paved with love;
    And what his storms have blasted and defaced
    For man's revolt, shall with a smile repair.
      Sweet is the harp of prophecy; too sweet
    Not to be wrong'd by a mere mortal touch:
    Nor can the wonders it records be sung
    To meaner music, and not suffer loss.
    But when a poet, or when one like me,
    Happy to rove among poetic flowers,
    Though poor in skill to rear them, lights at last
    On some fair theme, some theme divinely fair,
    Such is the impulse and the spur he feels,
    To give it praise proportion'd to its worth,
    That not to attempt it, arduous as he deems
    The labour, were a task more arduous still.
      O scenes surpassing fable, and yet true,
    Scenes of accomplish'd bliss! which who can see,
    Though but in distant prospect, and not feel
    His soul refresh'd with foretaste of the joy?
    Rivers of gladness water all the earth,
    And clothe all climes with beauty; the reproach
    Of barrenness is past. The fruitful field
    Laughs with abundance; and the land, once lean,
    Or fertile only in its own disgrace,
    Exults to see its thistly curse repeal'd.
    The various seasons woven into one,
    And that one season an eternal spring,
    The garden fears no blight, and needs no fence,
    For there is none to covet, all are full.
    The lion, and the libbard, and the bear
    Graze with the fearless flocks; all bask at noon
    Together, or all gambol in the shade
    Of the same grove, and drink one common stream.
    Antipathies are none. No foe to man
    Lurks in the serpent now: the mother sees,
    And smiles to see, her infant's playful hand
    Stretch'd forth to dally with the crested worm,
    To stroke his azure neck, or to receive
    The lambent homage of his arrowy tongue.
    All creatures worship man, and all mankind
    One Lord, one Father. Error has no place;
    That creeping pestilence is driven away;
    The breath of heaven has chased it. In the heart
    No passion touches a discordant string,
    But all is harmony and love. Disease
    Is not: the pure and uncontaminate blood
    Holds its due course, nor fears the frost of age.
    One song employs all nations; and all cry,
    "Worthy the Lamb, for he was slain for us!"
    The dwellers in the vales and on the rocks
    Shout to each other, and the mountain tops
    From distant mountains catch the flying joy;
    Till, nation after nation taught the strain,
    Earth rolls the rapturous Hosanna round.
    Behold the measure of the promise fill'd;
    See Salem built, the labour of a God;
    Bright as a sun, the sacred city shines;
    All kingdoms and all princes of the earth
    Flock to that light; the glory of all lands
    Flows into her; unbounded is her joy,
    And endless her increase. Thy rams are there,
    Nebaioth, and the flocks of Kedar there;[817]
    The looms of Ormus, and the mines of Ind,
    And Saba's spicy groves, pay tribute there.
    Praise is in all her gates: upon her walls,
    And in her streets, and in her spacious courts,
    Is heard salvation. Eastern Java there
    Kneels with the native of the farthest west;
    And Æthiopia spreads abroad the hand,
    And worships. Her report has travell'd forth
    Into all lands. From every clime they come
    To see thy beauty, and to share thy joy,
    O Sion! an assembly such as earth
    Saw never, such as Heaven stoops down to see.
      Thus heavenward all things tend. For all were once
    Perfect, and all must be at length restored.
    So God has greatly purposed; who would else
    In his dishonour'd works himself endure
    Dishonour, and be wrong'd without redress.
    Haste, then, and wheel away a shatter'd world,
    Ye slow-revolving seasons! we would see
    (A sight to which our eyes are strangers yet)
    A world that does not dread and hate his law
    And suffer for its crime; would learn how fair
    The creature is that God pronounces good,
    How pleasant in itself what pleases him.
    Here every drop of honey hides a sting;
    Worms wind themselves into our sweetest flowers;
    And e'en the joy that haply some poor heart
    Derives from heaven, pure as the fountain is,
    Is sullied in the stream, taking a taint
    From touch of human lips, at best impure.
    O for a world in principle as chaste
    As this is gross and selfish! over which
    Custom and prejudice shall bear no sway,
    That govern all things here, shouldering aside
    The meek and modest Truth, and forcing her
    To seek a refuge from the tongue of Strife
    In nooks obscure, far from the ways of men:
    Where Violence shall never lift the sword,
    Nor Cunning justify the proud man's wrong,
    Leaving the poor no remedy but tears:
    Where he, that fills an office, shall esteem
    The occasion it presents of doing good
    More than the perquisite: where Law shall speak
    Seldom, and never but as Wisdom prompts
    And Equity; not jealous more to guard
    A worthless form, than to decide aright:--
    Where Fashion shall not sanctify abuse,
    Nor smooth Good-breeding (supplemental grace)
    With lean performance ape the work of Love!
      Come then, and, added to thy many crowns,
    Receive yet one, the crown of all the earth,
    Thou who alone art worthy! It was thine
    By ancient covenant, ere Nature's birth;
    And thou hast made it thine by purchase since,
    And overpaid its value with thy blood.
    Thy saints proclaim thee king; and in their hearts
    Thy title is engraven with a pen
    Dipp'd in the fountain of eternal love.
    Thy saints proclaim thee king; and thy delay
    Gives courage to their foes, who, could they see
    The dawn of thy last advent, long desired,
    Would creep into the bowels of the hills,
    And flee for safety to the falling rocks.
    The very spirit of the world is tired
    Of its own taunting question, ask'd so long,
    "Where is the promise of your Lord's approach?"
    The infidel has shot his bolts away,
    Till, his exhausted quiver yielding none,
    He gleans the blunted shafts that have recoil'd,
    And aims them at the shield of Truth again.
    The veil is rent, rent too by priestly hands,
    That hides divinity from mortal eyes;
    And all the mysteries to faith proposed,
    Insulted and traduced, are cast aside,
    As useless, to the moles and to the bats.
    They now are deem'd the faithful, and are praised;
    Who, constant only in rejecting thee,
    Deny thy Godhead with a martyr's zeal,
    And quit their office for their error's sake.
    Blind, and in love with darkness! yet e'en these
    Worthy, compared with sycophants, who kneel
    Thy name adoring, and then preach thee man!
    So fares thy church. But how thy church may fare
    The world takes little thought. Who will may preach,
    And what they will. All pastors are alike
    To wandering sheep, resolved to follow none.
    Two gods divide them all--Pleasure and Gain:
    For these they live, they sacrifice to these,
    And in their service wage perpetual war
    With Conscience and with thee. Lust in their hearts,
    And mischief in their hands, they roam the earth
    To prey upon each other: stubborn, fierce,
    High-minded, foaming out their own disgrace.
    Thy prophets speak of such; and, noting down
    The features of the last degenerate times,
    Exhibit every lineament of these.
    Come then, and, added to thy many crowns,
    Receive yet one, as radiant as the rest,
    Due to thy last and most effectual work,
    Thy word fulfill'd, the conquest of a world!
      He is the happy man whose life e'en now
    Shows somewhat of that happier life to come;
    Who, doom'd to an obscure but tranquil state,
    Is pleased with it, and, were he free to choose,
    Would make his fate his choice; whom peace, the fruit
    Of virtue, and whom virtue, fruit of faith,
    Prepare for happiness; bespeak him one
    Content indeed to sojourn while he must
    Below the skies, but having there his home.
    The world o'erlooks him in her busy search
    Of objects, more illustrious in her view;
    And, occupied as earnestly as she,
    Though more sublimely, he o'erlooks the world.
    She scorns his pleasures, for she knows them not;
    He seeks not hers, for he has proved them vain.
    He cannot skim the ground like summer birds
    Pursuing gilded flies; and such he deems
    Her honours, her emoluments, her joys.
    Therefore in Contemplation is his bliss,
    Whose power is such, that whom she lifts from earth
    She makes familiar with a heaven unseen,
    And shows him glories yet to be revealed.
    Not slothful he, though seeming unemploy'd,
    And censured oft as useless. Stillest streams
    Oft water fairest meadows, and the bird
    That flutters least is longest on the wing.
    Ask him, indeed, what trophies he has raised,
    Or what achievements of immortal fame
    He purposes, and he shall answer--None.
    His warfare is within. There unfatigued
    His fervent spirit labours. There he fights,
    And there obtains fresh triumphs o'er himself,
    And never-withering wreaths, compared with which
    The laurels that a Cæsar reaps are weeds.
    Perhaps the self-approving haughty world,
    That as she sweeps him with her whistling silks
    Scarce deigns to notice him, or, if she see,
    Deems him a cypher in the works of God,
    Receives advantage from his noiseless hours,
    Of which she little dreams. Perhaps she owes
    Her sunshine and her rain, her blooming spring
    And plenteous harvest, to the prayer he makes,
    When, Isaac-like, the solitary saint
    Walks forth to meditate at even-tide,
    And think on her, who thinks not for herself.
    Forgive him, then, thou bustler in concerns
    Of little worth, an idler in the best,
    If, author of no mischief and some good,
    He seek his proper happiness by means
    That may advance, but cannot hinder, thine.
    Nor, though he tread the secret path of life,
    Engage no notice, and enjoy much ease,
    Account him an encumbrance on the state,
    Receiving benefits, and rendering none.
    His sphere, though humble, if that humble sphere
    Shine with his fair example, and though small
    His influence, if that influence all be spent
    In soothing sorrow and in quenching strife,
    In aiding helpless indigence, in works
    From which at least a grateful few derive
    Some taste of comfort in a world of woe;
    Then let the supercilious great confess
    He serves his country, recompenses well
    The state, beneath the shadow of whose vine
    He sits secure, and in the scale of life
    Holds no ignoble, though a slighted, place.
    The man, whose virtues are more felt than seen,
    Must drop indeed the hope of public praise;
    But he may boast, what few that win it can,
    That, if his country stand not by his skill,
    At least his follies have not wrought her fall.
    Polite Refinement offers him in vain
    Her golden tube, through which a sensual world
    Draws gross impurity, and likes it well,
    The neat conveyance hiding all the offence.
    Not that he peevishly rejects a mode
    Because that world adopts it. If it bear
    The stamp and clear impression of good sense,
    And be not costly more than of true worth,
    He puts it on, and, for decorum sake,
    Can wear it e'en as gracefully as she.
    She judges of refinement by the eye,
    He by the test of conscience, and a heart
    Not soon deceived; aware that what is base
    No polish can make sterling; and that vice,
    Though well perfumed and elegantly dress'd,
    Like an unburied carcass trick'd with flowers
    Is but a garnish'd nuisance, fitter far
    For cleanly riddance than for fair attire.
    So life glides smoothly and by stealth away,
    More golden than that age of fabled gold
    Renown'd in ancient song; not vex'd with care
    Or stain'd with guilt, beneficent, approved
    Of God and man, and peaceful in its end.
    So glide my life away! and so, at last,
    My share of duties decently fulfill'd,
    May some disease, not tardy to perform
    Its destined office, yet with gentle stroke,
    Dismiss me weary to a safe retreat,
    Beneath the turf that I have often trod.
    It shall not grieve me then that once, when call'd
    To dress a Sofa with the flowers of verse,
    I play'd awhile, obedient to the fair,
    With that light task; but soon, to please her more,
    Whom flowers alone I knew would little please,
    Let fall the unfinish'd wreath, and roved for fruit;
    Roved far, and gather'd much: some harsh, 'tis true,
    Pick'd from the thorns and briars of reproof,
    But wholesome, well-digested; grateful some
    To palates that can taste immortal truth;
    Insipid else, and sure to be despised.
    But all is in His hand, whose praise I seek.
    In vain the poet sings, and the world hears,
    If he regard not, though divine the theme.
    'Tis not in artful measures, in the chime
    And idle tinkling of a minstrel's lyre,
    To charm His ear, whose eye is on the heart;
    Whose frown can disappoint the proudest strain,
    Whose approbation--prosper even mine.

  [816] The Guelder Rose.

  [817] Nebaioth and Kedar, the sons of Ishmael, and progenitors
  of the Arabs, in the prophetic scripture here alluded to, may
  be reasonably considered as representatives of the Gentiles at
  large.




AN EPISTLE TO JOSEPH HILL, ESQ.


    Dear Joseph--five-and-twenty years ago--
    Alas, how time escapes!--'tis even so--
    With frequent intercourse, and always sweet,
    And always friendly, we were wont to cheat
    A tedious hour--and now we never meet!
    As some grave gentleman in Terence says,
    ('Twas therefore much the same in ancient days,)
    Good lack, we know not what to-morrow brings--
    Strange fluctuation of all human things!
    True. Changes will befall, and friends may part,
    But distance only cannot change the heart:
    And, were I call'd to prove the assertion true,
    One proof should serve--a reference to you.
      Whence comes it then, that, in the wane of life,
    Though nothing have occurr'd to kindle strife,
    We find the friends we fancied we had won,
    Though numerous once, reduced to few or none?
    Can gold grow worthless that has stood the touch?
    No; gold they seem'd, but they were never such.
      Horatio's servant once, with bow and cringe,
    Swinging the parlour door upon its hinge,
    Dreading a negative, and overawed
    Lest he should trespass, begg'd to go abroad.
    Go, fellow!--whither?--turning short about--
    Nay--stay at home--you're always going out.
    'Tis but a step, sir, just at the street's end.--
    For what?--An please you, sir, to see a friend.--
    A friend! Horatio cried, and seem'd to start--
    Yea marry shalt thou, and with all my heart.
    And fetch my cloak; for though the night be raw,
    I'll see him too--the first I ever saw.
      I knew the man, and knew his nature mild,
    And was his plaything often when a child;
    But somewhat at that moment pinch'd him close,
    Else he was seldom bitter or morose.
    Perhaps, his confidence just then betray'd,
    His grief might prompt him with the speech he made;
    Perhaps 'twas mere good humour gave it birth,
    The harmless play of pleasantry and mirth.
    Howe'er it was, his language, in my mind,
    Bespoke at least a man that knew mankind.
      But not to moralize too much, and strain
    To prove an evil of which all complain;
    (I hate long arguments verbosely spun;)
    One story more, dear Hill, and I have done.
    Once on a time an emperor, a wise man,
    No matter where, in China or Japan,
    Decreed that whosoever should offend
    Against the well-known duties of a friend,
    Convicted once, should ever after wear
    But half a coat, and show his bosom bare.
    The punishment importing this, no doubt,
    That all was naught within, and all found out.
      Oh, happy Britain! we have not to fear
    Such hard and arbitrary measure here;
    Else, could a law like that which I relate
    Once have the sanction of our triple state,
    Some few, that I have known in days of old,
    Would run most dreadful risk of catching cold;
    While you, my friend, whatever wind should blow,
    Might traverse England safely to and fro,
    An honest man, close-button'd to the chin,
    Broad-cloth without, and a warm heart within.




TIROCINIUM; OR, A REVIEW OF SCHOOLS.

  Κεφαλαιον δη παιδειας ορθη τροφη.--PLATO,

  Αρχη κολιτειας απασης τροφα.--DIOG. LAERT.


     To the Rev. William Cawthorne Unwin, Rector of Stock in Essex,
     the tutor of his two sons, the following poem, recommending
     private tuition in preference to an education at school, is
     inscribed, by his affectionate friend,

  WILLIAM COWPER.

_Olney, Nov. 6, 1784._


    It is not from his form, in which we trace
    Strength join'd with beauty, dignity with grace,
    That man, the master of this globe, derives
    His right of empire over all that lives.
    That form, indeed, the associate of a mind
    Vast in its powers, ethereal in its kind,
    That form, the labour of Almighty skill,
    Framed for the service of a freeborn will,
    Asserts precedence, and bespeaks control,
    But borrows all its grandeur from the soul.
    Hers is the state, the splendour, and the throne,
    An intellectual kingdom, all her own.
    For her the memory fills her ample page
    With truths pour'd down from every distant age;
    For her amasses an unbounded store,
    The wisdom of great nations, now no more;
    Though laden, not encumber'd with her spoil;
    Laborious, yet unconscious of her toil;
    When copiously supplied, then most enlarged;
    Still to be fed, and not to be surcharged.
    For her the Fancy, roving unconfined,
    The present muse of every pensive mind,
    Works magic wonders, adds a brighter hue
    To Nature's scenes than Nature ever knew.
    At her command winds rise and waters roar,
    Again she lays them slumbering on the shore;
    With flower and fruit the wilderness supplies,
    Or bids the rocks in ruder pomp arise.
    For her the Judgment, umpire in the strife
    That Grace and Nature have to wage through life,
    Quick-sighted arbiter of good and ill,
    Appointed sage preceptor to the Will,
    Condemns, approves, and with a faithful voice
    Guides the decision of a doubtful choice.
      Why did the fiat of a God give birth
    To yon fair Sun and his attendant Earth?
    And, when descending he resigns the skies,
    Why takes the gentler Moon her turn to rise,
    Whom Ocean feels through all his countless waves,
    And owns her power on every shore he laves?
    Why do the seasons still enrich the year,
    Fruitful and young as in their first career?
    Spring hangs her infant blossoms on the trees,
    Rock'd in the cradle of the western breeze;
    Summer in haste the thriving charge receives
    Beneath the shade of her expanded leaves,
    Till Autumn's fiercer heats and plenteous dews
    Dye them at last in all their glowing hues.--
    'Twere wild profusion all, and bootless waste,
    Power misemploy'd, munificence misplaced,
    Had not its Author dignified the plan,
    And crown'd it with the majesty of man.
    Thus form'd, thus placed, intelligent, and taught,
    Look where he will, the wonders God has wrought,
    The wildest scorner of his Maker's laws
    Finds in a sober moment time to pause,
    To press the important question on his heart,
    "Why form'd at all, and wherefore as thou art?"
    If man be what he seems, this hour a slave,
    The next mere dust and ashes in the grave;
    Endued with reason only to descry
    His crimes and follies with an aching eye;
    With passions, just that he may prove, with pain,
    The force he spends against their fury vain;
    And if, soon after having burnt, by turns,
    With every lust with which frail Nature burns,
    His being end where death dissolves the bond,
    The tomb take all, and all be blank beyond;
    Then he, of all that Nature has brought forth,
    Stands self-impeach'd the creature of least worth,
    And, useless while he lives, and when he dies,
    Brings into doubt the wisdom of the skies.
      Truths that the learn'd pursue with eager thought
    Are not important always as dear-bought,
    Proving at last, though told in pompous strains,
    A childish waste of philosophic pains;
    But truths on which depends our main concern,
    That 'tis our shame and misery not to learn,
    Shine by the side of every path we tread
    With such a lustre, he that runs may read.
    'Tis true that, if to trifle life away
    Down to the sunset of their latest day,
    Then perish on futurity's wide shore
    Like fleeting exhalations, found no more,
    Were all that heaven required of human kind,
    And all the plan their destiny design'd,
    What none could reverence all might justly blame,
    And man would breathe but for his Maker's shame.
    But reason heard, and nature well perused,
    At once the dreaming mind is disabused.
    If all we find possessing earth, sea, air,
    Reflect His attributes who placed them there,
    Fulfil the purpose, and appear design'd
    Proofs of the wisdom of the all-seeing mind,
    'Tis plain the creature, whom he chose to invest
    With kingship and dominion o'er the rest,
    Received his nobler nature, and was made
    Fit for the power in which he stands arrayed;
    That first, or last, hereafter, if not here,
    He too might make his author's wisdom clear,
    Praise him on earth, or, obstinately dumb,
    Suffer his justice in a world to come.
    This once believed, 'twere logic misapplied
    To prove a consequence by none denied,
    That we are bound to cast the minds of youth
    Betimes into the mould of heavenly truth,
    That taught of God they may indeed be wise,
    Nor ignorantly wandering miss the skies.
      In early days the conscience has in most
    A quickness, which in later life is lost:
    Preserved from guilt by salutary fears,
    Or guilty soon relenting into tears.
    Too careless often, as our years proceed,
    What friends we sort with, or what books we read,
    Our parents yet exert a prudent care
    To feed our infant minds with proper fare;
    And wisely store the nursery by degrees
    With wholesome learning, yet acquired with ease.
    Neatly secured from being soil'd or torn
    Beneath a pane of thin translucent horn,
    A book (to please us at a tender age
    'Tis call'd a book, though but a single page)
    Presents the prayer the Saviour deign'd to teach,
    Which children use, and parsons--when they preach.
    Lisping our syllables, we scramble next
    Through moral narrative, or sacred text;
    And learn with wonder how this world began,
    Who made, who marr'd, and who has ransom'd man:
    Points which, unless the Scripture made them plain,
    The wisest heads might agitate in vain.
    Oh thou, whom, borne on fancy's eager wing
    Back to the season of life's happy spring,
    I pleased remember, and, while memory yet
    Holds fast her office here, can ne'er forget;
    Ingenious dreamer, in whose well-told tale
    Sweet fiction and sweet truth alike prevail;
    Whose humorous vein, strong sense, and simple style,
    May teach the gayest, make the gravest smile;
    Witty, and well employ'd, and, like thy Lord,
    Speaking in parables his slighted word;
    I name thee not, lest so despised a name
    Should move a sneer at thy deserved fame;
    Yet e'en in transitory life's late day,
    That mingles all my brown with sober grey,
    Revere the man whose PILGRIM marks the road,
    And guides the PROGRESS of the soul to God.
    'Twere well with most, if books that could engage
    Their childhood pleased them at a riper age;
    The man, approving what had charm'd the boy,
    Would die at last in comfort, peace, and joy,
    And not with curses on his heart, who stole
    The gem of truth from his unguarded soul.
    The stamp of artless piety impress'd
    By kind tuition on his yielding breast,
    The youth, now bearded and yet pert and raw,
    Regards with scorn, though once received with awe;
    And, warp'd into the labyrinth of lies,
    That babblers, call'd philosophers, devise,
    Blasphemes his creed, as founded on a plan
    Replete with dreams, unworthy of a man.
    Touch but his nature in its ailing part,
    Assert the native evil of his heart,
    His pride resents the charge, although the proof[818]
    Rise in his forehead, and seem rank enough:
    Point to the cure, describe a Saviour's cross
    As God's expedient to retrieve his loss,
    The young apostate sickens at the view,
    And hates it with the malice of a Jew.
      How weak the barrier of mere nature proves,
    Opposed against the pleasures nature loves!
    While self-betray'd, and wilfully undone,
    She longs to yield, no sooner wooed than won.
    Try now the merits of this blest exchange
    Of modest truth for wit's eccentric range.
    Time was, he closed as he began the day,
    With decent duty, not ashamed to pray;
    The practice was a bond upon his heart,
    A pledge he gave for a consistent part;
    Nor could he dare presumptuously displease
    A power confess'd so lately on his knees.
    But now farewell all legendary tales,
    The shadows fly, philosophy prevails;
    Prayer to the winds, and caution to the waves;
    Religion makes the free by nature slaves.
    Priests have invented, and the world admired
    What knavish priests promulgate as inspired;
    Till Reason, now no longer overawed,
    Resumes her powers, and spurns the clumsy fraud;
    And, common sense diffusing real day,
    The meteor of the Gospel dies away.
    Such rhapsodies our shrewd discerning youth
    Learn from expert inquirers after truth;
    Whose only care, might truth presume to speak,
    Is not to find what they profess to seek.
    And thus, well tutor'd only while we share
    A mother's lectures and a nurse's care;
    And taught at schools much mythologic stuff,[819]
    But sound religion sparingly enough;
    Our early notices of truth disgraced,
    Soon lose their credit, and are all effaced.
    Would you your son should be a sot or dunce,
    Lascivious, headstrong, or all these at once;
    That in good time the stripling's finish'd taste
    For loose expense and fashionable waste
    Should prove your ruin, and his own at last;
    Train him in public with a mob of boys,
    Childish in mischief only and in noise,
    Else of a mannish growth, and five in ten
    In infidelity and lewdness men.
    There shall he learn, ere sixteen winters old,
    That authors are most useful pawn'd or sold;
    That pedantry is all that schools impart,
    But taverns teach the knowledge of the heart;
    There waiter Dick, with bacchanalian lays,
    Shall win his heart, and have his drunken praise,
    His counsellor and bosom friend shall prove,
    And some street-pacing harlot his first love.
    Schools, unless discipline were doubly strong,
    Detain their adolescent charge too long;
    The management of tiros of eighteen
    Is difficult, their punishment obscene.
    The stout tall captain, whose superior size
    The minor heroes view with envious eyes,
    Becomes their pattern, upon whom they fix
    Their whole attention, and ape all his tricks.
    His pride, that scorns to obey or to submit,
    With them is courage; his effrontery wit.
    His wild excursions, window-breaking feats,
    Robbery of gardens, quarrels in the streets,
    His hairbreadth 'scapes, and all his daring schemes,
    Transport them, and are made their favourite themes.
    In little bosoms such achievements strike
    A kindred spark: they burn to do the like.
    Thus, half accomplish'd ere he yet begin
    To show the peeping down upon his chin;
    And, as maturity of years comes on,
    Made just the adept that you design'd your son;
    To ensure the perseverance of his course,
    And give your monstrous project all its force,
    Send him to college. If he there be tamed,
    Or in one article of vice reclaim'd,
    Where no regard of ordinances is shown
    Or look'd for now, the fault must be his own.
    Some sneaking virtue, lurks in him, no doubt,
    Where neither strumpets' charms, nor drinking bout,
    Nor gambling practices can find it out.
    Such youths of spirit, and that spirit too,
    Ye nurseries of our boys, we owe to you:
    Though from ourselves the mischief more proceeds,
    For public schools 'tis public folly feeds.
    The slaves of custom and establish'd mode,
    With packhorse constancy we keep the road,
    Crooked or straight, through quags or thorny dells,
    True to the jingling of our leader's bells.
    To follow foolish precedents, and wink
    With both our eyes, is easier than to think:
    And such an age as ours balks no expense,
    Except of caution and of common sense;
    Else sure notorious fact, and proof so plain,
    Would turn our steps into a wiser train.
    I blame not those who, with what care they can,
    O'erwatch the numerous and unruly clan;
    Or, if I blame, 'tis only that they dare
    Promise a work of which they must despair.
    Have ye, ye sage intendants of the whole,
    A ubiquarian presence and control,
    Elisha's eye, that, when Gehazi stray'd,
    Went with him, and saw all the game he play'd?
    Yes--ye are conscious; and on all the shelves
    Your pupils strike upon have struck yourselves.
    Or if, by nature sober, ye had then,
    Boys as ye were, the gravity of men,
    Ye knew at least, by constant proofs address'd
    To ears and eyes, the vices of the rest.
    But ye connive at what ye cannot cure,
    And evils not to be endured endure,
    Lest power exerted, but without success,
    Should make the little ye retain still less.
    Ye once were justly famed for bringing forth
    Undoubted scholarship and genuine worth;
    And in the firmament of fame still shines
    A glory, bright as that of all the signs,
    Of poets raised by you, and statesmen, and divines.
    Peace to them all! those brilliant times are fled,
    And no such lights are kindling in their stead.
    Our striplings shine indeed, but with such rays
    As set the midnight riot in a blaze;
    And seem, if judged by their expressive looks,
    Deeper in none than in their surgeons' books.
      Say, muse, (for education made the song,
    No muse can hesitate, or linger long,)
    What causes move us, knowing, as we must,
    That these _ménageries_ all fail their trust,
    To send our sons to scout and scamper there,
    While colts and puppies cost us so much care?
      Be it a weakness, it deserves some praise,
    We love the play-place of our early days;
    The scene is touching, and the heart is stone
    That feels not at that sight, and feels at none.
    The wall on which we tried our graving skill,
    The very name we carved subsisting still;
    The bench on which we sat while deep employ'd,
    Though mangled, hack'd, and hew'd, not yet destroy'd;
    The little ones, unbutton'd, glowing hot,
    Playing our games, and on the very spot;
    As happy as we once, to kneel and draw
    The chalky ring, and knuckle down at taw;
    To pitch the ball into the grounded hat,
    Or drive it devious with a dextrous pat;
    The pleasing spectacle at once excites
    Such recollection of our own delights,
    That, viewing it, we seem almost to obtain
    Our innocent sweet simple years again.
    This fond attachment to the well-known place,
    Whence first we started into life's long race,
    Maintains its hold with such unfailing sway,
    We feel it e'en in age, and at our latest day.
    Hark! how the sire of chits, whose future share
    Of classic food begins to be his care,
    With his own likeness placed on either knee,
    Indulges all a father's heartfelt glee;
    And tells them, as he strokes their silver locks,
    That they must soon learn Latin, and to box;
    Then turning, he regales his listening wife
    With all the adventures of his early life;
    His skill in coachmanship, or driving chaise,
    In bilking tavern-bills, and spouting plays;
    What shifts he used, detected in a scrape,
    How he was flogg'd, or had the luck to escape;
    What sums he lost at play, and how he sold
    Watch, seals, and all--till all his pranks are told.
    Retracing thus his frolics, ('tis a name
    That palliates deeds of folly and of shame,)
    He gives the local bias all its sway;
    Resolves that where he play'd his sons shall play,
    And destines their bright genius to be shown
    Just in the scene where he display'd his own.
    The meek and bashful boy will soon be taught
    To be as bold and forward as he ought;
    The rude will scuffle through with ease enough,
    Great schools suit best the sturdy and the rough.
    Ah, happy designation, prudent choice,
    The event is sure; expect it, and rejoice!
    Soon see your wish fulfill'd in either child,
    The pert made perter, and the tame made wild.
      The great indeed, by titles, riches, birth,
    Excused the incumbrance of more solid worth,
    Are best disposed of where with most success
    They may acquire that confident address,
    Those habits of profuse and lewd expense,
    That scorn of all delights but those of sense,
    Which, though in plain plebeians we condemn,
    With so much reason, all expect from them.
    But families of less illustrious fame,
    Whose chief distinction is their spotless name,
    Whose heirs, their honours none, their income small,
    Must shine by true desert, or not at all,
    What dream they of, that, with so little care
    They risk their hopes, their dearest treasure, there?
    They dream of little Charles or William graced
    With wig prolix, down flowing to his waist;
    They see the attentive crowds his talents draw,
    They hear him speak--the oracle of law.
    The father, who designs his babe a priest,
    Dreams him episcopally such at least;
    And, while the playful jockey scours the room
    Briskly, astride upon the parlour broom,
    In fancy sees him more superbly ride
    In coach with purple lined, and mitres on its side.
    Events improbable and strange as these,
    Which only a parental eye foresees,
    A public school shall bring to pass with ease.
    But how? resides such virtue in that air,
    As must create an appetite for prayer?
    And will it breathe into him all the zeal
    That candidates for such a prize should feel,
    To take the lead and be the foremost still
    In all true worth and literary skill?
    "Ah, blind to bright futurity, untaught
    The knowledge of the World, and dull of thought!
    Church-ladders are not always mounted best
    By learned clerks and Latinists profess'd.
    The exalted prize demands an upward look,
    Not to be found by poring on a book.
    Small skill in Latin, and still less in Greek,
    Is more than adequate to all I seek.
    Let erudition grace him, or not grace,
    I give the bauble but the second place;
    His wealth, fame, honours, all that I intend,
    Subsist and centre in one point--a friend.
    A friend, whate'er he studies or neglects,
    Shall give him consequence, heal all defects.
    His intercourse with peers and sons of peers--
    There dawns the splendour of his future years:
    In that bright quarter his propitious skies
    Shall blush betimes, and there his glory rise.
    Your Lordship, and Your Grace! what school can teach
    A rhetoric equal to those parts of speech?
    What need of Homer's verse or Tully's prose,
    Sweet interjections! if he learn but those?
    Let reverend churls his ignorance rebuke,
    Who starve upon a dog's ear'd Pentateuch,
    The parson knows enough who knows a duke."
    Egregious purpose! worthily begun
    In barbarous prostitution of your son;
    Press'd on his part by means that would disgrace
    A scrivener's clerk, or footman out of place,
    And ending, if at last its end be gain'd,
    In sacrilege, in God's own house profaned.
    It may succeed; and, if his sins should call
    For more than common punishment, it shall;
    The wretch shall rise, and be the thing on earth
    Least qualified in honour, learning, worth,
    To occupy a sacred, awful post,
    In which the best and worthiest tremble most.
    The royal letters are a thing of course,
    A king, that would, might recommend his horse;
    And deans, no doubt, and chapters, with one voice,
    As bound in duty, would confirm the choice.
    Behold your bishop! well he plays his part,
    Christian in name, and infidel in heart,
    Ghostly in office, earthly in his plan,
    A slave at court, elsewhere a lady's man.
    Dumb as a senator, and as a priest
    A piece of mere church furniture at best;
    To live estranged from God his total scope,
    And his end sure, without one glimpse of hope.
    But, fair although and feasible it seem,
    Depend not much upon your golden dream;
    For Providence, that seems concern'd to exempt
    The hallow'd bench from absolute contempt,
    In spite of all the wrigglers into place,
    Still keeps a seat or two for worth and grace;
    And therefore 'tis, that, though the sight be rare,
    We sometimes see a Lowth or Bagot there.
    Besides, school friendships are not always found,
    Though fair in promise, permanent and sound;
    The most disinterested and virtuous minds,
    In early years connected, time unbinds
    New situations give a different cast
    Of habit, inclination, temper, taste;
    And he, that seem'd our counterpart at first,
    Soon shows the strong similitude reversed.
    Young heads are giddy, and young hearts are warm,
    And make mistakes for manhood to reform.
    Boys are, at best, but pretty buds unblown,
    Whose scent and hues are rather guess'd than known;
    Each dreams that each is just what he appears,
    But learns his error in maturer years,
    When disposition, like a sail unfurl'd,
    Shows all its rents and patches to the world.
    If, therefore, e'en when honest in design,
    A boyish friendship may so soon decline,
    'Twere wiser sure to inspire a little heart
    With just abhorrence of so mean a part,
    Than set your son to work at a vile trade
    For wages so unlikely to be paid.
      Our public hives of puerile resort,
    That are of chief and most approved report,
    To such base hopes, in many a sordid soul,
    Owe their repute in part, but not the whole.
    A principle, whose proud pretensions pass
    Unquestion'd, though the jewel be but glass--
    That with a world, not often over-nice,
    Ranks as a virtue, and is yet a vice;
    Or rather a gross compound, justly tried,
    Of envy, hatred, jealousy, and pride--
    Contributes most, perhaps, to enhance their fame;
    And emulation is its specious name.
    Boys, once on fire with that contentious zeal,
    Feel all the rage that female rivals feel;
    The prize of beauty in a woman's eyes
    Not brighter than in theirs the scholar's prize.
    The spirit of that competition burns
    With all varieties of ill by turns;
    Each vainly magnifies his own success,
    Resents his fellow's, wishes it were less,
    Exults in his miscarriage if he fail,
    Deems his reward too great if he prevail,
    And labours to surpass him day and night,
    Less for improvement than to tickle spite.
    The spur is powerful, and I grant its force;
    It pricks the genius forward in its course,
    Allows short time for play, and none for sloth;
    And, felt alike by each, advances both:
    But judge, where so much evil intervenes,
    The end, though plausible, not worth the means.
    Weigh, for a moment, classical desert
    Against a heart depraved and temper hurt;
    Hurt too perhaps for life; for early wrong
    Done to the nobler part affects it long;
    And you are staunch indeed in learning's cause,
    If you can crown a discipline, that draws
    Such mischiefs after it, with much applause.
      Connexion form'd for interest, and endear'd
    By selfish views, thus censured and cashier'd;
    And emulation, as engendering hate,
    Doom'd to a no less ignominious fate:
    The props of such proud seminaries fall,
    The Jachin and the Boaz of them all.
    Great schools rejected then, as those that swell
    Beyond a size that can be managed well,
    Shall royal institutions miss the bays,
    And small academies win all the praise?
    Force not my drift beyond its just intent,
    I praise a school as Pope a government;
    So take my judgment in his language dress'd,
    "Whate'er is best administer'd is best."
    Few boys are born with talents that excel,
    But all are capable of living well;
    Then ask not, whether limited or large?
    But, watch they strictly, or neglect their charge?
    If anxious only that their boys may learn,
    While morals languish, a despised concern,
    The great and small deserve one common blame,
    Different in size, but in effect the same.
    Much zeal in virtue's cause all teachers boast,
    Though motives of mere lucre sway the most;
    Therefore in towns and cities they abound,
    For there the game they seek is easiest found;
    Though there, in spite of all that care can do,
    Traps to catch youth are most abundant too.
    If shrewd, and of a well-constructed brain,
    Keen in pursuit, and vigorous to retain,
    Your son come forth a prodigy of skill;
    As, wheresoever taught, so form'd, he will;
    The pedagogue, with self-complacent air,
    Claims more than half the praise as his due share.
    But if, with all his genius, he betray,
    Not more intelligent than loose and gay,
    Such vicious habits as disgrace his name,
    Threaten his health, his fortune, and his fame;
    Though want of due restraint alone have bred
    The symptoms that you see with so much dread;
    Unenvied there, he may sustain alone
    The whole reproach, the fault was all his own.
      Oh! 'tis a sight to be with joy perused,
    By all whom sentiment has not abused;
    New-fangled sentiment, the boasted grace
    Of those who never feel in the right place;
    A sight surpass'd by none that we can show,
    Though Vestris on one leg still shine below;
    A father blest with an ingenuous son,
    Father, and friend, and tutor, all in one.
    How!--turn again to tales long since forgot,
    Æsop, and Phædrus, and the rest?--Why not?
    He will not blush, that has a father's heart,
    To take in childish plays a childish part;
    But bends his sturdy back to any toy
    That youth takes pleasure in, to please his boy:
    Then why resign into a stranger's hand
    A task as much within your own command,
    That God and nature, and your interest too,
    Seem with one voice to delegate to you?
    Why hire a lodging in a house unknown
    For one whose tenderest thoughts all hover round your own?
    This second weaning, needless as it is,
    How does it lacerate both your heart and his!
    The indented stick, that loses day by day,
    Notch after notch, till all are smooth'd away,
    Bears witness, long ere his dismission come,
    With what intense desire he wants his home.
    But though the joys he hopes beneath your roof
    Bid fair enough to answer in the proof,
    Harmless, and safe, and natural, as they are,
    A disappointment waits him even there:
    Arrived, he feels an unexpected change;
    He blushes, hangs his head, is shy and strange,
    No longer takes, as once, with fearless ease,
    His favourite stand between his father's knees,
    But seeks the corner of some distant seat,
    And eyes the door, and watches a retreat,
    And, least familiar where he should be most,
    Feels all his happiest privileges lost.
    Alas, poor boy!--the natural effect
    Of love by absence chill'd into respect.
    Say, what accomplishments, at school acquired,
    Brings he, to sweeten fruits so undesired?
    Thou well deserv'st an alienated son,
    Unless thy conscious heart acknowledge--none;
    None that, in thy domestic snug recess,
    He had not made his own with more address,
    Though some, perhaps, that shock thy feeling mind,
    And better never learn'd, or left behind.
    Add too, that, thus estranged, thou canst obtain
    By no kind arts his confidence again;
    That here begins with most that long complaint
    Of filial frankness lost, and love grown faint,
    Which, oft neglected, in life's waning years
    A parent pours into regardless ears.
      Like caterpillars, dangling under trees
    By slender threads, and swinging in the breeze,
    Which filthily bewray and sore disgrace
    The boughs in which are bred the unseemly race;
    While every worm industriously weaves
    And winds his web about the rivell'd leaves;
    So numerous are the follies that annoy
    The mind and heart of every sprightly boy;
    Imaginations noxious and perverse,
    Which admonition can alone disperse.
    The encroaching nuisance asks a faithful hand,
    Patient, affectionate, of high command,
    To check the procreation of a breed
    Sure to exhaust the plant on which they feed.
    'Tis not enough that Greek or Roman page,
    At stated hours, his freakish thoughts engage;
    E'en in his pastimes he requires a friend
    To warn, and teach him safely to unbend;
    O'er all his pleasures gently to preside,
    Watch his emotions, and control their tide;
    And levying thus, and with an easy sway,
    A tax of profit from his very play,
    To impress a value, not to be erased,
    On moments squander'd else, and running all to waste.
    And seems it nothing in a father's eye
    That unimproved those many moments fly?
    And is he well content his son should find
    No nourishment to feed his growing mind,
    But conjugated verbs and nouns declined?
    For such is all the mental food purveyed
    By public hackneys in the schooling trade;
    Who feed a pupil's intellect with store
    Of syntax, truly, but with little more;
    Dismiss their cares when they dismiss their flock,
    Machines themselves, and govern'd by a clock.
    Perhaps a father, blest with any brains,
    Would deem it no abuse, or waste of pains,
    To improve this diet, at no great expense,
    With savoury truth and wholesome common sense;
    To lead his son, for prospects of delight,
    To some not steep, though philosophic, height,
    Thence to exhibit to his wondering eyes
    Yon circling worlds, their distance, and their size,
    The moons of Jove, and Saturn's belted ball,
    And the harmonious order of them all;
    To show him in an insect or a flower
    Such microscopic proof of skill and power,
    As, hid from ages past, God now displays
    To combat atheists with in modern days;
    To spread the earth before him, and commend,
    With designation of the finger's end,
    Its various parts to his attentive note,
    Thus bringing home to him the most remote;
    To teach his heart to glow with generous flame,
    Caught from the deeds of men of ancient fame;
    And, more than all, with commendation due,
    To set some living worthy in his view,
    Whose fair example may at once inspire
    A wish to copy what he must admire.
    Such knowledge, gain'd betimes, and which appears,
    Though solid, not too weighty for his years,
    Sweet in itself, and not forbidding sport,
    When health demands it, of athletic sort,
    Would make him--what some lovely boys have been,
    And more than one perhaps that I have seen--
    An evidence and reprehension both
    Of the mere schoolboy's lean and tardy growth.
      Art thou a man professionally tied,
    With all thy faculties elsewhere applied,
    Too busy to intend a meaner care
    Than how to enrich thyself, and next thine heir;
    Or art thou (as, though rich, perhaps thou art)
    But poor in knowledge, having none to impart:--
    Behold that figure, neat, though plainly clad;
    His sprightly mingled with a shade of sad;
    Not of a nimble tongue, though now and then
    Heard to articulate like other men;
    No jester, and yet lively in discourse,
    His phrase well chosen, clear, and full of force;
    And his address, if not quite French in ease,
    Not English stiff, but frank, and form'd to please;
    Low in the world, because he scorns its arts;
    A man of letters, manners, morals, parts;
    Unpatronized, and therefore little known;
    Wise for himself and his few friends alone--
    In him thy well-appointed proxy see,
    Arm'd for a work too difficult for thee;
    Prepared by taste, by learning, and true worth,
    To form thy son, to strike his genius forth;
    Beneath thy roof, beneath thine eye, to prove
    The force of discipline when back'd by love;
    To double all thy pleasure in thy child,
    His mind inform'd, his morals undefiled.
    Safe under such a wing, the boy shall show
    No spots contracted among grooms below,
    Nor taint his speech with meannesses, design'd
    By footman Tom for witty and refined.
    There, in his commerce with the liveried herd,
    Lurks the contagion chiefly to be fear'd;
    For since (so fashion dictates) all, who claim
    A higher than a mere plebeian fame,
    Find it expedient, come what mischief may,
    To entertain a thief or two in pay,
    (And they that can afford the expense of more,
    Some half a dozen, and some half a score,)
    Great cause occurs to save him from a band
    So sure to spoil him, and so near at hand;
    A point secured, if once he be supplied
    With some such Mentor always at his side.
    Are such men rare? perhaps they would abound
    Were occupation easier to be found,
    Were education, else so sure to fail,
    Conducted on a manageable scale,
    And schools, that have outlived all just esteem,
    Exchanged for the secure domestic scheme.--
    But, having found him, be thou duke or earl,
    Show thou hast sense enough to prize the pearl,
    And, as thou wouldst the advancement of thine heir
    In all good faculties beneath his care,
    Respect, as is but rational and just,
    A man deem'd worthy of so dear a trust.
    Despised by thee, what more can he expect
    From youthful folly than the same neglect?
    A flat and fatal negative obtains
    That instant upon all his future pains;
    His lessons tire, his mild rebukes offend,
    And all the instructions of thy son's best friend
    Are a stream choked, or trickling to no end.
    Doom him not then to solitary meals;
    But recollect that he has sense, and feels;
    And that, possessor of a soul refined,
    An upright heart, and cultivated mind,
    His post not mean, his talents not unknown,
    He deems it hard to vegetate alone.
    And, if admitted at thy board he sit,
    Account him no just mark for idle wit;
    Offend not him, whom modesty restrains
    From repartee, with jokes that he disdains;
    Much less transfix his feelings with an oath;
    Nor frown, unless he vanish with the cloth.--
    And, trust me, his utility may reach
    To more than he is hired or bound to teach;
    Much trash unutter'd, and some ills undone,
    Through reverence of the censor of thy son.
      But, if thy table be indeed unclean,
    Foul with excess, and with discourse obscene,
    And thou a wretch, whom, following her old plan,
    The world accounts an honourable man,
    Because forsooth thy courage has been tried,
    And stood the test, perhaps on the wrong side;
    Though thou hadst never grace enough to prove
    That any thing but vice could win thy love;--
    Or hast thou a polite, card-playing wife,
    Chain'd to the routs that she frequents for life;
    Who, just when industry begins to snore,
    Flies, wing'd with joy, to some coach-crowded door;
    And thrice in every winter throngs thine own
    With half the chariots and sedans in town
    Thyself meanwhile e'en shifting as thou mayst;
    Not very sober though, nor very chaste;
    Or is thine house, though less superb thy rank,
    If not a scene of pleasure, a mere blank,
    And thou at best, and in thy soberest mood,
    A trifler vain, and empty of all good;--
    Though mercy for thyself thou canst have none,
    Hear Nature plead, show mercy to thy son.
    Saved from his home, where every day brings forth
    Some mischief fatal to his future worth,
    Find him a better in a distant spot,
    Within some pious pastor's humble cot,
    Where vile example (yours I chiefly mean,
    The most seducing, and the oftenest seen)
    May never more be stamp'd upon his breast,
    Not yet perhaps incurably impress'd.
    Where early rest makes early rising sure,
    Disease or comes not, or finds easy cure,
    Prevented much by diet neat and plain;
    Or, if it enter, soon starved out again:
    Where all the attention of his faithful host,
    Discreetly limited to two at most,
    May raise such fruits as shall reward his care,
    And not at last evaporate in air:
    Where, stillness aiding study, and his mind
    Serene, and to his duties much inclined,
    Not occupied in day dreams, as at home,
    Of pleasures past, or follies yet to come,
    His virtuous toil may terminate at last
    In settled habit and decided taste.--
    But whom do I advise? the fashion-led,
    The incorrigibly wrong, the deaf, the dead!
    Whom care and cool deliberation suit
    Not better much than spectacles a brute;
    Who, if their sons some slight tuition share,
    Deem it of no great moment whose, or where;
    Too proud to adopt the thoughts of one unknown,
    And much too gay to have any of their own.
    But courage, man! methought the Muse replied,
    Mankind are various, and the world is wide:
    The ostrich, silliest of the feather'd kind,
    And form'd of God without a parent's mind,
    Commits her eggs, incautious, to the dust,
    Forgetful that the foot may crush the trust;
    And, while on public nurseries they rely,
    Not knowing, and too oft not caring, why,
    Irrational in what they thus prefer,
    No few, that would seem wise, resemble her.
    But all are not alike. Thy warning voice
    May here and there prevent erroneous choice;
    And some, perhaps, who, busy as they are,
    Yet make their progeny their dearest care,
    (Whose hearts will ache, once told what ills may reach
    Their offspring, left upon so wild a beach,)
    Will need no stress of argument to enforce
    The expedience of a less adventurous course:
    The rest will slight thy counsel, or condemn;
    But they have human feelings--turn to them.
      To you, then, tenants of life's middle state,
    Securely placed between the small and great,
    Whose character, yet undebauch'd, retains
    Two-thirds of all the virtue that remains,
    Who, wise yourselves, desire your sons should learn
    Your wisdom and your ways--to you I turn.
    Look round you on a world perversely blind;
    See what contempt is fallen on human kind;
    See wealth abused, and dignities misplaced,
    Great titles, offices, and trusts disgraced,
    Long lines of ancestry, renown'd of old,
    Their noble qualities all quench'd and cold;
    See Bedlam's closeted and handcuff'd charge
    Surpass'd in frenzy by the mad at large;
    See great commanders making war a trade,
    Great lawyers, lawyers without study made;
    Churchmen, in whose esteem their best employ
    Is odious, and their wages all their joy,
    Who, far enough from furnishing their shelves
    With Gospel lore, turn infidels themselves;
    See womanhood despised, and manhood shamed
    With infamy too nauseous to be named,
    Fops at all corners, ladylike in mien,
    Civited fellows, smelt ere they are seen,
    Else coarse and rude in manners, and their tongue
    On fire with curses, and with nonsense hung,
    Now flush'd with drunkenness, now with whoredom pale,
    Their breath a sample of last night's regale;
    See volunteers in all the vilest arts,
    Men well endow'd, of honourable parts,
    Design'd by Nature wise, but self-made fools;
    All these, and more like these, were bred at schools.
    And if it chance, as sometimes chance it will,
    That though school-bred the boy be virtuous still;
    Such rare exceptions, shining in the dark,
    Prove, rather than impeach, the just remark:
    As here and there a twinkling star descried
    Serves but to show how black is all beside.
    Now look on him, whose very voice in tone
    Just echoes thine, whose features are thine own,
    And stroke his polish'd cheek of purest red,
    And lay thine hand upon his flaxen head,
    And say, My boy, the unwelcome hour is come,
    When thou, transplanted from thy genial home,
    Must find a colder soil and bleaker air,
    And trust for safety to a stranger's care;
    What character, what turn thou wilt assume
    From constant converse with I know not whom;
    Who there will court thy friendship, with what views,
    And, artless as thou art, whom thou wilt choose;
    Though much depends on what thy choice shall be,
    Is all chance-medley, and unknown to me.
    Canst thou, the tear just trembling on thy lids,
    And while the dreadful risk foreseen forbids;
    Free too, and under no constraining force,
    Unless the sway of custom warp thy course;
    Lay such a stake upon the losing side,
    Merely to gratify so blind a guide?
    Thou canst not! Nature, pulling at thine heart,
    Condemns the unfatherly, the imprudent part.
    Thou wouldst not, deaf to Nature's tenderest plea,
    Turn him adrift upon a rolling sea,
    Nor say, Go thither, conscious that there lay
    A brood of asps, or quicksands in his way;
    Then, only govern'd by the self-same rule
    Of natural pity, send him not to school.
    No--guard him better. Is he not thine own,
    Thyself in miniature, thy flesh, thy bone?
    And hopest thou not, ('tis every father's hope,)
    That, since thy strength must with thy years elope,
    And thou wilt need some comfort to assuage
    Health's last farewell, a staff of thine old age,
    That then, in recompence of all thy cares,
    Thy child shall show respect to thy grey hairs,
    Befriend thee, of all other friends bereft,
    And give thy life its only cordial left?
    Aware then how much danger intervenes,
    To compass that good end, forecast the means.
    His heart, now passive, yields to thy command;
    Secure it thine, its key is in thine hand;
    If thou desert thy charge, and throw it wide,
    Nor heed what guests there enter and abide,
    Complain not if attachments lewd and base
    Supplant thee in it and usurp thy place.
    But, if thou guard its sacred chambers sure
    From vicious inmates and delights impure,
    Either his gratitude shall hold him fast,
    And keep him warm and filial to the last;
    Or, if he prove unkind, (as who can say
    But, being man, and therefore frail, he may?)
    One comfort yet shall cheer thine aged heart,
    Howe'er he slight thee, thou hast done thy part.
      Oh, barbarous! wouldst thou with a Gothic hand
    Pull down the schools--what!--all the schools i' th' land;
    Or throw them up to livery-nags and grooms,
    Or turn them into shops and auction-rooms?
    A captious question, sir, (and yours is one,)
    Deserves an answer similar, or none.
    Wouldst thou, possessor of a flock, employ
    (Apprised that he is such) a careless boy,
    And feed him well, and give him handsome pay,
    Merely to sleep, and let them run astray?
    Survey our schools and colleges, and see
    A sight not much unlike my simile.
    From education, as the leading cause,
    The public character its colour draws;
    Thence the prevailing manners take their cast,
    Extravagant or sober, loose or chaste.
    And though I would not advertise them yet,
    Nor write on each--_This Building to be Let_,
    Unless the world were all prepared to embrace
    A plan well worthy to supply their place;
    Yet, backward as they are, and long have been,
    To cultivate and keep the MORALS clean,
    (Forgive the crime,) I wish them, I confess,
    Or better managed, or encouraged less.

  [818] See 2 Chron. xxvi. 19.

  [819] The author begs leave to explain.--Sensible that, without
  such knowledge, neither the ancient poets nor historians can be
  tasted, or indeed understood, he does not mean to censure the
  pains that are taken to instruct a schoolboy in the religion of
  the heathen, but merely that neglect of Christian culture which
  leaves him shamefully ignorant of his own.


THE YEARLY DISTRESS, OR TITHING TIME AT STOCK IN ESSEX.

     Verses addressed to a Country Clergyman, complaining of the
     sisagreeableness of the day annually appointed for receiving the
     Dues at the Parsonage.

    Come, ponder well, for 'tis no jest,
      To laugh it would be wrong,
    The troubles of a worthy priest,
      The burden of my song.

    This priest he merry is and blithe
      Three quarters of a year:
    But oh! it cuts him like a scythe,
      When tithing time draws near.

    He then is full of fright and fears,
      As one at point to die,
    And long before the day appears,
      He heaves up many a sigh.

    For then the farmers come jog, jog,
      Along the miry road,
    Each heart as heavy as a log,
      To make their payments good.

    In sooth the sorrow of such days
      Is not to be express'd,
    When he that takes and he that pays
      Are both alike distress'd.

    Now all unwelcome at his gates
      The clumsy swains alight,
    With rueful faces and bald pates--
      He trembles at the sight.

    And well he may, for well he knows
      Each bumpkin of the clan,
    Instead of paying what he owes,
      Will cheat him if he can.

    So in they come--each makes his leg,
      And flings his head before,
    And looks as if he came to beg,
      And not to quit a score.

    "And how does miss and madam do,
      The little boy and all?"
    "All tight and well. And how do you,
      Good Mr. What-d'ye-call?"

    The dinner comes, and down they sit,
      Were e'er such hungry folk?
    There's little talking, and no wit;
      It is no time to joke.

    One wipes his nose upon his sleeve,
      One spits upon the floor,
    Yet not to give offence or grieve,
      Holds up the cloth before.

    The punch goes round, and they are dull
      And lumpish still as ever;
    Like barrels with their bellies full,
      They only weigh the heavier.

    At length the busy time begins.
      "Come, neighbours, we must wag"--
    The money chinks, down drop their chins,
      Each lugging out his bag.

    One talks of mildew and of frost,
      And one of storms of hail,
    And one of pigs that he has lost
      By maggots at the tail.

    Quoth one, "A rarer man than you
    In pulpit none shall hear:
    But yet, methinks, to tell you true,
    You sell it plaguy dear."

    O why are farmers made so coarse,
      Or clergy made so fine?
    A kick, that scarce would move a horse,
      May kill a sound divine.

    Then let the boobies stay at home;
      'Twould cost him, I dare say,
    Less trouble taking twice the sum
      Without the clowns that pay.


SONNET, ADDRESSED TO HENRY COWPER, ESQ.

     On his emphatical and interesting Delivery of the Defence of
     Warren Hastings, Esq. in the House of Lords.

    Cowper, whose silver voice, task'd sometimes hard,
      Legends prolix delivers in the ears
      (Attentive when thou read'st) of England's peers,
    Let verse at length yield thee thy just reward.

    Thou wast not heard with drowsy disregard,
      Expending late on all that length of plea
      Thy generous powers, but silence honour'd thee,
    Mute as e'er gazed on orator or bard.

    Thou art not voice alone, but hast beside
      Both heart and head; and couldst with music sweet
        Of Attic phrase and senatorial tone,
    Like thy renown'd forefathers, far and wide
      Thy fame diffuse, praised not for utterance meet
        Of _others'_ speech, but magic of _thy own_.


LINES ADDRESSED TO DR. DARWIN,

AUTHOR OF "THE BOTANIC GARDEN."

    Two Poets,[820] (poets, by report,
      Not oft so well agree,)
    Sweet harmonist of Flora's court!
      Conspire to honour thee.

    They best can judge a poet's worth,
      Who oft themselves have known
    The pangs of a poetic birth
      By labours of their own.

    We therefore pleased extol thy song,
      Though various, yet complete,
    Rich in embellishment as strong,
      And learned as 'tis sweet.

    No envy mingles with our praise,
      Though, could our hearts repine
    At any poet's happier lays,
      They would--they must at thine.

    But we, in mutual bondage knit
      Of friendship's closest tie,
    Can gaze on even Darwin's wit
      With an unjaundiced eye;

    And deem the Bard, whoe'er he be,
      And howsoever known,
    Who would not twine a wreath for thee,
      Unworthy of his own.

  [820] Alluding to the poem by Mr. Hayley, which accompanied these
  lines.


ON MRS. MONTAGU'S FEATHER-HANGINGS.

    The birds put off their every hue
    To dress a room for Montagu.
      The peacock sends his heavenly dyes,
    His rainbows and his starry eyes;
    The pheasant plumes, which round enfold
    His mantling neck with downy gold;
    The cock his arch'd tail's azure show;
    And, river-blanch'd, the swan his snow.
    All tribes beside of Indian name,
    That glossy shine, or vivid flame,
    Where rises, and where sets the day,
    Whate'er they boast of rich and gay,
    Contribute to the gorgeous plan,
    Proud to advance it all they can.
    This plumage neither dashing shower,
    Nor blasts, that shake the dripping bower,
    Shall drench again or discompose,
    But, screen'd from every storm that blows,
    It boasts a splendour ever new,
    Safe with protecting Montagu.
      To the same patroness resort,
    Secure of favour at her court,
    Strong Genius, from whose forge of thought
    Forms rise, to quick perfection wrought,
    Which, though new-born, with vigour move,
    Like Pallas springing arm'd from Jove--
    Imagination scattering round
    Wild roses over furrow'd ground,
    Which Labour of his frown beguile,
    And teach Philosophy a smile--
    Wit flashing on Religion's side,
    Whose fires, to sacred Truth applied,
    The gem, though luminous before,
    Obtrude on human notice more,
    Like sunbeams on the golden height
    Of some tall temple playing bright--
    Well tutor'd Learning, from his books
    Dismiss'd with grave, not haughty, looks,
    Their order on his shelves exact,
    Not more harmonious or compact
    Than that to which he keeps confined
    The various treasures of his mind--
    All these to Montagu's repair,
    Ambitious of a shelter there.
    There Genius, Learning, Fancy, Wit,
    Their ruffled plumage calm refit,
    (For stormy troubles loudest roar
    Around their flight who highest soar,)
    And in her eye, and by her aid,
    Shine safe without a fear to fade.
      She thus maintains divided sway
    With yon bright regent of the day;
    The Plume and Poet both we know
    Their lustre to his influence owe;
    And she the works of Phoebus aiding,
    Both Poet saves and Plume from fading.



VERSES,

     Supposed to be written by Alexander Selkirk, during his solitary
     abode in the island of Juan Fernandez.

    I am monarch of all I survey,
      My right there is none to dispute;
    From the centre all round to the sea
      I am lord of the fowl and the brute.
    O Solitude! where are the charms
      That sages have seen in thy face?
    Better dwell in the midst of alarms
      Than reign in this horrible place.

    I am out of humanity's reach,
      I must finish my journey alone,
    Never hear the sweet music of speech,
      I start at the sound of my own.
    The beasts, that roam over the plain,
      My form with indifference see;
    They are so unacquainted with man,
      Their tameness is shocking to me.

    Society, friendship, and love,
      Divinely bestow'd upon man,
    O, had I the wings of a dove,
      How soon would I taste you again!
    My sorrows I then might assuage
      In the ways of religion and truth,
    Might learn from the wisdom of age,
      And be cheer'd by the sallies of youth.

    Religion! what treasure untold
      Resides in that heavenly word!
    More precious than silver and gold
      Or all that this earth can afford.
    But the sound of the church-going bell
      These valleys and rocks never heard,
    Never sigh'd at the sound of a knell,
      Or smiled when a sabbath appear'd.

    Ye winds, that have made me your sport,
      Convey to this desolate shore
    Some cordial endearing report
      Of a land I shall visit no more.
    My friends, do they now and then send
      A wish or a thought after me?
    O tell me I yet have a friend,
      Though a friend I am never to see.

    How fleet is the glance of the mind!
      Compared with the speed of its flight,
    The tempest itself lags behind,
      And the swift-winged arrows of light.
    When I think of my own native land,
      In a moment I seem to be there;
    But alas! recollection at hand
      Soon hurries me back to despair.

    But the sea-fowl is gone to her nest,
      The beast is laid down in his lair;
    Even here is a season of rest,
      And I to my cabin repair.
    There's mercy in every place,
      And mercy, encouraging thought!
    Gives even affliction a grace,
      And reconciles man to his lot.


ON OBSERVING SOME NAMES OF LITTLE NOTE

RECORDED IN THE BIOGRAPHIA BRITANNICA.

    Oh, fond attempt to give a deathless lot
    To names ignoble, born to be forgot!
    In vain recorded in historic page,
    They court the notice of a future age:
    Those twinkling tiny lustres of the land
    Drop one by one from Fame's neglecting hand;
    Lethæan gulfs receive them as they fall,
    And dark oblivion soon absorbs them all.
    So when a child, as playful children use,
    Has burnt to tinder a stale last year's news,
    The flame extinct, he views the roving fire--
    There goes my lady, and there goes the squire,
    There goes the parson, oh illustrious spark!
    And there, scarce less illustrious, goes the clerk!


REPORT OF AN ADJUDGED CASE,

NOT TO BE FOUND IN ANY OF THE BOOKS.

    Between Nose and Eyes a strange contest arose,
      The spectacles set them unhappily wrong;
    The point in dispute was, as all the world knows,
      To which the said spectacles ought to belong.

    So Tongue was the lawyer, and argued the cause
      With a great deal of skill, and a wig full of learning;
    While chief baron Ear sat to balance the laws,
      So famed for his talent in nicely discerning.

    In behalf of the Nose it will quickly appear,
      And your lordship, he said, will undoubtedly find,
    That the Nose has had spectacles always in wear,
      Which amounts to possession time out of mind.

    Then holding the spectacles up to the court--
      Your lordship observes they are made with a straddle,
    As wide as the ridge of the Nose is; in short,
      Design'd to sit close to it, just like a saddle.

    Again, would your lordship a moment suppose
      ('Tis a case that has happen'd, and may be again)
    That the visage or countenance had not a Nose,
      Pray who would, or who could, wear spectacles then?

    On the whole it appears, and my argument shows,
      With a reasoning the court will never condemn,
    That the spectacles plainly were made for the Nose,
      And the Nose was as plainly intended for them.

    Then shifting his side, (as a lawyer knows how,)
      He pleaded again in behalf of the Eyes:
    But what were his arguments few people know,
      For the court did not think they were equally wise.

    So his lordship decreed with a grave solemn tone,
      Decisive and clear, without one if or but--
    That, whenever the Nose put his spectacles on,
      By daylight or candlelight--Eyes should be shut!


ON THE PROMOTION OF EDWARD THURLOW, ESQ.

TO THE LORD HIGH CHANCELLORSHIP OF ENGLAND.

    Round Thurlow's head in early youth,
      And in his sportive days,
    Fair Science pour'd the light of truth,
      And Genius shed his rays.

    See! with united wonder cried
      The experienced and the sage,
    Ambition in a boy supplied
      With all the skill of age!

    Discernment, eloquence, and grace,
      Proclaim him born to sway
    The balance in the highest place,
      And bear the palm away.

    The praise bestow'd was just and wise;
      He sprang impetuous forth,
    Secure of conquest, where the prize
      Attends superior worth.

    So the best courser on the plain
      Ere yet he starts is known,
    And does but at the goal obtain
      What all had deem'd his own.


ODE TO PEACE.

    Come, peace of mind, delightful guest!
    Return, and make thy downy nest
      Once more in this sad heart:
    Nor riches I nor power pursue,
    Nor hold forbidden joys in view;
      We therefore need not part.

    Where wilt thou dwell, if not with me,
    From avarice and ambition free,
      And pleasure's fatal wiles?
    For whom, alas! dost thou prepare
    The sweets that I was wont to share,
      The banquet of thy smiles?

    The great, the gay, shall they partake
    The heaven that thou alone canst make?
      And wilt thou quit the stream
    That murmurs through the dewy mead,
    The grove and the sequestered shed,
      To be a guest with them?

    For thee I panted, thee I prized,
    For thee I gladly sacrificed
      Whatever I loved before;
    And shall I see thee start away,
    And helpless, hopeless, hear thee say--
      Farewell! we meet no more?


HUMAN FRAILTY.

    Weak and irresolute is man;
      The purpose of to-day,
    Woven with pains into his plan,
      To-morrow rends away.

    The bow well bent, and smart the spring,
      Vice seems already slain;
    But Passion rudely snaps the string,
      And it revives again.

    Some foe to his upright intent
      Finds out his weaker part;
    Virtue engages his assent,
      But Pleasure wins his heart.

    'Tis here the folly of the wise
      Through all his art we view;
    And, while his tongue the charge denies,
      His conscience owns it true.

    Bound on a voyage of awful length
      And dangers little known,
    A stranger to superior strength,
      Man vainly trusts his own.

    But oars alone can ne'er prevail
      To reach the distant coast;
    The breath of Heaven must swell the sail,
      Or all the toil is lost.


THE MODERN PATRIOT.

    Rebellion is my theme all day;
      I only wish 'twould come
    (As who knows but perhaps it may?)
      A little nearer home.

    Yon roaring boys, who rave and fight
      On t'other side the Atlantic,
    I always held them in the right,
      But most so when most frantic.

    When lawless mobs insult the court,
      That man shall be my toast,
    If breaking windows be the sport,
      Who bravely breaks the most.

    But O! for him my fancy culls
      The choicest flowers she bears,
    Who constitutionally pulls
      Your house about your ears.

    Such civil broils are my delight,
      Though some folks can't endure them,
    Who say the mob are mad outright,
      And that a rope must cure them.

    A rope! I wish we patriots had
      Such strings for all who need 'em--
    What! hang a man for going mad!
      Then farewell British freedom.


ON THE BURNING OF LORD MANSFIELD'S LIBRARY,

TOGETHER WITH HIS MSS. BY THE MOB, IN THE MONTH OF JUNE, 1780.

    So then--the Vandals of our isle,
      Sworn foes to sense and law,
    Have burnt to dust a nobler pile
      Than ever Roman saw!

    And Murray sighs o'er Pope and Swift,
      And many a treasure more,
    The well-judged purchase, and the gift
      That graced his letter'd store.

    Their pages mangled, burnt, and torn,
      The loss was his alone;
    But ages yet to come shall mourn
      The burning of his own.


ON THE SAME.

    When wit and genius meet their doom
      In all devouring flame,
    They tell us of the fate of Rome,
      And bid us fear the same.

    O'er Murray's loss the muses wept,
      They felt the rude alarm,
    Yet bless'd the guardian care that kept
      His sacred head from harm.

    There Memory, like the bee that's fed
      From Flora's balmy store,
    The quintessence of all he read
      Had treasured up before.

    The lawless herd, with fury blind,
      Have done him cruel wrong;
    The flowers are gone--but still we find
      The honey on his tongue.


THE LOVE OF THE WORLD REPROVED;

OR, HYPOCRISY DETECTED.[821]

  [821] It may be proper to inform the reader, that this piece has
  already appeared in print, having found its way, though with
  some unnecessary additions by an unknown hand, into the _Leeds
  Journal_, without the author's privity.

    Thus says the prophet of the Turk,
    Good Mussulman, abstain from pork;
    There is a part in every swine
    No friend or follower of mine
    May taste, whate'er his inclination,
    On pain of excommunication.
    Such Mahomet's mysterious charge,
    And thus he left the point at large.
    Had he the sinful part express'd,
    They might with safety eat the rest;
    But for one piece they thought it hard
    From the whole hog to be debarr'd;
    And set their wit at work to find
    What joint the prophet had in mind.
    Much controversy straight arose,
    These choose the back, the belly those;
    By some 'tis confidently said
    He meant not to forbid the head;
    While others at that doctrine rail,
    And piously prefer the tail.
    Thus, conscience freed from every clog,
    Mahometans eat up the hog.
      You laugh--'tis well--the tale applied
    May make you laugh on t'other side.
    Renounce the world--the preacher cries.
    We do--a multitude replies.
    While one as innocent regards
    A snug and friendly game at cards;
    And one, whatever you may say,
    Can see no evil in a play;
    Some love a concert, or a race;
    And others shooting, and the chase.
    Reviled and loved, renounced and follow'd,
    Thus, bit by bit, the world is swallow'd;
    Each thinks his neighbour makes too free,
    Yet likes a slice as well as he:
    With sophistry their sauce they sweeten,
    Till quite from tail to snout 'tis eaten.


ON THE DEATH OF MRS. (NOW LADY) THROCKMORTON'S BULLFINCH.

    Ye nymphs! if e'er your eyes were red
    With tears o'er hapless favourites shed,
          O share Maria's grief!
    Her favourite, even in his cage,
    (What will not hunger's cruel rage?)
          Assassin'd by a thief.

    Where Rhenus strays his vines among,
    The egg was laid from which he sprung;
          And, though by nature mute,
    Or only with a whistle blest,
    Well taught he all the sounds express'd
          Of flageolet or flute.

    The honours of his ebon poll
    Were brighter than the sleekest mole,
          His bosom of the hue
    With which Aurora decks the skies,
    When piping winds shall soon arise,
          To sweep away the dew.

    Above, below, in all the house,
    Dire foe alike of bird and mouse
          No cat had leave to dwell;
    And Bully's cage supported stood
    On props of smoothest shaven wood,
          Large-built and latticed well.

    Well latticed--but the grate, alas!
    Not rough with wire of steel or brass,
          For Bully's plumage sake,
    But smooth with wands from Ouse's side,
    With which, when neatly peel'd and dried,
          The swains their baskets make.

    Night veil'd the pole: all seem'd secure:
    When, led by instinct sharp and sure,
          Subsistence to provide,
    A beast forth sallied on the scout,
    Long back'd, long tail'd, with whisker'd snout,
          And badger-colour'd hide.

    He, entering at the study door,
    Its ample area 'gan explore;
          And something in the wind
    Conjectured, sniffing round and round,
    Better than all the books he found,
          Food chiefly for the mind.

    Just then, by adverse fate impress'd,
    A dream disturb'd poor Bully's rest;
          In sleep he seem'd to view
    A rat fast clinging to the cage,
    And, screaming at the sad presage,
          Awoke and found it true.

    For, aided both by ear and scent,
    Right to his mark the monster went--
          Ah, muse! forbear to speak
    Minute the horrors that ensued;
    His teeth were strong, the cage was wood--
          He left poor Bully's beak.

    O had he made that too his prey;
    That beak, whence issued many a lay
          Of such mellifluous tone,
    Might have repaid him well, I wote,
    For silencing so sweet a throat,
          Fast stuck within his own.

    Maria weeps--the Muses mourn--
    So when, by Bacchanalians torn,
          On Thracian Hebrus' side
    The tree-enchanter Orpheus fell,
    His head alone remain'd to tell
          The cruel death he died.


THE ROSE.

    The rose had been wash'd, just wash'd in a shower,
      Which Mary to Anna convey'd,
    The plentiful moisture encumber'd the flower,
      And weigh'd down its beautiful head.

    The cup was all fill'd, and the leaves were all wet,
      And it seem'd, to a fanciful view,
    To weep for the buds it had left, with regret,
      On the flourishing bush where it grew.

    I hastily seized it, unfit as it was
      For a nosegay, so dripping and drown'd,
    And swinging it rudely, too rudely, alas!
      I snapp'd it, it fell to the ground.

    And such, I exclaim'd, is the pitiless part
      Some act by the delicate mind,
    Regardless of wringing and breaking a heart
      Already to sorrow resign'd.

    This elegant rose, had I shaken it less,
      Might have bloom'd with its owner a while;
    And the tear, that is wiped with a little address,
      May be follow'd perhaps by a smile.


THE DOVES.

    Reasoning at every step he treads,
      Man yet mistakes his way
    While meaner things, whom instinct leads,
      Are rarely known to stray.

    One silent eve I wander'd late,
      And heard the voice of love;
    The turtle thus address'd her mate,
      And soothed the listening dove:

    Our mutual bond of faith and truth
      No time shall disengage,
    Those blessings of our early youth
      Shall cheer our latest age:

    While innocence without disguise,
      And constancy sincere,
    Shall fill the circles of those eyes,
      And mine can read them there;

    Those ills, that wait on all below,
      Shall ne'er be felt by me,
    Or gently felt, and only so,
      As being shared with thee.

    When lightnings flash among the trees,
      Or kites are hovering near,
    I fear lest thee alone they seize,
      And know no other fear.

    'Tis then I feel myself a wife,
      And press thy wedded side,
    Resolved a union form'd for life
      Death never shall divide.

    But oh! if, fickle and unchaste,
      (Forgive a transient thought,)
    Thou couldst become unkind at last,
      And scorn thy present lot,

    No need of lightnings from on high,
      Or kites with cruel beak;
    Denied the endearments of thine eye,
      This widow'd heart would break.

    Thus sang the sweet sequester'd bird,
      Soft as the passing wind,
    And I recorded what I heard,
      A lesson for mankind.


A FABLE.

    A raven, while with glossy breast
    Her new-laid eggs she fondly press'd,
    And, on her wicker-work high mounted,
    Her chickens prematurely counted,
    (A fault philosophers might blame,
    If quite exempted from the same,)
    Enjoy'd at ease the genial day;
    'Twas April, as the bumpkins say,
    The legislature call'd it May.
    But suddenly a wind, as high
    As ever swept a winter sky,
    Shook the young leaves about her ears,
    And fill'd her with a thousand fears,
    Lest the rude blast should snap the bough,
    And spread her golden hopes below.
    But just at eve the blowing weather
    And all her fears were hush'd together:
    And now, quoth poor unthinking Ralph,
    'Tis over, and the brood is safe;
    (For ravens, though, as birds of omen,
    They teach both conjurors and old women
    To tell us what is to befall,
    Can't prophesy themselves at all.)
    The morning came, when neighbour Hodge,
    Who long had mark'd her airy lodge,
    And destined all the treasure there
    A gift to his expecting fair,
    Climb'd like a squirrel to his dray,
    And bore the worthless prize away.

MORAL.

    'Tis Providence alone secures
    In every change both mine and yours:
    Safety consists not in escape
    From dangers of a frightful shape;
    An earthquake may be bid to spare
    The man that's strangled by a hair.
    Fate steals along with silent tread,
    Found oft'nest in what least we dread,
    Frowns in the storm with angry brow,
    But in the sunshine strikes the blow.


ODE TO APOLLO.

ON AN INKGLASS ALMOST DRIED IN THE SUN.

    Patron of all those luckless brains,
      That, to the wrong side leaning,
    Indite much metre with much pains,
      And little or no meaning;

    Ah why, since oceans, rivers, streams,
      That water all the nations,
    Pay tribute to thy glorious beams,
      In constant exhalations;

    Why, stooping from the noon of day,
      Too covetous of drink,
    Apollo, hast thou stolen away
      A poet's drop of ink?

    Upborne into the viewless air,
      It floats a vapour now,
    Impell'd through regions dense and rare,
      By all the winds that blow.

    Ordain'd perhaps, ere summer flies,
      Combined with millions more,
    To form an iris in the skies,
      Though black and foul before.

    Illustrious drop! and happy then
      Beyond the happiest lot,
    Of all that ever pass'd my pen,
      So soon to be forgot!

    Phoebus, if such be thy design.
      To place it in thy bow,
    Give wit, that what is left may shine
      With equal grace below.


A COMPARISON.

    The lapse of time and rivers is the same,
    Both speed their journey with a restless stream,
    The silent pace, with which they steal away,
    No wealth can bribe, no prayers persuade to stay;
    Alike irrevocable both when past,
    And a wide ocean swallows both at last.
    Though each resemble each in every part,
    A difference strikes at length the musing heart;
    Streams never flow in vain; where streams abound,
    How laughs the land with various plenty crown'd!
    But time, that should enrich the nobler mind,
    Neglected leaves a dreary waste behind.


ANOTHER.

ADDRESSED TO A YOUNG LADY.

    Sweet stream that winds through yonder glade,
    Apt emblem of a virtuous maid--
    Silent and chaste she steals along,
    Far from the world's gay busy throng;
    With gentle yet prevailing force,
    Intent upon her destined course;
    Graceful and useful all she does,
    Blessing and blest where'er she goes.
    Pure-bosom'd as that watery glass,
    And heaven reflected in her face.


THE POET'S NEW YEAR'S GIFT.

TO MRS. (NOW LADY) THROCKMORTON.

    Maria! I have every good
      For thee wish'd many a time,
    Both sad, and in a cheerful mood,
      But never yet in rhyme.

    To wish thee fairer is no need,
      More prudent, or more sprightly,
    Or more ingenious, or more freed
      From temper-flaws unsightly.

    What favour then not yet possess'd
      Can I for thee require,
    In wedded love already blest,
      To thy whole heart's desire?

    None here is happy but in part:
      Full bliss is bliss divine;
    There dwells some wish in every heart,
      And doubtless one in thine.

    That wish on some fair future day,
      Which fate shall brightly gild,
    ('Tis blameless, be it what it may,)
      I wish it all fulfill'd.


PAIRING TIME ANTICIPATED.

A FABLE.

    I shall not ask Jean Jaques Rousseau[822]

  [822] it was one of the whimsical speculations of this philosopher,
  that all fables which ascribe reason and speech to animals should
  be withheld from children, as being only vehicles of deception.
  but what child was ever deceived by them, or can be, against the
  evidence of his senses?

    If birds confabulate or no;
    'Tis clear, that they were always able
    To hold discourse, at least in fable;
    And e'en the child who knows no better
    Than to interpret, by the letter,
    A story of a cock and bull,
    Must have a most uncommon skull.
      It chanced then on a winter's day,
    But warm, and bright, and calm as May,
    The birds, conceiving a design
    To forestall sweet St. Valentine,
    In many an orchard, copse, and grove,
    Assembled on affairs of love,
    And with much twitter and much chatter
    Began to agitate the matter.
    At length a Bullfinch, who could boast
    More years and wisdom than the most,
    Entreated, opening wide his beak,
    A moment's liberty to speak;
    And, silence publicly enjoin'd,
    Deliver'd briefly thus his mind:
      My friends! be cautious how ye treat
    The subject upon which we meet;
    I fear we shall have winter yet.
      A Finch, whose tongue knew no control,
    With golden wing and satin poll,
    A last year's bird, who ne'er had tried
    What marriage means, thus pert replied:
      Methinks the gentleman, quoth she,
    Opposite in the apple tree,
    By his good will would keep us single
    Till yonder heaven and earth shall mingle,
    Or (which is likelier to befall)
    Till death exterminate us all.
    I marry without more ado,
    My dear Dick Redcap, what say you?
      Dick heard, and tweedling, ogling, bridling,
    Turning short round, strutting and sideling,
    Attested, glad, his approbation
    Of an immediate conjugation.
    Their sentiments so well express'd
    Influenced mightily the rest,
    All pair'd, and each pair built a nest.
      But, though the birds were thus in haste,
    The leaves came on not quite so fast,
    And destiny, that sometimes bears
    An aspect stern on man's affairs,
    Not altogether smiled on theirs.
    The wind, of late breathed gently forth,
    Now shifted east, and east by north;
    Bare trees and shrubs but ill, you know,
    Could shelter them from rain or snow,
    Stepping into their nests, they paddled,
    Themselves were chill'd, their eggs were addled;
    Soon every father bird and mother
    Grew quarrelsome, and peck'd each other,
    Parted without the least regret,
    Except that they had ever met,
    And learn'd in future to be wiser,
    Than to neglect a good adviser.

MORAL.

    Misses! the tale that I relate
      This lesson seems to carry--
    Choose not alone a proper mate,
      But proper time to marry.


THE DOG AND THE WATER LILY.

NO FABLE.

    The noon was shady, and soft airs
      Swept Ouse's silent tide,
    When, 'scaped from literary cares,
      I wander'd on his side.

    My spaniel, prettiest of his race,
      And high in pedigree,
    (Two nymphs[823] adorn'd with every grace
      That spaniel found for me,)

    Now wanton'd lost in flags and reeds,
      Now starting into sight,
    Pursued the swallow o'er the meads
      With scarce a slower flight.

    It was the time when Ouse display'd
      His lilies newly blown;
    Their beauties I intent survey'd,
      And one I wish'd my own.

    With cane extended far I sought
      To steer it close to land;
    But still the prize, though nearly caught,
      Escaped my eager hand.

    Beau mark'd my unsuccessful pains
      With fix'd considerate face,
    And puzzling set his puppy brains
      To comprehend the case.

    But with a cherup clear and strong
      Dispersing all his dream,
    I thence withdrew, and follow'd long
      The windings of the stream.

    My ramble ended, I return'd;
      Beau, trotting far before,
    The floating wreath again discern'd,
      And plunging, left the shore.

    I saw him with that lily cropp'd
      Impatient swim to meet
    My quick approach, and soon he dropp'd
      The treasure at my feet.

    Charm'd with the sight, the world, I cried,
      Shall hear of this thy deed:
    My dog shall mortify the pride
      Of man's superior breed:

    But chief myself I will enjoin,
      Awake at duty's call,
    To show a love as prompt as thine
      To Him who gives me all.

  [823] Sir Robert Gunning's daughters.


THE WINTER NOSEGAY.

    What Nature, alas! has denied
      To the delicate growth of our isle,
    Art has in a measure supplied,
      And winter is deck'd with a smile.
    See, Mary, what beauties I bring
      From the shelter of that sunny shed,
    Where the flowers have the charms of the spring,
      Though abroad they are frozen and dead.

    'Tis a bower of Arcadian sweets,
      Where Flora is still in her prime,
    A fortress to which she retreats
      From the cruel assaults of the clime.
    While earth wears a mantle of snow,
      These pinks are as fresh and as gay
    As the fairest and sweetest that blow
      On the beautiful bosom of May.

    See how they have safely survived
      The frowns of a sky so severe;
    Such Mary's true love, that has lived
      Through many a turbulent year.
    The charms of the late-blowing rose
      Seem graced with a livelier hue,
    And the winter of sorrow best shows
      The truth of a friend such as you.


THE POET, THE OYSTER, AND SENSITIVE PLANT.

    An Oyster, cast upon the shore,
    Was heard, though never heard before,
    Complaining in a speech well worded,
    And worthy thus to be recorded:--
      Ah, hapless wretch! condemn'd to dwell
    For ever in my native shell;
    Ordain'd to move when others please,
    Not for my own content or ease;
    But toss'd and buffeted about,
    Now in the water and now out.
    'Twere better to be born a stone,
    Of ruder shape, and feeling none,
    Than with a tenderness like mine,
    And sensibilities so fine!
    I envy that unfeeling shrub,
    Fast rooted against every rub.
    The plant he meant grew not far off,
    And felt the sneer with scorn enough:
    Was hurt, disgusted, mortified,
    And with asperity replied:
      (When, cry the botanists, and stare,
    Did plants call'd sensitive grow there?
    No matter when--a poet's muse is
    To make them grow just where she chooses)
      You shapeless nothing in a dish,
    You that are but almost a fish,
    I scorn your coarse insinuation,
    And have most plentiful occasion
    To wish myself the rock I view,
    Or such another dolt as you:
    For many a grave and learned clerk
    And many a gay unletter'd spark,
    With curious touch examines me,
    If I can feel as well as he;
    And when I bend, retire, and shrink,
    Says--Well, tis more than one would think!
    Thus life is spent (oh fie upon't)
    In being touch'd, and crying--Don't!
      A poet, in his evening walk,
    O'erheard and check'd this idle talk.
    And your fine sense, he said, and yours,
    Whatever evil it endures,
    Deserves not, if so soon offended,
    Much to be pitied or commended.
    Disputes, though short, are far too long,
    Where both alike are in the wrong;
    Your feelings in their full amount
    Are all upon your own account.
      You, in your grotto-work enclosed,
    Complain of being thus exposed;
    Yet nothing feel in that rough coat
    Save when the knife is at your throat,
    Wherever driven by wind or tide,
    Exempt from every ill beside.
      And as for you, my Lady Squeamish,
    Who reckon every touch a blemish,
    If all the plants, that can be found
    Embellishing the scene around,
    Should droop and wither where they grow,
    You would not feel at all--not you.
    The noblest minds their virtue prove
    By pity, sympathy, and love:
    These, these are feelings truly fine,
    And prove their owner half divine.
      His censure reach'd them as he dealt it
    And each by shrinking show'd he felt it.


THE SHRUBBERY.

WRITTEN IN A TIME OF AFFLICTION.

    Oh, happy shades--to me unblest!
      Friendly to peace, but not to me!
    How ill the scene that offers rest,
      And heart that cannot rest, agree!

    This glassy stream, that spreading pine,
      Those alders, quivering to the breeze,
    Might soothe a soul less hurt than mine,
      And please, if any thing could please.

    But fix'd unalterable Care
      Foregoes not what she feels within,
    Shows the same sadness every where,
      And slights the season and the scene.

    For all that pleased in wood or lawn,
      While Peace possess'd these silent bowers,
    Her animating smile withdrawn,
      Has lost its beauties and its powers.

    The saint or moralist should tread
      This moss-grown alley musing, slow;
    They seek like me the secret shade,
      But not like me to nourish woe!

    Me fruitful scenes and prospects waste
      Alike admonish not to roam;
    These tell me of enjoyments past,
      And those of sorrows yet to come.


MUTUAL FORBEARANCE

NECESSARY TO THE HAPPINESS OF THE MARRIED STATE.

    The lady thus address'd her spouse--
    What a mere dungeon is this house!
    By no means large enough; and was it,
    Yet this dull room, and that dark closet,
    Those hangings with their worn-out graces,
    Long beards, long noses, and pale faces,
    Are such an antiquated scene,
    They overwhelm me with the spleen.
    Sir Humphrey, shooting in the dark,
    Makes answer quite beside the mark:
    No doubt, my dear, I bade him come,
    Engaged myself to be at home,
    And shall expect him at the door
    Precisely when the clock strikes four.
      You are so deaf, the lady cried,
    (And raised her voice, and frown'd beside,)
    You are so sadly deaf, my dear,
    What shall I do to make you hear?
      Dismiss poor Harry! he replies;
    Some people are more nice than wise:
    For one slight trespass all this stir?
    What if he did ride whip and spur,
    'Twas but a mile--your favourite horse
    Will never look one hair the worse.
      Well, I protest 'tis past all bearing--
    Child! I am rather hard of hearing--
    Yes, truly--one must scream and bawl:
    I tell you, you can't hear at all!
    Then, with a voice exceeding low,
    No matter if you hear or no.
      Alas! and is domestic strife,
    That sorest ill of human life,
    A plague so little to be fear'd,
    As to be wantonly incurr'd,
    To gratify a fretful passion,
    On every trivial provocation?
    The kindest and the happiest pair
    Will find occasion to forbear;
    And something every day they live
    To pity, and perhaps forgive.
    But if infirmities, that fall
    In common to the lot of all,
    A blemish or a sense impair'd,
    Are crimes so little to be spared,
    Then farewell all that must create
    The comfort of the wedded state;
    Instead of harmony, 'tis jar,
    And tumult, and intestine war.
      The love that cheers life's latest stage,
    Proof against sickness and old age,
    Preserved by virtue from declension,
    Becomes not weary of attention;
    But lives, when that exterior grace,
    Which first inspired the flame, decays.
    'Tis gentle, delicate, and kind,
    To faults compassionate or blind,
    And will with sympathy endure
    Those evils it would gladly cure:
    But angry, coarse, and harsh expression,
    Shows love to be a mere profession;
    Proves that the heart is none of his,
    Or soon expels him if it is.


THE NEGRO'S COMPLAINT.

    Forced from home and all its pleasures,
      Afric's coast I left forlorn;
    To increase a stranger's treasures,
      O'er the raging billows borne.
    Men from England bought and sold me,
      Paid my price in paltry gold;
    But, though slave they have enroll'd me,
      Minds are never to be sold.

    Still in thought as free as ever,
      What are England's rights, I ask,
    Me from my delights to sever,
      Me to torture, me to task?
    Fleecy locks and black complexion
      Cannot forfeit nature's claim;
    Skins may differ, but affection
      Dwells in white and black the same.

    Why did all-creating Nature
      Make the plant for which we toil?
    Sighs must fan it, tears must water,
      Sweat of ours must dress the soil.
    Think, ye masters iron-hearted,
      Lolling at your jovial boards,
    Think how many backs have smarted
      For the sweets your cane affords.

    Is there, as ye sometimes tell us,
      Is there One who reigns on high?
    Has he bid you buy and sell us,
      Speaking from his throne, the sky?
    Ask him, if your knotted scourges,
      Matches, blood-extorting screws,
    Are the means that duty urges
      Agents of his will to use?

    Hark! he answers--wild tornadoes,
      Strewing yonder sea with wrecks;
    Wasting towns, plantations, meadows,
      Are the voice with which he speaks.
    He, foreseeing what vexations
      Afric's sons should undergo,
    Fix'd their tyrants' habitations
      Where his whirlwinds answer--no.

    By our blood in Afric wasted,
      Ere our necks received the chain;
    By the miseries that we tasted,
      Crossing in your barks the main;
    By our sufferings, since ye brought us
      To the man-degrading mart,
    All sustain'd by patience, taught us
      Only by a broken heart;

    Deem our nation brutes no longer,
      Till some reason ye shall find
    Worthier of regard, and stronger
      Than the colour of our kind.
    Slaves of gold, whose sordid dealings
      Tarnish all your boasted powers,
    Prove that you have human feelings,
      Ere you proudly question ours!


PITY FOR POOR AFRICANS.

    Video meliora proboque,
    Deteriora sequor.

    .......

    I own I am shock'd at the purchase of slaves,
    And fear those who buy them and sell them are knaves;
    What I hear of their hardships, their tortures, and groans,
    Is almost enough to draw pity from stones.

    I pity them greatly, but I must be mum,
    For how could we do without sugar and rum?
    Especially sugar, so needful we see?
    What, give up our desserts, our coffee, and tea!

    Besides, if we do, the French, Dutch, and Danes
    Will heartily thank us, no doubt, for our pains;
    If we do not buy the poor creatures, they will,
    And tortures and groans will be multiplied still.

    If foreigners likewise would give up the trade,
    Much more in behalf of your wish might be said;
    But, while they get riches by purchasing blacks,
    Pray tell me why we may not also go snacks?

    Your scruples and arguments bring to my mind
    A story so pat, you may think it is coin'd,
    On purpose to answer you, out of my mint;
    But I can assure you I saw it in print.

    A youngster at school, more sedate than the rest,
    Had once his integrity put to the test;
    His comrades had plotted an orchard to rob,
    And ask'd him to go and assist in the job.

    He was shock'd, sir, like you, and answer'd, "Oh no!
    What! rob our good neighbour! I pray you don't go;
    Besides, the man's poor, his orchard's his bread,
    Then think of his children, for they must be fed."

    "You speak very fine, and you look very grave,
    But apples we want, and apples we'll have;
    If you will go with us, you shall have a share,
    If not, you shall have neither apple nor pear."

    They spoke, and Tom pondered--"I see they will go;
    Poor man! what a pity to injure him so!
    Poor man! I would save him his fruit if I could,
    But staying behind will do him no good.

    "If the matter depended alone upon me,
    His apples might hang till they dropp'd from the tree;
    But, since they will take them, I think I'll go too,
    He will lose none by me, though I get a few."

    His scruples thus silenced, Tom felt more at ease,
    And went with his comrades the apples to seize;
    He blamed and protested, but join'd in the plan:
    He shared in the plunder, but pitied the man.


THE MORNING DREAM.

    'Twas in the glad season of spring,
      Asleep at the dawn of the day,
    I dream'd what I cannot but sing,
      So pleasant it seem'd as I lay.
    I dream'd that, on ocean afloat,
      Far hence to the westward I sail'd,
    While the billows high lifted the boat,
      And the fresh-blowing breeze never fail'd.

    In the steerage a woman I saw,
      Such at least was the form that she wore,
    Whose beauty impress'd me with awe,
      Ne'er taught me by woman before.
    She sat, and a shield at her side
      Shed light, like a sun on the waves,
    And smiling divinely, she cried--
      "I go to make freemen of slaves."

    Then, raising her voice to a strain
      The sweetest that ear ever heard,
    She sung of the slave's broken chain,
      Wherever her glory appear'd.
    Some clouds, which had over us hung,
      Fled, chased by her melody clear,
    And methought while she liberty sung,
      'Twas liberty only to hear.

    Thus swiftly dividing the flood,
      To a slave-cultured island we came,
    Where a demon, her enemy, stood--
      Oppression his terrible name.
    In his hand, as the sign of his sway,
      A scourge hung with lashes he bore,
    And stood looking out for his prey
      From Africa's sorrowful shore.

    But soon as, approaching the land,
      That goddesslike woman he view'd,
    The scourge he let fall from his hand,
      With blood of his subjects imbrued.
    I saw him both sicken and die,
      And, the moment the monster expired,
    Heard shouts, that ascended the sky,
      From thousands with rapture inspired.

    Awaking, how could I but muse
      At what such a dream should betide?
    But soon my ear caught the glad news,
      Which served my weak thought for a guide;
    That Britannia, renown'd o'er the waves
      For the hatred she ever has shown
    To the black-sceptred rulers of slaves,
      Resolves to have none of her own.


THE DIVERTING HISTORY OF JOHN GILPIN;

SHOWING HOW HE WENT FARTHER THAN HE INTENDED, AND CAME SAFE HOME
AGAIN.

    John Gilpin was a citizen
      Of credit and renown,
    A trainband captain eke was he
      Of famous London town.

    John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear:
      Though wedded we have been
    These twice ten tedious years, yet we
      No holiday have seen.

    To-morrow is our wedding-day,
      And we will then repair
    Unto the Bell at Edmonton
      All in a chaise and pair.

    My sister, and my sister's child,
      Myself, and children three,
    Will fill the chaise; so you must ride
      On horseback after we.

    He soon replied, I do admire
      Of womankind but one,
    And you are she, my dearest dear,
      Therefore it shall be done.

    I am a linendraper bold,
      As all the world doth know,
    And my good friend the calendrer
      Will lend his horse to go.

    Quoth Mrs. Gilpin, That's well said;
      And for that wine is dear,
    We will be furnish'd with our own,
      Which is both bright and clear.

    John Gilpin kiss'd his loving wife;
      O'erjoyed was he to find,
    That, though on pleasure she was bent,
      She had a frugal mind.

    The morning came, the chaise was brought,
      But yet was not allow'd
    To drive up to the door, lest all
      Should say that she was proud.

    So three doors off the chaise was stay'd,
      Where they did all get in;
    Six precious souls, and all agog
      To dash through thick and thin.

    Smack went the whip, round went the wheels,
      Were never folk so glad,
    The stones did rattle underneath,
      As if Cheapside were mad.

    John Gilpin at his horse's side
      Seized fast the flowing mane,
    And up he got, in haste to ride,
      But soon came down again;

    For saddletree scarce reach'd had he,
      His journey to begin,
    When, turning round his head, he saw
      Three customers come in.

    So down he came; for loss of time,
      Although it grieved him sore,
    Yet loss of pence, full well he knew,
      Would trouble him much more.

    'Twas long before the customers
      Were suited to their mind,
    When Betty screaming came down stairs,
      "The wine is left behind!"

    Good lack! quoth he--yet bring it me,
      My leathern belt likewise,
    In which I bear my trusty sword
      When I do exercise.

    Now mistress Gilpin (careful soul!)
      Had two stone bottles found,
    To hold the liquor that she loved,
      And keep it safe and sound.

    Each bottle had a curling ear,
      Through which the belt he drew,
    And hung a bottle on each side,
      To make his balance true.

    Then over all, that he might be
      Equipp'd from top to toe,
    His long red cloak, well brush'd and neat,
      He manfully did throw.

    Now see him mounted once again
      Upon his nimble steed,
    Full slowly pacing o'er the stones,
      With caution and good heed.

    But finding soon a smoother road
      Beneath his well shod feet,
    The snorting beast began to trot,
      Which gall'd him in his seat.

    So, fair and softly, John he cried,
      But John he cried in vain;
    That trot became a gallop soon,
      In spite of curb and rein.

    So stooping down, as needs he must
      Who cannot sit upright,
    He grasp'd the mane with both his hands,
      And eke with all his might.

    His horse, who never in that sort
      Had handled been before,
    What thing upon his back had got
      Did wonder more and more.

    Away went Gilpin, neck or nought;
      Away went hat and wig;
    He little dreamt, when he set out,
      Of running such a rig.

    The wind did blow, the cloak did fly,
      Like streamer long and gay,
    Till, loop and button failing both,
      At last it flew away.

    Then might all people well discern
      The bottles he had slung;
    A bottle swinging at each side,
      As hath been said or sung.

    The dogs did bark, the children scream'd
      Up flew the windows all;
    And every soul cried out, Well done!
      As loud as he could bawl.

    Away went Gilpin--who but he?
      His fame soon spread around,
    He carries weight! he rides a race!
      'Tis for a thousand pound!

    And still, as fast as he drew near,
      'Twas wonderful to view,
    How in a trice the turnpike men
      Their gates wide open threw.

    And now, as he went bowing down
      His reeking head full low,
    The bottles twain behind his back
      Were shatter'd at a blow.

    Down ran the wine into the road,
      Most piteous to be seen,
    Which made his horse's flanks to smoke,
      As they had basted been.

    But still he seem'd to carry weight,
      With leathern girdle braced;
    For all might see the bottle necks
      Still dangling at his waist.

    Thus all through merry Islington
      These gambols he did play,
    Until he came unto the Wash
      Of Edmonton so gay;

    And there he threw the wash about
      On both sides of the way,
    Just like unto a trundling mop,
      Or a wild goose at play.

    At Edmonton, his loving wife
      From the balcony spied
    Her tender husband, wondering much
      To see how he did ride.

    Stop, stop, John Gilpin!--Here's the house!
      They all at once did cry;
    The dinner waits, and we are tired:
      Said Gilpin--So am I!

    But yet his horse was not a whit
      Inclined to tarry there;
    For why?--his owner had a house
      Full ten miles off, at Ware.

    So like an arrow swift he flew,
      Shot by an archer strong;
    So did he fly--which brings me to
      The middle of my song.

    Away went Gilpin out of breath,
      And sore against his will,
    Till at his friend the calendrer's
      His horse at last stood still.

    The calendrer, amazed to see
      His neighbour in such trim,
    Laid down his pipe, flew to the gate,
      And thus accosted him:

    What news? what news? your tidings tell;
      Tell me you must and shall--
    Say why bareheaded you are come,
      Or why you come at all?

    Now Gilpin had a pleasant wit,
      And loved a timely joke!
    And thus unto the calendrer
      In merry guise he spoke:

    I came because your horse would come,
      And, if I well forebode,
    My hat and wig will soon be here,
      They are upon the road.

    The calendrer, right glad to find
      His friend in merry pin,
    Return'd him not a single word,
      But to the house went in;

    Whence straight he came with hat and wig;
      A wig that flow'd behind,
    A hat not much the worse for wear,
      Each comely in its kind.

    He held them up, and in his turn
      Thus show'd his ready wit:
    My head is twice as big as yours,
      They therefore needs must fit.

    But let me scrape the dirt away
      That hangs upon your face;
    And stop and eat, for well you may
      Be in a hungry case.

    Said John, It is my wedding-day,
      And all the world would stare,
    If wife should dine at Edmonton,
      And I should dine at Ware.

    So turning to his horse, he said,
      I am in haste to dine;
    'Twas for your pleasure you came here,
      You shall go back for mine.

    Ah luckless speech, and bootless boast!
      For which he paid full dear;
    For, while he spake, a braying ass
      Did sing most loud and clear;

    Whereat his horse did snort, as he
      Had heard a lion roar,
    And gallop'd off with all his might,
      As he had done before.

    Away went Gilpin, and away,
      Went Gilpin's hat and wig:
    He lost them sooner than at first,
      For why?--they were too big.

    Now mistress Gilpin, when she saw
      Her husband posting down
    Into the country far away,
      She pull'd out half-a-crown;

    And thus unto the youth she said,
      That drove them to the Bell,
    This shall be yours, when you bring back
      My husband safe and well.

    The youth did ride, and soon did meet
      John coming back amain;
    Whom in a trice he tried to stop,
      By catching at his rein;

    But, not performing what he meant,
      And gladly would have done,
    The frighted steed he frighted more,
      And made him faster run.

    Away went Gilpin, and away
      Went postboy at his heels,
    The postboy's horse right glad to miss
      The lumbering of the wheels.

    Six gentlemen upon the road
      Thus seeing Gilpin fly,
    With postboy scampering in the rear,
      They raised the hue and cry:--

    Stop thief! stop thief!--a highwayman!
      Not one of them was mute;
    And all and each that pass'd that way
      Did join in the pursuit.

    And now the turnpike gates again
      Flew open in short space;
    The toll-men thinking as before,
      That Gilpin rode a race.

    And so he did, and won it too,
      For he got first to town;
    Nor stopp'd till where he had got up
      He did again get down.

    Now let us sing, long live the king,
      And Gilpin long live he;
    And when he next doth ride abroad,
      May I be there to see!


THE NIGHTINGALE AND GLOWWORM.

    A Nightingale, that all day long
    Had cheer'd the village with his song,
    Nor yet at eve his note suspended,
    Nor yet when eventide was ended,
    Began to feel, as well he might,
    The keen demands of appetite;
    When, looking eagerly around
    He spied far off, upon the ground,
    A something shining in the dark,
    And knew the glowworm by his spark;
    So stooping down from hawthorn top,
    He thought to put him in his crop.
    The worm, aware of his intent,
    Harangued him thus, right eloquent--
      Did you admire my lamp, quoth he,
    As much as I your minstrelsy,
    You would abhor to do me wrong
    As much as I to spoil your song;
    For 'twas the self-same Power divine
    Taught you to sing, and me to shine;
    That you with music, I with light,
    Might beautify and cheer the night.
    The songster heard his short oration.
    And, warbling out his approbation,
    Released him, as my story tells,
    And found a supper somewhere else.
      Hence jarring sectaries may learn
    Their real interest to discern;
    That brother should not war with brother,
    And worry and devour each other;
    But sing and shine by sweet consent,
    Till life's poor transient night is spent,
    Respecting in each other's case
    The gifts of nature and of grace.
      Those Christians best deserve the name
    Who studiously make peace their aim;
    Peace both the duty and the prize
    Of him that creeps and him that flies.


AN EPISTLE TO AN AFFLICTED PROTESTANT LADY IN FRANCE.

    MADAM,

                A stranger's purpose in these lays
    Is to congratulate, and not to praise.
    To give the creature the Creator's due
    Were sin in me, and an offence to you.
    From man to man, or e'en to woman paid,
    Praise is the medium of a knavish trade,
    A coin by craft for folly's use design'd,
    Spurious, and only current with the blind.
      The path of sorrow, and that path alone,
    Leads to the land where sorrow is unknown;
    No traveller ever reach'd that blest abode,
    Who found not thorns and briers in his road.
    The world may dance along the flowery plain,
    Cheer'd as they go by many a sprightly strain,
    Where Nature has her mossy velvet spread,
    With unshod feet they yet securely tread,
    Admonish'd, scorn the caution and the friend,
    Bent all on pleasure, heedless of its end.
    But He, who knew what human hearts would prove,
    How slow to learn the dictates of his love,
    That, hard by nature and of stubborn will,
    A life of ease would make them harder still,
    In pity to the souls his grace design'd
    To rescue from the ruins of mankind,
    Call'd for a cloud to darken all their years,
    And said, "Go, spend them in the vale of tears."
    O balmy gales of soul-reviving air!
    O salutary streams, that murmur there!
    These flowing from the fount of grace above,
    Those breathed from lips of everlasting love.
    The flinty soil indeed their feet annoys;
    Chill blasts of trouble nip their springing joys;
    An envious world will interpose its frown,
    To mar delights superior to its own;
    And many a pang, experienced still within,
    Reminds them of their hated inmate, Sin:
    But ills of every shape and every name,
    Transform'd to blessings, miss their cruel aim:
    And every moment's calm, that soothes the breast,
    Is given in earnest of eternal rest.
      Ah, be not sad, although thy lot be cast
    Far from the flock, and in a boundless waste!
    No shepherd's tents within thy view appear,
    But the chief Shepherd even there is near;
    Thy tender sorrows and thy plaintive strain
    Flow in a foreign land, but not in vain;
    Thy tears all issue from a source divine,
    And every drop bespeaks a Saviour thine--
    So once in Gideon's fleece the dews were found,
    And drought on all the drooping herbs around.


TO THE REV. W. CAWTHORNE UNWIN.

    Unwin, I should but ill repay
      The kindness of a friend,
    Whose worth deserves as warm a lay
      As ever friendship penn'd,
    Thy name omitted in a page
    That would reclaim a vicious age.

    A union form'd, as mine with thee,
      Not rashly, or in sport,
    May be as fervent in degree
      And faithful in its sort,
    And may as rich in comfort prove,
    As that of true fraternal love.

    The bud inserted in the rind,
      The bud of peach or rose,
    Adorns, though differing in its kind,
      The stock whereon it grows,
    With flower as sweet, or fruit as fair,
    As if produced by nature there.

    Not rich, I render what I may,
      I seize thy name in haste,
    And place it in this first essay,
      Lest this should prove the last.
    'Tis where it should be--in a plan
    That holds in view the good of man.

    The poet's lyre, to fix his fame,
      Should be the poet's heart;
    Affection lights a brighter flame
      Than ever blazed by art.
    No muses on these lines attend,
    I sink the poet in the friend.


TO THE REVEREND MR. NEWTON

AN INVITATION INTO THE COUNTRY.

    The swallows in their torpid state
      Compose their useless wing,
    And bees in hives as idly wait
      The call of early Spring.

    The keenest frost that binds the stream,
      The wildest wind that blows,
    Are neither felt nor fear'd by them,
      Secure of their repose.

    But man, all feeling and awake,
      The gloomy scene surveys;
    With present ills his heart must ache,
      And pant for brighter days.

    Old Winter, halting o'er the mead,
      Bids me and Mary mourn;
    But lovely Spring peeps o'er his head,
      And whispers your return.

    Then April, with her sister May,
      Shall chase him from the bowers,
    And weave fresh garlands every day,
      To crown the smiling hours.

    And if a tear that speaks regret
      Of happier times, appear,
    A glimpse of joy, that we have met,
      Shall shine, and dry the tear.


CATHARINA.

ADDRESSED TO MISS STAPLETON, (NOW MRS. COURTNEY.)

    She came--she is gone--we have met--
      And meet perhaps never again;
    The sun of that moment is set,
      And seems to have risen in vain.
    Catharina has fled like a dream--
      (So vanishes pleasure, alas!)
    But has left a regret and esteem
      That will not so suddenly pass.

    The last evening ramble we made,
      Catharina, Maria, and I,
    Our progress was often delay'd
      By the nightingale warbling nigh.
    We paused under many a tree,
      And much she was charm'd with a tone,
    Less sweet to Maria and me,
      Who so lately had witnessed her own.

    My numbers that day she had sung,
      And gave them a grace so divine,
    As only her musical tongue
      Could infuse into numbers of mine.
    The longer I heard, I esteem'd
      The work of my fancy the more,
    And e'en to myself never seem'd
      So tuneful a poet before.

    Though the pleasures of London exceed
      In number the days of the year,
    Catharina, did nothing impede,
      Would feel herself happier here;
    For the close-woven arches of limes
      On the banks of our river, I know,
    Are sweeter to her many times
      Than aught that the city can show.

    So it is when the mind is endued
      With a well-judging taste from above,
    Then, whether embellish'd or rude,
      'Tis nature alone that we love.
    The achievements of art may amuse,
      May even our wonder excite;
    But groves, hills, and valleys diffuse
      A lasting, a sacred delight.

    Since then in the rural recess
      Catharina alone can rejoice,
    May it still be her lot to possess
      The scene of her sensible choice!
    To inhabit a mansion remote
      From the clatter of street-pacing steeds,
    And by Philomel's annual note
      To measure the life that she leads.

    With her book, and her voice, and her lyre,
      To wing all her moments at home;
    And with scenes that new rapture inspire,
      As oft as it suits her to roam;
    She will have just the life she prefers,
      With little to hope or to fear,
    And ours would be pleasant as hers,
      Might we view her enjoying it here.


THE MORALIZER CORRECTED.

A TALE.

    A hermit, (or if 'chance you hold
    That title now too trite and old,)
    A man, once young, who lived retired
    As hermit could have well desired,
    His hours of study closed at last,
    And finish'd his concise repast,
    Stoppled his cruise, replaced his book,
    Within its customary nook,
    And, staff in hand, set forth to share
    The sober cordial of sweet air,
    Like Isaac, with a mind applied
    To serious thought at evening-tide.
    Autumnal rains had made it chill,
    And from the trees, that fringed his hill,
    Shades slanting at the close of day,
    Chill'd more his else delightful way.
    Distant a little mile he spied
    A western bank's still sunny side,
    And right toward the favour'd place
    Proceeding with his nimblest pace,
    In hope to bask a little yet,
    Just reach'd it when the sun was set.
      Your hermit, young and jovial sirs!
    Learns something from whate'er occurs--
    And hence, he said, my mind computes
    The real worth of man's pursuits.
    His object chosen, wealth or fame,
    Or other sublunary game,
    Imagination to his view
    Presents it deck'd with every hue,
    That can seduce him not to spare
    His powers of best exertion there,
    But youth, health, vigour to expend
    On so desirable an end.
    Ere long approach life's evening shades
    The glow that fancy gave it fades;
    And, earn'd too late, it wants the grace
    That first engaged him in the chase.
      True, answer'd an angelic guide,
    Attendant at the senior's side--
    But whether all the time it cost,
    To urge the fruitless chase be lost,
    Must be decided by the worth
    Of that which call'd his ardour forth.
    Trifles pursued, whate'er the event,
    Must cause him shame or discontent;
    A vicious object still is worse,
    Successful there, he wins a curse;
    But he, whom e'en in life's last stage
    Endeavours laudable engage,
    Is paid at least in peace of mind,
    And sense of having well design'd;
    And if, ere he attain his end,
    His sun precipitate descend,
    A brighter prize than that he meant
    Shall recompense his mere intent.
    No virtuous wish can bear a date
    Either too early or too late.


THE FAITHFUL BIRD.

    The greenhouse is my summer seat;
    My shrubs displaced from that retreat
        Enjoy'd the open air;
    Two goldfinches, whose sprightly song
    Had been their mutual solace long,
        Lived happy prisoners there.

    They sang as blithe as finches sing,
    That flutter loose on golden wing,
        And frolic where they list;
    Strangers to liberty, 'tis true,
    But that delight they never knew,
        And therefore never miss'd.

    But nature works in every breast,
    With force not easily suppress'd;
        And Dick felt some desires,
    That, after many an effort vain,
    Instructed him at length to gain
        A pass between his wires.

    The open windows seem'd to invite
    The freeman to a farewell flight;
        But Tom was still confined;
    And Dick, although his way was clear,
    Was much too generous and sincere
        To leave his friend behind.

    So settling on his cage, by play,
    And chirp, and kiss, he seem'd to say,
        You must not live alone--
    Nor would he quit that chosen stand
    Till I, with slow and cautious hand,
          Return'd him to his own.

    O ye, who never taste the joys
    Of Friendship, satisfied with noise,
          Fandango, ball, and rout!
    Blush when I tell you how a bird
    A prison with a friend preferr'd
          To liberty without.


THE NEEDLESS ALARM.

A TALE.

    There is a field, through which I often pass,
    Thick overspread with moss and silky grass,
    Adjoining close to Kilwick's echoing wood,
    Where oft the bitch-fox hides her hapless brood,
    Reserved to solace many a neighbouring squire,
    That he may follow them through brake and brier,
    Contusion hazarding of neck, or spine,
    Which rural gentlemen call sport divine.
    A narrow brook, by rushy banks conceal'd,
    Runs in a bottom, and divides the field;
    Oaks intersperse it, that had once a head,
    But now wear crests of oven-wood instead;
    And where the land slopes to its watery bourn
    Wide yawns a gulf beside a ragged thorn;
    Bricks line the sides, but shiver'd long ago,
    And horrid brambles intertwine below;
    A hollow scoop'd, I judge, in ancient time,
    For baking earth, or burning rock to lime.
      Not yet the hawthorn bore her berries red,
    With which the fieldfare, wintry guest, is fed;
    Nor Autumn yet had brush'd from every spray,
    With her chill hand, the mellow leaves away;
    But corn was housed, and beans were in the stack,
    Now therefore issued forth the spotted pack,
    With tails high mounted, ears hung low, and throats
    With a whole gamut fill'd of heavenly notes,
    For which, alas! my destiny severe,
    Though ears she gave me two, gave me no ear.
      The sun, accomplishing his early march,
    His lamp now planted on heaven's topmost arch,
    When, exercise and air my only aim,
    And heedless whither, to that field I came,
    Ere yet with ruthless joy the happy hound
    Told hill and dale that Reynard's track was found,
    Or with the high-raised horn's melodious clang
    All Kilwick[824] and all Dinglederry[824] rang.
      Sheep grazed the field; some with soft bosom press'd
    The herb as soft, while nibbling stray'd the rest;
    Nor noise was heard but of the hasty brook,
    Struggling, detain'd in many a petty nook.
    All seem'd so peaceful, that, from them convey'd,
    To me their peace by kind contagion spread.
      But when the huntsman, with distended cheek,
    'Gan make his instrument of music speak,
    And from within the wood that crash was heard,
    Though not a hound from whom it burst appear'd,
    The sheep recumbent and the sheep that grazed,
    All huddling into phalanx, stood and gazed,
    Admiring, terrified, the novel strain,
    Then coursed the field around, and coursed it round again;
    But recollecting, with a sudden thought,
    That flight in circles urged advanced them nought,
    They gathered close around the old pit's brink,
    And thought again--but knew not what to think.
      The man to solitude accustom'd long,
    Perceives in every thing that lives a tongue;
    Not animals alone, but shrubs and trees
    Have speech for him, and understood with ease;
    After long drought, when rains abundant fall,
    He hears the herbs and flowers rejoicing all;
    Knows what the freshness of their hue implies,
    How glad they catch the largess of the skies;
    But, with precision nicer still, the mind
    He scans of every locomotive kind;
    Birds of all feather, beasts of every name;
    That serve mankind, or shun them, wild or tame;
    The looks and gestures of their griefs and fears
    Have all articulation in his ears;
    He spells them true by intuition's light,
    And needs no glossary to set him right.
      This truth premised was needful as a text,
    To win due credence to what follows next.
      Awhile they mused; surveying every face,
    Thou hadst supposed them of superior race;
    Their periwigs of wool and fears combined,
    Stamp'd on each countenance such marks of mind,
    That sage they seem'd, as lawyers o'er a doubt,
    Which, puzzling long, at last they puzzle out;
    Or academic tutors, teaching youths,
    Sure ne'er to want them, mathematic truths;
    When thus a mutton statelier than the rest,
    A ram, the ewes and wethers sad address'd.
      Friends! we have lived too long. I never heard
    Sounds such as these, so worthy to be fear'd.
    Could I believe, that winds for ages pent
    In earth's dark womb have found at last a vent,
    And from their prison-house below arise,
    With all these hideous howlings to the skies,
    I could be much composed, nor should appear,
    For such a cause to feel the slightest fear.
    Yourselves have seen, what time the thunders roll'd
    All night, me resting quiet in the fold.
    Or heard we that tremendous bray alone,
    I could expound the melancholy tone;
    Should deem it by our old companion made,
    The ass; for he, we know, has lately stray'd,
    And, being lost, perhaps, and wandering wide,
    Might be supposed to clamour for a guide.
    But ah! those dreadful yells what soul can hear,
    That owns a carcass, and not quake for fear?
    Demons produce them doubtless, brazen-claw'd
    And fang'd with brass the demons are abroad;
    I hold it therefore wisest and most fit
    That, life to save, we leap into the pit.
      Him answer'd then his loving mate and true,
    But more discreet than he, a Cambrian ewe.
      How! leap into the pit our life to save?
    To save our life leap all into the grave?
    For can we find it less? Contemplate first
    The depth how awful! falling there, we burst:
    Or should the brambles, interposed, our fall
    In part abate, that happiness were small;
    For with a race like theirs no chance I see
    Of peace or ease to creatures clad as we.
    Meantime, noise kills not. Be it Dapple's bray,
    Or be it not, or be it whose it may,
    And rush those other sounds, that seem by tongues
    Of demons utter'd, from whatever lungs,
    Sounds are but sounds, and, till the cause appear,
    We have at least commodious standing here.
    Come fiend, come fury, giant, monster, blast
    From earth or hell, we can but plunge at last.
      While thus she spake, I fainter heard the peals,
    For Reynard, close attended at his heels
    By panting dog, tired man, and spatter'd horse,
    Through mere good fortune, took a different course.
    The flock grew calm again, and I, the road
    Following, that led me to my own abode,
    Much wonder'd that the silly sheep had found
    Such cause of terror in an empty sound,
    So sweet to huntsman, gentleman, and hound.

  [824] Two woods belonging to John Throckmorton, Esq.


MORAL.

    Beware of desperate steps. The darkest day,
    Live till to-morrow, will have pass'd away.


BOADICEA.

AN ODE.

    When the British warrior queen,
      Bleeding from the Roman rods,
    Sought with an indignant mien,
      Counsel of her country's gods,

    Sage beneath the spreading oak
      Sat the Druid, hoary chief;
    Every burning word he spoke
      Full of rage, and full of grief.

    Princess! if our aged eyes
      Weep upon thy matchless wrongs,
    'Tis because resentment ties
      All the terrors of our tongues.

    Rome shall perish--write that word
      In the blood that she has spilt;
    Perish, hopeless and abhorr'd,
      Deep in ruin as in guilt.

    Rome, for empire far renown'd,
      Tramples on a thousand states;
    Soon her pride shall kiss the ground
      Hark! the Gaul is at her gates!

    Other Romans shall arise,
      Heedless of a soldier's name;
    Sounds, not arms, shall win the prize,
      Harmony the path to fame.

    Then the progeny that springs
      From the forests of our land,
    Arm'd with thunder, clad with wings,
      Shall a wider world command.

    Regions Cæsar never knew
      Thy posterity shall sway;
    Where his eagles never flew,
      None invincible as they.

    Such the bard's prophetic words,
      Pregnant with celestial fire,
    Bending as he swept the chords
      Of his sweet but awful lyre.

    She, with all a monarch's pride,
      Felt them in her bosom glow:
    Rush'd to battle, fought, and died;
      Dying, hurl'd them at the foe.

    Ruffians, pitiless as proud,
      Heaven awards the vengeance due;
    Empire is on us bestow'd,
      Shame and ruin wait for you.


HEROISM.

    There was a time when Ætna's silent fire
    Slept unperceiv'd, the mountain yet entire;
    When, conscious of no danger from below,
    She tower'd a cloud-capt pyramid of snow.
    No thunders shook with deep intestine sound
    The blooming groves that girdled her around.
    Her unctuous olives, and her purple vines
    (Unfelt the fury of those bursting mines)
    The peasant's hopes, and not in vain, assured,
    In peace upon her sloping sides matured.
    When on a day, like that of the last doom,
    A conflagration labouring in her womb,
    She teem'd and heaved with an infernal birth,
    That shook the circling seas and solid earth.
    Dark and voluminous the vapours rise,
    And hang their horrors in the neighbouring skies,
    While through the Stygian veil, that blots the day,
    In dazzling streaks the vivid lightnings play.
    But oh! what muse, and in what powers of song,
    Can trace the torrent as it burns along?
    Havoc and devastation in the van,
    It marches o'er the prostrate works of man;
    Vines, olives, herbage, forests disappear,
    And all the charms of a Sicilian year.
      Revolving seasons, fruitless as they pass,
    See it an uninformed and idle mass;
    Without a soil to invite the tiller's care,
    Or blade that might redeem it from despair.
    Yet time at length (what will not time achieve?)
    Clothes it with earth, and bids the produce live.
    Once more the spiry myrtle crowns the glade,
    And ruminating flocks enjoy the shade.
    O bliss precarious, and unsafe retreats,
    O charming Paradise of shortlived sweets!
    The self-same gale that wafts the fragrance round
    Brings to the distant ear a sullen sound:
    Again the mountain feels the imprison'd foe,
    Again pours ruin on the vale below.
    Ten thousand swains the wasted scene deplore,
    That only future ages can restore.
      Ye monarchs, whom the lure of honour draws,
    Who write in blood the merits of your cause,
    Who strike the blow, then plead your own defence,
    Glory your aim, but justice your pretence;
    Behold in Ætna's emblematic fires
    The mischiefs your ambitious pride inspires!
      Fast by the stream that bounds your just domain,
    And tells you where you have a right to reign,
    A nation dwells, not envious of your throne,
    Studious of peace, their neighbour's and their own,
    Ill-fated race! how deeply must they rue
    Their only crime, vicinity to you!
    The trumpet sounds, your legions swarm abroad,
    Through the ripe harvest lies their destined road;
    At every step beneath their feet they tread
    The life of multitudes, a nation's bread!
    Earth seems a garden in its loveliest dress
    Before them, and behind a wilderness.
    Famine, and Pestilence, her firstborn son,
    Attend to finish what the sword begun;
    And echoing praises, such as fiends might earn,
    And folly pays, resound at your return.
    A calm succeeds--but Plenty, with her train
    Of heartfelt joys, succeeds not soon again:
    And years of pining indigence must show
    What scourges are the gods that rule below.
      Yet man, laborious man, by slow degrees,
    (Such is his thirst of opulence and ease,)
    Plies all the sinews of industrious toil,
    Gleans up the refuse of the general spoil,
    Rebuilds the towers that smoked upon the plain,
    And the sun gilds the shining spires again.
      Increasing commerce and reviving art
    Renew the quarrel on the conqueror's part;
    And the sad lesson must be learn'd once more,
    That wealth within is ruin at the door.
    What are ye, monarchs, laurell'd heroes, say,
    But Ætnas of the suffering world ye sway?
    Sweet Nature, stripp'd of her embroider'd robe,
    Deplores the wasted regions of her globe;
    And stands a witness at Truth's awful bar,
    To prove you there destroyers as ye are.
      O place me in some heaven-protected isle,
    Where Peace, and Equity, and Freedom smile;
    Where no volcano pours his fiery flood,
    No crested warrior dips his plume in blood;
    Where Power secures what Industry has won;
    Where to succeed is not to be undone;
    A land that distant tyrants hate in vain,
    In Britain's isle, beneath a George's reign.


  ON
  THE RECEIPT OF MY MOTHER'S PICTURE
  OUT OF NORFOLK,

THE GIFT OF MY COUSIN, ANN BODHAM.

    O that those lips had language! Life has pass'd
    With me but roughly since I heard thee last.
    Those lips are thine--thy own sweet smile I see,
    The same that oft in childhood solaced me;
    Voice only fails, else how distinct they say,
    "Grieve not, my child, chase all thy fears away!"
    The meek intelligence of those dear eyes
    (Blest be the art that can immortalize,
    The art that baffles Time's tyrannic claim
    To quench it) here shines on me still the same.
      Faithful remembrancer of one so dear,
    O welcome guest, though unexpected here:
    Who bidst me honour with an artless song,
    Affectionate, a mother lost so long.
    I will obey, not willingly alone,
    But gladly, as the precept were her own:
    And, while that face renews my filial grief,
    Fancy shall weave a charm for my relief,
    Shall steep me in Elysian reverie,
    A momentary dream, that thou art she.
      My mother! when I learn'd that thou wast dead,
    Say, wast thou conscious of the tears I shed?
    Hover'd thy spirit o'er thy sorrowing son,
    Wretch even then, life's journey just begun?
    Perhaps thou gavest me, though unfelt, a kiss;
    Perhaps a tear, if souls can weep in bliss--
    Ah, that maternal smile! it answers--Yes.
    I heard the bell toll'd on thy burial day,
    I saw the hearse that bore thee slow away,
    And turning from my nursery window, drew
    A long, long sigh, and wept a last adieu!
    But was it such?--It was.--Where thou art gone
    Adieus and farewells are a sound unknown.
    May I but meet thee on that peaceful shore,
    The parting word shall pass my lips no more!
    Thy maidens, grieved themselves at my concern,
    Oft gave me promise of thy quick return.
    What ardently I wish'd, I long believed,
    And, disappointed still, was still deceived.
    By expectation every day beguiled,
    Dupe of to-morrow even from a child.
    Thus many a sad to-morrow came and went,
    Till, all my stock of infant sorrows spent,
    I learn'd at last submission to my lot,
    But, though I less deplored thee, ne'er forgot.
      Where once we dwelt our name is heard no more,
    Children not thine have trod my nursery floor;
    And where the gardener Robin, day by day,
    Drew me to school along the public way,
    Delighted with my bauble coach, and wrapp'd
    In scarlet mantle warm, and velvet capp'd,
    'Tis now become a history little known,
    That once we call'd the pastoral house our own.
    Short-lived possession! but the record fair,
    That memory keeps of all thy kindness there,
    Still outlives many a storm, that has effaced
    A thousand other themes less deeply traced.
    Thy nightly visits to my chamber made,
    That thou mightst know me safe and warmly laid;
    Thy morning bounties ere I left my home,
    The biscuit or confectionary plum;
    The fragrant waters on my cheeks bestow'd
    By thy own hand, till fresh they shone and glow'd:
    All this, and more endearing still than all,
    Thy constant flow of love that knew no fall,
    Ne'er roughen'd by those cataracts and breaks
    That humour interposed too often makes;
    All this still legible in memory's page,
    And still to be so to my latest age,
    Adds joy to duty, makes me glad to pay
    Such honours to thee as my numbers may;
    Perhaps a frail memorial, but sincere,
    Not scorn'd in heaven, though little noticed here.
      Could Time, his flight reversed, restore the hours,
    When, playing with thy vesture's tissued flowers,
    The violet, the pink, and jessamine,
    I prick'd them into paper with a pin,
    (And thou wast happier than myself the while,
    Wouldst softly speak, and stroke my head, and smile,)
    Could those few pleasant days again appear,
    Might one wish bring them, would I wish them here?
    I would not trust my heart--the dear delight
    Seems so to be desired, perhaps I might.--
    But no--what here we call our life is such,
    So little to be loved, and thou so much,
    That I should ill requite thee to constrain
    Thy unbound spirit into bonds again.
      Thou, as a gallant bark from Albion's coast
    (The storms all weather'd and the ocean cross'd)
    Shoots into port at some well-haven'd isle
    Where spices breathe, and brighter seasons smile,
    There sits quiescent on the floods, that show
    Her beauteous form reflected clear below,
    While airs impregnated with incense play
    Around her, fanning light her streamers gay:
    So thou, with sails how swift! hast reach'd the shore,
    "Where tempests never beat nor billows roar;"[825]
    And thy loved consort on the dangerous tide
    Of life long since has anchor'd by thy side.
    But me, scarce hoping to attain that rest,
    Always from port withheld, always distress'd--
    Me howling blasts drive devious, tempest-toss'd
    Sails ripp'd, seams opening wide, and compass lost,
    And day by day some current's thwarting force
    Sets me more distant from a prosperous course.
    But oh, the thought, that thou art safe, and he!
    That thought is joy, arrive what may to me.
    My boast is not that I deduce my birth
    From loins enthroned, and rulers of the earth;
    But higher far my proud pretensions rise--
    The son of parents pass'd into the skies.
    And now, farewell--Time unrevoked has run
    His wonted course, yet what I wish'd is done.
    By contemplation's help, not sought in vain,
    I seem to have lived my childhood o'er again;
    To have renew'd the joys that once were mine,
    Without the sin of violating thine;
    And, while the wings of fancy still are free,
    And I can view this mimic show of thee,
    Time has but half succeeded in his theft--
    Thyself removed, thy power to soothe me left.

  [825] Garth.


FRIENDSHIP.

    What virtue, or what mental grace
    But men unqualified and base
      Will boast it their possession?
    Profusion apes the noble part
    Of liberality of heart,
      And dullness of discretion.

    If every polish'd gem we find,
    Illuminating heart or mind,
      Provoke to imitation;
    No wonder friendship does the same,
    That jewel of the purest flame,
      Or rather constellation.

    No knave but boldly will pretend
    The requisites that form a friend,
      A real and a sound one;
    Nor any fool, he would deceive,
    But prove as ready to believe,
      And dream that he had found one.

    Candid, and generous, and just,
    Boys care but little whom they trust,
      An error soon corrected--
    For who but learns in riper years
    That man, when smoothest he appears,
      Is most to be suspected?

    But here again a danger lies,
    Lest, having misapplied our eyes,
      And taken trash for treasure,
    We should unwarily conclude
    Friendship a false ideal good,
      A mere Utopian pleasure.

    An acquisition rather rare
    Is yet no subject of despair;
      Nor is it wise complaining,
    If, either on forbidden ground,
    Or where it was not to be found,
      We sought without attaining.

    No friendship will abide the test,
    That stands on sordid interest,
      Or mean self-love erected;
    Nor such as may awhile subsist
    Between the sot and sensualist,
      For vicious ends connected.

    Who seek a friend should come disposed
    To exhibit, in full bloom disclosed,
      The graces and the beauties
    That form the character he seeks,
    For 'tis a union that bespeaks
      Reciprocated duties.

    Mutual attention is implied,
    And equal truth on either side,
      And constantly supported;
    'Tis senseless arrogance to accuse
    Another of sinister views,
      Our own as much distorted.

    But will sincerity suffice?
    It is indeed above all price,
      And must be made the basis;
    But every virtue of the soul
    Must constitute the charming whole,
      All shining in their places.

    A fretful temper will divide
    The closest knot that may be tied,
      By ceaseless sharp corrosion;
    A temper passionate and fierce
    May suddenly your joys disperse
      At one immense explosion.

    In vain the talkative unite
    In hopes of permanent delight--
      The secret just committed,
    Forgetting its important weight,
    They drop through mere desire to prate,
      And by themselves outwitted.

    How bright soe'er the prospect seems,
    All thoughts of friendship are but dreams,
      If envy chance to creep in;
    An envious man, if you succeed,
    May prove a dangerous foe indeed,
      But not a friend worth keeping.

    As envy pines at good possess'd,
    So jealousy looks forth distress'd
      On good that seems approaching;
    And, if success his steps attend,
    Discerns a rival in a friend,
      And hates him for encroaching.

    Hence authors of illustrious name,
    Unless belied by common fame,
      Are sadly prone to quarrel,
    To deem the wit a friend displays
    A tax upon their own just praise,
      And pluck each other's laurel.

    A man renown'd for repartee
    Will seldom scruple to make free
      With friendship's finest feeling,
    Will thrust a dagger at your breast,
    And say he wounded you in jest,
      By way of balm for healing.

    Whoever keeps an open ear
    For tattlers will be sure to hear
      The trumpet of contention;
    Aspersion is the babbler's trade,
    To listen is to lend him aid,
      And rush into dissension.

    A friendship that in frequent fits
    Of controversial rage emits
      The sparks of disputation,
    Like hand-in-hand insurance-plates,
    Most unavoidably creates
      The thought of conflagration.

    Some fickle creatures boast a soul
    True as a needle to the pole,
      Their humour yet so various--
    They manifest their whole life through
    The needle's deviations too,
      Their love is so precarious.

    The great and small but rarely meet
    On terms of amity complete;
      Plebeians must surrender,
    And yield so much to noble folk,
    It is combining fire with smoke,
      Obscurity with splendour.

    Some are so placid and serene
    (As Irish bogs are always green)
      They sleep secure from waking;
    And are indeed a bog, that bears
    Your unparticipated cares
      Unmoved and without quaking.

    Courtier and patriot cannot mix
    Their heterogeneous politics
      Without an effervescence,
    Like that of salts with lemon juice,
    Which does not yet like that produce
      A friendly coalescence.

    Religion should extinguish strife,
    And make a calm of human life;
      But friends that chance to differ
    On points which God has left at large,
    How freely will they meet and charge
      No combatants are stiffer.

    To prove at last my main intent
    Needs no expense of argument,
      No cutting and contriving--
    Seeking a real friend, we seem
    To adopt the chemist's golden dream,
      With still less hope of thriving.

    Sometimes the fault is all our own,
    Some blemish in due time made known
      By trespass or omission;
    Sometimes occasion brings to light
    Our friend's defect, long hid from sight,
      And even from suspicion.

    Then judge yourself, and prove your man
    As circumspectly as you can,
      And, having made election,
    Beware no negligence of yours,
    Such as a friend but ill endures,
      Enfeeble his affection.

    That secrets are a sacred trust,
    That friends should be sincere and just,
      That constancy befits them,
    Are observations on the case,
    That savour much of common place,
      And all the world admits them.

    But 'tis not timber, lead, and stone,
    An architect requires alone
      To finish a fine building--
    The palace were but half complete,
    If he could possibly forget
      The carving and the gilding.

    The man that hails you Tom or Jack,
    And proves by thumps upon your back
      How he esteems your merit,
    Is such a friend, that one had need
    Be very much his friend indeed
      To pardon or to bear it.

    As similarity of mind,
    Or something not to be defined,
      First fixes our attention;
    So manners decent and polite,
    The same we practised at first sight,
      Must save it from declension.

    Some act upon this prudent plan,
    "Say little, and hear all you can."
      Safe policy, but hateful--
    So barren sands imbibe the shower,
    But render neither fruit nor flower,
      Unpleasant and ungrateful.

    The man I trust, if shy to me,
    Shall find me as reserved as he,
      No subterfuge or pleading
    Shall win my confidence again;
    I will by no means entertain
      A spy on my proceeding.

    These samples--for alas! at last
    These are but samples, and a taste
      Of evils yet unmention'd--
    May prove the task a task indeed,
    In which 'tis much if we succeed,
      However well intention'd.

    Pursue the search, and you will find
    Good sense and knowledge of mankind
      To be at least expedient,
    And, after summing all the rest,
    Religion ruling in the breast
      A principal ingredient.

    The noblest Friendship ever shown
    The Saviour's history makes known,
      Though some have turn'd and turn'd it;
    And, whether being crazed or blind,
    Or seeking with a biass'd mind,
      Have not, it seems, discern'd it.

    O Friendship! if my soul forego
    Thy dear delights while here below,
      To mortify and grieve me,
    May I myself at last appear
    Unworthy, base, and insincere,
      Or may my friend deceive me!


ON A MISCHIEVOUS BULL,

WHICH THE OWNER OF HIM SOLD AT THE AUTHOR'S INSTANCE.

    Go--thou art all unfit to share
      The pleasures of this place
    With such as its old tenants are,
      Creatures of gentler race.

    The squirrel here his hoard provides,
      Aware of wintry storms,
    And woodpeckers explore the sides
      Of rugged oaks for worms.

    The sheep here smooths the knotted thorn
      With frictions of her fleece;
    And here I wander eve and morn,
      Like her, a friend to peace.

    Ah!--I could pity thee exiled
      From this secure retreat--
    I would not lose it to be styled
      The happiest of the great.

    But thou canst taste no calm delight;
      Thy pleasure is to show
    Thy magnanimity in fight,
      Thy prowess--therefore, go--

    I care not whether east or north,
      So I no more may find thee;
    The angry muse thus sings thee forth,
      And claps the gate behind thee.


ANNUS MEMORABILIS, 1789.

WRITTEN IN COMMEMORATION OF HIS MAJESTY'S HAPPY RECOVERY.

    I ransack'd for a theme of song,
    Much ancient chronicle, and long;
    I read of bright embattled fields,
    Of trophied helmets, spears, and shields,
    Of chiefs, whose single arm could boast
    Prowess to dissipate a host;
    Through tomes of fable and of dream
    I sought an eligible theme,
    But none I found, or found them shared
    Already by some happier bard.
      To modern times, with truth to guide
    My busy search, I next applied;
    Here cities won, and fleets dispersed,
    Urged loud a claim to be rehearsed,
    Deeds of unperishing renown,
    Our fathers' triumphs and our own.
      Thus as the bee, from bank to bower,
    Assiduous sips at every flower,
    But rests on none till that be found
    Where most nectareous sweets abound,
    So I, from theme to theme display'd
    In many a page historic, stray'd,
    Siege after siege, fight after fight,
    Contemplating with small delight,
    (For feats of sanguinary hue
    Not always glitter in my view,)
    Till, settling on the current year,
    I found the far-sought treasure near.
    A theme for poetry divine,
    A theme to ennoble even mine,
    In memorable eighty-nine.
      The spring of eighty-nine shall be
    An æra cherish'd long by me,
    Which joyful I will oft record,
    And thankful at my frugal board;
    For then the clouds of eighty-eight,
    That threaten'd England's trembling state
    With loss of what she least could spare,
    Her sovereign's tutelary care,
    One breath of heaven, that cried--Restore!
    Chased, never to assemble more:
    And for the richest crown on earth,
    If valued by its wearer's worth,
    The symbol of a righteous reign
    Sat fast on George's brows again.
      Then peace and joy again possess'd
    Our Queen's long-agitated breast;
    Such joy and peace as can be known
    By sufferers like herself alone,
    Who losing, or supposing lost,
    The good on earth they valued most,
    For that dear sorrow's sake forego
    All hope of happiness below,
    Then suddenly regain the prize,
    And flash thanksgivings to the skies!
      O Queen of Albion, queen of isles!
    Since all thy tears were changed to smiles,
    The eyes, that never saw thee, shine
    With joy not unallied to thine;
    Transports not chargeable with art
    Illume the land's remotest part,
    And strangers to the air of courts,
    Both in their toils and at their sports,
    The happiness of answer'd prayers,
    That gilds thy features, show in theirs.
      If they who on thy state attend,
    Awe-struck, before thy presence bend,
    'Tis but the natural effect
    Of grandeur that ensures respect;
    But she is something more than queen
    Who is beloved where never seen.


HYMN,

FOR THE USE OF THE SUNDAY SCHOOL AT OLNEY.

    Hear, Lord, the song of praise and prayer,
      In heaven thy dwelling place,
    From infants made the public care,
      And taught to seek thy face.

    Thanks for thy word, and for thy day,
      And grant us, we implore,
    Never to waste in sinful play
      Thy holy sabbaths more.

    Thanks that we hear,--but O impart
      To each desires sincere,
    That we may listen with our heart,
      And learn as well as hear.

    For if vain thoughts the minds engage
      Of older far than we,
    What hope, that, at our heedless age,
      Our minds should e'er be free?

    Much hope, if thou our spirits take
      Under thy gracious sway,
    Who canst the wisest wiser make,
      And babes as wise as they.

    Wisdom and bliss thy word bestows,
      A sun that ne'er declines,
    And be thy mercies shower'd on those
      Who placed us where it shines.


STANZAS.

SUBJOINED TO THE YEARLY BILL OF MORTALITY OF THE PARISH OF
ALL-SAINTS, NORTHAMPTON,[826] ANNO DOMINI 1787.

  [826] Composed for John Cox, parish clerk of Northampton.

    Pallida mors æquo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
      Regumque turres.--HORACE.

    Pale death with equal foot strikes wide the door
    Of royal halls and hovels of the poor.

    While thirteen moons saw smoothly run
      The Nen's barge-laden wave,
    All these, life's rambling journey done,
      Have found their home, the grave.

    Was man (frail always) made more frail
      Than in foregoing years?
    Did famine or did plague prevail,
      That so much death appears?

    No; these were vigorous as their sires,
      Nor plague nor famine came;
    This annual tribute Death requires,
      And never waves his claim.

    Like crowded forest trees we stand,
      And some are mark'd to fall;
    The axe will smite at God's command,
      And soon shall smite us all.

    Green as the bay tree, ever green,
      With its new foliage on,
    The gay, the thoughtless, have I seen,
      I pass'd--and they were gone.

    Read, ye that run, the awful truth
      With which I charge my page;
    A worm is in the bud of youth,
      And at the root of age.

    No present health can health ensure
      For yet an hour to come;
    No medicine, though it oft can cure,
      Can always balk the tomb.

    And O! that humble as my lot,
      And scorn'd as is my strain,
    These truths, though known, too much forgot,
      I may not teach in vain.

    So prays your clerk with all his heart,
      And, ere he quits the pen,
    Begs _you_ for once to take _his_ part,
      And answer all--Amen!


ON A SIMILAR OCCASION.

FOR THE YEAR 1788.

                Quod adest, memento
    Componere æquus. Cætera fluminis
    Ritu feruntur.--HORACE.

    Improve the present hour, for all beside
    Is a mere feather on a torrent's tide.

    Could I, from heaven inspired, as sure presage
    To whom the rising year shall prove his last,
    As I can number in my punctual page,
    And item down the victims of the past;

    How each would trembling wait the mournful sheet,
    On which the press might stamp him next to die;
    And, reading here his sentence, how replete
    With anxious meaning, heavenward turn his eye!

    Time then would seem more precious than the joys
    In which he sports away the treasure now;
    And prayer more seasonable than the noise
    Of drunkards, or the music-drawing bow.

    Then doubtless many a trifler, on the brink
    Of this world's hazardous and headlong shore,
    Forced to a pause, would feel it good to think,
    Told that his setting sun must rise no more.

    Ah self-deceived! Could I prophetic say
    Who next is fated, and who next to fall,
    The rest might then seem privileged to play;
    But, naming none, the Voice now speaks to ALL.

    Observe the dappled foresters, how light
    They bound and airy o'er the sunny glade--
    One falls--the rest, wide scatter'd with affright,
    Vanish at once into the darkest shade.

    Had we their wisdom, should we, often warn'd,
    Still need repeated warnings, and at last,
    A thousand awful admonitions scorn'd,
    Die self-accused of life run all to waste!

    Sad waste! for which no after-thrift atones.
    The grave admits no cure for guilt or sin;
    Dewdrops may deck the turf that hides the bones,
    But tears of godly grief ne'er flow within.

    Learn then, ye living! by the mouths be taught
    Of all these sepulchres, instructors true,
    That, soon or late, death also is your lot,
    And the next opening grave may yawn for you.


ON A SIMILAR OCCASION.

FOR THE YEAR 1789.

  --Placidâque ibi demum morte quievit.--VIRG.

  There calm at length he breathed his soul away.

    "O most delightful hour by man
      Experienced here below,
    The hour that terminates his span,
      His folly and his woe!

    "Worlds should not bribe me back to tread
      Again life's dreary waste,
    To see again my day o'erspread
      With all the gloomy past.

    "My home henceforth is in the skies,
      Earth, seas, and sun, adieu!
    All heaven unfolded to my eyes,
      I have no sight for you."

    So spake Aspasio, firm possess'd
      Of faith's supporting rod,
    Then breathed his soul into its rest,
      The bosom of his God.

    He was a man among the few
      Sincere on virtue's side;
    And all his strength from Scripture drew,
      To hourly use applied.

    That rule he prized, by that he fear'd,
      He hated, hoped, and loved;
    Nor ever frown'd, or sad appear'd,
      But when his heart had roved.

    For he was frail as thou or I,
      And evil felt within;
    But when he felt it, heaved a sigh,
      And loathed the thought of sin.

    Such lived Aspasio; and at last
      Call'd up from earth to heaven,
    The gulf of death triumphant pass'd,
      By gales of blessing driven.

    His joys be mine, each reader cries,
      When my last hour arrives:
    They shall be yours, my verse replies,
      Such only be your lives.


ON A SIMILAR OCCASION.

FOR THE YEAR 1790.

  Ne commonentem recta sperne.--BUCHANAN.

  Despise not my good counsel.

    He who sits from day to day
      Where the prison'd lark is hung,
    Heedless of his loudest lay,
      Hardly knows that he has sung.

    Where the watchman in his round
      Nightly lifts his voice on high,
    None, accustom'd to the sound,
      Wakes the sooner for his cry.

    So your verse-man I, and clerk,
      Yearly in my song proclaim
    Death at hand--yourselves his mark--
      And the foe's unerring aim.

    Duly at my time I come,
      Publishing to all aloud--
    Soon the grave must be your home,
      And your only suit, a shroud,

    But the monitory strain,
      Oft repeated in your ears,
    Seems to sound too much in vain,
      Wins no notice, wakes no fears.

    Can a truth, by all confess'd
      Of such magnitude and weight,
    Grow, by being oft impress'd,
      Trivial as a parrot's prate?

    Pleasure's call attention wins,
      Hear it often as we may;
    New as ever seem our sins,
      Though committed every day.

    Death and judgment, heaven and hell--
      These alone, so often heard,
    No more move us than the bell
      When some stranger is interr'd.

    O then, ere the turf or tomb
      Cover us from every eye,
    Spirit of instruction, come,
      Make us learn that we must die.


ON A SIMILAR OCCASION,

FOR THE YEAR 1792.

    Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
    Atque metus omnes et inexorabile fatum
    Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari!

  VIRG.

    Happy the mortal who has traced effects
    To their first cause, cast fear beneath his feet,
    And death and roaring hell's voracious fires!

    Thankless for favours from on high,
      Man thinks he fades too soon;
    Though 'tis his privilege to die,
      Would he improve the boon.

    But he, not wise enough to scan
      His blest concerns aright,
    Would gladly stretch life's little span
      To ages, if he might.

    To ages in a world of pain,
      To ages, where he goes
    Gall'd by affliction's heavy chain,
      And hopeless of repose.

    Strange fondness of the human heart,
      Enamour'd of its harm!
    Strange world, that costs it so much smart,
      And still has power to charm.

    Whence has the world her magic power?
      Why deem we death a foe?
    Recoil from weary life's best hour,
      And covet longer woe?

    The cause is Conscience--Conscience oft
      Her tale of guilt renews:
    Her voice is terrible though soft,
      And dread of death ensues.

    Then anxious to be longer spared
      Man mourns his fleeting breath:
    All evils then seem light, compared
      With the approach of death.

    'Tis judgment shakes him: there's the fear
      That prompts the wish to stay:
    He has incurr'd a long arrear,
      And must despair to pay.

    _Pay!_--follow Christ, and all is paid;
      is death your peace ensures;
    Think on the grave where _he_ was laid,
      And calm descend to _yours_.


ON A SIMILAR OCCASION.

FOR THE YEAR 1793.

  De sacris autem hæc sit una sententia, ut conserventur.

  CIC. DE LEG.

  But let us all concur in this one sentiment, that things sacred be
        inviolate.

    He lives who lives to God alone,
      And all are dead beside;
    For other source than God is none
      Whence life can be supplied

    To live to God is to requite
      His love as best we may:
    To make his precepts our delight,
      His promises our stay.

    But life, within a narrow ring
      Of giddy joys comprised,
    Is falsely named, and no such thing,
      But rather death disguised.

    Can life in them deserve the name,
      Who only live to prove
    For what poor toys they can disclaim
      An endless life above?

    Who, much diseased, yet nothing feel;
      Much menaced, nothing dread;
    Have wounds, which only God can heal,
      Yet never ask his aid?

    Who deem his house a useless place,
      Faith, want of common sense;
    And ardour in the Christian race,
      A hypocrite's pretence?

    Who trample order; and the day
      Which God asserts his own
    Dishonour with unhallow'd play,
      And worship chance alone?

    If scorn of God's commands, impress'd
      On word and deed, imply
    The better part of man unbless'd
      With life that cannot die;

    Such want it, and that want uncured
      Till man resigns his breath,
    Speaks him a criminal, assured
      Of everlasting death.

    Sad period to a pleasant course!
      Yet so will God repay
    Sabbaths profaned without remorse,
      And mercy cast away.


ON A GOLDFINCH,

STARVED TO DEATH IN HIS CAGE.

    Time was when I was free as air,
    The thistle's downy seed my fare,
      My drink the morning dew;
    I perch'd at will on every spray,
    My form genteel, my plumage gay,
      My strains for ever new.

    But gaudy plumage, sprightly strain,
    And form genteel were all in vain,
      And of a transient date;
    For, caught and caged, and starved to death,
    In dying sighs my little breath
      Soon pass'd the wiry grate.

    Thanks, gentle swain, for all my woes,
    And thanks for this effectual close
      And cure of every ill!
    More cruelty could none express;
    And I, if you had shown me less,
      Had been your prisoner still.


THE PINE-APPLE AND THE BEE.

    The pine-apples, in triple row,
    Were basking hot, and all in blow;
    A bee of most discerning taste
    Perceived the fragrance as he pass'd,
    On eager wing the spoiler came,
    And search'd for crannies in the frame,
    Urged his attempt on every side,
    To every pane his trunk applied;
    But still in vain, the frame was tight,
    And only pervious to the light:
    Thus having wasted half the day,
    He trimm'd his flight another way.
      Methinks, I said, in thee I find
    The sin and madness of mankind.
    To joys forbidden man aspires,
    Consumes his soul with vain desires;
    Folly the spring of his pursuit,
    And disappointment all the fruit.
    While Cynthio ogles, as she passes,
    The nymph between two chariot glasses,
    She is the pineapple, and he
    The silly unsuccessful bee.
    The maid who views with pensive air
    The show-glass fraught with glittering ware,
    Sees watches, bracelets, rings, and lockets,
    But sighs at thought of empty pockets;
    Like thine, her appetite is keen,
    But ah, the cruel glass between!
      Our dear delights are often such,
    Exposed to view, but not to touch;
    The sight our foolish heart inflames,
    We long for pine-apples in frames;
    With hopeless wish one looks and lingers;
    One breaks the glass, and cuts his fingers;
    But they whom truth and wisdom lead
    Can gather honey from a weed.


VERSES WRITTEN AT BATH, ON FINDING THE HEEL OF A SHOE.

    Fortune! I thank thee: gentle goddess! thanks!
    Not that my muse, though bashful, shall deny
    She would have thank'd thee rather hadst thou cast
    A treasure in her way; for neither meed
    Of early breakfast, to dispel the fumes,
    And bowel-racking pains of emptiness,
    Nor noontide feast, nor evening's cool repast,
    Hopes she from this--presumptuous, though, perhaps
    The cobbler, leather-carving artist! might.
    Nathless she thanks thee and accepts thy boon,
    Whatever; not as erst the fabled cock,
    Vain-glorious fool! unknowing what he found,
    Spurn'd the rich gem thou gavest him. Wherefore, ah!
    Why not on me that favour, (worthier sure!)
    Conferr'dst thou, goddess! Thou art blind thou say'st:
    Enough!--thy blindness shall excuse the deed.
      Nor does my muse no benefit exhale
    From this thy scant indulgence!--even here
    Hints worthy sage philosophy are found;
    Illustrious hints, to moralize my song!
    This ponderous heel of perforated hide
    Compact, with pegs indented, many a row,
    Haply (for such its massy form bespeaks)
    The weighty tread of some rude peasant clown
    Upbore: on this, supported oft, he stretch'd,
    With uncouth strides, along the furrow'd glebe,
    Flattening the stubborn clod, till cruel time
    (What will not cruel time?) on a wry step
    Sever'd the strict cohesion; when, alas!
    He, who could erst, with even, equal pace,
    Pursue his destined way with symmetry,
    And some proportion form'd, now on one side
    Curtail'd and maim'd, the sport of vagrant boys,
    Cursing his frail supporter, treacherous prop!
    With toilsome steps, and difficult, moves on.
    Thus fares it oft with other than the feet
    Of humble villager--the statesman thus,
    Up the steep road where proud ambition leads,
    Aspiring, first uninterrupted winds
    His prosperous way; nor fears miscarriage foul,
    While policy prevails, and friends prove true;
    But, that support soon failing, by him left
    On whom he most depended, basely left,
    Betray'd, deserted; from his airy height
    Headlong he falls; and through the rest of life
    Drags the dull load of disappointment on.

  1748.


AN ODE,

ON READING RICHARDSON'S HISTORY OF SIR CHARLES GRANDISON.

    Say, ye apostate and profane,
    Wretches, who blush not to disdain
        Allegiance to your God,--
    Did e'er your idly wasted love
    Of virtue for her sake remove
      And lift you from the crowd?

    Would you the race of glory run,
    Know, the devout, and they alone,
      Are equal to the task:
    The labours of the illustrious course
    Far other than the unaided force
      Of human vigour ask.

    To arm against reputed ill
    The patient heart too brave to feel
      The tortures of despair:
    Nor safer yet high-crested pride,
    When wealth flows in with every tide
      To gain admittance there.

    To rescue from the tyrant's sword
    The oppress'd; unseen and unimplored,
      To cheer the face of woe;
    From lawless insult to defend
    An orphan's right--a fallen friend,
      And a forgiven foe;

    These, these distinguish from the crowd,
    And these alone, the great and good,
      The guardians of mankind;
    Whose bosoms with these virtues heave,
    O with what matchless speed they leave
      The multitude behind!

    Then ask ye, from what cause on earth
    Virtues like these derive their birth?
      Derived from Heaven alone,
    Full on that favour'd breast they shine,
    Where faith and resignation join
      To call the blessing down.

    Such is that heart:--but while the muse
    Thy theme, O Richardson, pursues,
      Her feeble spirits faint:
    She cannot reach, and would not wrong,
    The subject for an angel's song,
      The hero, and the saint!

1753.


AN EPISTLE TO ROBERT LLOYD, ESQ.

    'Tis not that I design to rob
    Thee of thy birthright, gentle Bob,
    For thou art born sole heir, and single,
    Of dear Mat Prior's easy jingle;
    Not that I mean, while thus I knit
    My threadbare sentiments together,
    To show my genius or my wit,
    When God and you know I have neither;
    Or such as might be better shown
    By letting poetry alone.
    'Tis not with either of these views
    That I presumed to address the muse:
    But to divert a fierce banditti,
    (Sworn foes to every thing that's witty!)
    That, with a black, infernal train,
    Make cruel inroads in my brain,
    And daily threaten to drive thence
    My little garrison of sense;
    The fierce banditti which I mean
    Are gloomy thoughts led on by spleen.
    Then there's another reason yet,
    Which is, that I may fairly quit
    The debt, which justly became due
    The moment when I heard from you;
    And you might grumble, crony mine,
    If paid in any other coin;
    Since twenty sheets of lead, God knows,
    (I would say twenty sheets of prose,)
    Can ne'er be deem'd worth half so much
    As one of gold, and yours was such.
    Thus, the preliminaries settled,
    I fairly find myself pitchkettled,[827]
    And cannot see, though few see better,
    How I shall hammer out a letter.
      First, for a thought--since all agree--
    A thought--I have it--let me see--
    'Tis gone again--plague on't! I thought
    I had it--but I have it not.
    Dame Gurton thus, and Hodge her son,
    That useful thing, her needle, gone!
    Rake well the cinders--sweep the floor,
    And sift the dust behind the door;
    While eager Hodge beholds the prize
    In old grimalkin's glaring eyes;
    And Gammer finds it, on her knees,
    In every shining straw she sees.
    This simile were apt enough;
    But I've another, critic-proof!
    The virtuoso thus, at noon,
    Broiling beneath a July sun,
    The gilded butterfly pursues,
    O'er hedge and ditch, through gaps and mews;
    And, after many a vain essay,
    To captivate the tempting prey,
    Gives him at length the lucky pat,
    And has him safe beneath his hat:
    Then lifts it gently from the ground;
    But, ah! 'tis lost as soon as found;
    Culprit his liberty regains,
    Flits out of sight, and mocks his pains.
    The sense was dark; 'twas therefore fit
    With simile to illustrate it;
    But as too much obscures the sight,
    As often as too little light,
    We have our similes cut short,
    For matters of more grave import.
    That Matthew's numbers run with ease,
    Each man of common sense agrees!
    All men of common sense allow
    That Robert's lines are easy too:
    Where then the preference shall we place,
    Or how do justice in this case?
    Matthew (says Fame,) with endless pains
    Smoothed and refined the meanest strains;
    Nor suffer'd one ill chosen rhyme
    To escape him at the idlest time;
    And thus o'er all a lustre cast,
    That, while the language lives shall last.
    A'nt please your ladyship (quoth I,)
    For 'tis my business to reply;
    Sure so much labour, so much toil,
    Bespeak at least a stubborn soil:
    Theirs be the laurel-wreath decreed,
    Who both write well, and write full speed!
    Who throw their Helicon about
    As freely as a conduit spout!
    Friend Robert, thus like _chien savant_
    Lets fall a poem _en passant_,
    Nor needs his genuine ore refine--
    'Tis ready polish'd from the mine.

  [827] Pitchkettled, a favourite phrase at the time when this Epistle
  was written, expressive of being puzzled, or what in the Spectator's
  time would have been called bamboozled.


A TALE, FOUNDED ON A FACT,

WHICH HAPPENED IN JANUARY, 1779.

    Where Humber pours his rich commercial stream
    There dwelt a wretch, who breathed but to blaspheme;
    In subterraneous caves his life he led,
    Black as the mine in which he wrought for bread.
    When on a day, emerging from the deep,
    A sabbath-day, (such sabbaths thousands keep!)
    The wages of his weekly toil he bore
    To buy a cock--whose blood might win him more;
    As if the noblest of the feather'd kind
    Were but for battle and for death design'd;
    As if the consecrated hours were meant
    For sport, to minds on cruelty intent;
    It chanced (such chances Providence obey)
    He met a fellow labourer on the way,
    Whose heart the same desires had once inflamed;
    But now the savage temper was reclaim'd,
    Persuasion on his lips had taken place;
    For all plead well who plead the cause of grace.
    His iron heart with scripture he assail'd,
    Woo'd him to hear a sermon, and prevail'd.
    His faithful bow the mighty preacher drew,
    Swift as the lightning-glimpse the arrow flew.
    He wept; he trembled; cast his eyes around,
    To find a worse than he; but none he found.
    He felt his sins, and wonder'd he should feel.
    Grace made the wound, and grace alone could heal.
      Now farewell oaths, and blasphemies, and lies!
    He quits the sinner's for the martyr's prize.
    That holy day was wash'd with many a tear,
    Gilded with hope, yet shaded too by fear.
    The next, his swarthy brethren of the mine
    Learn'd, by his altered speech, the change divine!
    Laugh'd when they should have wept, and swore the day
    Was nigh when he would swear as fast as they.
    "No," said the penitent, "such words shall share
    This breath no more; devoted now to prayer.
    O! if Thou seest (thine eye the future sees)
    That I shall yet again blaspheme, like these;
    Now strike me to the ground on which I kneel,
    Ere yet this heart relapses into steel;
    Now take me to that heaven I once defied,
    Thy presence, thy embrace!"--He spoke, and died!


TO THE REV. MR. NEWTON, ON HIS RETURN FROM RAMSGATE.

    That ocean you have late survey'd,
      Those rocks I too have seen;
    But I, afflicted and dismay'd,
      You, tranquil and serene.

    You from the flood-controlling steep
      Saw stretch'd before your view,
    With conscious joy, the threatening deep,
      No longer such to you.

    To me the waves, that ceaseless broke
      Upon the dangerous coast,
    Hoarsely and ominously spoke
      Of all my treasure lost.

    Your sea of troubles you have past,
      And found the peaceful shore;
    I, tempest-toss'd, and wreck'd at last,
      Come home to port no more.

Oct. 1780.


LOVE ABUSED.

    What is there in the vale of life
    Half so delightful as a wife,
    When friendship, love, and peace combine
    To stamp the marriage-bond divine?
    The stream of pure and genuine love
    Derives its current from above;
    And earth a second Eden shows,
    Where'er the healing water flows:
    But ah, if from the dykes and drains
    Of sensual nature's feverish veins,
    Lust, like a lawless headstrong flood,
    Impregnated with ooze and mud,
    Descending fast on every side,
    Once mingles with the sacred tide,
    Farewell the soul-enlivening scene!
    The banks that wore a smiling green,
    With rank defilement overspread,
    Bewail their flowery beauties dead.
    The stream polluted, dark, and dull,
    Diffused into a Stygian pool,
    Through life's last melancholy years
    Is fed with overflowing tears:
    Complaints supply the zephyr's part,
    And sighs that heave a breaking heart.


A POETICAL EPISTLE TO LADY AUSTEN.

    DEAR ANNA--between friend and friend
    Prose answers every common end;
    Serves, in a plain and homely way,
    To express the occurrence of the day;
    Our health, the weather, and the news;
    What walks we take, what books we choose;
    And all the floating thoughts we find
    Upon the surface of the mind.
      But when a poet takes the pen,
    Far more alive than other men,
    He feels a gentle tingling come
    Down to his finger and his thumb,
    Derived from nature's noblest part,
    The centre of a glowing heart:
    And this is what the world, who knows
    No flights above the pitch of prose,
    His more sublime vagaries slighting,
    Denominates an itch for writing.
    No wonder I, who scribble rhyme
    To catch the triflers of the time,
    And tell them truths divine and clear,
    Which, couch'd in prose, they will not hear;
    Who labour hard to allure and draw
    The loiterers I never saw,
    Should feel that itching and that tingling,
    With all my purpose intermingling,
    To your intrinsic merit true,
    When call'd to address myself to you.
      Mysterious are His ways whose power
    Brings forth that unexpected hour,
    When minds, that never met before,
    Shall meet, unite, and part no more:
    It is the allotment of the skies,
    The hand of the Supremely Wise,
    That guides and governs our affections,
    And plans and orders our connexions:
    Directs us in our distant road,
    And marks the bounds of our abode.
    Thus we were settled when you found us,
    Peasants and children all around us,
    Not dreaming of so dear a friend,
    Deep in the abyss of Silver-End.[828]
    Thus Martha, e'en against her will,
    Perch'd on the top of yonder hill;
    And you, though you must needs prefer
    The fairer scenes of sweet Sancerre,[829]
    Are come from distant Loire, to choose
    A cottage on the banks of Ouse.
    This page of Providence quite new,
    And now just opening to our view,
    Employs our present thoughts and pains
    To guess and spell what it contains:
    But day by day, and year by year,
    Will make the dark enigma clear;
    And furnish us, perhaps, at last,
    Like other scenes already past,
    With proof, that we, and our affairs,
    Are part of a Jehovah's cares;
    For God unfolds by slow degrees
    The purport of his deep decrees;
    Sheds every hour a clearer light
    In aid of our defective sight;
    And spreads, at length, before the soul,
    A beautiful and perfect whole,
    Which busy man's inventive brain
    Toils to anticipate in vain.
      Say, Anna, had you never known
    The beauties of a rose full blown,
    Could you, though luminous your eye,
    By looking on the bud descry,
    Or guess with a prophetic power,
    The future splendour of the flower?
    Just so the Omnipotent, who turns
    The system of a world's concerns,
    From mere minutiæ can educe
    Events of most important use;
    And bid a dawning sky display
    The blaze of a meridian day.
    The works of man tend, one and all,
    As needs they must, from great to small;
    And vanity absorbs at length
    The monuments of human strength.
    But who can tell how vast the plan
    Which this day's incident began?
    Too small, perhaps, the slight occasion
    For our dim-sighted observation;
    It pass'd unnoticed, as the bird
    That cleaves the yielding air unheard,
    And yet may prove, when understood,
    A harbinger of endless good.
      Not that I deem, or mean to call
    Friendship a blessing cheap or small:
    But merely to remark, that ours,
    Like some of nature's sweetest flowers,
    Rose from a seed of tiny size
    That seem'd to promise no such prize;
    A transient visit intervening,
    And made almost without a meaning,
    (Hardly the effect of inclination,
    Much less of pleasing expectation,)
    Produced a friendship, then begun,
    That has cemented us in one;
    And placed it in our power to prove,
    By long fidelity and love,
    That Solomon has wisely spoken;
    "A threefold cord is not soon broken."

  Dec. 1781.

  [828] An obscure part of Olney, adjoining to the residence of
  Cowper, which faced the market-place.

  [829] Lady Austen's residence in France.


THE COLUBRIAD.

    Close by the threshold of a door nail'd fast
    Three kittens sat; each kitten look'd aghast.
    I, passing swift and inattentive by,
    At the three kittens cast a careless eye;
    Not much concern'd to know what they did there;
    Not deeming kittens worth a poet's care.
    But presently a loud and furious hiss
    Caused me to stop, and to exclaim, "What's this?"
    When lo! upon the threshold met my view
    With head erect, and eyes of fiery hue,
    A viper, long as Count de Grasse's queue.
    Forth from his head his forked tongue he throws,
    Darting it full against a kitten's nose;
    Who, having never seen, in field or house,
    The like, sat still and silent as a mouse;
    Only projecting, with attention due,
    Her whisker'd face, she ask'd him, "Who are you?"
    On to the hall went I, with pace not slow,
    But swift as lightning, for a long Dutch hoe:
    With which well arm'd I hasten'd to the spot,
    To find the viper, but I found him not.
    And, turning up the leaves and shrubs around,
    Found only that he was not be found.
    But still the kittens, sitting as before,
    Sat watching close the bottom of the door.
    "I hope," said I, "the villain I would kill
    Has slipp'd between the door and the door-sill;
    And if I make despatch, and follow hard,
    No doubt but I shall find him in the yard:"
    For long ere now it should have been rehearsed,
    'Twas in the garden that I found him first.
    E'en there I found him, there the full-grown cat,
    His head, with velvet paw, did gently pat;
    As curious as the kittens erst had been
    To learn what this phenomenon might mean.
    Fill'd with heroic ardour at the sight,
    And fearing every moment he would bite,
    And rob our household of our only cat
    That was of age to combat with a rat;
    With outstretch'd hoe I slew him at the door,
    And taught him NEVER TO COME THERE NO MORE.

  1782.


SONG. ON PEACE.

Written in the summer of 1783, at the request of Lady Austen, who
gave the sentiment.

AIR--"_My fond Shepherds of late._"

    No longer I follow a sound;
      No longer a dream I pursue;
    O happiness! not to be found,
      Unattainable treasure, adieu!

    I have sought thee in splendour and dress,
      In the regions of pleasure and taste;
    I have sought thee, and seem'd to possess,
      But have proved thee a vision at last.

    An humble ambition and hope
      The voice of true wisdom inspires;
    'Tis sufficient, if peace be the scope,
      And the summit of all our desires.

    Peace may be the lot of the mind
      That seeks it in meekness and love;
    But rapture and bliss are confined
      To the glorified spirits above.


SONG.

Also written at the request of Lady Austen.

AIR--"_The Lass of Pattie's Mill._"

    When all within is peace,
      How nature seems to smile!
    Delights that never cease
      The livelong day beguile.
    From morn to dewy eve
      With open hand she showers
    Fresh blessings, to deceive
      And soothe the silent hours.

    It is content of heart
      Gives Nature power to please;
    The mind that feels no smart
      Enlivens all it sees;
    Can make a wintry sky
      Seem bright as smiling May,
    And evening's closing eye
      As peep of early day.

    The vast majestic globe,
      So beauteously array'd
    In Nature's various robe,
      With wondrous skill display'd,
    Is to a mourner's heart
      A dreary wild at best;
    It flutters to depart,
      And longs to be at rest.


VERSES SELECTED FROM AN OCCASIONAL POEM ENTITLED "VALEDICTION."

    Oh Friendship! cordial of the human breast!
    So little felt, so fervently profess'd!
    Thy blossoms deck our unsuspecting years;
    The promise of delicious fruit appears:
    We hug the hopes of constancy and truth,
    Such is the folly of our dreaming youth;
    But soon, alas! detect the rash mistake
    That sanguine inexperience loves to make;
    And view with tears the expected harvest lost,
    Decay'd by time, or wither'd by a frost.
    Whoever undertakes a friend's great part
    Should be renew'd in nature, pure in heart,
    Prepared for martyrdom, and strong to prove
    A thousand ways the force of genuine love.
    He may be call'd to give up health and gain,
    To exchange content for trouble, ease for pain,
    To echo sigh for sigh, and groan for groan,
    And wet his cheeks with sorrows not his own.
    The heart of man, for such a task too frail,
    When most relied on is most sure to fail;
    And, summon'd to partake its fellow's woe,
    Starts from its office like a broken bow.
      Votaries of business and of pleasure prove
    Faithless alike in friendship and in love.
    Retired from all the circles of the gay,
    And all the crowds that bustle life away,
    To scenes where competition, envy, strife,
    Beget no thunder-clouds to trouble life,
    Let me, the charge of some good angel, find
    One who has known, and has escaped mankind;
    Polite, yet virtuous, who has brought away
    The manners, not the morals, of the day:
    With him, perhaps with her (for men have known
    No firmer friendships than the fair have shown,)
    Let me enjoy, in some unthought-of spot,
    All former friends forgiven and forgot,
    Down to the close of life's fast fading scene,
    Union of hearts without a flaw between.
    'Tis grace, 'tis bounty, and it calls for praise,
    If God give health, that sunshine of our days!
    And if he add, a blessing shared by few,
    Content of heart, more praises still are due--
    But if he grant a friend, that boon possess'd
    Indeed is treasure, and crowns all the rest;
    And giving one, whose heart is in the skies,
    Born from above and made divinely wise,
    He gives, what bankrupt nature never can,
    Whose noblest coin is light and brittle man,
    Gold, purer far than Ophir ever knew,
    A soul, an image of himself, and therefore true.

  Nov. 1783.


EPITAPH ON DR. JOHNSON.

    Here Johnson lies--a sage by all allow'd,
    Whom to have bred may well make England proud,
    Whose prose was eloquence, by wisdom taught,
    The graceful vehicle of virtuous thought;
    Whose verse may claim--grave, masculine, and strong--
    Superior praise to the mere poet's song;
    Who many a noble gift from heaven possess'd,
    And faith at last, alone worth all the rest.
    O man, immortal by a double prize,
    By fame on earth--by glory in the skies!

  Jan. 1785.


TO MISS C----, ON HER BIRTHDAY.

    How many between east and west
      Disgrace their parent earth,
    Whose deeds constrain us to detest
      The day that gave them birth!
    Not so when Stella's natal morn
      Revolving months restore,
    We can rejoice that she was born,
      And wish her born once more!

1786.


GRATITUDE.

ADDRESSED TO LADY HESKETH.

    This cap, that so stately appears,
      With ribbon-bound tassel on high,
    Which seems by the crest that it rears
      Ambitious of brushing the sky:
    This cap to my cousin I owe,
      She gave it, and gave me beside,
    Wreath'd into an elegant bow,
      The ribbon with which it is tied.

    This wheel-footed studying chair,
      Contrived both for toil and repose,
    Wide-elbow'd, and wadded with hair,
      In which I both scribble and dose,
    Bright-studded to dazzle the eyes,
      And rival in lustre of that
    In which, or astronomy lies,
      Fair Cassiopeia sat:

    These carpets so soft to the foot,
      Caledonia's traffic and pride!
    Oh spare them, ye knights of the boot,
      Escaped from a cross-country ride!
    This table, and mirror within,
      Secure from collision and dust,
    At which I oft shave cheek and chin
      And periwig nicely adjust:

    This moveable structure of shelves,
      For its beauty admired and its use,
    And charged with octavos and twelves,
      The gayest I had to produce;
    Where, flaming in scarlet and gold,
      My poems enchanted I view,
    And hope in due time, to behold
      My Iliad and Odyssey too:

    This china, that decks the alcove,
      Which here people call a buffet,
    But what the gods call it above
      Has ne'er been reveal'd to us yet:
    These curtains that keep the room warm
      Or cool, as the season demands,
    Those stoves that for pattern and form
      Seem the labour of Mulciber's hands:

    All these are not half that I owe
      To one, from our earliest youth,
    To me ever ready to show
      Benignity, friendship, and truth;
    For Time, the destroyer declared
      And foe of our perishing kind,
    If even her face he has spared,
      Much less could he alter her mind.

    Thus compass'd about with the goods
      And chattels of leisure and ease,
    I indulge my poetical moods
      In many such fancies as these;
    And fancies I fear they will seem--
      Poets' goods are not often so fine;
    The poets will swear that I dream
      When I sing of the splendour of mine.

1786.


LINES COMPOSED FOR A MEMORIAL OF ASHLEY COWPER, ESQ.

IMMEDIATELY AFTER HIS DEATH, BY HIS NEPHEW WILLIAM OF WESTON.

    Farewell! endued with all that could engage
    All hearts to love thee, both in youth and age!
    In prime of life, for sprightliness enroll'd
    Among the gay, yet virtuous as the old;

    In life's last stage, (O blessings rarely found!)
    Pleasant as youth with all its blossoms crown'd;
    Through every period of this changeful state
    Unchanged thyself--wise, good, affectionate!

    Marble may flatter, and lest this should seem
    O'ercharged with praises on so dear a theme,
    Although thy worth be more than half supprest,
    Love shall be satisfied, and veil the rest.

June, 1788.


ON THE QUEEN'S VISIT TO LONDON.

THE NIGHT OF THE SEVENTEENTH OF MARCH, 1789.

    When, long sequester'd from his throne,
      George took his seat again,
    By right of worth, not blood alone,
      Entitled here to reign,

    Then loyalty, with all his lamps
      New trimm'd, a gallant show!
    Chasing the darkness and the damps,
      Set London in a glow.

    'Twas hard to tell, of streets or squares
      Which form'd the chief display,
    These most resembling cluster'd stars,
      Those the long milky way.

    Bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires,
      And rockets flew, self-driven,
    To hang their momentary fires
      Amid the vault of heaven.

    So, fire with water to compare,
      The ocean serves, on high
    Up-spouted by a whale in air,
      To express unwieldy joy.

    Had all the pageants of the world
      In one procession join'd,
    And all the banners been unfurl'd
      That heralds e'er design'd,

    For no such sight had England's queen
      Forsaken her retreat,
    Where George, recover'd, made a scene
      Sweet always, doubly sweet.

    Yet glad she came that night to prove,
      A witness undescried,
    How much the object of her love
      Was loved by all beside.

    Darkness the skies had mantled o'er
      In aid of her design--
    Darkness, O Queen! ne'er call'd before
      To veil a deed of thine!

    On borrow'd wheels away she flies,
      Resolved to be unknown,
    And gratify no curious eyes
      That night except her own.

    Arrived, a night like noon she sees,
      And hears the million hum;
    As all by instinct, like the bees,
      Had known their sovereign come.

    Pleased she beheld, aloft portray'd
      On many a splendid wall,
    Emblems of health and heavenly aid,
      And George the theme of all.

    Unlike the enigmatic line,
      So difficult to spell,
    Which shook Belshazzar at his wine
      The night his city fell.

    Soon watery grew her eyes and dim,
      But with a joyful tear,
    None else, except in prayer for him,
      George ever drew from her.

    It was a scene in every part
      Like those in fable feign'd,
    And seem'd by some magician's art
      Created and sustain'd.

    But other magic there, she knew,
      Had been exerted none,
    To raise such wonders in her view,
      Save love of George alone.

    That cordial thought her spirit cheer'd,
      And, through the cumbrous throng,
    Not else unworthy to be fear'd,
      Convey'd her calm along.

    So, ancient poets say, serene
      The sea-maid rides the waves,
    And fearless of the billowy scene
      Her peaceful bosom laves.

    With more than astronomic eyes
      She view'd the sparkling show;
    One Georgian star adorns the skies,
      She myriads found below.

    Yet let the glories of a night
      Like that, once seen, suffice,
    Heaven grant us no such future sight,
      Such previous woe the price!


THE COCK-FIGHTER'S GARLAND.[830]

  [830] Written on reading the following in the obituary of
  the Gentleman's Magazine for April, 1789.--"At Tottenham,
  John Ardesoif, Esq., a young man of large fortune, and in the
  splendour of his carriages and horses rivalled by few country
  gentlemen. His table was that of hospitality, where, it may be
  said, he sacrificed too much to conviviality; but, if he had his
  foibles he had his merits also, that far outweighed them. Mr.
  A. was very fond of cock-fighting, and had a favourite cock,
  upon which he had won many profitable matches. The last bet he
  laid upon this cock he lost; which so enraged him, that he had
  the bird tied to a spit and roasted alive before a large fire.
  The screams of the miserable animal were so affecting, that
  some gentlemen who were present attempted to interfere, which
  so enraged Mr. A., that he seized a poker, and with the most
  furious vehemence declared, that he would kill the first man who
  interposed; but, in the midst of his passionate asseverations,
  he fell down dead upon the spot. Such, we are assured, were the
  circumstances which attended the death of this great pillar of
  humanity."

    Muse--hide his name of whom I sing,
    Lest his surviving house thou bring
        For his sake into scorn,
    Nor speak the school from which he drew
    The much or little that he knew,
        Nor place where he was born.

    That such a man once was, may seem
    Worthy of record (if the theme
        Perchance may credit win)
    For proof to man, what man may prove,
    If grace depart, and demons move
        The source of guilt within.

    This man (for since the howling wild
    Disclaims him, man he must be styled)
        Wanted no good below,
    Gentle he was, if gentle birth
    Could make him such, and he had worth,
        If wealth can worth bestow.

    In social talk and ready jest,
    He shone superior at the feast,
        And qualities of mind,
    Illustrious in the eyes of those
    Whose gay society he chose,
        Possess'd of every kind.

    Methinks I see him powder'd red,
    With bushy locks his well-dress'd head
        Wing'd broad on either side,
    The mossy rosebud not so sweet;
    His steeds superb, his carriage neat,
        As luxury could provide.

    Can such be cruel? Such can be
    Cruel as hell, and so was he;
        A tyrant entertain'd
    With barbarous sports, whose fell delight
    Was to encourage mortal fight
        'Twixt birds to battle train'd.

    One feathered champion he possess'd,
    His darling far beyond the rest,
        Which never knew disgrace,
    Nor e'er had fought but he made flow
    The life-blood of his fiercest foe,
        The Cæsar of his race.

    It chanced at last, when, on a day,
    He push'd him to the desperate fray,
        His courage droop'd, he fled.
    The master storm'd, the prize was lost,
    And, instant, frantic at the cost,
        He doom'd his favourite dead.

    He seized him fast, and from the pit
    Flew to the kitchen, snatch'd the spit,
        And, Bring me cord, he cried;
    The cord was brought, and, at his word,
    To that dire implement the bird,
        Alive and struggling, tied.

    The horrid sequel asks a veil;
    And all the terrors of the tale
        That can be shall be sunk--
    Led by the sufferer's screams aright
    His shock'd companions view the sight,
        And him with fury drunk.

    All, suppliant, beg a milder fate
    For the old warrior at the grate:
        He, deaf to pity's call,
    Whirl'd round him rapid as a wheel
    His culinary club of steel,
        Death menacing on all.

    But vengeance hung not far remote,
    For while he stretch'd his clamorous throat,
        And heaven and earth defied,
    Big with a curse too closely pent,
    That struggled vainly for a vent,
        He totter'd, reel'd, and died.

    'Tis not for us, with rash surmise,
    To point the judgment of the skies;
        But judgments plain as this,
    That, sent for man's instruction, bring
    A written label on their wing,
        'Tis hard to read amiss.

May, 1789.


TO WARREN HASTINGS, ESQ.

BY AN OLD SCHOOLFELLOW OF HIS AT WESTMINSTER.

    Hastings! I knew thee young, and of a mind,
    While young, humane, conversable, and kind,
    Nor can I well believe thee, gentle then,
    Now grown a villain, and the worst of men.
    But rather some suspect, who have oppress'd
    And worried thee, as not themselves the best.


TO MRS. THROCKMORTON,

ON HER BEAUTIFUL TRANSCRIPT OF HORACE'S ODE, "AD LIBRUM SUUM."

    Maria, could Horace have guess'd
      What honour awaited his ode
    To his own little volume address'd,
      The honour which you have bestow'd;
    Who have traced it in characters here,
      So elegant, even, and neat,
    He had laugh'd at the critical sneer
      Which he seems to have trembled to meet.

    And sneer, if you please, he had said,
      A nymph shall hereafter arise,
    Who shall give me, when you are all dead,
      The glory your malice denies;
    Shall dignity give to my lay,
      Although but a mere bagatelle;
    And even a poet shall say,
      Nothing ever was written so well.

Feb. 1790.


TO THE IMMORTAL MEMORY OF THE HALIBUT,

ON WHICH I DINED THIS DAY, MONDAY, APRIL 26, 1784.

    Where hast thou floated, in what seas pursued
    Thy pastime? when wast thou an egg new spawn'd,
    Lost in the immensity of ocean's waste?
    Roar as they might, the overbearing winds
    That rock'd the deep, thy cradle, thou wast safe--
    And in thy minikin and embryo state,
    Attach'd to the firm leaf of some salt weed,
    Didst outlive tempests, such as wrung and rack'd
    The joints of many a stout and gallant bark,
    And whelm'd them in the unexplored abyss.
    Indebted to no magnet and no chart,
    Nor under guidance of the polar fire,
    Thou wast a voyager on many coasts,
    Grazing at large in meadows submarine,
    Where flat Batavia, just emerging, peeps
    Above the brine--where Caledonia's rocks
    Beat back the surge--and where Hibernia shoots
    Her wondrous causeway far into the main.
    --Wherever thou hast fed, thou little thoughtst,
    And I not more, that I should feed on thee.
    Peace, therefore, and good health, and much good fish,
    To him who sent thee! and success, as oft
    As it descends into the billowy gulf,
    To the same drag that caught thee!--Fare thee well!
    Thy lot thy brethren of the slimy fin
    Would envy, could they know that thou wast doom'd
    To feed a bard, and to be praised in verse.


INSCRIPTION FOR A STONE

ERECTED AT THE SOWING OF A GROVE OF OAKS AT CHILLINGTON, THE SEAT OF
T. GIFFARD, ESQ. 1790.

    Other stones the era tell
    When some feeble mortal fell;
    I stand here to date the birth
    Of these hardy sons of earth.
      Which shall longest brave the sky,
    Storm and frost--these oaks or I?
    Pass an age or two away,
    I must moulder and decay,
    But the years that crumble me
    Shall invigorate the tree,
    Spread its branch, dilate its size,
    Lift its summit to the skies.
      Cherish honour, virtue, truth,
    So shalt thou prolong thy youth.
    Wanting these, however fast
    Man be fix'd and form'd to last,
    He is lifeless even now,
    Stone at heart, and cannot grow.

June, 1790.


ANOTHER,

For a stone erected on a similar occasion at the same place in the
following year.

    Reader! behold a monument
      That asks no sigh or tear,
    Though it perpetuate the event
      Of a great burial here.

June, 1790.

  Anno 1791.


TO MRS. KING,

On her kind present to the author, a patchwork counterpane of her
own making.

    The bard, if e'er he feel at all,
    Must sure be quicken'd by a call
      Both on his heart and head,
    To pay with tuneful thanks the care
    And kindness of a lady fair,
      Who deigns to deck his bed.

    A bed like this, in ancient time,
    On Ida's barren top sublime,
      (As Homer's epic shows)
    Composed of sweetest vernal flowers,
    Without the aid of sun or showers,
      For Jove and Juno rose.

    Less beautiful, however gay,
    Is that which in the scorching day
      Receives the weary swain,
    Who, laying his long scythe aside,
    Sleeps on some bank with daisies pied,
      Till roused to toil again.

    What labours of the loom I see!
    Looms numberless have groan'd for me!
      Should every maiden come
    To scramble for the patch that bears
    The impress of the robe she wears,
      The bell would toll for some.

    And oh, what havoc would ensue!
    This bright display of every hue
      All in a moment fled!
    As if a storm should strip the bowers
    Of all their tendrils, leaves, and flowers--
      Each pocketing a shred.

    Thanks then to every gentle fair
    Who will not come to peck me bare
      As bird of borrow'd feather,
    And thanks to one above them all,
    The gentle fair of Pertenhall,
      Who put the whole together.

August, 1790.


IN MEMORY OF

THE LATE JOHN THORNTON, ESQ.

    Poets attempt the noblest task they can,
    Praising the Author of all good in man,
    And, next, commemorating worthies lost,
    The dead in whom that good abounded most.
      Thee, therefore, of commercial fame, but more
    Famed for thy probity from shore to shore,
    Thee, Thornton! worthy in some page to shine,
    As honest and more eloquent than mine,
    I mourn; or, since thrice happy thou must be,
    The world, no longer thy abode, not thee.
    Thee to deplore were grief misspent indeed;
    It were to weep that goodness has its meed,
    That there is bliss prepared in yonder sky,
    And glory for the virtuous when they die.
      What pleasure can the miser's fondled hoard,
    Or spendthrift's prodigal excess afford,
    Sweet as the privilege of healing woe
    By virtue suffer'd combating below?
    That privilege was thine; Heaven gave thee means
    To illumine with delight the saddest scenes,
    Till thy appearance chased the gloom, forlorn
    As midnight, and despairing of a morn.
    Thou hadst an industry in doing good,
    Restless as his who toils and sweats for food;
    Avarice in thee was the desire of wealth
    By rust unperishable or by stealth,
    And if the genuine worth of gold depend
    On application to its noblest end,
    Thine had a value in the scales of Heaven
    Surpassing all that mine or mint had given.
    And, though God made thee of a nature prone
    To distribution boundless of thy own,
    And still by motives of religious force
    Impell'd thee more to that heroic course,
    Yet was thy liberality discreet,
    Nice in its choice, and of a temper'd heat;
    And, though in act unwearied, secret still,
    As in some solitude the summer rill
    Refreshes, where it winds, the faded green,
    And cheers the drooping flowers, unheard, unseen.
      Such was thy charity: no sudden start,
    After long sleep, of passion in the heart,
    But stedfast principle, and, in its kind,
    Of close relation to the Eternal Mind,
    Traced easily to its true source above,
    To him whose works bespeak his nature, love.
      Thy bounties all were Christian, and I make
    This record of thee for the Gospel's sake;
    That the incredulous themselves may see
    Its use and power exemplified in thee.

  Nov. 1790.


THE FOUR AGES.

(A BRIEF FRAGMENT OF AN EXTENSIVE PROJECTED POEM.)

    "I could be well content, allowed the use
    Of past experience, and the wisdom glean'd
    From worn-out follies, now acknowledged such,
    To recommence life's trial, in the hope
    Of fewer errors, on a second proof!"
      Thus, while grey evening lull'd the wind, and call'd
    Fresh odours from the shrubbery at my side,
    Taking my lonely winding walk, I mused,
    And held accustom'd conference with my heart;
    When from within it thus a voice replied:
      "Couldst thou in truth? and art thou taught at length
    This wisdom, and but this, from all the past?
    Is not the pardon of thy long arrear,
    Time wasted, violated laws, abuse
    Of talents, judgment, mercies, better far
    Than opportunity vouchsafed to err
    With less excuse, and, haply, worse effect?"
      I heard, and acquiesced: then to and fro
    Oft pacing, as the mariner his deck,
    My gravelly bounds, from self to human kind
    I pass'd, and next consider'd--what is man.
      Knows he his origin? can he ascend
    By reminiscence to his earliest date?
    Slept he in Adam? And in those from him
    Through numerous generations, till he found
    At length his destined moment to be born?
    Or was he not, till fashion'd in the womb?
    Deep mysteries both! which schoolmen must have toil'd
    To unriddle, and have left them mysteries still.
      It is an evil incident to man,
    And of the worst, that unexplored he leaves
    Truths useful and attainable with ease,
    To search forbidden deeps, where mystery lies
    Not to be solved, and useless if it might.
    Mysteries are food for angels; they digest
    With ease, and find them nutriment; but man,
    While yet he dwells below, must stoop to glean
    His manna from the ground, or starve and die.

  May, 1791.


THE RETIRED CAT.[831]

  [831] Cowper's partiality to animals is well known. Lady Hesketh,
  in one of her letters, states, "that he had, at one time, five
  rabbits, three hares, two guinea-pigs, a magpie, a jay, and a
  starling; besides two goldfinches, two canary birds, and two
  dogs. It is amazing how the three hares can find room to gambol
  and frolic (as they certainly do) in his small parlour;" and she
  adds, "I forgot to enumerate a squirrel, which he had at the same
  time, and which used to play with one of the hares continually.
  One evening, the cat giving one of the hares a sound box on the
  ear, the hare ran after her, and, having caught her, punished her
  by drumming on her back with her two feet as hard as drum-sticks,
  till the creature would have actually been killed, had not Mrs.
  Unwin rescued her."

    A poet's cat, sedate and grave
    As poet well could wish to have,
    Was much addicted to inquire
    For nooks to which she might retire,
    And where, secure as mouse in chink,
    She might repose, or sit and think.
    I know not where she caught the trick--
      Nature perhaps herself had cast her
    In such a mould philosophique,
      Or else she learn'd it of her master.
    Sometimes ascending, debonnair,
    An apple tree, or lofty pear,
    Lodged with convenience in the fork,
    She watch'd the gardener at his work;
    Sometimes her ease and solace sought
    In an old empty watering pot:
    There, wanting nothing save a fan,
    To seem some nymph in her sedan
    Apparell'd in exactest sort,
    And ready to be borne to court.
      But love of change, it seems, has place
    Not only in our wiser race;
    Cats also feel, as well as we,
    That passion's force, and so did she.
    Her climbing, she began to find,
    Exposed her too much to the wind,
    And the old utensil of tin
    Was cold and comfortless within:
    She therefore wish'd instead of those
    Some place of more serene repose,
    Where neither cold might come, nor air
    Too rudely wanton with her hair,
    And sought it in the likeliest mode
    Within her master's snug abode.
      A drawer, it chanced, at bottom lined
    With linen of the softest kind,
    With such as merchants introduce
    From India, for the ladies' use,
    A drawer impending o'er the rest,
    Half open in the topmost chest,
    Of depth enough, and none to spare,
    Invited her to slumber there;
    Puss with delight beyond expression,
    Survey'd the scene, and took possession.
    Recumbent at her ease, ere long,
    And lull'd by her own humdrum song,
    She left the cares of life behind,
    And slept as she would sleep her last,
    When in came, housewifely inclined,
    The chambermaid, and shut it fast;
    By no malignity impell'd,
    But all unconscious whom it held.
      Awaken'd by the shock (cried Puss)
    "Was ever cat attended thus?
    The open drawer was left, I see,
    Merely to prove a nest for me,
    For soon as I was well composed,
    Then came the maid, and it was closed,
    How smooth these 'kerchiefs, and how sweet!
    O what a delicate retreat!
    I will resign myself to rest
    Till Sol, declining in the west,
    Shall call to supper, when, no doubt,
    Susan will come and let me out."
      The evening came, the sun descended,
    And Puss remain'd still unattended.
    The night roll'd tardily away,
    (With her indeed 'twas never day,)
    The sprightly morn her course renew'd,
    The evening grey again ensued,
    And puss came into mind no more
    Than if entomb'd the day before.
    With hunger pinch'd, and pinch'd for room,
    She now presaged approaching doom,
    Nor slept a single wink, or purr'd,
    Conscious of jeopardy incurr'd.
      That night, by chance, the poet watching,
    Heard an inexplicable scratching;
    His noble heart went pit-a-pat,
    And to himself he said--"What's that?"
    He drew the curtain at his side,
    And forth he peep'd, but nothing spied.
    Yet, by his ear directed, guess'd
    Something imprison'd in the chest,
    And, doubtful what, with prudent care
    Resolved it should continue there.
    At length a voice which well he knew,
    A long and melancholy mew,
    Saluting his poetic ears,
    Consoled him and dispell'd his fears:
    He left his bed, he trod the floor,
    He 'gan in haste the drawers explore,
    The lowest first, and without stop
    The rest in order to the top.
    For 'tis a truth well known to most,
    That whatsoever thing is lost,
    We seek it, ere it come to light,
    In every cranny but the right.
    Forth skipp'd the cat, not now replete
    As erst with airy self-conceit,
    Nor in her own fond apprehension
    A theme for all the world's attention,
    But modest, sober, cured of all
    Her notions hyperbolical,
    And wishing for a place of rest
    Any thing rather than a chest.
    Then stepp'd the poet into bed
    With this reflection in his head:

MORAL.

    Beware of too sublime a sense
    Of your own worth and consequence:
    The man who dreams himself so great,
    And his importance of such weight,
    That all around, in all that's done,
    Must move and act for him alone,
    Will learn in school of tribulation
    The folly of his expectation.

1791.


THE JUDGMENT OF THE POETS.

    Two nymphs, both nearly of an age,
      Of numerous charms possess'd,
    A warm dispute once chanced to wage,
      Whose temper was the best.

    The worth of each had been complete
      Had both alike been mild:
    But one, although her smile was sweet,
      Frown'd oftener than she smiled.

    And in her humour, when she frown'd,
      Would raise her voice, and roar,
    And shake with fury to the ground
      The garland that she wore.

    The other was of gentler cast,
      From all such frenzy clear,
    Her frowns were seldom known to last,
      And never proved severe.

    To poets of renown in song
      The nymphs referr'd the cause,
    Who, strange to tell, all judg'd it wrong,
      And gave misplaced applause.

    They gentle call'd, and kind and soft,
      The flippant and the scold,
    And though she changed her mood so oft,
      That failing left untold.

    No judges, sure, were e'er so mad,
      Or so resolved to err--
    In short the charms her sister had
      They lavish'd all on her.

    Then thus the god, whom fondly they
      Their great inspirer call,
    Was heard, one genial summer's day,
      To reprimand them all.

    "Since thus ye have combined," he said,
      "My favourite nymph to slight,
    Adorning May, that peevish maid,
      With June's undoubted right,

    "The minx shall, for your folly's sake,
      Still prove herself a shrew,
    Shall make your scribbling fingers ache,
      And pinch your noses blue."

  May, 1791.


YARDLEY OAK.[832]

  [832] This tree had been known by the name of _Judith_ for many
  ages. Perhaps it received that name on being planted by the
  Countess Judith, niece to the Conqueror, whom he gave in marriage
  to the English Earl Waltheof, with the counties of Northampton
  and Huntingdon as her dower. _Vide_ Letters, p. 301.

    Survivor sole, and hardly such, of all
    That once lived here, thy brethren, at my birth,
    (Since which I number threescore winters past,)
    A shatter'd veteran, hollow-trunk'd perhaps,
    As now, and with excoriate forks deform,
    Relics of ages! could a mind, imbued
    With truth from heaven, created thing adore,
    I might with reverence kneel, and worship thee.
      It seems idolatry with some excuse,
    When our forefather druids in their oaks
    Imagined sanctity. The conscience, yet
    Unpurified by an authentic act
    Of amnesty, the meed of blood divine,
    Loved not the light, but, gloomy, into gloom
    Of thickest shades, like Adam after taste
    Of fruit proscribed, as to a refuge, fled.
      Thou wast a bauble once, a cup and ball
    Which babes might play with; and the thievish jay,
    Seeking her food, with ease might have purloin'd
    The auburn nut that held thee, swallowing down
    Thy yet close-folded latitude of boughs
    And all thine embryo vastness at a gulp.
    But fate thy growth decreed; autumnal rains
    Beneath thy parent tree mellow'd the soil
    Design'd thy cradle; and a skipping deer,
    With pointed hoof dibbling the glebe, prepared
    The soft receptacle, in which, secure,
    Thy rudiments should sleep the winter through.
      So fancy dreams. Disprove it, if ye can,
    Ye reasoners broad awake, whose busy search
    Of argument, employ'd too oft amiss,
    Sifts half the pleasures of short life away!
      Thou fell'st mature; and, in the loamy clod
    Swelling with vegetative force instinct,
    Didst burst thine egg, as theirs the fabled twins,
    Now stars; two lobes, protruding, pair'd exact;
    A leaf succeeded, and another leaf,
    And, all the elements thy puny growth
    Fostering propitious, thou becamest a twig.
      Who lived when thou wast such? Oh, could'st thou speak,
    As in Dodona once thy kindred trees
    Oracular, I would not curious ask
    The future, best unknown, but at thy mouth
    Inquisitive, the less ambiguous past.
      By thee I might correct, erroneous oft,
    The clock of history, facts and events
    Timing more punctual, unrecorded facts
    Recovering, and misstated setting right--
    Desperate attempt, till trees shall speak again!
      Time made thee what thou wast, king of the woods;
    And time hath made thee what thou art--a cave
    For owls to roost in. Once thy spreading boughs
    O'erhung the champaign; and the numerous flocks
    That grazed it stood beneath that ample cope
    Uncrowded, yet safe shelter'd from the storm.
    No flock frequents thee now. Thou hast outlived
    Thy popularity, and art become
    (Unless verse rescue thee awhile) a thing
    Forgotten, as the foliage of thy youth.
      While thus through all the stages thou hast push'd
    Of treeship--first a seedling, hid in grass;
    Then twig; then sapling; and, as century roll'd
    Slow after century, a giant bulk
    Of girth enormous, with moss-cushion'd root
    Upheaved above the soil, and sides emboss'd
    With prominent wens globose--till at the last
    The rottenness, which time is charged to inflict
    On other mighty ones, found also thee.
      What exhibitions various hath the world
    Witness'd of mutability in all
    That we account most durable below?
    Change is the diet on which all subsist,
    Created changeable, and change at last,
    Destroys them. Skies uncertain now the heat
    Transmitting cloudless, and the solar beam
    Now quenching in a boundless sea of clouds--
    Calm and alternate storm, moisture, and drought,
    Invigorate by turns the springs of life
    In all that live, plant, animal, and man,
    And in conclusion mar them. Nature's threads,
    Fine passing thought, e'en in their coarsest works,
    Delight in agitation, yet sustain
    The force that agitates not unimpair'd;
    But worn by frequent impulse, to the cause
    Of their best tone their dissolution owe.
      Thought cannot spend itself, comparing still
    The great and little of thy lot, thy growth
    From almost nullity into a state
    Of matchless grandeur, and declension thence,
    Slow, into such magnificent decay.
    Time was when, settling on thy leaf, a fly
    Could shake thee to the root--and time has been
    When tempests could not. At thy firmest age
    Thou hadst within thy bole solid contents
    That might have ribb'd the sides and plank'd the deck
    Of some flagg'd admiral; and tortuous arms,
    The shipwright's darling treasure, didst present
    To the four-quarter'd winds, robust and bold,
    Warp'd into tough knee-timber, many a load![833]
    But the axe spared thee. In those thriftier days
    Oaks fell not, hewn by thousands, to supply
    The bottomless demands of contest waged
    For senatorial honours. Thus to time
    The task was left to whittle thee away
    With his sly scythe, whose ever-nibbling edge,
    Noiseless, an atom, and an atom more,
    Disjoining from the rest, has, unobserved,
    Achieved a labour which had, far and wide,
    By man perform'd, made all the forest ring.
      Embowell'd now, and of thy ancient self
    Possessing nought but the scoop'd rind, that seems
    A huge throat calling to the clouds for drink,
    Which it would give in rivulets to thy root,
    Thou temptest none, but rather much forbidd'st
    The feller's toil, which thou couldst ill requite.
    Yet is thy root sincere, sound as the rock,
    A quarry of stout spurs and knotted fangs,
    Which, crook'd into a thousand whimsies, clasp
    The stubborn soil, and hold thee still erect.
      So stands a kingdom, whose foundation yet
    Fails not, in virtue and in wisdom laid,
    Though all the superstructure, by the tooth
    Pulverized of venality, a shell
    Stands now, and semblance only of itself!
      Thine arms have left thee. Winds have rent them off
    Long since, and rovers of the forest wild
    With bow and shaft have burnt them. Some have left
    A splinter'd stump bleach'd to a snowy white;
    And some memorial none where once they grew.
    Yet life still lingers in thee, and puts forth
    Proof not contemptible of what she can,
    Even where death predominates. The spring
    Finds thee not less alive to her sweet force
    Than yonder upstarts of the neighbouring wood,
    So much thy juniors, who their birth received
    Half a millennium since the date of thine.
      But since, although well-qualified by age
    To teach, no spirit dwells in thee, nor voice
    May be expected from thee, seated here
    On thy distorted root, with hearers none,
    Or prompter, save the scene, I will perform
    Myself the oracle, and will discourse
    In my own ear such matter as I may.
      One man alone, the father of us all,
    Drew not his life from woman; never gazed,
    With mute unconsciousness of what he saw,
    On all around him; learn'd not by degrees,
    Nor owed articulation to his ear;
    But, moulded by his Maker into man
    At once, upstood intelligent, survey'd
    All creatures, with precision understood
    Their purport, uses, properties, assign'd
    To each his name significant, and, fill'd
    With love and wisdom, render'd back to Heaven
    In praise harmonious the first air he drew.
    He was excused the penalties of dull
    Minority. No tutor charged his hand
    With the thought-tracing quill, or task'd his mind
    With problems. History, not wanted yet,
    Lean'd on her elbow, watching time, whose course,
    Eventful, should supply her with a theme....

  1791.

  [833] Knee-timber is found in the crooked arms of oak, which,
  by reason of their distortion, are easily adjusted to the angle
  formed where the deck and the ship's sides meet.


TO THE NIGHTINGALE,

WHICH THE AUTHOR HEARD SING ON NEW YEAR'S DAY.

    Whence is it that, amazed, I hear
      From yonder wither'd spray,
    This foremost morn of all the year,
      The melody of May?

    And why, since thousands would be proud
      Of such a favour shown,
    Am I selected from the crowd
      To witness it alone?

    Sing'st thou, sweet Philomel, to me,
      For that I also long
    Have practised in the groves like thee,
      Though not like thee in song?

    Or sing'st thou, rather, under force
      Of some divine command,
    Commission'd to presage a course
      Of happier days at hand!

    Thrice welcome then! for many a long
      And joyless year have I,
    As thou to-day, put forth my song
      Beneath a wintry sky.

    But thee no wintry skies can harm,
      Who only need'st to sing
    To make e'en January charm,
      And every season spring.

1792.


LINES WRITTEN IN AN ALBUM

OF MISS PATTY MORE'S, SISTER OF HANNAH MORE.

    In vain to live from age to age
      While modern bards endeavour,
    I write my name in Patty's page,
      And gain my point for ever.

  W. COWPER.
  March 6, 1792.


SONNET

TO WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, ESQ.

    Thy country, Wilberforce, with just disdain,
      Hears thee by cruel men and impious call'd
      Fanatic, for thy zeal to loose the enthrall'd
    From exile, public sale, and slavery's chain.
      Friend of the poor, the wrong'd, the fetter-gall'd,
    Fear not lest labour such as thine be vain.
      Thou hast achieved a part; hast gain'd the ear
    Of Britain's senate to thy glorious cause; [pause
    Hope smiles, joy springs, and, though cold caution
      And weave delay, the better hour is near
      That shall remunerate thy toils severe,
    By peace for Afric, fenced with British laws.
    Enjoy what thou hast won, esteem and love
    From all the just on earth and all the blest above.

April 16, 1792.


EPIGRAM

PRINTED IN THE NORTHAMPTON MERCURY.

    To purify their wine, some people bleed
    A lamb into the barrel, and succeed;
    No nostrum, planters say, is half so good
    To make fine sugar as a negro's blood.
    Now lambs and negroes both are harmless things,
    And thence perhaps this wondrous virtue springs,
    'Tis in the blood of innocence alone--
    Good cause why planters never try their own.


TO DR. AUSTIN,

OF CECIL STREET, LONDON.

    Austin! accept a grateful verse from me,
    The poet's treasure, no inglorious fee.
    Loved by the muses, thy ingenuous mind
    Pleasing requital in my verse may find;
    Verse oft has dash'd the scythe of Time aside,
    Immortalizing names which else had died:
    And O! could I command the glittering wealth
    With which sick kings are glad to purchase health!
    Yet, if extensive fame, and sure to live,
    Were in the power of verse like mine to give,
    I would not recompense his arts with less,
    Who, giving Mary health, heals my distress.
      Friend of my friend![834] I love thee, though unknown,
    And boldly call thee, being his, my own.

May 26, 1792.

  [834] Hayley.


CATHARINA:

THE SECOND PART: ON HER MARRIAGE TO GEORGE COURTENAY, ESQ.

    Believe it or not, as you choose,
      The doctrine is certainly true,
    That the future is known to the muse,
      And poets are oracles too.
    I did but express a desire
      To see Catharina at home,
    At the side of my friend George's fire,
      And lo--she is actually come!

    Such prophecy some may despise,
      But the wish of a poet and friend
    Perhaps is approved in the skies,
      And therefore attains to its end.
    'Twas a wish that flew ardently forth
      From a bosom effectually warm'd
    With the talents, the graces, and worth
      Of the person for whom it was form'd.

    Maria[835] would leave us, I knew,
      To the grief and regret of us all,
    But less to our grief, could we view
      Catharina the Queen of the Hall.
    And therefore I wish'd as I did,
      And therefore this union of hands:
    Not a whisper was heard to forbid,
      But all cry--Amen--to the bans.

    Since, therefore, I seem to incur
      No danger of wishing in vain
    When making good wishes for her,
      I will e'en to my wishes again--
    With one I have made her a wife,
      And now I will try with another,
    Which I cannot suppress for my life--
      How soon I can make her a mother.

June, 1792.

  [835] Lady Throckmorton.


EPITAPH ON FOP,

A DOG BELONGING TO LADY THROCKMORTON.

    Though once a puppy, and though Fop by name,
    Here moulders one whose bones some honour claim.
    No sycophant, although of spaniel race,
    And though no hound, a martyr to the chace--
    Ye squirrels, rabbits, leverets, rejoice,
    Your haunts no longer echo to his voice;
    This record of his fate exulting view,
    He died worn out with vain pursuit of you.
      "Yes,"--the indignant shade of Fop replies--
    "And worn with vain pursuit, man also dies."

August, 1792.


SONNET TO GEORGE ROMNEY, ESQ.

ON HIS PICTURE OF ME IN CRAYONS,

Drawn at Eartham in the 61st year of my age, and in the months of
August and September, 1792.

    Romney, expert infallibly to trace
      On chart or canvass, not the form alone
      And semblance, but however faintly shown,
    The mind's impression too on every face--
    With strokes that time ought never to erase,
      Thou hast so pencill'd mine, that though I own
      The subject worthless, I have never known
    The artist shining with superior grace.

    But this I mark--that symptoms none of woe
      In thy incomparable work appear.
    Well--I am satisfied it should be so,
      Since, on maturer thought, the cause is clear;

    For in my looks what sorrow couldst thou see
    When I was Hayley's guest, and sat to thee?

October, 1792.


MARY AND JOHN.

    If John marries Mary, and Mary alone,
    'Tis a very good match between Mary and John.
    Should John wed a score, oh, the claws and the scratches!
    It can't be a match--'tis a bundle of matches.


EPITAPH ON MR. CHESTER,

OF CHICHELEY.

    Tears flow, and cease not, where the good man lies,
    Till all who knew him follow to the skies.
    Tears therefore fall where Chester's ashes sleep;
    Him wife, friends, brothers, children, servants weep--
    And justly--few shall ever him transcend
    As husband, parent, brother, master, friend.

April, 1793.


TO MY COUSIN, ANNE BODHAM,

On receiving from her a network purse made by herself.

    My gentle Anne, whom heretofore,
    When I was young, and thou no more
      Than plaything for a nurse,
    I danced and fondled on my knee,
    A kitten both in size and glee,
      I thank thee for my purse.

    Gold pays the worth of all things here;
    But not of love;--that gem's too dear
      For richest rogues to win it;
    I, therefore, as a proof of love,
    Esteem thy present far above
      The best things kept within it.

May 4, 1793.


INSCRIPTION FOR A HERMITAGE IN THE AUTHOR'S GARDEN.

    This cabin, Mary, in my sight appears,
    Built as it has been in our waning years,
    A rest afforded to our weary feet,
    Preliminary to--the last retreat.

May, 1793.


TO MRS. UNWIN.

    Mary! I want a lyre with other strings,
      Such aid from heaven as some have feign'd they drew,
      An eloquence scarce given to mortals, new
    And undebased by praise of meaner things,
    That, ere through age or woe I shed my wings,
      I may record thy worth with honour due,
      In verse as musical as thou art true,
    And that immortalizes whom it sings.
    But thou hast little need. There is a book
      By seraphs writ with beams of heavenly light,
    On which the eyes of God not rarely look,
      A chronicle of actions just and bright;

    There all thy deeds, my faithful Mary, shine,
    And, since thou own'st that praise, I spare thee mine.

May, 1793.


TO JOHN JOHNSON, ESQ.

On his presenting me with an antique bust of Homer.

    Kinsman beloved, and as a son, by me!
      When I behold the fruit of thy regard,
      The sculptured form of my old favourite bard,
    I reverence feel for him, and love for thee:
    Joy too and grief--much joy that there should be,
      Wise men and learn'd, who grudge not to reward
      With some applause my bold attempt and hard,
    Which others scorn; critics by courtesy.
    The grief is this, that, sunk in Homer's mine,
      I lose my precious years, now soon to fail,
    Handling his gold, which, howsoe'er it shine,
      Proves dross when balanced in the Christian scale.
    Be wiser thou--like our forefather Donne,
    Seek heavenly wealth, and work for God alone.

May, 1793.


TO A YOUNG FRIEND,

On his arriving at Cambridge wet when no rain had fallen there.

    If Gideon's fleece, which drench'd with dew he found
    While moisture none refresh'd the herbs around,
    Might fitly represent the church, endow'd
    With heavenly gifts to heathens not allow'd;
    In pledge, perhaps, of favours from on high,
    Thy locks were wet when others' locks were dry:
    Heaven grant us half the omen--may we see
    Not drought on others, but much dew on thee!

May, 1793.


ON A SPANIEL, CALLED BEAU, KILLING A YOUNG BIRD.

    A spaniel, Beau, that fares like you,
      Well fed, and at his ease,
    Should wiser be than to pursue
      Each trifle that he sees.

    But you have kill'd a tiny bird,
      Which flew not till to-day,
    Against my orders, whom you heard
      Forbidding you the prey.

    Nor did you kill that you might eat
      And ease a doggish pain,
    For him, though chased with furious heat,
      You left where he was slain.

    Nor was he of the thievish sort,
      Or one whom blood allures,
    But innocent was all his sport
      Whom you have torn for yours.

    My dog! what remedy remains,
      Since teach you all I can,
    I see you, after all my pains,
      So much resemble man?

  July 15, 1793.


BEAU'S REPLY.

    Sir, when I flew to seize the bird
      In spite of your command,
    A louder voice than yours I heard,
      And harder to withstand.

    You cried--Forbear!--but in my breast
      A mightier cried--Proceed!--
    'Twas nature, Sir, whose strong behest
      Impell'd me to the deed.

    Yet, much as nature I respect,
      I ventured once to break
    (As you perhaps may recollect)
      Her precept for your sake;

    And when your linnet on a day,
      Passing his prison door,
    Had flutter'd all his strength away,
      And panting press'd the floor.

    Well knowing him a sacred thing,
      Not destined to my tooth,
    I only kiss'd his ruffled wing,
      And lick'd the feathers smooth.

    Let my obedience then excuse
      My disobedience now,
    Nor some reproof yourself refuse
      From your aggrieved bow-wow:

    If killing birds be such a crime,
      (Which I can hardly see,)
    What think you, Sir, of killing time
      With verse address'd to me!


TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

    Dear architect of fine chateaux in air,
      Worthier to stand for ever, if they could,
      Than any built of stone or yet of wood,
    For back of royal elephant to bear!

    O for permission from the skies to share,
      Much to my own, though little to thy good,
      With thee (not subject to the jealous mood!)
    A partnership of literary ware!

    But I am bankrupt now; and doom'd henceforth
      To drudge, in descant dry, on others' lays;
    Bards, I acknowledge, of unequall'd birth!
      But what his commentator's happiest praise?

    That he has furnish'd lights for other eyes,
    Which they who need them use, and then despise.

June 29, 1793.


ANSWER

     To Stanzas addressed to Lady Hesketh, by Miss Catharine
     Fanshawe, in returning a Poem of Mr. Cowper's, lent to her, on
     condition she should neither show it, nor take a copy.

    To be remember'd thus is fame,
      And in the first degree;
    And did the few like her the same,
      The press might sleep for me.

    So Homer in the memory stored
      Of many a Grecian belle,
    Was once preserved--a richer hoard,
      But never lodged so well.

1793.


ON FLAXMAN'S PENELOPE.

    The suitors sinn'd, but with a fair excuse,
    Whom all this elegance might well seduce;
    Nor can our censure on the husband fall,
    Who, for a wife so lovely, slew them all.

September, 1793.


TO THE SPANISH ADMIRAL COUNT GRAVINA,

On his translating the Author's Song on a Rose into Italian Verse.

    My rose, Gravina, blooms anew,
      And steep'd not now in rain,
    But in Castilian streams by you,
      Will never fade again.

1793.


INSCRIPTION

FOR THE TOMB OF MR. HAMILTON.

    Pause here, and think: a monitory rhyme
    Demands one moment of thy fleeting time.
      Consult life's silent clock, thy bounding vein;
    Seems it to say--"Health here has long to reign?"
    Hast thou the vigour of thy youth? an eye
    That beams delight? a heart untaught to sigh?
    Yet fear. Youth, ofttimes healthful and at ease,
    Anticipates a day it never sees;
    And many a tomb, like Hamilton's, aloud
    Exclaims "Prepare thee for an early shroud."


EPITAPH ON A HARE.

    Here lies, whom hound did ne'er pursue,
      Nor swifter greyhound follow,
    Whose foot ne'er tainted morning dew,
      Nor ear heard huntsman's halloo;

    Old Tiney, surliest of his kind,
      Who, nursed with tender care,
    And to domestic bounds confined,
      Was still a wild Jack hare.

    Though duly from my hand he took
      His pittance every night,
    He did it with a jealous look,
      And, when he could, would bite.

    His diet was of wheaten bread
      And milk, and oats, and straw;
    Thistles, or lettuces instead,
      With sand to scour his maw.

    On twigs of hawthorn he regaled,
      On pippins' russet peel,
    And, when his juicy salads fail'd,
      Sliced carrot pleased him well.

    A Turkey carpet was his lawn,
      Whereon he loved to bound,
    To skip and gambol like a fawn,
      And swing his rump around.

    His frisking was at evening hours,
      For then he lost his fear,
    But most before approaching showers,
      Or when a storm drew near.

    Eight years and five round rolling moons
      He thus saw steal away,
    Dozing out all his idle noons,
      And every night at play.

    I kept him for his humour's sake,
      For he would oft beguile
    My heart of thoughts that made it ache,
      And force me to a smile.

    But now beneath this walnut shade
      He finds his long last home,
    And waits, in snug concealment laid,
      Till gentler Puss shall come.

    He, still more aged, feels the shocks,
      From which no care can save,
    And, partner once of Tiney's box,
      Must soon partake his grave.

  [Illustration: _J. Gilbert fecit._

  _W. Greatbach sculp._

  THE TAME HARE.

    "THOUGH DULY FROM MY HAND HE TOOK,
      HIS PITTANCE EVERY NIGHT,
    HE DID IT WITH A JEALOUS LOOK,
      AND WHEN HE COULD WOULD BITE."]


  EPITAPHIUM ALTERUM.

        Hic etiam jacet,
    Qui totum novennium vixit,
            Puss.
        Siste paulisper,
      Qui præteriturus es,
      Et tecum sic reputa--
    Hunc neque canis venaticus,
      Nec plumbum missile,
          Nec laqueus,
        Nec imbres nimii,
            Confecêre:
      Tamen mortuus est--
          Et moriar ego.

The following account of the treatment of his hares was inserted
   by Cowper in the Gentleman's Magazine.

In the year 1774, being much indisposed both in mind and body,
incapable of diverting myself either with company or books, and
yet in a condition that made some diversion necessary, I was glad
of any thing that would engage my attention, without fatiguing
it. The children of a neighbour of mine had a leveret given them
for a plaything; it was at that time about three months old.
Understanding better how to tease the poor creature than to
feed it, and soon becoming weary of their charge, they readily
consented that their father, who saw it pining and growing leaner
every day, should offer it to my acceptance. I was willing enough
to take the prisoner under my protection, perceiving that, in the
management of such an animal, and in the attempt to tame it, I
should find just that sort of employment which my case required.
It was soon known among the neighbours that I was pleased with
the present, and the consequence was, that in a short time I had
as many leverets offered to me as would have stocked a paddock. I
undertook the care of three, which it is necessary that I should
here distinguish by the names I gave them--Puss, Tiney, and Bess.
Notwithstanding the two feminine appellatives, I must inform you,
that they were all males. Immediately commencing carpenter, I
built them houses to sleep in; each had a separate apartment, so
contrived that their ordure would pass through the bottom of it;
an earthen pan placed under each received whatsoever fell, which
being duly emptied and washed, they were thus kept perfectly
sweet and clean. In the day time they had the range of a hall,
and at night retired each to his own bed, never intruding into
that of another.

Puss grew presently familiar, would leap into my lap, raise
himself upon his hinder feet, and bite the hair from my temples.
He would suffer me to take him up, and to carry him about in my
arms, and has more than once fallen fast asleep upon my knee.
He was ill three days, during which time I nursed him, kept him
apart from his fellows, that they might not molest him (for,
like many other wild animals, they persecute one of their own
species that is sick,) and by constant care, and trying him with
a variety of herbs, restored him to perfect health. No creature
could be more grateful than my patient after his recovery; a
sentiment which he most significantly expressed by licking my
hand, first the back of it, then the palm, then every finger
separately, then between all the fingers, as if anxious to leave
no part of it unsaluted; a ceremony which he never performed
but once again upon a similar occasion. Finding him extremely
tractable, I made it my custom to carry him always after
breakfast into the garden, where he hid himself generally under
the leaves of a cucumber vine, sleeping or chewing the cud till
evening; in the leaves also of that vine he found a favourite
repast. I had not long habituated him to this taste of liberty,
before he began to be impatient for the return of the time when
he might enjoy it. He would invite me to the garden by drumming
upon my knee, and by a look of such expression as it was not
possible to misinterpret. If this rhetoric did not immediately
succeed, he would take the skirt of my coat between his teeth,
and pull it with all his force. Thus Puss might be said to be
perfectly tamed; the shyness of his nature was done away, and on
the whole it was visible by many symptoms, which I have not room
to enumerate, that he was happier in human society than, when
shut up with his natural companions.

Not so Tiney; upon him the kindest treatment had not the least
effect. He too was sick, and in his sickness had an equal share
of my attention; but if, after his recovery, I took the liberty
to stroke him, he would grunt, strike with his fore feet, spring
forward, and bite. He was however very entertaining in his way;
even his surliness was matter of mirth, and in his play he
preserved such an air of gravity, and performed his feats with
such a solemnity of manner, that in him too I had an agreeable
companion.

Bess, who died soon after he was full grown, and whose death
was occasioned by his being turned into his box, which had been
washed, while it was yet damp, was a hare of great humour and
drollery. Puss was tamed by gentle usage; Tiney was not to be
tamed at all; and Bess had a courage and confidence that made him
tame from the beginning. I always admitted them into the parlour
after supper, when, the carpet affording their feet a firm hold,
they would frisk, and bound, and play a thousand gambols, in
which Bess, being remarkably strong and fearless, was always
superior to the rest, and proved himself the Vestris of the
party. One evening, the cat being in the room, had the hardiness
to pat Bess upon the cheek, an indignity which he resented by
drumming upon her back with such violence that the cat was happy
to escape from under his paws, and hide herself.

I describe these animals as having each a character of his
own. Such they were in fact, and their countenances were so
expressive of that character, that, when I looked only on the
face of either, I immediately knew which it was. It is said
that a shepherd, however numerous his flock, soon becomes so
familiar with their features, that he can, by that indication
only, distinguish each from all the rest; and yet, to a common
observer, the difference is hardly perceptible. I doubt not that
the same discrimination in the cast of countenances would be
discoverable in hares, and am persuaded that among a thousand
of them no two could be found exactly similar: a circumstance
little suspected by those who have not had opportunity to observe
it. These creatures have a singular sagacity in discovering the
minutest alteration that is made in the place to which they are
accustomed, and instantly apply their nose to the examination
of a new object. A small hole being burnt in the carpet, it was
mended with a patch, and that patch in a moment underwent the
strictest scrutiny. They seem too to be very much directed by
the smell in the choice of their favourites: to some persons,
though they saw them daily, they could never be reconciled, and
would even scream when they attempted to touch them; but a miller
coming in engaged their affections at once; his powdered coat had
charms that were irresistible. It is no wonder that my intimate
acquaintance with these specimens of the kind has taught me to
hold the sportman's amusement in abhorrence; he little knows
what amiable creatures he persecutes, of what gratitude they are
capable, how cheerful they are in their spirits, what enjoyment
they have of life, and that, impressed as they seem with a
peculiar dread of man, it is only because man gives them peculiar
cause for it.

That I may not be tedious, I will just give a short summary of
those articles of diet that suit them best.

I take it to be a general opinion, that they graze, but it is
an erroneous one, at least grass is not their staple; they seem
rather to use it medicinally, soon quitting it for leaves of
almost any kind. Sowthistle, dandelion, and lettuce, are their
favourite vegetables, especially the last. I discovered by
accident that fine white sand is in great estimation with them;
I suppose as a digestive. It happened, that I was cleaning a
birdcage when the hares were with me; I placed a pot filled with
such sand upon the floor, which, being at once directed to it by
a strong instinct, they devoured voraciously; since that time I
have generally taken care to see them well supplied with it. They
account green corn a delicacy, both blade and stalk, but the ear
they seldom eat: straw of any kind, especially wheat-straw, is
another of their dainties: they will feed greedily upon oats, but
if furnished with clean straw never want them; it serves them
also for a bed, and, if shaken up daily, will be kept sweet and
dry for a considerable time. They do not indeed require aromatic
herbs, but will eat a small quantity of them with great relish,
and are particularly fond of the plant called musk; they seem to
resemble sheep in this, that, if their pasture be too succulent,
they are very subject to the rot; to prevent which, I always made
bread their principal nourishment, and, filling a pan with it cut
into small squares, placed it every evening in their chambers,
for they feed only at evening and in the night; during the
winter, when vegetables were not to be got, I mingled this mess
of bread with shreds of carrot, adding to it the rind of apples
cut extremely thin; for, though they are fond of the paring, the
apple itself disgusts them. These however not being a sufficient
substitute for the juice of summer herbs, they must at this time
be supplied with water; but so placed, that they cannot overset
it into their beds. I must not omit, that occasionally they are
much pleased with twigs of hawthorn, and of the common brier,
eating even the very wood when it is of considerable thickness.

Bess, I have said, died young; Tiney lived to be nine years old,
and died at last, I have reason to think, of some hurt in his
loins by a fall; Puss is still living, and has just completed
his tenth year, discovering no signs of decay, nor even of
age, except that he is grown more discreet and less frolicsome
than he was. I cannot conclude without observing, that I have
lately introduced a dog to his acquaintance, a spaniel that had
never seen a hare to a hare that had never seen a spaniel. I
did it with great caution, but there was no real need of it.
Puss discovered no token of fear, nor Marquis the least symptom
of hostility. There is therefore, it should seem, no natural
antipathy between dog and hare, but the pursuit of the one
occasions the flight of the other, and the dog pursues because he
is trained to it; they eat bread at the same time out of the same
hand, and are in all respects sociable and friendly.

I should not do complete justice to my subject, did I not add,
that they have no ill scent belonging to them, that they are
indefatigably nice in keeping themselves clean, for which purpose
nature has furnished them with a brush under each foot; and that
they are never infested by any vermin.

  May 28, 1784.


MEMORANDUM FOUND AMONG MR. COWPER'S PAPERS.

Tuesday, March 9, 1786.

This day died poor Puss, aged eleven years eleven months. He died
between twelve and one at noon, of mere old age, and apparently
without pain.



A TALE[836]

  [836] This tale is founded on an article which appeared in the
  Buckinghamshire Herald, Saturday, June 1, 1793;--"Glasgow, May
  23. In a block, or pulley, near the head of the mast of a gabert,
  now lying at the Broomielaw, there is a chaffinch's nest and
  four eggs. The nest was built while the vessel lay at Greenock,
  and was followed hither by both birds. Though the block is
  occasionally lowered for the inspection of the curious, the birds
  have not forsaken the nest. The cock, however, visits the nest
  but seldom, while the hen never leaves it, but when she descends
  to the hull for food."

    In Scotland's realms, where trees are few,
      Nor even shrubs abound;
    But where, however bleak the view,
      Some better things are found;

    For husband there and wife may boast
      Their union undefiled,
    And false ones are as rare almost
      As hedgerows in the wild--

    In Scotland's realm forlorn and bare
      The history chanced of late--
    The history of a wedded pair,
      A chaffinch and his mate.

    The spring drew near, each felt a breast
      With genial instinct fill'd;
    They pair'd, and would have built a nest,
      But found not where to build.

    The heaths uncover'd and the moors
      Except with snow and sleet,
    Sea-beaten rocks and naked shores
      Could yield them no retreat.

    Long time a breeding-place they sought,
      Till both grew vex'd and tired;
    At length a ship arriving brought
      The good so long desired.

    A ship!--could such a restless thing
      Afford them place of rest?
    Or was the merchant charged to bring
      The homeless birds a nest?

    Hush--silent hearers profit most--
      This racer of the sea
    Proved kinder to them than the coast,
      It served them with a tree.

    But such a tree! 'twas shaven deal,
      The tree they call a mast,
    And had a hollow with a wheel
      Through which the tackle pass'd.

    Within that cavity aloft
      Their roofless home they fix'd,
    Form'd with materials neat and soft,
      Bents, wool, and feathers mix'd.

    Four ivory eggs soon pave its floor
      With russet specks bedight--
    The vessel weighs, forsakes the shore,
      And lessens to the sight.

    The mother-bird is gone to sea,
      As she had changed her kind;
    But goes the male? Far wiser, he
      Is doubtless left behind.

    No--soon as from ashore he saw
      The winged mansion move,
    He flew to reach it, by a law
      Of never-failing love;

    Then, perching at his consort's side,
      Was briskly borne along,
    The billows and the blast defied,
      And cheer'd her with a song.

    The seaman with sincere delight
      His feather'd shipmates eyes,
    Scarce less exulting in the sight
      Than when he tows a prize.

    For seamen much believe in signs,
      And from a chance so new
    Each some approaching good divines,
      And may his hopes be true!

    Hail, honour'd land! a desert where
      Not even birds can hide,
    Yet parent of this loving pair
      Whom nothing could divide.

    And ye who, rather than resign
      Your matrimonial plan,
    Were not afraid to plough the brine
      In company with man;

    For whose lean country much disdain
      We English often show,
    Yet from a richer nothing gain
      But wantonness and woe--

    Be it your fortune, year by year
      The same resource to prove,
    And may ye, sometimes landing here,
      Instruct us how to love!

June, 1793.


TO MARY.

    The twentieth year is well nigh past
      Since first our sky was overcast;
    Ah! would that this might be the last!
                                  My Mary!

    Thy spirits have a fainter flo
      I see thee daily weaker gro
    'Twas my distress that brought thee low,
                                   My Mary!

    Thy needles, once a shining store,
      For my sake restless heretofore,
    Now rust disused, and shine no more;
                                   My Mary!

    For, though thou gladly wouldst fulfil
      The same kind office for me still,
    Thy sight now seconds not thy will,
                                   My Mary!

    But well thou play'dst the housewife's part,
      And all thy threads with magic art
    Have wound themselves about this heart,
                                   My Mary!

    Thy indistinct expressions seem
      Like language utter'd in a dream:
    Yet me they charm, whate'er the theme,
                                   My Mary!

    Thy silver locks, once auburn bright,
      Are still more lovely in my sight
    Than golden beams of orient light,
                                   My Mary!

    For, could I view nor them nor thee,
      What sight worth seeing could I see?
    The sun would rise in vain for me,
                                   My Mary!

    Partakers of thy sad decline,
      Thy hands their little force resign;
    Yet gently press'd, press gently mine,
                                   My Mary!

    Such feebleness of limbs thou provest,
      That now at every step thou movest
    Upheld by two; yet still thou lovest,
                                   My Mary!

    And still to love, though press'd with ill,
      In wintry age to feel no chill,
    With me is to be lovely still,
                                   My Mary!

    But ah! by constant heed I know,
      How oft the sadness that I show
    Transforms thy smiles to looks of woe,
                                   My Mary!

    And should my future lot be cast
      With much resemblance of the past,
    Thy worn-out heart will break at last,
                                   My Mary!

Autumn of 1793.

THE CASTAWAY.

    Obscurest night involved the sky,
      The Atlantic billows roar'd,
    When such a destined wretch as I,
      Wash'd headlong from on board,
    Of friends, of hope, of all bereft,
    His floating home for ever left.

    No braver chief could Albion boast
      Than he with whom he went,
    Nor ever ship left Albion's coast
      With warmer wishes sent.
    He loved them both, but both in vain,
    Nor him beheld, nor her again.

    Not long beneath the whelming brine,
      Expert to swim, he lay;
    Nor soon he felt his strength decline,
      Or courage die away:
    But waged with death a lasting strife,
    Supported by despair of life.

    He shouted; nor his friends had fail'd
      To check the vessel's course,
    But so the furious blast prevail'd,
      That, pitiless perforce,
    They left their outcast mate behind,
    And scudded still before the wind.

    Some succour yet they could afford;
      And, such as storms allow,
    The cask, the coop, the floated cord,
      Delay'd not to bestow:
    But he, they knew, nor ship nor shore,
    Whate'er they gave, should visit more.

    Nor, cruel as it seem'd, could he
      Their haste himself condemn,
    Aware that flight, in such a sea,
      Alone could rescue them;
    Yet bitter felt it still to die
    Deserted, and his friends so nigh.

    He long survives, who lives an hour
      In ocean, self-upheld:
    And so long he, with unspent power,
      His destiny repell'd:
    And ever, as the minutes flew,
    Entreated help, or cried--"Adieu!"

    At length, his transient respite past,
      His comrades, who before
    Had heard his voice in every blast,
      Could catch the sound no more:
    For then, by toil subdued, he drank
    The stifling wave, and then he sank.

    No poet wept him; but the page
      Of narrative sincere,
    That tells his name, his worth, his age,
      Is wet with Anson's tear;
    And tears by bards or heroes shed
    Alike immortalize the dead.

    I therefore purpose not, or dream,
      Descanting on his fate,
    To give the melancholy theme
      A more enduring date:
    But misery still delights to trace
    Its semblance in another's case.

    No voice divine the storm allay'd,
      No light propitious shone;
    When, snatch'd from all effectual aid,
      We perish'd, each alone:
    But I beneath a rougher sea,
    And whelm'd in deeper gulfs than he.

March 20, 1799.


TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.

    DEAR President, whose art sublime
    Gives perpetuity to time,
    And bids transactions of a day,
    That fleeting hours would waft away
    To dark futurity, survive,
    And in unfading beauty live,--
    You cannot with a grace decline
    A special mandate of the Nine--
    Yourself, whatever task you choose,
    So much indebted to the Muse.
      Thus say the sisterhood:--We come--
    Fix well your pallet on your thumb,
    Prepare the pencil and the tints--
    We come to furnish you with hints.
    French disappointment, British glory,
    Must be the subject of the story.
      First strike a curve, a graceful bow,
    Then slope it to a point below;
    Your outline easy, airy, light,
    Fill'd up, becomes a paper kite.
    Let independence, sanguine, horrid,
    Blaze like a meteor in the forehead:
    Beneath (but lay aside your graces)
    Draw six-and-twenty rueful faces,
    Each with a staring, stedfast eye,
    Fix'd on his great and good ally.
    France flies the kite--'tis on the wing--
    Britannia's lightning cuts the string.
    The wind that raised it, ere it ceases,
    Just rends it into thirteen pieces,
    Takes charge of every fluttering sheet,
    And lays them all at George's feet.
      Iberia, trembling from afar,
    Renounces the confederate war.
    Her efforts and her arts o'ercome,
    France calls her shatter'd navies home.
    Repenting Holland learns to mourn
    The sacred treaties she has torn;
    Astonishment and awe profound
    Are stamp'd upon the nations round:
    Without one friend, above all foes,
    Britannia gives the world repose.


ON THE AUTHOR OF LETTERS ON LITERATURE.[837]

  [837] Nominally by Robert Heron, Esq., but supposed to have been
  written by John Pinkerton. 8vo. 1785.

    The Genius of the Augustan age
    His head among Rome's ruins rear'd,
    And, bursting with heroic rage,
    When literary Heron appear'd;

    Thou hast, he cried, like him of old
    Who set the Ephesian dome on fire,
    By being scandalously bold,
    Attain'd the mark of thy desire.

    And for traducing Virgil's name
    Shalt share his merited reward;
    A perpetuity of fame,
    That rots, and stinks, and is abhorr'd.


THE DISTRESSED TRAVELLERS;

OR, LABOUR IN VAIN.

_A New Song, to a Tune never sung before._

      I sing of a journey to Clifton,[838]
        We would have performed, if we could;
      Without cart or barrow, to lift on
        Poor Mary[839] and me through the mud.
          Slee, sla, slud,
          Stuck in the mud;
    Oh it is pretty to wade through a flood!

      So away we went, slipping and sliding;
        Hop, hop, _à la mode de deux frogs_;
      'Tis near as good walking as riding,
        When ladies are dressed in their clogs.
          Wheels, no doubt,
          Go briskly about,
    But they clatter, and rattle, and make such a rout.

  [838] A village near Olney.

  [839] Mrs. Unwin.

DIALOGUE.

SHE.

    "Well! now, I protest it is charming;
      How finely the weather improves!
    That cloud, though 'tis rather alarming,
      How slowly and stately it moves."

HE.

            "Pshaw! never mind,
            'Tis not in the wind,
    We are travelling south, and shall leave it behind."

SHE.

    "I am glad we are come for an airing,
      For folks may be pounded, and penn'd,
    Until they grow rusty, not caring
      To stir half a mile to an end."

HE.

            "The longer we stay,
            The longer we may;
    It's a folly to think about weather or way."

SHE.

    "But now I begin to be frighted,
      If I fall, what a way I should roll!
    I am glad that the bridge was indicted,
      Stay! stop! I am sunk in a hole!"

HE.

              "Nay never care,
              'Tis a common affair;
    You'll not be the last, that will set a foot there."

SHE.

    "Let me breathe now a little, and ponder
      On what it were better to do;
    That terrible lane I see yonder,
      I think we shall never get through."

HE.

            "So think I:--
            But, by the bye,
    We never shall know, if we never should try."

SHE.

    "But should we get there, how shall we get home?
      What a terrible deal of bad road we have past!
    Slipping, and sliding, and if we should come
      To a difficult stile, I am ruined at last!
            Oh this lane!
            Now it is plain
    That struggling and striving is labour in vain."

HE.

"Stick fast there while I go and look;"

SHE.

"Don't go away, for fear I should fall:"

HE.

    "I have examined it, every nook,
    And what you see here is a sample of all.
          Come, wheel round,
          The dirt we have found
    Would be an estate, at a farthing a pound."

    Now, sister Anne,[840] the guitar you must take,
      Set it, and sing it, and make it a song:
    I have varied the verse, for variety's sake,
      And cut it off short--because it was long.
          'Tis hobbling and lame,
          Which critics won't blame,
    For the sense and the sound, they say, should be the same.

  [840] The late Lady Austen.


  STANZAS

  ON THE LATE INDECENT LIBERTIES TAKEN WITH THE REMAINS OF
  MILTON.[841] ANNO 1790.

  [841] The bones of Milton, who lies buried in Cripplegate church,
  were disinterred; a pamphlet by Le Neve was published at the
  time, giving an account of what appeared on opening his coffin.

    "Me too, perchance, in future days,
      The sculptured stone shall show,
    With Paphian myrtle or with bays
      Parnassian on my brow.

    "But I, or ere that season come,
      Escaped from every care,
    Shall reach my refuge in the tomb,
      And sleep securely there."[842]

    So sang, in Roman tone and style,
      The youthful bard, ere long
    Ordain'd to grace his native isle
      With her sublimest song.

    Who then but must conceive disdain,
      Hearing the deed unblest
    Of wretches who have dared profane
      His dread sepulchral rest?

    Ill fare the hands that heaved the stones[843]
      Where Milton's ashes lay,
    That trembled not to grasp his bones
      And steal his dust away!

    O ill requited bard! neglect
      Thy living worth repaid,
    And blind idolatrous respect
      As much affronts thee dead.

  August, 1790.

  [842]

    Forsitan et nostros ducat de marmore vultus,
    Nectens aut Paphia myrti aut Parnasside lauri
    Fronde comas--At ego secura pace quiescam.

  _Milton in Manso._

  [843] Cowper, no doubt, had in his memory the lines said to have
  been written by Shakspeare on his tomb:

    "Good friend, for Jesus' sake forbear
    To dig the dust inclosed here.
    Blest be the man that spares these stones,
    And curst be he that moves my bones."


TO THE REV. WILLIAM BULL.

June 22, 1782.
MY DEAR FRIEND,

  If reading verse be your delight,
  'Tis mine as much, or more, to write;
  But what we would, so weak is man,
  Lies oft remote from what we can.
  For instance, at this very time
  I feel a wish by cheerful rhyme
  To soothe my friend, and, had I power,
  To cheat him of an anxious hour;
  Not meaning (for I must confess,
  It were but folly to suppress)
  His pleasure, or his good alone,
  But squinting partly at my own.
  But though the sun is flaming high
  In the centre of yon arch, the sky,
  And he had once (and who but he?)
  The name for setting genius free,
  Yet whether poets of past days
  Yielded him undeserved praise.
  And he by no uncommon lot
  Was famed for virtues he had not;
  Or whether, which is like enough,
  His Highness may have taken huff,
  So seldom sought with invocation,
  Since it has been the reigning fashion
  To disregard his inspiration,
  I seem no brighter in my wits,
  For all the radiance he emits,
  Than if I saw, through midnight vapour,
  The glimmering of a farthing taper.
  Oh for a succedaneum, then,
  To accelerate a creeping pen!
  Oh for a ready succedaneum,
  Quod caput, cerebrum, et cranium
  Pondere liberet exoso,
  Et morbo jam caliginoso!
  'Tis here; this oval box well fill'd
  With best tobacco, finely mill'd,
  Beats all Anticyra's pretences
  To disengage the encumber'd senses.
    Oh Nymph of transatlantic fame,
  Where'er thine haunt, whate'er thy name,
  Whether reposing on the side
  Of Oroonoquo's spacious tide,
  Or listening with delight not small
  To Niagara's distant fall,
  'Tis thine to cherish and to feed
  The pungent nose-refreshing weed
  Which, whether pulverized it gain
  A speedy passage to the brain,
  Or whether, touch'd with fire, it rise
  In circling eddies to the skies,
  Does thought more quicken and refine
  Than all the breath of all the Nine--
  Forgive the bard, if bard he be,
  Who once too wantonly made free,
  To touch with a satiric wipe
  That symbol of thy power, the pipe;
  So may no blight infest thy plains,
  And no unseasonable rains;
  And so may smiling peace once more
  Visit America's sad shore;
  And thou, secure from all alarms,
  Of thundering drums and glittering arms,
  Rove unconfined beneath the shade
  Thy wide expanded leaves have made;
  So may thy votaries increase,
  And fumigation never cease.
  May Newton with renew'd delights
  Perform thine odoriferous rites,
  While clouds of incense half divine
  Involve thy disappearing shrine;
  And so may smoke-inhaling Bull
  Be always filling, never full.


EPITAPH ON MRS. M. HIGGINS, OF WESTON.

  Laurels may flourish round the conqueror's tomb,
  But happiest they who win the world to come:
  Believers have a silent field to fight,
  And their exploits are veil'd from human sight.
  They in some nook, where little known they dwell,
  Kneel, pray in faith, and rout the hosts of hell;
  Eternal triumphs crown their toils divine,
  And all those triumphs, Mary, now are thine.

1791.


SONNET TO A YOUNG LADY ON HER BIRTH-DAY.

  Deem not, sweet rose, that bloom'st 'midst many a thorn,
  Thy friend, tho' to a cloister's shade consign'd,
  Can e'er forget the charms he left behind,
  Or pass unheeded this auspicious morn!
  In happier days to brighter prospects born,
  O tell thy thoughtless sex, the virtuous mind,
  Like thee, content in every state may find,
  And look on Folly's pageantry with scorn.
  To steer with nicest art betwixt th' extreme
  Of idle mirth, and affectation coy;
  To blend good sense with elegance and ease;
  To bid Affliction's eye no longer stream;
  Is thine; best gift, the unfailing source of joy,
  The guide to pleasures which can never cease!


ON A MISTAKE IN HIS TRANSLATION OF HOMER.

  Cowper had sinn'd with some excuse,
    If, bound in rhyming tethers,
  He had committed this abuse
    Of changing ewes for wethers;[844]

  But, male for female is a trope,
    Or rather bold misnomer,
  That would have startled even Pope,
    When he translated Homer.

  [844] I have heard about my wether mutton from various quarters.
  It was a blunder hardly pardonable in a man who has lived amid
  fields and meadows, grazed by sheep, almost these thirty years.
  I have accordingly satirized myself in two stanzas which I
  composed last night, while I lay awake, tormented with pain, and
  well dosed with laudanum. If you find them not very brilliant,
  therefore, you will know how to account for it.--_Letter to
  Joseph Hill, Esq._ dated April 15, 1792.


ON THE BENEFIT RECEIVED BY HIS MAJESTY, FROM SEA-BATHING IN THE YEAR
1789.

    O sovereign of an isle renown'd
      For undisputed sway,
    Wherever o'er yon gulf profound
      Her navies wing their way,

    With juster claims she builds at length
      Her empire on the sea,
    And well may boast the waves her strength,
      Which strength restored to thee.


ADDRESSED TO MISS ---- ON READING THE PRAYER FOR INDIFFERENCE.[845]

  [845] For Mrs. Greville's Ode, see _Annual Register_, vol. v. p.
  202.

    And dwells there in a female heart,
      By bounteous Heaven design'd,
    The choicest raptures to impart,
      To feel the most refined--

    Dwells there a wish in such a breast
      Its nature to forego,
    To smother in ignoble rest
      At once both bliss and woe!

    Far be the thought, and far the strain,
      Which breathes the low desire,
    How sweet soe'er the verse complain,
      Though Phoebus string the lyre.

    Come, then, fair maid, (in nature wise,)
      Who, knowing them, can tell
    From generous sympathy what joys
      The glowing bosom swell:

    In justice to the various powers
      Of pleasing, which you share,
    Join me, amid your silent hours,
      To form the better prayer.

    With lenient balm may Oberon hence
      To fairy land be driven,
    With every herb that blunts the sense
      Mankind received from heaven.

    "Oh! if my sovereign Author please,
      Far be it from my fate
    To live unbless'd in torpid ease,
      And slumber on in state;

    "Each tender tie of life defied,
      Whence social pleasures spring,
    Unmoved with all the world beside,
      A solitary thing--"

    Some Alpine mountain, wrapt in snow,
      Thus braves the whirling blast,
    Eternal winter doom'd to know,
      No genial spring to taste.

    In vain warm suns their influence shed,
      The zephyrs sport in vain,
    He rears unchanged his barren head,
      Whilst beauty decks the plain.

    What though in scaly armour dress'd,
      Indifference may repel
    The shafts of woe--in such a breast
      No joy can ever dwell.

    'Tis woven in the world's great plan,
      And fix'd by Heaven's decree,
    That all the true delights of man
      Should spring from sympathy.

    'Tis nature bids, and whilst the laws
      Of nature we retain,
    Our self-approving bosom draws
      A pleasure from its pain.

    Thus grief itself has comforts dear
      The sordid never know;
    And ecstasy attends the tear
      When virtue bids it flow.

    For, when it streams from that pure source,
      No bribes the heart can win
    To check, or alter from its course,
      The luxury within.

    Peace to the phlegm of sullen elves,
      Who, if from labour eased,
    Extend no care beyond themselves,
      Unpleasing and unpleased.

    Let no low thought suggest the prayer,
      Oh! grant, kind Heaven, to me,
    Long as I draw ethereal air,
      Sweet Sensibility!

    Where'er the heavenly nymph is seen,
      With lustre-beaming eye,
    A train, attendant on their queen,
      (Her rosy chorus) fly;

    The jocund loves in Hymen's band,
      With torches ever bright,
    And generous friendship, hand in hand
      With pity's wat'ry sight.

    The gentler virtues too are join'd
      In youth immortal warm;
    The soft relations, which, combined,
      Give life her every charm.

    The arts come smiling in the close,
      And lend celestial fire;
    The marble breathes, the canvas glows,
      The muses sweep the lyre.

    "Still may my melting bosom cleave
      To sufferings not my own,
    And still the sigh responsive heave
      Where'er is heard a groan.

    "So pity shall take virtue's part.
      Her natural ally,
    And fashioning my soften'd heart,
      Prepare it for the sky."

    This artless vow may Heaven receive,
      And you, fond maid, approve:
    So may your guiding angel give
      Whate'er you wish or love!

    So may the rosy-finger'd hours
      Lead on the various year,
    And every joy, which now is yours,
      Extend a larger sphere!

    And suns to come, as round they wheel,
      Your golden moments bless
    With all a tender heart can feel,
      Or lively fancy guess!

  1762.


FROM

A LETTER TO THE REV. MR. NEWTON,

LATE RECTOR OF ST. MARY WOOLNOTH.

    Says the pipe to the snuff-box, I can't understand
      What the ladies and gentlemen see in your face,
    That you are in fashion all over the land,
      And I am so much fallen into disgrace.

    Do but see what a pretty contemplative air
      I give to the company--pray do but note 'em--
    You would think that the wise men of Greece were all there,
      Or at least would suppose them the wise men of Gotham.

    My breath is as sweet as the breath of blown roses,
      While you are a nuisance where'er you appear;
    There is nothing but snivelling and blowing of noses,
      Such a noise as turns any man's stomach to hear.

    Then, lifting his lid in a delicate way,
      And opening his mouth with a smile quite engaging,
    The box in reply was heard plainly to say,
      What a silly dispute is this we are waging!

    If you have a little of merit to claim,
      You may thank the sweet-smelling Virginian weed,
    And I, if I seem to deserve any blame,
      The before-mention'd drug in apology plead.

    Thus neither the praise nor the blame is our own,
      No room for a sneer, much less a cachinnus,
    We are vehicles, not of tobacco alone,
      But of any thing else they may choose to put in us.


THE FLATTING MILL.

AN ILLUSTRATION.

    When a bar of pure silver or ingot of gold
    Is sent to be flatted or wrought into length,
    It is pass'd between cylinders often, and roll'd
    In an engine of utmost mechanical strength.

    Thus tortured and squeezed, at last it appears
    Like a loose heap of ribbon, a glittering show,
    Like music it tinkles and rings in your ears,
    And, warm'd by the pressure, is all in a glow.

    This process achieved, it is doom'd to sustain
    The thump after thump of a gold-beater's mallet,
    And at last is of service in sickness or pain
    To cover a pill for a delicate palate.

    Alas for the poet! who dares undertake
    To urge reformation of national ill--
    His head and his heart are both likely to ache
    With the double employment of mallet and mill.

    If he wish to instruct, he must learn to delight,
    Smooth, ductile, and even his fancy must flow,
    Must tinkle and glitter like gold to the sight,
    And catch in its progress a sensible glow.

    After all he must beat it as thin and as fine
    As the leaf that enfolds what an invalid swallows;
    For truth is unwelcome, however divine,
    And unless you adorn it, a nausea follows.


EPITAPH ON A FREE BUT TAME REDBREAST,

A FAVOURITE OF MISS SALLY HURDIS.

    These are not dewdrops, these are tears,
      And tears by Sally shed
    For absent Robin, who she fears,
      With too much cause, is dead.

    One morn he came not to her hand
      As he was wont to come,
    And, on her finger perch'd, to stand
      Picking his breakfast-crumb.

    Alarm'd, she call'd him, and perplex'd
      She sought him, but in vain--
    That day he came not, nor the next,
      Nor ever came again.

    She therefore raised him here a tomb,
      Though where he fell, or how,
    None knows, so secret was his doom,
      Nor where he moulders now.

    Had half a score of coxcombs died
      In social Robin's stead,
    Poor Sally's tears had soon been dried,
      Or haply never shed.

    But Bob was neither rudely bold
      Nor spiritlessly tame;
    Nor was, like theirs, his bosom cold,
      But always in a flame.

  March, 1792.


SONNET,

ADDRESSED TO WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQ.

    Hayley--thy tenderness fraternal shown
      In our first interview, delightful guest!
      To Mary, and me for her dear sake distress'd,
    Such as it is, has made my heart thy own,
    Though heedless now of new engagements grown;
      For threescore winters make a wintry breast,
      And I had purposed ne'er to go in quest
    Of friendship more, except with God alone.
      But thou hast won me; nor is God my foe,
    Who, ere this last afflictive scene began,
      Sent thee to mitigate the dreadful blow,
      My brother, by whose sympathy I know
    Thy true deserts infallibly to scan,
    Not more to admire the bard than love the man.

  June 2, 1792.


AN EPITAPH.

    Here lies one who never drew
    Blood himself, yet many slew;
    Gave the gun its aim, and figure
    Made in field, yet ne'er pull'd trigger.
    Armed men have gladly made
    Him their guide, and him obey'd;
    At his signified desire
    Would advance, present, and fire--
    Stout he was, and large of limb,
    Scores have fled at sight of him!
    And to all this fame he rose
    Only following his nose.
    Neptune was he call'd, not he
    Who controls the boisterous sea,
    But of happier command,
    Neptune of the furrow'd land;
    And, your wonder vain to shorten,
    Pointer to Sir John Throckmorton.

  1792.


ON RECEIVING HAYLEY'S PICTURE.

    In language warm as could be breathed or penn'd
    Thy picture speaks the original, my friend,
    Not by those looks that indicate thy mind--
    They only speak thee friend of all mankind;
    Expression here more soothing still I see,
    That friend of all a partial friend to me.

  January, 1793.


ON A PLANT OF VIRGIN'S BOWER.

DESIGNED TO COVER A GARDEN-SEAT.

    Thrive, gentle plant! and weave a bower
      For Mary and for me,
    And deck with many a splendid flower,
      Thy foliage large and free.

    Thou camest from Eartham, and wilt shade
      (If truly I divine)
    Some future day the illustrious head
      Of him who made thee mine.

    Should Daphne show a jealous frown,
      And envy seize the bay,
    Affirming none so fit to crown
      Such honour'd brows as they,

    Thy cause with zeal we shall defend,
      And with convincing power;
    For why should not the virgin's friend
      Be crown'd with virgin's bower?

  Spring of 1793.


ON RECEIVING HEYNE'S VIRGIL

FROM MR. HAYLEY.

    I should have deem'd it once an effort vain
    To sweeten more sweet Maro's matchless strain,
    But from that error now behold me free,
    Since I received him as a gift from thee.


STANZAS,

ADDRESSED TO LADY HESKETH, BY A LADY,

_In returning a Poem, of Mr. Cowper's, lent to the Writer, on
condition she should neither show it nor take a copy._

    What wonder! if my wavering hand
      Had dared to disobey,
    When Hesketh gave a harsh command,
      And Cowper led astray.

    Then take this tempting gift of thine,
      By pen uncopied yet!
    But canst thou Memory confine,
      Or teach me to forget?

    More lasting than the touch of art,
      Her characters remain;
    When written by a feeling heart
      On tablets of the brain.


COWPER'S REPLY.

    To be remember'd thus is fame,
      And in the first degree;
    And did the few, like her, the same,
      The press might rest for me.

    So Homer, in the mem'ry stor'd
      Of many a Grecian belle,
    Was once preserved--a richer hoard,
      But never lodged so well.


LINES ADDRESSED TO MISS THEODORA JANE COWPER.

    William was once a bashful youth,
      His modesty was such,
    That one might say, to say the truth,
      He rather had too much.

    Some said that it was want of sense,
      And others, want of spirit,
    (So blest a thing is impudence,)
      While others could not bear it.

    But some a different notion had,
      And at each other winking,
    Observed, that though he little said,
      He paid it off with thinking.

    Howe'er, it happened, by degrees,
      He mended, and grew perter,
    In company was more at ease,
      And dress'd a little smarter;

    Nay, now and then, could look quite gay,
      As other people do;
    And sometimes said, or tried to say,
      A witty thing or so.

    He eyed the women, and made free
      To comment on their shapes,
    So that there was, or seem'd to be,
      No fear of a relapse.

    The women said, who thought him rough,
      But now no longer foolish,
    "The creature may do well enough,
      But wants a deal of polish."

    At length improved from head to heel,
      'Twere scarce too much to say,
    No dancing beau was so genteel,
      Or half so _dégagé_.

    Now that a miracle so strange
      May not in vain be shown,
    Let the dear maid who wrought the change
      E'en claim him for her own!


TO THE SAME.

    How quick the change from joy to wo,
    How chequer'd is our lot below!
    Seldom we view the prospect fair;
    Dark clouds of sorrow, pain, and care,
    (Some pleasing intervals between,)
    Scowl over more than half the scene.
    Last week with Delia, gentle maid!
    Far hence in happier fields I stray'd.
    Five suns successive rose and set,
    And saw no monarch in his state,
    Wrapt in the blaze of majesty,
    So free from every care as I.
    Next day the scene was overcast--
    Such day till then I never pass'd,--
    For on that day, relentless fate!
    Delia and I must separate.
    Yet ere we look'd our last farewell,
    From her dear lips this comfort fell,--
    "Fear not that time, where'er we rove,
    Or absence, shall abate my love."


LINES ON A SLEEPING INFANT.

    Sweet babe! whose image here express'd
      Does thy peaceful slumbers show;
    Guilt or fear, to break thy rest,
      Never did thy spirit know.

    Soothing slumbers! soft repose,
      Such as mock the painter's skill,
    Such as innocence bestows,
      Harmless infant! lull thee still.


LINES.

    Oh! to some distant scene, a willing exile
    From the wild roar of this busy world,
    Were it my fate with Delia to retire,
    With her to wander through the sylvan shade,
    Each morn, or o'er the moss-embrowned turf,
    Where, blest as the prime parents of mankind
    In their own Eden, we would envy none,
    But, greatly pitying whom the world calls happy,
    Gently spin out the silken thread of life!


INSCRIPTION FOR A MOSS-HOUSE IN THE SHRUBBERY AT WESTON.

    Here, free from riot's hated noise,
    Be mine, ye calmer, purer joys,
        A book or friend bestows;
    Far from the storms that shake the great,
    Contentment's gale shall fan my seat,
        And sweeten my repose.


LINES ON THE DEATH OF SIR WILLIAM RUSSEL.

    Doom'd, as I am, in solitude to waste
    The present moments, and regret the past;
    Deprived of every joy I valued most,
    My friend torn from me, and my mistress lost;
    Call not this gloom I wear, this anxious mien,
    The dull effect of humour, or of spleen!
    Still, still, I mourn, with each returning day,
    Him[846] snatch'd by fate in early youth away;
    And her--thro' tedious years of doubt and pain,
    Fix'd in her choice, and faithful--but in vain!
    O prone to pity, generous, and sincere,
    Whose eye ne'er yet refus'd the wretch a tear;
    Whose heart the real claim of friendship knows
    Nor thinks a lover's are but fancied woes;
    See me--ere yet my destin'd course half done,
    Cast forth a wand'rer on a world unknown!
    See me neglected on the world's rude coast,
    Each dear companion of my voyage lost!
    Nor ask why clouds of sorrow shade my brow,
    And ready tears wait only leave to flow!
    Why all that soothes a heart from anguish free,
    All that delights the happy--palls with me!

  [846] Sir William Russel, the favourite friend of the young poet.


ON THE HIGH PRICE OF FISH.

    Cocoa-nut naught,
    Fish too dear,
    None must be bought
    For us that are here:

    No lobster on earth,
    That ever I saw,
    To me would be worth
    Sixpence a claw.

    So, dear madam, wait
    Till fish can be got
    At a reas'nable rate,
    Whether lobster or not;

    Till the French and the Dutch
    Have quitted the seas,
    And then send as much
    And as oft as you please.


TO MRS. NEWTON.

    A noble theme demands a noble verse,
    In such I thank you for your fine oysters.
    The barrel was magnificently large,
    But, being sent to Olney at free charge,
    Was not inserted in the driver's list,
    And therefore overlook'd, forgot, or miss'd;
    For, when the messenger whom we despatch'd
    Inquir'd for oysters, Hob his noddle scratch'd;
    Denying that his wagon or his wain
    Did any such commodity contain.
    In consequence of which, your welcome boon
    Did not arrive till yesterday at noon;
    In consequence of which some chanc'd to die,
    And some, though very sweet, were very dry.
    Now Madam says, (and what she says must still
    Deserve attention, say she what she will,)
    That what we call the diligence, be-case
    It goes to London with a swifter pace,
    Would better suit the carriage of your gift,
    Returning downward with a pace as swift;
    And therefore recommends it with this aim--
    To save at least three days,--the price the same;
    For though it will not carry or convey
    For less than twelve pence, send whate'er you may,
    For oysters bred upon the salt sea-shore,
    Pack'd in a barrel, they will charge no more.

      News have I none that I can deign to write,
    Save that it rain'd prodigiously last night;
    And that ourselves were, at the seventh hour,
    Caught in the first beginning of the show'r;
    But walking, running, and with much ado,
    Got home--just time enough to be wet through,
    Yet both are well, and, wond'rous to be told,
    Soused as we were, we yet have caught no cold;
    And wishing just the same good hap to you,
    We say, good Madam, and good Sir, adieu!


VERSES PRINTED BY HIMSELF ON A FLOOD AT OLNEY.

    To watch the storms, and hear the sky
    Give all our almanacks the lie;
    To shake with cold, and see the plains
    In autumn drown'd with wintry rains;
    'Tis thus I spend my moments here,
    And wish myself a Dutch mynheer;
    I then should have no need of wit;
    For lumpish Hollander unfit!
    Nor should I then repine at mud,
    Or meadows deluged with a flood;
    But in a bog live well content,
    And find it just my element;
    Should be a clod, and not a man;
    Nor wish in vain for Sister Ann,
    With charitable aid to drag
    My mind out of its proper quag;
    Should have the genius of a boor,
    And no ambition to have more.


EXTRACT FROM A SUNDAY-SCHOOL HYMN.

    Hear, Lord, the song of praise and pray'r,
      In heaven, thy dwelling-place,
    From infants, made the public care,
      And taught to seek thy face!

    Thanks for thy word, and for thy day,
      And grant us, we implore,
    Never to waste in sinful play
      Thy holy sabbaths more.

    Thanks that we hear--but, oh! impart
      To each desires sincere,
    That we may listen with our heart,
      And learn, as well as hear.


ON THE RECEIPT OF A HAMPER.

(IN THE MANNER OF HOMER.)

    The straw-stuff'd hamper with his ruthless steel
    He open'd, cutting sheer th' inserted cords
    Which bound the lid and lip secure. Forth came
    The rustling package first, bright straw of wheat,
    Or oats, or barley; next a bottle green
    Throat-full, clear spirits the contents, distill'd
    Drop after drop odorous, by the art
    Of the fair mother of his friend--the Rose.


ON THE NEGLECT OF HOMER.

    Could Homer come himself, distress'd and poor,
    And tune his harp at Rhedicina's door,
    The rich old vixen would exclaim, (I fear,)
    "Begone! no tramper gets a farthing here."




SKETCH OF THE LIFE OF THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.


The Rev. John Newton has formed too prominent a feature in the life
and correspondence of Cowper, and is too intimately associated with
his endeared name, not to require a brief notice of the leading
events of his life, on introducing those beautiful Olney Hymns
which were written by Cowper. Any detailed statement is rendered
unnecessary by his own memoir of himself,[847] and a subsequent
one by the Rev. Mr. Cecil. The life of Newton abounds with the
most extraordinary incidents, resembling the fictions of romance,
rather than the realities of common life. But the hand of God is so
visible, and the ultimate triumph of divine grace is so signally
displayed amidst the most daring provocations, as to render it one
of the most remarkable biographical memoirs ever submitted to the
public eye.

  [847] See The Life of the Rev. John Newton, written by himself,
  in a series of letters addressed to the Rev. Mr. Haweis.

The Rev. John Newton was born in London the 24th of July, 1725. His
father was master of a ship in the Mediterranean trade. His mother
was a pious character; and it is to her that he was indebted, in
his early years, for those religious impressions which, however
subsequently weakened, were probably never wholly effaced. Her
premature death deprived him of this excellent parent, at an age
when he most needed her superintending care. When he was eleven
years old he joined his father, and made five voyages with him to
the Mediterranean. His early life seems to present a mingled detail
of religious duties and declensions--relapses into sin, accompanied
by strong convictions of his guilt and danger--providential
warnings, which roused his conscience for a time, and were
subsequently forgotten; till at length, by successive instances
of grieving God's Holy Spirit, he sank into the very depths of
wickedness. In the year 1742 he formed an attachment, equalling
in degree all that the writers of romance have imagined; but in
its duration unalterable. In 1743 he was impressed, put on board a
tender, from which he was released by the exertions of his father,
and soon after entered the navy as a midshipman. Here he was seduced
into infidel principles by one of his companions, who in a violent
storm was swept into eternity, while he himself was mercifully
spared. Having deserted his ship, he was overtaken, kept in irons,
publicly whipped, and degraded from his office. He now became a prey
to the most gloomy thoughts, and seemed to be given up to judicial
hardness, and even to doubt the existence of a future state of being.

We contemplate this period of his life with awe and terror. He
subsequently engaged in the slave-trade on the coast of Africa,
where his conduct awakened, even among the slaves, emotions of alarm
and astonishment. In the midst of this daring impiety, Newton passed
through every successive stage of providential dealings, from the
first whisper of conscience, till the awful catalogue of judgments
seemed to be utterly expended. Every thing was exhausted save the
long-suffering and mercy of God. His guilt was equalled only by his
misery. The slave-trade on the coast of Africa was to him the fit
memorial of a captivity more galling in its character, more terrible
in its consequences. At home, abroad, on the mighty deep, or on
foreign shores, he carried with him the marks of his servitude, the
taint of his corruption, and the visible wrath of an offended God.

The divine dealings towards the children of pious parents are
strongly illustrated in the foregoing narrative. We have often
observed that they are generally the subjects of a special
dispensation whenever they become wanderers from God. In mercy to
the praying parent, as well as to the erring child, he never leaves
them without repeated tokens of his displeasure and intimations
of his will. He disappoints their hopes, blights their prospects,
and brings upon them the day of his wrathful visitation. "_If his
children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; if they
break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.
Nevertheless, my loving-kindness will I not utterly take from him,
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail_." Psal. lxxxix. 30-33.

We by no means interpret this clause as generally conveying the
assurance that the children of pious parents will ultimately be
saved. The conclusion would be too absolute, and seem opposed to the
testimony of facts. But we nevertheless believe that the prayers and
instructions of a godly parent rise up, like the alms of Cornelius,
as a memorial before God; and that early impressions are seldom
utterly effaced. They pursue the memory amid the tumult of business,
the seductions of pleasure, and the broad path of sin. They are a
powerful stimulant to conscience in moments of pain, depression, and
sorrow; till at length the cry of penitence often bursts from the
overwhelmed heart, and the last accents have been known to be those
of prayer and praise.

We now proceed to detail the particulars of Newton's conversion.
This event occurs on his return homewards from the coast of Africa,
when the ship is overtaken by a dreadful storm, and death seems to
be inevitable. We extract the account from his own narrative.

"The 21st of March is a day much to be remembered by me, and I have
never suffered it to pass wholly unnoticed since the year 1748.
On that day the Lord sent from on high, and delivered me out of
deep waters. I began to think of my former religious professions;
the extraordinary turns in my life; the calls, warnings, and
deliverances I had met with; the licentious course of my
conversation, particularly my unparalleled effrontery in making the
gospel-history the constant subject of profane ridicule. I thought,
allowing the Scripture premises, there never was, nor could be such
a sinner as myself; and then, comparing the advantages I had broken
through, I concluded at first, that my sins were too great to be
forgiven. The Scripture likewise seemed to say the same; for I had
formerly been well acquainted with the Bible, and many passages
upon this occasion returned upon my memory, particularly those
awful passages, Prov. i. 24-31; Heb. vi. 4-6; and 2 Pet ii. 20,
which seemed so exactly to suit my case and character as to bring
with them a presumptive proof of a divine original. Thus, as I have
said, I waited with fear and impatience to receive my inevitable
doom. Yet, though I had thoughts of this kind, they were exceedingly
faint and disproportionate; it was not till long after, (perhaps
several years,) till I had gained some clear views of the infinite
righteousness and grace of Jesus Christ my Lord, that I had a deep
and strong apprehension of my state by nature and practice: and,
perhaps, till then I could not have borne the sight. When I saw,
beyond all probability, there was still hope of respite, and heard
about six in the evening that the ship was freed from water, there
arose a gleam of hope; I thought I saw the hand of God displayed in
our favour. I began to pray; I could not utter the prayer of faith;
I could not draw near to a reconciled God, and call him Father. My
prayer was like the cry of the ravens, which yet the Lord does not
disdain to hear. I now began to think of that Jesus whom I had so
often derided. I recollected the particulars of his life, and of his
death: and death for sins _not his own_, but, as I remembered, for
the sake of those who in their distress should put their trust in
Him. And now I chiefly wanted evidence. The comfortless principles
of infidelity were deeply riveted, and I rather wished than believed
these things were real facts. The great question now was, how to
obtain _faith_? I speak not of an appropriating faith, (of which I
then knew neither the nature nor necessity,) but how I should gain
an assurance that the Scriptures were of divine inspiration, and a
sufficient warrant for the exercise of trust and hope in God. One
of the first helps I received (in consequence of a determination
to examine the New Testament more carefully) was from Luke xi. 13.
I had been sensible that to profess faith in Jesus Christ, when in
reality I did not believe his history, was no better than a mockery
of a heart-searching God: but here I found a Spirit spoken of, which
was to be communicated to those who ask it. Upon this I reasoned
thus. If this book is true, the promise in this passage is true
likewise. I have need of that very Spirit by which the whole was
written, in order to understand it aright. He has engaged here to
give that Spirit to those who ask. I must, therefore, pray for it;
and if it is of God, he will make good his own word. My purposes
were strengthened by John vii. 17. I concluded from thence, that
though I could not say from my heart that I believed the gospel, yet
I would for the present take it for granted, and that by studying
it in this light I should be more and more confirmed in it. If what
I am writing could be perused by our modern infidels, they would
say (for I too well know their manner) that I was very desirous to
persuade myself into this opinion. I confess I was; and so would
they be, if the Lord should show them, as he was pleased to show me
at that time, the absolute necessity of some expedient to interpose
between a righteous God and a sinful soul. Upon the gospel scheme I
saw at least a peradventure of hope, but on every other side I was
surrounded with black unfathomable despair."[848]

  [848] See "Life of Newton," prefixed to his works.

Alluding to the means which he enjoyed at this eventful period, for
acquiring spiritual light and knowledge, he observes, "As to books,
I had a New Testament, Stanhope, and a volume of Bishop Beveridge's
Sermons, one of which, upon our Lord's passion, affected me much.
In perusing the New Testament, I was struck with several passages,
particularly that of the fig-tree, Luke xiii.; the case of St.
Paul, 1 Tim. i.; but particularly the prodigal, Luke xv.--a case
I thought had never been so clearly exemplified as by myself. And
then the goodness of the father in receiving, nay, in running to
meet such a son, and this intended only to illustrate the Lord's
goodness to returning sinners; this gained upon me. I continued much
in prayer; I saw that the Lord had interposed _so far_ to save me;
and I hoped he would do more. The outward circumstances helped in
this place to make me still more serious and earnest in crying to
Him who alone could relieve me; and sometimes I thought I could be
content to die even for want of food, if I might but die a believer.
Thus far I was answered, that before we arrived in Ireland I had a
satisfactory evidence in my own mind of the truth of the gospel, as
considered in itself, and its exact suitableness to answer all my
needs. I saw that, by the way there pointed out, God might declare,
not his mercy only, but his justice also, in the pardon of sin, on
account of the obedience and sufferings of Jesus Christ. I stood
in need of an Almighty Saviour, and such a one I found described
in the New Testament. Thus far the Lord had wrought a marvellous
thing. I was no longer an infidel. I heartily renounced my former
profaneness; I had taken up some right notions; was seriously
disposed, and sincerely touched with a sense of the undeserved mercy
I had received, in being brought safe through so many dangers. I
was sorry for my past misspent life, and purposed an immediate
reformation: I was quite freed from the habit of swearing, which
seemed to have been deeply rooted in me as a second nature. Thus,
to all appearance, I was a new man. But though I cannot doubt that
this change, so far as it prevailed, was wrought by the Spirit and
power of God; yet still I was greatly deficient in many respects. I
was, in some degree, affected with a sense of my more enormous sins,
but I was little aware of the innate evils of my heart. I had no
apprehension of the spirituality and extent of the law of God. The
hidden life of a Christian, as it consists in communion with God by
Jesus Christ, and a continual dependence on him for hourly supplies
of wisdom, strength, and comfort, was a mystery, of which I had as
yet no knowledge. I acknowledged the Lord's mercy in pardoning what
was past, but depended chiefly upon my own resolution to do better
for the time to come. I had no Christian friend or faithful minister
to advise me that my strength was no more than my righteousness: and
though I soon began to inquire for serious books, yet, not having
spiritual discernment, I frequently made a wrong choice; and I was
not brought in the way of evangelical preaching or conversation,
(except a few times, when I heard but understood not,) for six years
after this period. Those things the Lord was pleased to discover to
me gradually. I learned them here a little and there a little, by
my own painful experience, at a distance from the common means and
ordinances, and in the midst of the same course of evil company, and
bad examples, as I had been conversant with for some time. From this
period I could no more make a mock at sin, or jest with holy things;
I no more questioned the truth of Scripture, or lost a sense of the
rebukes of conscience. Therefore I consider this as the beginning
of my return to God, or rather of his return to me; but I cannot
consider myself to have been a believer (in the full sense of the
word) till a considerable time afterwards."[849]

  [849] Life of Newton.

Progressive conversions seem to be most agreeable to the analogy
of nature; and though we by no means question the reality of
instantaneous conversions, or consider that the grace of God is
limited either to time, manner, or degree; yet we have generally
observed that they partake too much of a spirit of excitement
to form a sure and safe test. The excitement of the senses is a
dangerous ingredient in holy things, because they are equally
susceptible of opposite impressions. Those conversions ultimately
prove most solid and abiding, where the understanding is
enlightened, the conscience roused, and the will subdued by the
simultaneous energy and power that moves and purifies the feelings
and affections of the heart.

But in whatever manner it was accomplished, the conversion of
Newton claims to rank among those memorable acts of divine grace
which have invested the names of a Rochester, a Gardiner, and a
Bunyan, with so much interest and celebrity. May we not also mark
its affinity to the still more distinguished examples recorded in
the sacred writings, such as a Manasses, or a Saul, prototypes not
less in guilt than in mercy? If any man could justly appropriate the
words of the apostle, surely that individual was Newton. "Howbeit
for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ
might show forth all long suffering, for a pattern to them which
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting." 1 Tim. i. 16.
Instances like these abound in edifying truths. They exhibit the
divine sovereignty in legible and unerring characters. They serve
also to confound the pride and self-glory of man, by proving that
"base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God
chosen, yea and things which are not, to bring to nought things that
are; that no flesh should glory in his presence." 1 Cor. i. 28, 29.

But above all they proclaim that no man is beyond the reach of
mercy, however guilty, depraved, or lost; and that the door is never
closed to the broken and contrite spirit. Let not then the penitent
despair, nor yet the impenitent presume; but rightly interpreting
these wonderful and gracious dispensations, may many a returning
prodigal, like Newton, exclaim in the accents of adoring faith and
love, "Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and
passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He
retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy."
Micah vii. 18.

That we may proceed to the more important events of Newton's
subsequent history, we shall here briefly mention, that at this
time he wrote to his father, who was then going out as Governor of
York Fort, in Hudson's Bay, where he died in 1750. He previously
gave his consent to his son's marriage with Miss Catlett, the lady
who had been the object of so long and romantic an attachment. They
were united on the 1st of February, 1750. After this event he made
three voyages to Africa, devoting much of his time to classical and
devotional studies, and performing public worship in his vessel
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, twice every day.
The moral change which his mind had experienced is expressed in the
following beautiful and edifying manner, strongly exemplifying the
power of divine grace to raise and elevate the soul.

"To be at sea in these circumstances, withdrawn out of the reach of
innumerable temptations, with opportunity and turn of mind disposed
to observe the wonders of God in the great deep, with the two
noblest objects of sight, the expanded _heavens_ and the expanded
_ocean_, continually in view; and where evident interpositions of
Divine Providence, in answer to prayer, occur almost every day;
these are helps to quicken and confirm the life of faith, which,
in a good measure, supply to a religious sailor the want of those
advantages which can be enjoyed only upon the shore. And, indeed,
though my knowledge of spiritual things, as knowledge is usually
estimated, was at this time very small; yet I sometimes look back
with regret on these scenes. I never knew sweeter or more frequent
hours of divine communion, than in my two last voyages to Guinea,
when I was either almost secluded from society on shipboard, or
when on shore amongst the natives. I have wandered through the
woods, reflecting on the singular goodness of the Lord to me, in a
place where, perhaps, there was not a person that knew Him for some
thousands of miles round about me.

    "In desert woods, with thee, my God,
    Where human footsteps never trod,
        How happy could I be;
    Thou my repose from care, my light,
    Amidst the darkness of the night,
        In solitude my company."[850]

  [850] These lines are a translation from the following well-known
  passage of Propertius; Newton piously applying to the Creator
  what the poet addresses to the creature.

    Sic ego desertis possim bene vivere sylvis,
    Quo nulla humano sit via trita pede.
    Tu mihi curarum requies, in nocte vel atrâ
    Lumen, et in solis tu mihi turba locis.

  See _Life of Newton_.

His views on the subject of the slave-trade are thus recorded by
himself.

"During the time I was engaged in the slave-trade I never had
the least scruple as to its lawfulness. I was upon the whole
satisfied with it, as the appointment Providence had marked
out for me; yet it was, in many respects, far from eligible.
It was, indeed, accounted a genteel employment, and usually
very profitable, though to me it did not prove so, the Lord
seeing that a large increase of wealth would not be good for
me. However, I considered myself as a sort of a _gaoler_ or
_turnkey_, and I was sometimes shocked with an employment that
was perpetually conversant with chains, bolts, and shackles. In
this view I had often petitioned in my prayers that the Lord,
in his own time, would be pleased to fix me in a more humane
calling, and, if it might be, place me where I might have more
frequent converse with his people and ordinances, and be freed
from those long separations from home which very often were hard
to bear. My prayers were now answered, though in a way which I
little expected."[851]

  [851] Life of Newton.

The circumstance to which he alludes may be briefly stated. When
he was within two days of sailing on a new voyage, and to all
appearance in good health, he was suddenly seized with a fit, which
deprived him of sense and motion. It lasted about an hour, but left
behind such symptoms as induced the physicians to judge that it
would not be safe or prudent to proceed on the voyage. The event was
remarkable. The person who was appointed to take his place, most of
the officers, and many of the crew died, and the vessel was brought
back to Liverpool with great difficulty.[852]

  [852] Ibid.

Thus ended Newton's connexion with Africa and the slave-trade and
with a sea-faring mode of life. He was destined for higher ends,
and the providence and grace of God soon pointed out a sphere more
suited to his newly acquired views, and presenting ample means for
extended usefulness.

"And now," he observes, "having reason to close with the Apostle's
determination, 'to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified,'
I devoted my life to the prosecution of spiritual knowledge,
and resolved to pursue nothing but in subservience to this main
design."[853] With this view he acquired a sufficient proficiency in
the Greek language, so as to read with facility the New Testament
and Septuagint; he then entered upon the study of the Hebrew,
and two years afterwards engaged in the Syriac, besides reading
the best writers in divinity, and attending on the ministry of
men distinguished for their piety and their scriptural views. In
reference to his own entrance on the sacred office, he thus states
his sentiments.

  [853] Life of Newton.

"One word concerning my views to the _ministry_, and I have done. I
have told you, that this was my dear mother's hope concerning me;
but her death and the scenes of life in which I afterwards engaged,
seemed to cut off the probability. The first desires of this sort
in my own mind arose many years ago, from a reflection on Gal. i.
23, 24. 'But they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in
times past, now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed. And
they glorified God in me.' I could not but wish for such a public
opportunity to testify the riches of divine grace. I thought I
was, above most living, a fit person to proclaim that faithful
saying, 'That Jesus Christ came into the world to save the chief
of sinners;' and as my life had been full of remarkable turns, and
I seemed selected to show what the Lord could do, I was in some
hopes that perhaps, sooner or later, he might call me into this
service."[854]

  [854] Ibid.

This choice of Newton seemed to be not only a natural consequence of
his newly-acquired state of mind, but to be in perfect conformity
with those leadings of Providence which we have so fully recorded.
Who so fit to proclaim the adorable mercy and goodness of God,
the freeness of his grace, the severity of his justice, and the
tenderness of his love, as he who had so recently gone through the
whole of the mighty process? Who could trace the natural obduracy
and corruption of the human heart, the rebellion of the will, the
vile slavery of sin, and the power that breaks its fetters, like him
whose past history so forcibly illustrated these truths? Men cannot
teach others till they themselves are first taught of God; and so
long as this necessary discipline is wanting, preaching is but a
sublime and empty declamation.

Newton being further confirmed in his resolution by the judgment of
some Christian friends, received a title to a curacy in Yorkshire,
Dec. 16, 1758, and applied to the Archbishop of York, Dr. Gilbert,
for ordination. As he had not however graduated at the University,
he was rejected, the Archbishop alleging the rules and canons of the
church. Four years after this period, in 1762, having experienced
a continuance of the same difficulties, and conscious that he was
burying his talents, he was about to direct his zeal in another
channel, when he was restrained by the influence of his wife. In
reference to this trial, he makes the following reflection. "The
exercises of my mind upon this point, I believe, have not been
peculiar to myself. I have known several persons, sensible, pious,
of competent abilities, and cordially attached to the established
church, who, being wearied out with repeated refusals of ordination,
and, perhaps, not having the advantage of such an adviser as I had,
have at length struck into the itinerant path, or settled among
the Dissenters. Some of these, yet living, are men of respectable
characters and useful in their ministry. But their influence, which
would once have been serviceable to the true interests of the church
of England, now rather operates against it."

Finally, being recommended by the Earl of Dartmouth[855] to Dr.
Green, Bishop of Lincoln, of whose candour and kindness he speaks
with much respect, he was ordained deacon at Buckden, April 29,
1764, and appointed to the curacy of Olney, Bucks. He received
priest's orders the year following.

  [855] Lord Dartmouth was the patron of the living of Olney and
  distinguished for his piety. It is due to this noble family to
  state, that in no instance has a vacancy in the living ever been
  filled up but in subserviency to the interests of true religion.

In this sphere of duty Newton continued nearly sixteen years
exercising the functions of his office with exemplary fidelity,
going from house to house, and exhibiting a pattern of an excellent
parish priest. By the munificence of John Thornton, Esq., he was
enabled to exercise the rites of hospitality and to dispense relief
effectually to the poor. "Be hospitable," said Mr. Thornton, "and
keep an open house for such as are worthy of entertainment. Help
the poor and needy. I will statedly allow you 200_l._ a year, and
readily send whatever you have occasion to draw for more." Newton
once observed, that he thought he had received of Mr. Thornton
upwards of 3,000_l._ in this way, during the time he resided at
Olney.[856]

  [856] Cecil's Memoir of Newton.

Such traits do honour to human nature.

One of the incidents which distinguishes the residence of Newton at
Olney is his friendship and intercourse with Cowper. It is said,
that this intercourse was injurious to the poet, and that Newton's
peculiar views, which were Calvinistic, increased the morbid turn
of his mind. The doctrinal sentiments of Newton we shall shortly
consider, without however entering upon a lengthened discussion
unsuited to the character of the present work. But we hesitate not
to affirm that though the standard of Newton was unquestionably more
Calvinistic than what is generally adopted by the clergy in these
times, the main doctrines which he held were the common fundamental
principles of the Christian faith, and that no preacher could have
been more practical in his views. In other respects, Newton was
social in his spirit, affectionate in his feelings, and cultivated
in his understanding. Having had ample means of ascertaining his
real character, the editor can with truth assert that no man was
more beloved, admired, and respected.

We next examine Newton's _doctrinal views_.

The doctrines of Newton embraced all those great fundamental truths
which distinguish the period of the reformation, and were continued
downwards to the times of Charles I., when an evident departure
from sound doctrine is perceptible in the writers of that age, as
well as in those which succeeded.[857] We claim for Newton the
praise of having been one among a few faithful witnesses who boldly
proclaimed those truths, when religion was degenerating, with
some few exceptions, into a system of moral ethics. It is to such
men as Romaine, Venn, Berridge, Milner, Walker of Truro, Adam of
Wintringham, Stillingfleet, Jones of St. Saviour's, Newton, and a
few others, that we owe that revival of piety which is now diffusing
itself so generally among the members of our church. These doctrines
comprise the fall and corruption of man, the divinity and offices
of the Saviour, the necessity of conversion by the grace of the
Holy Spirit, free justification by faith in the atonement, the work
of sanctification in all its progressive stages, attested by the
evidence of a holy and devoted life, founded on these views and
principles.

  [857] Bishops Hall, Davenant, and Jeremy Taylor, are honourable
  exceptions.

These great and important truths are generally called "doctrines
according to godliness;" that is, they constitute the only genuine
spring and source of godliness. It cannot be effected without them,
because the principle would be wanting which is alone competent to
produce real holiness. They form the vital essence of Christianity,
its distinguishing and essential badge, its grace, its ornament, and
glory.

Some men decry doctrine altogether, and assert that we are more
concerned with the precepts than the doctrines of the Bible. But
these doctrines are to be found in our Articles,[858] in our
Homilies,[859] in the works of Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper,
Tindal, and others, the confessors and martyrs of the glorious
Reformation.

  [858] See 9, 10, 11, 12, 13th Articles.

  [859] See the Homilies entitled "On the misery of man;" on
  "Justifying faith;" "Good works annexed to faith;" on "the death
  and passion of our Saviour Christ;" Homily for Whitsunday, &c.

We subjoin the testimony of an eminent prelate on this subject,
delivered in a charge in the year 1792. We refer to the venerable
Bishop of Durham, Dr. Shute Barrington.

"All that distinguishes Christianity from other religions is
doctrinal; a Christian's hopes and consolations, his obligations
and motives, are doctrinal points; the very means and end of his
salvation, the many objects of his most earnest intention, are
all points of faith and doctrine. Divest Christianity of its
faith and doctrines, and you despoil it of all that is peculiar
to it in its motives, its consolations, its sanctions, and its
duties. You divest it of all that made revelation necessary; you
reduce it to the cold and ineffectual substance of what is called
philosophy; that philosophy which has of late shown itself not the
friend of religion, learning, and civil order, but of anarchy,
conceit, and atheism: you reduce it to the obscure glimmerings of
human knowledge; that knowledge which the greatest of the ancient
philosophers[860] confessed to be totally insufficient to satisfy
the doubts and solicitude of an inquiring mind, and looked forward
with a kind of prophetic exultation to the period when Divine
Providence, in compassion to the weakness of our nature, should
enlighten mankind by the revelation of himself, which modern
philosophers reject."[861]

  [860] Plato.

  [861] See Bishop of Durham's Charge, (Barrington,) 1792.

We add the distinguished testimony of Archbishop Secker.

"To improve the people effectually, you must be assiduous in
teaching the principles not only of virtue and natural religion,
but of the gospel; and of the gospel, not as almost explained away
by modern refiners, but 'as the truth is in Jesus;' as it is taught
by the church of which you are members; as you have engaged by your
subscriptions and declarations, that you will teach it yourselves.
You must preach to them faith in the ever-blessed Trinity; you must
set forth the original corruption of our nature; our redemption,
according to God's eternal purpose in Christ, by the sacrifice
of the cross; our sanctification by the influences of the Divine
Spirit; the insufficiency of good works, and the efficacy of faith
to salvation....

"The _truth_, I fear, is, that many, if not most of us, have dwelt
too little on these doctrines in our sermons, ... partly from not
having studied theology deeply enough to treat of them ably and
beneficially. God grant it may never have been for want of inwardly
experiencing their importance. But, whatever be the cause, _the
effect has been lamentable_."[862]

  [862] See "Watson's Tracts," vol. vi.

If a solemn and admonitory warning was ever conveyed to the
Christian world on this subject, it has been afforded by the
conduct of the church of Geneva. By a regulation, the breach of
which was made punishable by expulsion, the great fundamental
doctrines, such as the essential divinity of Christ, the doctrine
of human corruption, the atonement, justification by faith, and the
personality and offices of the Holy Spirit, were prohibited in the
pulpit. The people, no longer accustomed to these important truths,
soon forgot them, and the consequence has been the substitution of
a cold and lifeless Socinianism. Had it not been for that band of
faithful men in this country, so much misrepresented and traduced,
who shall say whether, in our own communion, we might not have
incurred the same fearful result? They stood in the gap, like
Phinehas, and the plague was stayed.

We know all that is urged in opposition to this reasoning, and
we will examine its merits. These doctrines, it is said, are
overcharged. The corruption of human nature, for instance, instead
of being described as partial, is represented to be total. Society,
we are assured, could not exist on such a supposition.

Let us listen to what Newton remarks on this subject.

"His natural powers, though doubtless impaired, were not destroyed.
Man by nature is still capable of great things. His understanding,
reason, memory, imagination, &c. sufficiently proclaim that the
'hand which made him is divine.' He is, as Milton says of Beelzebub,
'_majestic though in ruins_.' He can reason, invent, and, by
application, attain a considerable knowledge in natural things. The
exertions of human genius, as specified in the characters of some
philosophers, poets, orators, &c. are wonderful. _But man cannot
know, love, trust or serve his Maker, unless he be renewed in the
spirit of his mind._"[863]

  [863] See Newton's "Cardiphonia." Letter to Rev. Mr. S.

"Sin did not deprive him of rationality but of spirituality."[864]

Again: "God has not left man destitute of such dispositions as are
necessary to the peace of society; but I deny that there is any
moral goodness in them, unless they are founded in a supreme love
to God, have his glory for their aim, and are produced by faith in
Jesus Christ."[864]

  [864] Ibid.

What does Newton here assert that is not maintained in the 13th
Article of our own church?[865]

  [865] Works done before the grace of Christ and the inspiration
  of his Spirit are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring
  not of faith in Jesus Christ, &c.

Thus man's natural and moral powers survive the fall; but those
which are _spiritual_ are effaced and lost. Nature cannot confer
what it is the province of grace alone to bestow. It requires a
divine power to restore and quicken the soul. But what is the
doctrine of the church of England as regards man's partial or total
corruption? We extract the following passage from the Homily on the
Nativity:--

"Whereby it came to pass that, as before (the fall) he was blessed,
so now he was accursed; as before he was loved, so now he was
abhorred; as before he was most beautiful and precious, so now he
was most vile and wretched _in the sight of his Lord and Maker_.
Instead of the image of God, he was now become the image of the
devil, instead of the citizen of heaven, he was become the bond
slave of hell, _having in himself no one part of his former purity
and cleanness, but being altogether spotted and defiled, insomuch
that now he seemed to be nothing else but a lump of sin_."[866]
Whoever used language stronger and more explicit than these words?

  [866] See also Article IX. of the church of England, on Original
  Sin.

Thus we see that men, in attacking these views and sentiments, are,
in fact, impugning the doctrines of their own church.

We merely add one more remark on the much-controverted subject of
conversion. To those who deny this doctrine, and describe it as
"spiritual revelry," pretended illuminations, &c., we recommend the
consideration of the following passage in the Homily on Whitsunday.
It refers to our Lord's conversation with Nicodemus, and to the
inability of the latter to comprehend this great spiritual change of
heart.

"Behold a lively pattern of a fleshly and carnal man. He had little
or no intelligence of the Holy Ghost, and therefore he goeth
bluntly to work, and asketh how this thing were possible to be
true. Whereas, otherwise, if he had known the great power of the
Holy Ghost in this behalf, that it is He which inwardly worketh the
regeneration and new birth of mankind, he would never have marvelled
at Christ's words, but would rather take occasion thereby to praise
and glorify God."

We have thought proper to adduce these testimonies, because they
vindicate the doctrines of Newton, and of those who concur with
him in these views. They fully prove how much the stability of our
church, in the estimation of some of its ablest advocates, depends
on the faithfulness with which these doctrines are maintained. On
this subject we would beg to express our deepest conviction that,
if the Church of England is to survive those perils by which she is
threatened; if, as we anticipate, she will rise from her tribulation
with renewed strength and beauty; it is to the purity of her
doctrine, and to the devotedness of her ministers, and not to the
richness of her endowments, or to the secular arm of the state, that
she must be indebted for her durability and greatness. To be upheld,
she must be "strong in the Lord and in the power of his might,"
apostolical in her doctrines, restored in her discipline, and holy
in her practice. The language shall then be addressed to her that is
applied by the inspired prophet to Zion: "No weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn." Isaiah liv. 17. Or, to use
words still more emphatic, "The gates of hell shall not prevail
against her."

Having thus generally vindicated the doctrines of Newton, we next
advert to some of his writings. We make a few extracts from his
Cardiphonia, the most popular of his writings, being a series of
letters on religious subjects. The following is addressed to a
nobleman, distinguished for his piety.

"To devote soul and body, every talent, power, and faculty, to the
service of the Lord's cause and will; to let our light shine (in our
several situations) to the praise of his grace; to place our highest
joy in the contemplation of his adorable perfections; to rejoice
even in tribulations and distresses, in reproaches and infirmities,
if thereby the power of Christ may rest upon us, and be magnified in
us; to be content, yea, glad to be nothing, that he may be all in
all;--to obey _him_ in opposition to the threats or solicitations of
men; to trust _him_, though all outward appearances seem against us;
to rejoice in _him_, though we should (as will sooner or later be
the case) have nothing else to rejoice in; to live above the world,
and to have our conversation in heaven; to be like the angels,
finding our own pleasure in performing his;--this, my Lord, is the
prize, the mark of our high calling, to which we are encouraged with
a holy ambition continually to aspire. It is true, we shall still
fall short; we shall find that, when we should do good, evil will
be present with us; but the attempt is glorious, and shall not be
wholly in vain. He that gives us thus to _will_, will enable us to
perform with growing success, and teach us to profit even by our
mistakes and imperfections."[867]

  [867] "Cardiphonia." Letters to a Nobleman.

The privileges of the believer are thus set forth.

"How great and honourable is the privilege of a true believer! That
he has neither wisdom nor strength in himself is no disadvantage;
for he is connected with infinite wisdom and almighty power. Though
weak as a worm, his arms are strengthened by the mighty God of
Jacob, and all things become possible, yea, easy to him, that occur
within the compass of his proper duty and calling. The Lord, whom
he serves, engages to proportion his strength to his day, whether
it be a day of service or of suffering; and, though he be fallible
and short-sighted, exceedingly liable to mistake and imposition,
yet, while he retains a sense that he is so, and with the simplicity
of a child asks counsel and direction of the Lord, he seldom takes
a wrong step, at least not in matters of consequence; and even
his inadvertencies are overruled for good. If he forgets his true
state, and thinks himself to be something, he presently finds he
is indeed nothing; but if he is content to be nothing, and to have
nothing, he is sure to find a seasonable and abundant communication
of all that he wants. Thus he lives, like Israel in the wilderness,
upon mere bounty; but then it is a bounty unchangeable, unwearied,
inexhaustible, and all-sufficient."[868]

  [868] "Cardiphonia."

The believer's call, duty, and privilege is thus illustrated by the
happy application of Milton's character of Abdiel, at the end of
book 5, of the "Paradise Lost." The compliment to his noble friend
is just and merited.

                  "Faithful found
    Among the faithless, faithful only he,
    Among innumerable false, unmov'd,
    Unshaken, unseduc'd, unterrified,
    His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal;
    Nor number, nor example, with him wrought
    To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
    Though single."

"Methinks your Lordship's situation particularly resembles that in
which the poet has placed Abdiel. You are not indeed called to serve
God quite alone; but, amongst those of your own rank, and with whom
the station in which he has placed you necessitates you to converse,
how few are there who can understand, second, or approve the
principles upon which you act; or easily bear a conduct which must
impress conviction or reflect dishonour upon themselves! But you are
not alone. The Lord's people (many of whom you will not know till
you meet them in glory) are helping you here with their prayers. His
angels are commissioned to guard and guide your steps. Yea, the Lord
himself fixes his eye of mercy upon your private and public path,
and is near you at your right hand, that you may not be moved! That
he may comfort you with the light of his countenance, and uphold you
with the arm of his power, is my frequent prayer."[869]

  [869] Ibid.

Such is the sweet strain of practical and experimental piety
in which Newton writes, uniting the graces of composition with
the courtesy of Christian feeling, and the sentiments of an
exalted piety. The nobleman, to whom these letters are addressed,
(twenty-six in number,) was the Earl of Dartmouth, the patron of
the living of Olney. Happy would it be if men of rank were always
willing to listen to such truths, and the pen of a Newton could
record them with so much faithfulness and grace. The date of this
correspondence commences in the year 1765, and terminates in 1777.
The succeeding eight letters, to the Rev. Mr. S., are addressed to
the Rev. Thomas Scott, and will be shortly adverted to. Mr. B.,
to whom eleven letters are inscribed, is Mr. Barham, the father
of the late Jos. Foster Barham, Esq. M.P. One letter is addressed
to the latter, as Mr. B., jun.; and Miss M. B., is Miss Martha
Barham, his sister. The Rev. Mr. R., is Mr. Rose, late Rector of
Beckenham, who married her sister. I am enabled to verify these
facts from family connexion, and personal knowledge. Besides these
letters, Newton was the author of "Omicron," "Letters to a Wife,"
"Review of Ecclesiastical History," "Sermons," "The Aged Pilgrim's
Triumph," "Life of the Rev. William Grimshawe," an ancestor of the
Editor, distinguished for his piety and laborious exertions, though
accompanied with some peculiarities; I cannot however record his
name without reverence for his piety and zeal. The majority of
the Olney Hymns were contributed by Newton, and have always been
acceptable to the religious public. They are diversified in their
subject, and uniformly spiritual and experimental, though inferior,
as poetical compositions, to those contributed by Cowper.

His lines on the Ocean are characterized by great force and beauty.

A THOUGHT ON THE SEA SHORE.

    In ev'ry object here I see
    Something, O Lord! that leads to thee.
      Firm as the rocks thy promise stands,
      Thy mercies countless as the sands;
      Thy love a sea immensely wide,
      Thy grace an ever-flowing tide.

    In ev'ry object here I see
    Something, my heart, that points at thee.
      Hard as the rocks that bound the strand,
      Unfruitful as the barren sand,
      Deep and deceitful as the ocean,
      And, like the tides, in constant motion.

The last point of view in which Newton claims to be considered
is, as the honoured instrument, in the hands of God, for raising
up others who became eminent for piety and usefulness. We pass
over many instances of comparatively less importance, and select
two of known celebrity, the late Rev. Thomas Scott, and the Rev.
Claudius Buchanan. Mr. Scott, at the time of Newton's residence at
Olney, was the curate of Ravenstone, in that neighbourhood. Though
strictly conscientious, and earnest in the discharge of his duties,
yet his views were indistinct, and his mind labouring under strong
prejudices. The sentiments and principles of Newton, so opposite to
his own, excited his attention. He was unable to comprehend them,
and, as a natural consequence, deprecated and rejected them. Newton
presented him with one of his publications, entitled "Omicron." This
led to a correspondence, which is inserted in the "Cardiphonia."
The influence of Newton's arguments, though slow, was finally
successful. The strong and powerful prejudices of Scott yielded,
like the mists that are dispelled by the penetrating beams of the
sun. He has recorded this eventful period of his life in his "Force
of Truth," a book which merits to be universally read. Mr. Scott's
subsequent career and usefulness are well known. He was "a burning
and a shining light." His "Commentary on the Bible" requires no
eulogium, its praise is in all the churches. In America alone, we
believe that not less than forty or fifty thousand copies have
been sold. It is now circulating in France and in Switzerland.
Perhaps no book has contributed so essentially to diffuse the great
doctrines of the Reformation, and to revive the piety and spirit
of former ages. We do not know a more splendid trophy to the name
and usefulness of Newton, than to be recorded as the instrument,
under the Divine blessing, of having raised up so distinguished a
character as the Rev. Thomas Scott.

The second instance is that of the Rev. Claudius Buchanan. Mr.
Newton, after a residence of nearly sixteen years at Olney, was
removed to London, having been presented, by the recommendation
of John Thornton, Esq., to the living of St. Mary Woolnoth. On a
Sunday evening a stranger stood in one of the aisles of the church,
while Newton was preaching. He became impressed with what he heard,
and communicated to him the state of his mind: Newton admiring his
talents, and anticipating his future usefulness, introduced him to
the late Henry Thornton, Esq., by whose liberality he was sent to
college. He was afterwards ordained, and subsequently filled an
important situation in the east. He at length returned to Europe to
awaken Britain to the claims of India. The effect produced by his
appeals, and by his celebrated sermon, "The Star in the East," will
long be remembered. He was eminently instrumental in rousing public
attention to the duty of evangelizing India.

The stranger whose history we have thus briefly recorded was the
Rev. Claudius Buchanan.

Such is the history of Newton, abounding in the most singular and
eventful incidents, and exhibiting a man not less distinguished
by his piety than by his acknowledged talents and great
usefulness. The moral truths that it conveys are both numerous and
highly instructive. To parents it is fraught with the greatest
encouragement, by proving that early impressions of piety, however
they may seem to be extinguished by a long course of impenitence,
may subsequently revive, though probably under the most solemn
dispensations: "Thou shalt be visited of the Lord with thunder, and
with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the
flame of devouring fire." Isaiah xxix. 6. The mercy that spares in
the midst of manifold provocations; the long-suffering and goodness
of God; the doctrine of a particular Providence; the strivings of
his Spirit; the necessity of the conversion of the soul to God;
and the ultimate triumphs of his grace; how forcibly have these
truths been illustrated in the foregoing narrative! Reader, adore
the wonderful power and grace of God! See what this grace has done
for others! Learn what it is capable of effecting for yourself, and
what an instrument of extended usefulness Providence may render you,
when your own heart is once renewed by his Spirit! Who shall trace
the final consequences of a single soul thus brought to God! The
last great day alone can reveal the issue. If then you have not yet
entered on this heavenly road, make _the grand experiment_ in the
strength and power of God. "It is high time to awake out of sleep."
"The night is far spent, the day is at hand." _Save thyself and
others._ Flee to the cross of Christ for pardon and mercy. Read the
neglected Bible. Pour out the heart in fervent, persevering prayer;
and let thy faith be quickened, and thy fears assuaged by the
gracious assurance, "All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
believing, ye shall receive." Matt. xxi. 22.

He died at his residence in Coleman-street Buildings, London, Dec.
21, 1807, in his 83rd year.

The following epitaph, composed by himself, is inscribed on a plain
marble tablet, near the vestry door, in the church of St. Mary
Woolnoth, London.

  JOHN NEWTON, CLERK,
  ONCE AN INFIDEL AND LIBERTINE,
  A SERVANT OF SLAVES IN AFRICA,
  WAS, BY THE RICH MERCY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOUR
  JESUS CHRIST,
  PRESERVED, RESTORED, PARDONED,
  AND APPOINTED TO PREACH THE FAITH HE HAD LONG
  LABOURED TO DESTROY,
  NEAR SIXTEEN YEARS AT OLNEY IN BUCKS,
  AND TWENTY-EIGHT YEARS IN THIS CHURCH.
  ON FEB. 1, 1750, HE MARRIED
  MARY,
  DAUGHTER OF THE LATE GEORGE CATLETT,
  OF CHATHAM, KENT.
  HE RESIGNED HER TO THE LORD WHO GAVE HER,
  ON THE 15TH OF DECEMBER, 1790.

In his study at the vicarage in Olney, Bucks, are still to be seen
the following lines, inscribed on the wall:--

     "Since thou wast precious in my sight thou hast been
     honourable."--_Isaiah_ xliii. 4.

But,

     "Thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
     Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee!"--_Deuteronomy_ xv.
     15.




PRELIMINARY REMARKS ON THE OLNEY HYMNS.


The origin of the Olney Hymns, and the proportion contributed by
Cowper to that collection, have been already stated in the first
part of this work.[870] Before, however, we enter on the subject of
these hymns, it will not perhaps be thought uninteresting to present
the reader with a brief historical account of Psalmody, and to
detail the circumstances which first gave rise to a metrical version
of the Psalms of David. We shall extract the information principally
from "Warton's History of English Poetry." Sir John Hawkins may also
be consulted on the same subject.[871]

  [870] Page 34.

  [871] History of Music.

The praise of having first effected a metrical version of the
Psalms is to be assigned to France. About the year 1540, Clement
Marot, valet of the bedchamber to Francis I., was the favourite
poet of France. Being tired of the vanities of profane poetry, and
anxious to raise the tone of public taste and feeling, he attempted
a version of the Psalms into French rhyme, aided by Theodore Beza,
and encouraged by the Professor of Hebrew in the University of
Paris. This translation, not aiming at any innovation in the public
worship, received the sanction of the Sorbonne, as containing
nothing contrary to sound doctrine. Solicitous to justify this
new application of his poetical powers, Marot expatiates in his
dedication on the superior claims of sacred poetry, and observes
"that the golden age would now be restored, when we should see the
peasant at his plough, the carman in the streets, and the mechanic
in his shop, solacing their toils with psalms and canticles; and the
shepherd and shepherdess, reposing in the shade, and teaching the
rocks to echo the name of the Creator."[872]

  [872]

    Le Laboureur a sa charruë,
    Le Charretier parmy le ruë,
    Et l'Artisan en sa boutique,
    Avecques un Pseaume ou Cantique,
    En son labour se soulager.
    Heureux qui orra le Berger
    Et la Bergere au bois estans,
    Fair que rochers et estangs
    Apres eux chantent la hauteur
    Du sainct nom de Createur.

  CLEMENT MAROT.

This version soon eclipsed the brilliancy of his madrigals and
sonnets. In the festive and splendid court of Francis I. of a
sudden nothing was heard but the psalms of Clement Marot. By each
of the royal family and the principal nobility of the court, a
psalm was chosen, and adapted to a popular ballad tune.

Calvin soon discovered what a powerful auxiliary psalm-singing
might prove to the reformed religion, and immediately introduced
Marot's version into his congregation at Geneva. They were
adapted to plain and easy melodies[873] by Guillaume de Franc,
and became a characteristic badge of the newly established
worship. Germany next caught the sacred ardour, and the choral
mode of service yielded to the attractive and popular character
of a devotional melody, in which all might join, without
distinction of rank or character. Psalms singing being thus
associated with the Reformed religion, became interdicted to the
Catholics under the most severe penalties.

  [873] This mode of adaptation may be seen in the "Godly and
  Spiritual Songs," &c. printed at Edinburgh in 1597, and reprinted
  there in 1801.--_Park._

This predilection for sacred song soon reached England. Previously
however to this event, Sir Thomas Wyatt and the celebrated Lord
Surrey had translated portions of the Psalms into metre. We subjoin
a brief specimen from each of these writers, as illustrating the
style and poetical pretensions of that early period of English
literature.

PSALM xxxii.--_Beati quorum_, &c.

    Oh! happy are they that have forgiveness got
    Of their offence, not by their penitence,
    As by merit, which recompenseth not;
    Although that yet pardon hath not offence
    Without the same, but by the goodness
    Of Him that hath perfect intelligence,
    Of heart contrite, and covereth the greatness
    Of sin within a merciful discharge.--
    And happy is he to whom God doth impute
    No more his faults, by 'knowledging his sin:
    But cleansed now the Lord doth him repute.

  _Sir Thomas Wyatt._

PSALM viii. LORD, WHAT IS MAN?

    But yet among all these I ask, "What thing is man?"
    Whose turn to serve in his poor need this work Thou first began.
    Or what is Adam's son that bears his father's mark?
    For whose delight and comfort eke Thou has wrought all this work.
    I see thou mind'st him much, that dost reward him so:
    Being but earth, to rule the earth, whereon himself doth go.
    From angels' substance eke Thou mad'st him differ small;
    Save one doth change his life awhile; the other not at all.
    The sun and moon also Thou mad'st to give him light;
    And each one of the wandering stars to twinkle sparkles bright.
    The air to give him breath; the water for his health;
    The earth to bring forth grain and fruit, for to increase his wealth.

_Earl of Surrey._

Sir Thomas Wyatt versified the seven Penitential Psalms, and died in
1542. The Earl of Surrey honoured his memory and virtues by three
sonnets. Five years afterwards this distinguished and highly-gifted
nobleman fell a victim to the tyranny of Henry VIII. and was
beheaded, in the year 1547. He has left a version of the eighth,
fifty-fifth, seventy-third, and eighty-eighth Psalms.[874]

  [874] There is also a fragment of a comment on the Seven
  Penitential Psalms, in English verse, attributed to Dr. Alcock,
  Bishop of Ely, the founder of Jesus College, Cambridge.

The versification of Sternhold and Hopkins, the first that was ever
used in the Church of England, next demands our attention. Sternhold
was groom of the robes to Henry VIII. It is singular that both in
France and England we are indebted to laymen and court poets for
the introduction of what subsequently became so characteristic
a feature in the reformed worship. Sternhold composed fifty-one
Psalms, and dedicated his version to King Edward VI. His coadjutor
in this undertaking was John Hopkins, a clergyman and school-master,
in Suffolk. His poetry is rather of a higher order than that of
Sternhold. He translated fifty-eight Psalms. To the above may be
added the names of William Whyttingham, Dean of Durham, who added
sixteen Psalms. The hundredth and hundred and nineteenth Psalms
were included in this number. The rest were contributed by Robert
Wisdome, Archdeacon of Ely; by William Hethe, a Scotch divine; John
Pullain, and Thomas Churchyard, one of the pages of the Earl of
Surrey. The entire version of the Psalter was at length published by
John Day, in 1562, attached for the first time to the Common Prayer,
and entitled, "The whole Booke of Psalmes, collected into English
metre, by J. Sternhold, J. Hopkins, and others, conferred with the
Ebrue, with apt Notes to sing them withall."

They are believed to contain some of the original melodies composed
by French and German musicians. Many of them are the tunes of
Gondinel and Le Jeune, who are among the first composers of Marot's
French psalms. Not a few were probably imported by the Protestant
refugees from Flanders, who fled into England from the persecution
of the Duke of Alva. Some of our own musicians, such as Marbeck,
Tallis, Tye, Parsons, and Munday, are supposed to have contributed
their talents towards this undertaking.

We insert a few extracts from the original version, which in this
refined age will appear rather ludicrous, and unsuited to the
dignity of sacred poetry.

PSALM lxxxiv. 12.

    Why doost withdrawe thy hand aback,
    And hide it in thy lappe?
    O plucke it out, and be not slack
    To give thy foes a rappe!

PSALM lxviii. 37.

    For why? their hearts were nothing bent,
      To him nor to his _trade_.

The miraculous march of Jehovah before the Israelites, through the
wilderness, is thus represented by Sternhold.

PSALM lxviii.

    When thou didst march before thy folk,
      The Egyptians from among,
    And brought them from the wilderness,
      _Which was both wide and long:_

    The earth did quake, the raine pourde downe,
      _Heard were great claps of thunder;_
    The mount Sinai shooke in such a sorte,
      _As it would cleave in sunder._

    Thy heritage with drops of rain
      Abundantly was _washt_;
    And _if so be_ it barren was,
      By thee it was _refresht_.

    God's _army is two millions_,
      Of warriours _good and strong_,
    The Lord also in Sinai
      Is present them among.

Though this version has undergone many revisions, yet we fully
agree with Warton, that its continued use is discreditable to
the Church of England.[875] The translation, in its genuine and
unsophisticated state, may justly indeed be considered, as he
observes, no inconsiderable monument of our ancient literature, if
not of our ancient poetry; and Fuller, likewise, remarks, "Match
these verses for their ages, they shall go abreast with the best
poems of those times." Still the spirit of the present age demands
a higher standard both of poetical taste and devotional piety.
They are too bald and jejune. The public feeling requires a more
luminous exhibition of the great truths of the gospel, and a more
experimental mode of delineating the trials and conflicts of the
Christian warfare. No man has accomplished this important task
more successfully than Watts. He has united the inspiration of
poetry with the hallowed fire from the altar; and we hesitate not
to assert, that if Watts had been a churchman, his version would
have been in universal repute among us. It is already incorporated
with most of the modern selections, where there is a return to the
doctrines of the Reformation; and Sternhold and Hopkins are becoming
increasingly unsuited to the advancing spirit of religious inquiry.

  [875] Warton's censure is expressed in very strong language. "To
  the disgrace of sacred music, sacred poetry, and our established
  worship, these Psalms still continue to be sung in the Church of
  England." See _History of English Poetry_, vol. ii. p. 461.

It was this conviction that induced Newton, in the year 1771, to
engage in the composition of the Olney Hymns. They were designed
to be the joint contribution of Newton and Cowper, but the morbid
depression of the poet prevented the fulfilment of his share
of the engagement. The total number contributed by Cowper has
been variously stated. Hayley estimates it at sixty-eight. Other
biographers have considerably reduced the amount. Some editions
assign sixty-three; others insert sixty-five. There is at present
no uniform standard, nor is there, to the best of our judgment, one
single edition entitled to the credit of correctness.[876] We trust
that we have the means of deciding this controverted subject. So far
as the original edition, now lying before us, published, under the
superintendence of Newton himself, by Johnson, the bookseller, and
bearing the date of 1779, may be considered as the most authentic
guide and criterion, we are enabled to state that the original
number, distinguished by the initial letter C (Cowper's signature)
is sixty-seven. If to the above we add a hymn _not_ inserted in
Newton's original edition, because subsequently composed, but
which we have been enabled to authenticate as the production of
Cowper, the total number, entitled to be ascribed to his pen, is
sixty-eight. The hymn that we allude to begins,

  "To Jesus, the crown of my hope."

It has already appeared before the public in some modern selections.

  [876] One edition imputes two hymns of Newton's to Cowper, by
  mistaking the numerical letter C for the initial of Cowper's name.

Of these hymns two were written at the period of Cowper's recovery
at St. Albans, when his mind had received those gracious impressions
which so powerfully influenced his future principles and writings.
The _first_ which Cowper ever composed was in allusion to this
event. It is entitled "The Happy Change," and begins with the words,

  "How bless'd thy creature is, O God."

The _second_ was written when he contemplated retiring from the busy
world. It is the beautiful and admired hymn,

  "Far from the world, O Lord, I flee."

It may be interesting to the reader to learn, from concurring
sources of information, that the celebrated hymn commencing with

  "God moves in a mysterious way,"

was the _last_ in the collection that he composed, and that it was
written on the eve of that afflicting malady, which, occurring in
Jan. 1773, suspended his powers for nearly seven successive years,
though his correspondence was partially resumed with Mr. Hill and
Mr. Unwin, from the year 1776. It was during a solitary walk in the
fields that he had a presentiment of his approaching attack, and it
is to this remarkable impression that we owe the origin of the above
admired composition.

This hymn acquires a peculiar interest from the above incident, as
well as from the unshaken faith and submission which it inculcates
under the darkest dispensations. It seems as if God were giving him
a chart of the voyage through those seas of trouble which he was
about to navigate. No man could have written this hymn unless under
the influence of a real or supposed special dispensation; and one
end perhaps designed by it was, that Cowper should not only convey
instruction to his own mind, but be made the instrument of consoling
others. Few hymns have been more admired or more frequently quoted.
It stands pre-eminent in that class which refer to the mysterious
dealings of God, and is singularly qualified to invigorate the
faith, to check the speculations of finite reason, and to lead the
sufferer to repose on the unerring wisdom and goodness of God.

We must be careful, at the same time, how we reason on these
subjects. That impressions of approaching trials may be sent from
God, and subsequently be realised, we are by no means prepared to
deny; but that they are often the occasion of fulfilling themselves,
by acting strongly on a nervous temperament, we still more firmly
believe. Again, that they frequently exist, and are not confirmed by
the result, is well known. On the whole, we think reason as well as
Scripture militates strongly against the doctrine of impressions.
There is often an order and progression in them which, if minutely
traced, prove their fallacy. Anxiety first suggests fear. A too
great sensitiveness of feeling, an excursive imagination, and the
want of a more vigorous exercise of faith next invest what was only
imaginary, with reality. It thus acquires a form and existence, next
expands into magnitude, and then rises into the power and ascendency
of an absorbing idea; till, by a final deception, the impression is
attributed to a divine hand. But who does not see that it is more
justly to be ascribed to morbid sensibility, to nervous excitement,
and, most of all, to the want of a firmer confidence in the power
and goodness of God? The language of Scripture is decidedly opposed
to the theory of impressions. The Bible directs us never to indulge
in anticipations of evil, and to "take no thought for the morrow."
An habitual trust in a superintending Providence will ever prove to
be the best preservative against imaginary or real evil, and will
fill the mind with the sweet calm of a holy and abiding peace.

In returning to the subject of the Olney Hymns, we may remark
that those contributed by Cowper are, with some few exceptions,
distinguished by excellences of no common kind. To the grace and
beauty of poetical composition they unite the sublimity of religious
sentiment, and the tenderness and fervour of devotional feeling. The
nearer approaches to the Deity, which constitute the communion of
the soul with God, and in which the believer is able to contemplate
him as a reconciled Father in Christ Jesus; the sufficiency of
divine grace to pardon all our sins, and to renew and sanctify
the soul; the aspirations of prayer for the attainment of these
blessings, and the song of praise in the consciousness of their
enjoyment; the faith that reposes every care on his promises, and
realizes their covenanted truth;--such are the subjects on which
Cowper delights to dwell with a fervour which gives new wings to
our devotion, and raises us above the enfeebling vanity of earthly
things.

To specify all the hymns which lay claim to our admiration, would
far exceed the limits of our plan, and interfere with the judgment
and discrimination of the reader. We cannot, however, avoid
referring to the following:--"O for a closer walk with God;" "Ere
God had built the mountains:" "The Lord will happiness divine;"
"There is a fountain fill'd with blood;" "Hark, my soul, it is
the Lord;" "God of my life, to thee I call;" and especially,
"The billows swell, the winds are high." There is a character of
experimental piety pervading the hymns of Cowper, which singularly
adapts them to meet the feelings of the contemplative or tried
Christian. The deeper and more secret emotions of the soul; the
vicissitudes of joy and sorrow; the fears that depress, and the
hopes that soothe and tranquillize the mind, are treated with a
fidelity and pathos, that render Cowper emphatically the poet of
the heart. His hymns possess one peculiar feature which powerfully
engages our sympathies. They disclose the inward recesses, and
deep exercises of his own mind. But the sorrows of Cowper are now
ended. Every trace is obliterated, except the record of them which
is stamped on his interesting page. He has entered within the
vail, where the mysterious dispensations of Providence, which once
cast their deep shade on his chequered path, are vindicated and
explained. He has joined "the general assembly and church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven, and an innumerable company
of angels, and God, the judge of all, and the spirits of just men
made perfect, and Jesus, the Mediator of the new covenant." There,
freed from the sorrows and finite conceptions of erring reason, he
unites with the redeemed of the Lord in that nobler song of praise,
"Unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father;
to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."




THE OLNEY HYMNS.


I. WALKING WITH GOD.--_Gen._ v. 24.

    Oh! for a closer walk with God,
      A calm and heavenly frame;
    A light to shine upon the road
      That leads me to the Lamb!

    Where is the blessedness I knew
      When first I saw the Lord?
    Where is the soul-refreshing view
      Of Jesus and his word?

    What peaceful hours I once enjoy'd!
      How sweet their memory still!
    But they have left an aching void,
      The world can never fill.

    Return, O holy Dove, return!
      Sweet messenger of rest:
    I hate the sins that made thee mourn,
      And drove thee from my breast.

    The dearest idol I have known,
      Whate'er that idol be,
    Help me to tear it from thy throne,
      And worship only thee.

    So shall my walk be close with God,
      Calm and serene my frame:
    So purer light shall mark the road
      That leads me to the Lamb.


II. JEHOVAH-JIREH. THE LORD WILL PROVIDE.--_Gen._ xxii. 14.

    The saints should never be dismay'd,
      Nor sink in hopeless fear;
    For when they least expect his aid,
      The Saviour will appear.

    This Abraham found: he raised the knife;
      God saw, and said, "Forbear!
    Yon ram shall yield his meaner life;
      Behold the victim there."

    Once David seem'd Saul's certain prey;
      But hark! the foe's at hand;[877]
    Saul turns his arms another way,
      To save the invaded land.

    When Jonah sunk beneath the wave,
      He thought to rise no more;[878]
    But God prepared a fish to save,
      And bear him to the shore.

    Blest proofs of power and grace divine,
      That meet us in his word!
    May every deep-felt care of mine
      Be trusted with the Lord.

    Wait for his seasonable aid,
      And though it tarry, wait:
    The promise may be long delay'd,
      But cannot come too late.

  [877] 1 Sam. xxiii. 27.

  [878] Jonah i. 17.


III. JEHOVAH-ROPHI. I AM THE LORD THAT HEALETH THEE.--_Exod._ xv. 26.

    Heal us, Emmanuel, here we are,
      Waiting to feel thy touch:
    Deep-wounded souls to thee repair,
      And, Saviour, we are such.

    Our faith is feeble, we confess,
      We faintly trust thy word;
    But wilt thou pity us the less?
      Be that far from thee, Lord!

    Remember him who once applied,
      With trembling, for relief;
    "Lord, I believe," with tears he cried,[879]
      "Oh, help my unbelief!"

    She too, who touch'd thee in the press,
      And healing virtue stole,
    Was answer'd, "Daughter, go in peace,[880]
      Thy faith hath made thee whole."

    Conceal'd amid the gathering throng,
      She would have shunn'd thy view;
    And if her faith was firm and strong,
      Had strong misgivings too.

    Like her, with hopes and fears we come,
      To touch thee, if we may;
    Oh! send us not despairing home,
      Send none unheal'd away.

  [879] Mark ix. 24.

  [880] Mark v. 34.


IV. JEHOVAH-NISSI. THE LORD MY BANNER.--_Exod._ xvii. 15.

      By whom was David taught
        To aim the deadly blow,
      When he Goliath fought,
        And laid the Gittite low?
    Nor sword nor spear the stripling took,
    But chose a pebble from the brook.

      'Twas Israel's God and king
        Who sent him to the fight;
      Who gave him strength to sling,
        And skill to aim aright.
    Ye feeble saints, your strength endures,
    Because young David's God is yours.

      Who order'd Gideon forth,
        To storm the invaders' camp,
      With arms of little worth,
        A pitcher and a lamp?[881]
    The trumpets made his coming known,
    And all the host was overthrown.

      Oh! I have seen the day,
        When, with a single word,
      God helping me to say,
        My trust is in the Lord,
    My soul hath quell'd a thousand foes,
    Fearless of all that could oppose.

      But unbelief, self-will,
        Self-righteousness, and pride,
      How often do they steal
        My weapon from my side!
    Yet David's Lord, and Gideon's friend,
    Will help his servant to the end.

  [881] Judges vii. 9, and 20.


V. JEHOVAH-SHALOM. THE LORD SEND PEACE.--_Judges_ vi. 24.

    Jesus, whose blood so freely stream'd,
      To satisfy the law's demand;
    By thee from guilt and wrath redeem'd,
      Before the Father's face I stand.

    To reconcile offending man,
      Make Justice drop her angry rod;
    What creature could have form'd the plan,
      Or who fulfil it but a God?

    No drop remains of all the curse,
      For wretches who deserved the whole;
    No arrows dipt in wrath to pierce
      The guilty but returning soul.

    Peace by such means so dearly bought,
      What rebel could have hoped to see?
    Peace, by his injured Sovereign wrought,
      His Sovereign fasten'd to a tree.

    Now, Lord, thy feeble worm prepare!
      For strife with earth and hell begins;
    Confirm and guard me for the war,
      They hate the soul that hates his sins.

    Let them in horrid league agree!
      They may assault, they may distress;
    But cannot quench thy love to me,
      Nor rob me of the Lord, my peace.


VI. WISDOM.--_Prov._ viii. 22-31.

    Ere God had built the mountains,
      Or raised the fruitful hills;
    Before he fill'd the fountains
      That feed the running rills;
    In me, from everlasting,
      The wonderful I AM,
    Found pleasures never-wasting,
      And Wisdom is my name.

    When, like a tent to dwell in,
      He spread the skies abroad,
    And swathed about the swelling
      Of Ocean's mighty flood;
    He wrought by weight and measure,
      And I was with him then:
    Myself the Father's pleasure,
      And mine, the sons of men.

    Thus Wisdom's words discover
      Thy glory and thy grace,
    Thou everlasting lover
      Of our unworthy race!
    Thy gracious eye survey'd us
      Ere stars were seen above;
    In wisdom thou hast made us,
      And died for us in love.

    And couldst thou be delighted
      With creatures such as we,
    Who, when we saw thee, slighted
      And nail'd thee to a tree?
    Unfathomable wonder,
      And mystery divine!
    The voice that speaks in thunder,
      Says, "Sinner, I am thine!"


VII. VANITY OF THE WORLD.

    God gives his mercies to be spent;
      Your hoard will do your soul no good;
    Gold is a blessing only lent,
      Repaid by giving others food.

    The world's esteem is but a bribe,
      To buy their peace you sell your own;
    The slave of a vain-glorious tribe,
      Who hate you while they make you known.

    The joy that vain amusements give,
      Oh! sad conclusion that it brings!
    The honey of a crowded hive,
      Defended by a thousand stings.

    'Tis thus the world rewards the fools
      That live upon her treacherous smiles:
    She leads them blindfold by her rules,
      And ruins all whom she beguiles.

    God knows the thousands who go down
      From pleasure into endless woe;
    And with a long despairing groan
      Blaspheme their Maker as they go.

    O fearful thought! be timely wise:
      Delight but in a Saviour's charms,
    And God shall take you to the skies,
      Embraced in everlasting arms.


VIII. O LORD, I WILL PRAISE THEE.--_Isaiah_ xii. 1.

    I will praise thee every day
    Now thine anger's turn'd away!
    Comfortable thoughts arise
    From the bleeding Sacrifice.

    Here in the fair gospel-field,
    Wells of free salvation yield
    Streams of life, a plenteous store,
    And my soul shall thirst no more.

    Jesus is become at length
    My salvation and my strength;
    And his praises shall prolong,
    While I live, my pleasant song.

    Praise ye then his glorious name,
    Publish his exalted fame!
    Still his worth your praise exceeds,
    Excellent are all his deeds.

    Raise again the joyful sound,
    Let the nations roll it round!
    Zion, shout, for this is he,
    God the Saviour dwells in thee!

IX. THE CONTRITE HEART.--_Isaiah_ lvii. 15.

    The Lord will happiness divine
    On contrite hearts bestow;
    Then tell me, gracious God, is mine
    A contrite heart or no?

    I hear, but seem to hear in vain,
    Insensible as steel;
    If aught is felt, 'tis only pain
    To find I cannot feel.

    I sometimes think myself inclined
    To love thee, if I could;
    But often feel another mind,
    Averse to all that's good.

    My best desires are faint and few,
    I fain would strive for more;
    But when I cry, "My strength renew,"
    Seem weaker than before.

    Thy saints are comforted, I know,
      And love thy house of prayer;
    I therefore go where others go,
      But find no comfort there.

    O make this heart rejoice or ache;
      Decide this doubt for me;
    And if it be not broken, break,
      And heal it if it be.


X. THE FUTURE PEACE AND GLORY OF THE CHURCH.--_Isaiah_ ix. 15-20.

    Hear what God the Lord hath spoken,
    "O my people, faint and few,
    Comfortless, afflicted, broken,
    Fair abodes I build for you;
    Thorns of heart-felt tribulation
    Shall no more perplex your ways:
    You shall name your walls, Salvation,
    And your gates shall all be praise.

    "There, like streams that feed the garden,
    Pleasures without end shall flow;
    For the Lord, your faith rewarding,
    All his bounty shall bestow;
    Still in undisturb'd possession
    Peace and righteousness shall reign;
    Never shall you feel oppression,
    Hear the voice of war again.

    "Ye no more your suns descending,
    Waning moons no more shall see;
    But, your griefs for ever ending,
    Find eternal noon in me;
    God shall rise, and shining o'er you,
    Change to day the gloom of night;
    He, the Lord, shall be your glory,
    God your everlasting light."


XI. JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.--_Jer._ xxiii. 6.

    My God, how perfect are thy ways!
      But mine polluted are;
    Sin twines itself about my praise,
      And slides into my prayer.

    When I would speak what thou hast done,
      To save me from my sin,
    I cannot make thy mercies known,
      But self-applause creeps in.

    Divine desire, that holy flame
      Thy grace creates in me;
    Alas! impatience is its name,
      When it returns to thee.

    This heart, a fountain of vile thoughts,
      How does it overflow!
    While self upon the surface floats,
      Still bubbling from below.

    Let others in the gaudy dress
      Of fancied merit shine;
    The Lord shall be my righteousness,
      The Lord for ever mine.


XII. EPHRAIM REPENTING.--_Jer._ xxxi. 18-20.

    My God, till I received thy stroke,
      How like a beast was I!
    So unaccustom'd to the yoke,
      So backward to comply.

    With grief my just reproach I bear,
      Shame fills me at the thought;
    How frequent my rebellions were!
      What wickedness I wrought!

    Thy merciful restraint I scorn'd,
      And left the pleasant road;
    Yet turn me, and I shall be turn'd
      Thou art the Lord my God.

    "Is Ephraim banish'd from my thoughts,
      Or vile in my esteem?
    No," saith the Lord, "with all his faults,
      I still remember him.

    "Is he a dear and pleasant child?
      Yes, dear and pleasant still;
    Though sin his foolish heart beguiled,
      And he withstood my will.

    "My sharp rebuke has laid him low,
      He seeks my face again;
    My pity kindles at his woe,
      He shall not seek in vain."


XIII. THE COVENANT.--_Ezek._ xxxvi. 25-28.

    The Lord proclaims his grace abroad!
    Behold, I change your hearts of stone;
    Each shall renounce his idol-god,
    And serve, henceforth, the Lord alone.

    My grace, a flowing stream, proceeds
    To wash your filthiness away;
    Ye shall abhor your former deeds,
    And learn my statutes to obey.

    My truth the great design ensures,
    I give myself away to you;
    You shall be mine, I will be yours,
    Your God unalterably true.

    Yet not unsought, or unimplored,
    The plenteous grace shall I confer;[882]
    No--your whole hearts shall seek the Lord,
    I'll put a praying spirit there.

    From the first breath of life divine,
    Down to the last expiring hour,
    The gracious work shall all be mine,
    Begun and ended in my power.

  [882] Verse 37.


XIV. JEHOVAH-SHAMMAH.--_Ezek._ xlviii. 35.

    As birds their infant brood protect,[883]
    And spread their wings to shelter them,
    Thus saith the Lord to his elect,
    "So will I guard Jerusalem."

    And what then is Jerusalem,
    This darling object of his care?
    Where is its worth in God's esteem?
    Who built it, who inhabits there?

    Jehovah founded it in blood,
    The blood of his incarnate Son;
    There dwell the saints, once foes to God,
    The sinners whom he calls his own.

    There, though besieged on every side,
    Yet much beloved and guarded well,
    From age to age they have defied
    The utmost force of earth and hell.

    Let earth repent, and hell despair,
    This city has a sure defence;
    Her name is call'd The Lord is there,
    And who has power to drive him thence?

  [883] Isaiah xxxi. 5.


XV. PRAISE FOR THE FOUNTAIN OPENED.--_Zec._ xiii. 1.

    There is a fountain fill'd with blood
      Drawn from Emmanuel's veins;
    And sinners, plunged beneath that flood,
      Lose all their guilty stains.

    The dying thief rejoiced to see
      That fountain in his day;
    And there have I, as vile as he,
      Wash'd all my sins away.

    Dear dying Lamb, thy precious blood
      Shall never lose its power,
    Till all the ransom'd church of God
      Be saved to sin no more.

    E'er since, by faith, I saw the stream
      Thy flowing wounds supply,
    Redeeming love has been my theme,
      And shall be till I die.

    Then in a nobler, sweeter song,
      I'll sing thy power to save;
    When this poor lisping stammering tongue
      Lies silent in the grave.

    Lord, I believe thou hast prepared
      (Unworthy though I be)
    For me a blood-bought free reward,
      A golden harp for me!

    'Tis strung, and tuned, for endless years,
      And form'd by power divine,
    To sound in God the Father's ears
      No other name but thine.


XVI. THE SOWER.--_Matt._ xiii. 3.

    Ye sons of earth, prepare the plough,
      Break up the fallow ground;
    The sower is gone forth to sow,
      And scatter blessings round.

    The seed that finds a stony soil,
      Shoots forth a hasty blade;
    But ill repays the sower's toil,
      Soon wither'd, scorch'd, and dead.

    The thorny ground is sure to balk
      All hopes of harvest there;
    We find a tall and sickly stalk,
      But not the fruitful ear.

    The beaten path and highway side
      Receive the trust in vain;
    The watchful birds the spoil divide,
      And pick up all the grain.

    But where the Lord of grace and power
      Has bless'd the happy field,
    How plenteous is the golden store
      The deep-wrought furrows yield!

    Father of mercies, we have need
      Of thy preparing grace;
    Let the same hand that gives the seed
      Provide a fruitful place.


XVII. THE HOUSE OF PRAYER.--_Mark_ xi. 17.

    Thy mansion is the Christian's heart,
      O Lord, thy dwelling-place secure!
    Bid the unruly throng depart,
      And leave the consecrated door.

    Devoted as it is to thee,
      A thievish swarm frequents the place;
    They steal away my joys from me,
      And rob my Saviour of his praise.

    There, too, a sharp designing trade
      Sin, Satan, and the world maintain;
    Nor cease to press me, and persuade
      To part with ease, and purchase pain.

    I know them, and I hate their din,
      Am weary of the bustling crowd;
    But while their voice is heard within,
      I cannot serve thee as I would.

    Oh! for the joy thy presence gives,
      What peace shall reign when thou art here!
    Thy presence makes this den of thieves
      A calm delightful house of prayer.

    And if thou make thy temple shine,
      Yet, self-abased, will I adore;
    The gold and silver are not mine,
      I give thee what was thine before.


XVIII. LOVEST THOU ME?--_John_ xxi. 16.

    Hark, my soul! it is the Lord:
    'Tis thy Saviour, hear his word;
    Jesus speaks, and speaks to thee:
    "Say, poor sinner, lovest thou me?

    "I deliver'd thee when bound,
    And when bleeding, heal'd thy wound;
    Sought thee wandering, set thee right,
    Turn'd thy darkness into light.

    "Can a woman's tender care
    Cease towards the child she bare?
    Yes, she may forgetful be,
    Yet will I remember thee.

    "Mine is an unchanging love,
    Higher than the heights above;
    Deeper than the depths beneath,
    Free and faithful, strong as death.

    "Thou shalt see my glory soon,
    When the work of grace is done;
    Partner of my throne shalt be:--
    Say, poor sinner, lovest thou me?"

    Lord, it is my chief complaint,
    That my love is weak and faint:
    Yet I love thee and adore:
    Oh for grace to love thee more!


XIX. CONTENTMENT.--_Phil._ iv. 11.

    Fierce passions discompose the mind,
      As tempests vex the sea:
    But calm content and peace we find,
      When, Lord, we turn to thee.

    In vain by reason and by rule
      We try to bend the will;
    For none but in the Saviour's school
      Can learn the heavenly skill.

    Since at his feet my soul has sat,
      His gracious words to hear,
    Contented with my present state,
      I cast on him my care.

    "Art thou a sinner, soul?" he said,
      "Then how canst thou complain?
    How light thy troubles here, if weigh'd
      With everlasting pain!

    "If thou of murmuring wouldst be cured,
      Compare thy griefs with mine;
    Think what my love for thee endured,
      And thou wilt not repine.

    "'Tis I appoint thy daily lot,
      And I do all things well;
    Thou soon shalt leave this wretched spot,
      And rise with me to dwell.

    "In life my grace shall strength supply,
      Proportion'd to thy day;
    At death thou still shalt find me nigh,
      To wipe thy tears away."

    Thus I, who once my wretched days
      In vain repinings spent,
    Taught in my Saviour's school of grace,
      Have learnt to be content.


XX. OLD TESTAMENT GOSPEL.--_Heb._ iv. 2.

      Israel, in ancient days,
        Not only had a view
      Of Sinai in a blaze,
        But learn'd the Gospel too;
    The types and figures were a glass
    In which they saw a Saviour's face.

      The paschal sacrifice,
        And blood-besprinkled door,[884]
      Seen with enlighten'd eyes,
        And once applied with power,
    Would teach the need of other blood,
    To reconcile an angry God.

  [884] Exod. xii. 13.

      The Lamb, the Dove, set forth
        His perfect innocence,[885]
      Whose blood of matchless worth
        Should be the soul's defence;
    For he who can for sin atone,
    Must have no failings of his own.

      The scape-goat on his head[886]
        The people's trespass bore,
      And, to the desert led,
        Was to be seen no more:
    In him our Surety seem'd to say,
    "Behold, I bear your sins away."

      Dipt in his fellow's blood,
        The living bird went free;[887]
      The type, well understood,
        Express'd the sinner's plea;
    Described a guilty soul enlarged,
    And by a Saviour's death discharged.

      Jesus, I love to trace,
        Throughout the sacred page,
      The footsteps of thy grace,
        The same in every age!
    O grant that I may faithful be
    To clearer light vouchsafed to me!

  [885] Lev. xii. 6.

  [886] Lev. xvi. 21.

  [887] Lev. xiv. 51-53.


XXI. SARDIS.--_Rev._ iii. 1-6.

    "Write to Sardis," saith the Lord,
      And write what he declares,
    He whose Spirit, and whose word,
      Upholds the seven stars:
    "All thy works and ways I search,
      Find thy zeal and love decay'd:
    Thou art call'd a living church,
      But thou art cold and dead.

    "Watch, remember, seek, and strive,
      Exert thy former pains;
    Let thy timely care revive,
      And strengthen what remains:
    Cleanse thine heart, thy works amend,
      Former times to mind recall,
    Lest my sudden stroke descend,
      And smite thee once for all.

    "Yet I number now in thee
      A few that are upright;
    These my Father's face shall see
      And walk with me in white.
    When in judgment I appear,
      They for mine shall be confest;
    Let my faithful servants hear,
      And woe be to the rest."


XXII. PRAYER FOR A BLESSING ON THE YOUNG.

    Bestow, dear Lord, upon our youth
      The gift of saving grace;
    And let the seed of sacred truth
      Fall in a fruitful place.

    Grace is a plant, where'er it grows,
      Of pure and heavenly root;
    But fairest in the youngest shows,
      And yields the sweetest fruit.

    Ye careless ones, O hear betimes
      The voice of sovereign love!
    Your youth is stain'd with many crimes,
      But mercy reigns above.

    True, you are young, but there's a stone
      Within the youngest breast;
    Or half the crimes which you have done
      Would rob you of your rest.

    For you the public prayer is made,
      Oh! join the public prayer!
    For you the secret tear is shed,
      O shed yourselves a tear!

    We pray that you may early prove
      The Spirit's power to teach;
    You cannot be too young to love
      That Jesus whom we preach.


XXIII. PLEADING FOR AND WITH YOUTH.

    Sin has undone our wretched race,
      But Jesus has restored,
    And brought the sinner face to face
      With his forgiving Lord.

    This we repeat, from year to year,
      And press upon our youth;
    Lord, give them an attentive ear,
      Lord, save them by thy truth.

    Blessings upon the rising race!
      Make this a happy hour,
    According to thy richest grace,
      And thine almighty power.

    We feel for your unhappy state,
      (May you regard it too,)
    And would awhile ourselves forget
      To pour out prayer for you.

    We see, though you perceive it not,
      The approaching awful doom;
    O tremble at the solemn thought,
      And flee the wrath to come!

    Dear Saviour, let this new-born year
      Spread an alarm abroad;
    And cry in every careless ear,
      "Prepare to meet thy God!"


XXIV. PRAYER FOR CHILDREN.

    Gracious Lord, our children see,
    By thy mercy we are free;
    But shall these, alas! remain
    Subjects still of Satan's reign?
    Israel's young ones, when of old
    Pharaoh threaten'd to withhold,[888]
    Then thy messenger said, "No;
    Let the children also go."

    When the angel of the Lord,
    Drawing forth his dreadful sword,
    Slew, with an avenging hand,
    All the first-born of the land;[889]
    Then thy people's doors he pass'd,
    Where the bloody sign was placed;
    Hear us, now, upon our knees,
    Plead the blood of Christ for these!

    Lord, we tremble, for we know
    How the fierce malicious foe,
    Wheeling round his watchful flight,
    Keeps them ever in his sight:
    Spread thy pinions, King of kings!
    Hide them safe beneath thy wings;
    Lest the ravenous bird of prey
    Stoop, and bear the brood away.

  [888] Exod. x. 9.

  [889] Exod. xii. 12.


XXV. JEHOVAH JESUS.

    My song shall bless the Lord of all,
      My praise shall climb to his abode;
    Thee, Saviour, by that name I call,
      The great Supreme, the mighty God.

    Without beginning or decline,
      Object of faith, and not of sense;
    Eternal ages saw him shine,
      He shines eternal ages hence.

    As much, when in the manger laid,
      Almighty ruler of the sky,
    As when the six days' works he made
      Fill'd all the morning stars with joy.

    Of all the crowns Jehovah bears,
      Salvation is his dearest claim;
    That gracious sound well pleased he hears,
      And owns Emmanuel for his name.

      A cheerful confidence I feel,
    My well placed hopes with joy I see;
      My bosom glows with heavenly zeal,
    To worship him who died for me.

      As man, he pities my complaint,
    His power and truth are all divine;
      He will not fail, he cannot faint,
    Salvation's sure, and must be mine.


XXVI. ON OPENING A PLACE FOR SOCIAL PRAYER.

    Jesus! where'er thy people meet,
    There they behold thy mercy-seat;
    Where'er they seek thee, thou art found,
    And every place is hallow'd ground.

    For thou, within no walls confined,
    Inhabitest the humble mind;
    Such ever bring thee where they come,
    And going, take thee to their home.

    Dear Shepherd of thy chosen few!
    Thy former mercies here renew;
    Here to our waiting hearts proclaim
    The sweetness of thy saving name.

    Here may we prove the power of prayer,
    To strengthen faith and sweeten care;
    To teach our faint desires to rise,
    And bring all heaven before our eyes.

    Behold, at thy commanding word
    We stretch the curtain and the cord;[890]
    Come thou and fill this wider space,
    And bless us with a large increase.

    Lord, we are few, but thou art near;
    Nor short thine arm, nor deaf thine ear;
    Oh rend the heavens, come quickly down,
    And make a thousand hearts thine own!

  [890] Isaiah liv. 2.


XXVII. WELCOME TO THE TABLE.

    This is the feast of heavenly wine
      And God invites to sup;
    The juices of the living vine
      Were press'd to fill the cup.

    Oh! bless the Saviour, ye that eat,
      With royal dainties fed;
    Not heaven affords a costlier treat,
      For Jesus is the bread.

    The vile, the lost, he calls to them,
      Ye trembling souls, appear!
    The righteous in their own esteem
      Have no acceptance here.

    Approach, ye poor, nor dare refuse
      The banquet spread for you;
    Dear Saviour, this is welcome news,
      Then I may venture too.

    If guilt and sin afford a plea,
      And may obtain a place,
    Surely the Lord will welcome me,
      And I shall see his face.


XXVIII. JESUS HASTING TO SUFFER.

    The Saviour, what a noble flame
      Was kindled in his breast,
    When hasting to Jerusalem,
      He march'd before the rest!

    Good-will to men and zeal for God
      His every thought engross;
    He longs to be baptized with blood,[891]
      He pants to reach the cross!

    With all his sufferings full in view,
      And woes to us unknown,
    Forth to the task his spirit flew;
      'Twas love that urged him on.

    Lord, we return thee what we can:
      Our hearts shall sound abroad
    Salvation to the dying Man,
      And to the rising God!

    And while thy bleeding glories here
      Engage our wondering eyes,
    We learn our lighter cross to bear,
      And hasten to the skies.

  [891] Luke xii. 50.


XXIX. EXHORTATION TO PRAYER.

    What various hindrances we meet
    In coming to a mercy-seat!
    Yet who that knows the worth of prayer,
    But wishes to be often there?

    Prayer makes the darken'd cloud withdraw,
    Prayer climbs the ladder Jacob saw,
    Gives exercise to faith and love,
    Brings every blessing from above.

    Restraining prayer, we cease to fight,
    Prayer makes the Christian's armour bright;
    And Satan trembles when he sees
    The weakest saint upon his knees.

    While Moses stood with arms spread wide,
    Success was found on Israel's side;
    But when through weariness they fail'd,
    That moment Amalek prevail'd.[892]

    Have you no words? Ah! think again,
    Words flow apace when you complain,
    And fill your fellow creature's ear
    With the sad tale of all your care.

    Were half the breath thus vainly spent
    To Heaven in supplication sent,
    Your cheerful song would oftener be,
    "Hear what the Lord has done for me."

  [892] Exodus xvii. 11.


XXX. THE LIGHT AND GLORY OF THE WORD.

    The Spirit breathes upon the Word,
      And brings the truth to sight;
    Precepts and promises afford
      A sanctifying light.

    A glory gilds the sacred page,
      Majestic like the sun;
    It gives a light to every age,
      It gives, but borrows none.

    The hand that gave it still supplies
      The gracious light and heat:
    His truths upon the nations rise,
      They rise, but never set.

    Let everlasting thanks be thine,
      For such a bright display,
    As makes a world of darkness shine
      With beams of heavenly day.

    My soul rejoices to pursue
      The steps of him I love,
    Till glory breaks upon my view
      In brighter worlds above.


XXXI. ON THE DEATH OF A MINISTER.

    His master taken from his head,
      Elisha saw him go;
    And in desponding accents said,
      "Ah, what must Israel do?"

    But he forgot the Lord who lifts
      The beggar to the throne;
    Nor knew, that all Elijah's gifts
      Will soon be made his own.

    What! when a Paul has run his course,
      Or when Apollos dies,
    Is Israel left without resource?
      And have we no supplies?

    Yes, while the dear Redeemer lives
      We have a boundless store,
    And shall be fed with what he gives,
      Who lives for evermore.


XXXII. THE SHINING LIGHT.

    My former hopes are fled,
      My terror now begins;
    I feel, alas! that I am dead
      In trespasses and sins.

    Ah, whither shall I fly!
      I hear the thunder roar;
    The law proclaims destruction nigh,
      And vengeance at the door.

    When I review my ways,
      I dread impending doom:
    But sure a friendly whisper says,
      "Flee from the wrath to come."

    I see, or think I see,
      A glimmering from afar;
    A beam of day, that shines for me,
      To save me from despair.

    Forerunner of the sun,[893]
      It marks the pilgrim's way;
    I'll gaze upon it while I run,
      And watch the rising day.

  [893] Psalm cxxx. 6.


XXXIII. SEEKING THE BELOVED.

    To those who know the Lord I speak,
      Is my beloved near?
    The bridegroom of my soul I seek,
      Oh! when will he appear?

    Though once a man of grief and shame,
      Yet now he fills a throne,
    And bears the greatest, sweetest name,
      That earth or heaven has known.

    Grace flies before, and love attends
      His steps where'er he goes;
    Though none can see him but his friends,
      And they were once his foes.

    He speaks--obedient to his call
      Our warm affections move:
    Did he but shine alike on all,
      Then all alike would love.

    Then love in every heart would reign,
      And war would cease to roar;
    And cruel and bloodthirsty men
      Would thirst for blood no more.

    Such Jesus is, and such his grace,
      Oh, may he shine on you!
    And tell him, when you see his face,
      I long to see him too.[894]

  [894] Cant. v. 8.


XXXIV. THE WAITING SOUL.

    Breathe from the gentle south, O Lord,
      And cheer me from the north;
    Blow on the treasures of thy word,
      And call the spices forth!

    I wish, thou know'st, to be resign'd,
      And wait with patient hope;
    But hope delay'd fatigues the mind,
      And drinks the spirit up.

    Help me to reach the distant goal,
      Confirm my feeble knee;
    Pity the sickness of a soul
      That faints for love of thee.

    Cold as I feel this heart of mine,
      Yet since I feel it so;
    It yields some hope of life divine
      Within, however low.

    I seem forsaken and alone,
      I hear the lion roar;
    And ev'ry door is shut but one,
      And that is mercy's door.

    There, till the dear Deliv'rer come,
      I'll wait with humble pray'r;
    And when he calls his exile home,
      The Lord shall find me there.


XXXV. WELCOME CROSS.

    'Tis my happiness below
      Not to live without the cross,
    But the Saviour's power to know,
      Sanctifying every loss:
    Trials must and will befall;
      But with humble faith to see
    Love inscribed upon them all
      This is happiness to me.

    God in Israel sows the seeds
      Of affliction, pain, and toil;
    These spring up and choke the weeds
      Which would else o'erspread the soil:
    Trials make the promise sweet,
      Trials give new life to prayer;
    Trials bring me to his feet,
      Lay me low, and keep me there.

    Did I meet no trials here,
      No chastisement by the way:
    Might I not, with reason, fear
      I should prove a castaway?
    Bastards may escape the rod,[895]
      Sunk in earthly, vain delight;
    But the true born child of God
      Must not, would not, if he might.

  [895] Hebrews xii. 8.


XXXVI. AFFLICTIONS SANCTIFIED BY THE WORD.

    O How I love thy holy word,
    Thy gracious covenant, O Lord!
    It guides me in the peaceful way;
    I think upon it all the day.

    What are the mines of shining wealth,
    The strength of youth, the bloom of health!
    What are all joys compared with those
    Thine everlasting word bestows!

    Long unafflicted, undismay'd,
    In pleasure's path secure I stray'd;
    Thou madest me feel thy chastening rod,[896]
    And straight I turn'd unto my God.

    What though it pierced my fainting heart,
    I bless thine hand that caused the smart;
    It taught my tears awhile to flow,
    But saved me from eternal woe.

    Oh! hadst thou left me unchastised,
    Thy precept I had still despised;
    And still the snare in secret laid,
    Had my unwary feet betray'd.

    I love thee, therefore, O my God,
    And breathe towards thy dear abode;
    Where, in thy presence fully blest,
    Thy chosen saints for ever rest.

  [896] Psalm cxix. 71.


XXXVII. TEMPTATION.

    The billows swell, the winds are high,
    Clouds overcast my wintry sky;
    Out of the depths to thee I call,--
    My fears are great, my strength is small.

    O Lord, the pilot's part perform,
    And guard and guide me through the storm,
    Defend me from each threatening ill,
    Control the waves,--say, "Peace, be still."

    Amidst the roaring of the sea,
    My soul still hangs her hope on thee;
    Thy constant love, thy faithful care,
    Is all that saves me from despair.

    Dangers of every shape and name
    Attend the followers of the Lamb,
    Who leave the world's deceitful shore,
    And leave it to return no more.

    Though tempest-toss'd and half a wreck,
    My Saviour through the floods I seek;
    Let neither winds nor stormy main
    Force back my shatter'd bark again.


XXXVIII. LOOKING UPWARDS IN A STORM.

    God of my life, to thee I call,
    Afflicted at thy feet I fall;
    When the great water-floods prevail,[897]
    Leave not my trembling heart to fail!

    Friend of the friendless and the faint!
    Where should I lodge my deep complaint?
    Where but with thee, whose open door
    Invites the helpless and the poor!

    Did ever mourner plead with thee,
    And thou refuse that mourner's plea?
    Does not the word still fix'd remain,
    That none shall seek thy face in vain?

    That were a grief I could not bear,
    Didst thou not hear and answer prayer;
    But a prayer-hearing, answering God,
    Supports me under every load.

    Fair is the lot that's cast for me;
    I have an Advocate with thee;
    They whom the world caresses most
    Have no such privilege to boast.

    Poor though I am, despised, forgot,[898]
    Yet God, my God, forgets me not:
    And he is safe, and must succeed,
    For whom the Lord vouchsafes to plead.

  [897] Psalm lxix. 15.

  [898] Psalm xl. 17.


XXXIX. THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH.

    My soul is sad, and much dismay'd,
      See, Lord, what legions of my foes,
    With fierce Apollyon at their head,
      My heavenly pilgrimage oppose!

    See, from the ever-burning lake
      How like a smoky cloud they rise!
    With horrid blasts my soul they shake,
      With storms of blasphemies and lies.

    Their fiery arrows reach the mark,[899]
      My throbbing heart with anguish tear;
    Each lights upon a kindred spark,
      And finds abundant fuel there.

    I hate the thought that wrongs the Lord;
      Oh! I would drive it from my breast,
    With thy own sharp two-edged sword,
      Far as the east is from the west.

    Come, then, and chase the cruel host,
      Heal the deep wounds I have received!
    Nor let the powers of darkness boast,
      That I am foil'd, and thou art grieved!

  [899] Ephes. vi. 16.


XL. PEACE AFTER A STORM.

    When darkness long has veil'd my mind,
      And smiling day once more appears;
    Then, my Redeemer, then I find
      The folly of my doubts and fears.

    Straight I upbraid my wandering heart,
      And blush that I should ever be
    Thus prone to act so base a part,
      Or harbour one hard thought of thee!

    Oh! let me then at length be taught
      What I am still so slow to learn;
    That God is love, and changes not,
      Nor knows the shadow of a turn.

    Sweet truth, and easy to repeat!
      But, when my faith is sharply tried,
    I find myself a learner yet,
      Unskilful, weak, and apt to slide.

    But, O my Lord, one look from thee
      Subdues the disobedient will;
    Drives doubt and discontent away,
      And thy rebellious worm is still.

    Thou art as ready to forgive
      As I am ready to repine;
    Thou, therefore, all the praise receive;
      Be shame and self-abhorrence mine.


XLI. MOURNING AND LONGING.

      The Saviour hides his face!
      My spirit thirsts to prove
    Renew'd supplies of pardoning grace,
      And never-fading love.

      The favour'd souls who know
      What glories shine in him,
    Pant for his presence as the roe
      Pants for the living stream!

      What trifles tease me now!
      They swarm like summer flies,
    They cleave to every thing I do,
      And swim before my eyes.

      How dull the sabbath day,
      Without the sabbath's Lord!
    How toilsome then to sing and pray,
      And wait upon the word!

      Of all the truths I hear,
      How few delight my taste!
    I glean a berry here and there,
      But mourn the vintage past.

      Yet let me (as I ought)
      Still hope to be supplied;
    No pleasure else is worth a thought,
      Nor shall I be denied.

      Though I am but a worm,
      Unworthy of his care,
    The Lord will my desire perform,
      And grant me all my prayer.


XLII. SELF-ACQUAINTANCE.

    Dear Lord! accept a sinful heart,
      Which of itself complains,
    And mourns, with much and frequent smart,
      The evil it contains.

    There fiery seeds of anger lurk,
      Which often hurt my frame;
    And wait but for the tempter's work,
      To fan them to a flame.

    Legality holds out a bribe
      To purchase life from thee;
    And discontent would fain prescribe
      How thou shalt deal with me.

    While unbelief withstands thy grace,
      And puts the mercy by;
    Presumption, with a brow of brass,
      Says, "Give me, or I die."

    How eager are my thoughts to roam
      In quest of what they love!
    But ah! when duty calls them home,
      How heavily they move!

    Oh, cleanse me in a Saviour's blood,
      Transform me by thy power,
    And make me thy beloved abode,
      And let me rove no more.


XLIII. PRAYER FOR PATIENCE.

    Lord, who hast suffer'd all for me,
      My peace and pardon to procure,
    The lighter cross I bear for thee,
      Help me with patience to endure.

    The storm of loud repining hush,
      I would in humble silence mourn;
    Why should the unburnt though burning bush,
      Be angry as the crackling thorn?

    Man should not faint at thy rebuke,
      Like Joshua falling on his face,[900]
    When the curst thing that Achan took
      Brought Israel into just disgrace.

    Perhaps some golden wedge suppress'd,
      Some secret sin offends my God;
    Perhaps that Babylonish vest,
      Self-righteousness, provokes the rod.

    Ah! were I buffeted all day,
      Mock'd, crown'd with thorns, and spit upon;
    I yet should have no right to say,
      My great distress is mine alone.

    Let me not angrily declare
      No pain was ever sharp like mine;
    Nor murmur at the cross I bear,
      But rather weep, remembering thine.

  [900] Joshua vii. 10, 11.


XLIV. SUBMISSION.

    O Lord, my best desire fulfil,
      And help me to resign
    Life, health, and comfort to thy will,
      And make thy pleasure mine.

    Why should I shrink at thy command,
      Whose love forbids my fears?
    Or tremble at the gracious hand
      That wipes away my tears?

    No, let me rather freely yield
      What most I prize to thee;
    Who never hast a good withheld,
      Or wilt withhold, from me.

    Thy favour, all my journey through,
      Thou art engaged to grant;
    What else I want, or think I do,
      'Tis better still to want.

    Wisdom and mercy guide my way,
      Shall I resist them both?
    A poor blind creature of a day,
      And crush'd before the moth!

    But ah! my inward spirit cries,
      Still bind me to thy sway;
    Else the next cloud that veils the skies,
      Drives all these thoughts away.


XLV. THE HAPPY CHANGE.

    How blest thy creature is, O God,
      When, with a single eye,
    He views the lustre of thy word,
      The dayspring from on high!

    Through all the storms that veil the skies,
      And frown on earthly things,
    The Sun of Righteousness he eyes,
      With healing on his wings.

    Struck by that light, the human heart,
      A barren soil no more,
    Sends the sweet smell of grace abroad,
      Where serpents lurk'd before.[901]

    The soul a dreary province once
      Of Satan's dark domain,
    Feels a new empire form'd within,
      And owns a heavenly reign.

    The glorious orb, whose golden beams
      The fruitful year control,
    Since first, obedient to thy word,
      He started from the goal;

    Has cheer'd the nations with the joys
      His orient rays impart;
    But, Jesus, 'tis thy light alone
      Can shine upon the heart.

  [901] Isaiah xxxv. 7.


XLVI. RETIREMENT.

    Far from the world, O Lord, I flee,
      From strife and tumult far;
    From scenes where Satan wages still
      His most successful war.

    The calm retreat, the silent shade,
      With prayer and praise agree;
    And seem by thy sweet bounty made
      For those who follow thee.

    There, if thy Spirit touch the soul,
      And grace her mean abode,
    Oh, with what peace, and joy, and love,
      She communes with her God!

    There like the nightingale she pours
      Her solitary lays;
    Nor asks a witness of her song,
      Nor thirsts for human praise.

    Author and Guardian of my life,
      Sweet source of light divine,
    And (all harmonious names in one)
      My Saviour, thou art mine!

    What thanks I owe thee, and what love,
      A boundless, endless store,
    Shall echo through the realms above
      When time shall be no more.


XLVII. THE HIDDEN LIFE.

    To tell the Saviour all my wants,
      How pleasing is the task!
    Nor less to praise him when he grants
      Beyond what I can ask.

    My labouring spirit vainly seeks
      To tell but half the joy;
    With how much tenderness he speaks,
      And helps me to reply.

    Nor were it wise, nor should I choose,
      Such secrets to declare;
    Like precious wines their tastes they lose,
      Exposed to open air.

    But this with boldness I proclaim,
      Nor care if thousands hear,
    Sweet is the ointment of his name,
      Not life is half so dear.

    And can you frown, my former friends,
      Who knew what once I was;
    And blame the song that thus commends
      The Man who bore the cross?

    Trust me, I draw the likeness true,
      And not as fancy paints;
    Such honour may he give to you,
      For such have all his saints.


XLVIII. JOY AND PEACE IN BELIEVING.

    Sometimes a light surprises
      The Christian while he sings;
    It is the Lord who rises
      With healing in his wings:
    When comforts are declining,
      He grants the soul again
    A season of clear shining,
      To cheer it after rain.

    In holy contemplation,
      We sweetly then pursue
    The theme of God's salvation,
      And find it ever new.
    Set free from present sorrow
      We cheerfully can say,
    E'en let the unknown to-morrow[902]
      Bring with it what it may.

    It can bring with it nothing,
      But he will bear us through;
    Who gives the lilies clothing,
      Will clothe his people too;
    Beneath the spreading heavens
      No creature but is fed;
    And he who feeds the ravens,
      Will give his children bread.

    The vine nor fig-tree neither[903]
      Their wonted fruit should bear,
    Though all the field should wither,
      Nor flocks nor herds be there:
    Yet God the same abiding,
      His praise shall tune my voice;
    For, while in him confiding,
      I cannot but rejoice.

  [902] Matthew vi. 34.

  [903] Habakkuk iii. 17, 18.


XLIX. TRUE PLEASURES.

    Lord, my soul with pleasure springs,
      When Jesus' name I hear;
    And when God the Spirit brings
      The word of promise near:
    Beauties too, in holiness,
      Still delighted I perceive;
    Nor have words that can express
      The joys thy precepts give.

    Clothed in sanctity and grace,
      How sweet it is to see
    Those who love thee as they pass,
      Or when they wait on thee:
    Pleasant too, to sit and tell
      What we owe to love divine;
    Till our bosoms grateful swell,
      And eyes begin to shine.

    Those the comforts I possess,
      Which God shall still increase,
    All his ways are pleasantness,[904]
      And all his paths are peace.
    Nothing Jesus did or spoke,
      Henceforth let me ever slight;
    For I love his easy yoke,[905]
      And find his burden light.

  [904] Prov. iii. 17.

  [905] Matt. xi. 30.


L. THE CHRISTIAN.

    Honour and happiness unite
      To make the Christian's name a praise;
    How fair the scene, how clear the light,
      That fills the remnant of his days!

    A kingly character he bears,
      No change his priestly office knows;
    Unfading is the crown he wears,
      His joys can never reach a close.

    Adorn'd with glory from on high,
      Salvation shines upon his face;
    His robe is of the ethereal dye,
      His steps are dignity and grace.

    Inferior honours he disdains,
      Nor stoops to take applause from earth:
    The King of kings himself maintains
      The expenses of his heavenly birth.

    The noblest creature seen below,
      Ordain'd to fill a throne above;
    God gives him all he can bestow,
      His kingdom of eternal love!

    My soul is ravish'd at the thought!
      Methinks from earth I see him rise!
    Angels congratulate his lot,
      And shout him welcome to the skies!


LI. LIVELY HOPE AND GRACIOUS FEAR.

    I was a grovelling creature once,
      And basely cleaved to earth;
    I wanted spirit to renounce
      The clod that gave me birth.

    But God has breath'd upon a worm,
      And sent me, from above,
    Wings such as clothe an angel's form,
      The wings of joy and love.

    With these to Pisgah's top I fly,
      And there delighted stand,
    To view beneath a shining sky
      The spacious promised land.

    The Lord of all the vast domain
      Has promised it to me;
    The length and breadth of all the plain,
      As far as faith can see.

    How glorious is my privilege!
      To thee for help I call;
    I stand upon a mountain's edge,
      Oh save me, lest I fall!

    Though much exalted in the Lord,
      My strength is not my own;
    Then let me tremble at his word,
      And none shall cast me down.


LII. FOR THE POOR.

    When Hagar found the bottle spent,
      And wept o'er Ishmael,
    A message from the Lord was sent
      To guide her to a well.[906]

    Should not Elijah's cake and cruse[907]
      Convince us at this day,
    A gracious God will not refuse
      Provisions by the way?

    His saints and servants shall be fed,
      The promise is secure;
    "Bread shall be given them," he has said,
      "Their water shall be sure."[908]

    Repasts far richer they shall prove,
      Than all earth's dainties are;
    'Tis sweet to taste a Saviour's love,
      Though in the meanest fare.

    To Jesus then your trouble bring,
      Nor murmur at your lot;
    While you are poor and he is King,
      You shall not be forgot.

  [906] Gen. xxi. 19.

  [907] 1 Kings xvii. 14.

  [908] Isa. xxxiii. 16.


LIII. MY SOUL THIRSTETH FOR GOD.

    I thirst, but not as once I did,
      The vain delights of earth to share;
    Thy wounds, Emmanuel, all forbid
      That I should seek my pleasures there.

    It was the sight of thy dear cross
      First wean'd my soul from earthly things;
    And taught me to esteem as dross
      The mirth of fools and pomp of kings.

    I want that grace that springs from thee,
      That quickens all things where it flows,
    And makes a wretched thorn like me
      Bloom as the myrtle or the rose.

    Dear fountain of delight unknown!
      No longer sink below the brim;
    But overflow, and pour me down
      A living and life-giving stream!

    For sure, of all the plants that share
      The notice of thy Father's eye,
    None proves less grateful to his care,
      Or yields him meaner fruit than I.


LIV. LOVE CONSTRAINING TO OBEDIENCE.

    No strength of nature can suffice
      To serve the Lord aright:
    And what she has she misapplies,
      For want of clearer light.

    How long beneath the law I lay
      In bondage and distress!
    I toil'd the precept to obey,
      But toil'd without success.

    Then, to abstain from outward sin
      Was more than I could do;
    Now, if I feel its power within,
      I feel I hate it too.

    Then, all my servile works were done
      A righteousness to raise;
    Now, freely chosen in the Son,
      I freely choose his ways.

    "What shall I do," was then the word,
      "That I may worthier grow?"
    "What shall I render to the Lord?"
      Is my inquiry now.

    To see the law by Christ fulfill'd,
      And hear his pardoning voice,
    Changes a slave into a child,[909]
      And duty into choice.

  [909] Romans iii. 31.


LV. THE HEART HEALED AND CHANGED BY MERCY.

    Sin enslaved me many years,
      And led me bound and blind;
    Till at length a thousand fears
      Came swarming o'er my mind.
    "Where," I said, in deep distress,
      "Will these sinful pleasures end?
    How shall I secure my peace,
      And make the Lord my friend?"

    Friends and ministers said much
      The gospel to enforce;
    But my blindness still was such,
      I chose a legal course:
    Much I fasted, watch'd, and strove,
      Scarce would show my face abroad,
    Fear'd almost to speak or move,
      A stranger still to God.

    Thus afraid to trust his grace,
      Long time did I rebel;
    Till, despairing of my case.
      Down at his feet I fell:
    Then my stubborn heart he broke,
      And subdued me to his sway;
    By a simple word he spoke,
      "Thy sins are done away."


LVI. HATRED OF SIN.

    Holy Lord God! I love thy truth,
      Nor dare thy least commandment slight;
    Yet pierced by sin, the serpent's tooth,
      I mourn the anguish of the bite.

    But, though the poison lurks within,
      Hope bids me still with patience wait;
    Till death shall set me free from sin,
      Free from the only thing I hate.

    Had I a throne above the rest,
      Where angels and archangels dwell,
    One sin, unslain, within my breast,
      Would make that heaven as dark as hell.

    The prisoner, sent to breathe fresh air,
      And bless'd with liberty again,
    Would mourn, were he condemned to wear
      One link of all his former chain.

    But, oh! no foe invades the bliss,
      When glory crowns the Christian's head;
    One view of Jesus as he is
      Will strike all sin for ever dead.


LVII. THE NEW CONVERT.

    The new-born child of gospel grace,
      Like some fair tree when summer's nigh,
    Beneath Emmanuel's shining face
      Lifts up his blooming branch on high.

    No fears he feels, he sees no foes,
      No conflict yet his faith employs,
    Nor has he learnt to whom he owes
      The strength and peace his soul enjoys.

    But sin soon darts its cruel sting,
      And comforts sinking day by day:
    What seem'd his own, a self-fed spring,
      Proves but a brook that glides away.

    When Gideon arm'd his numerous host,
      The Lord soon made his numbers less;
    And said, "Lest Israel vainly boast,[910]
      'My arm procured me this success,'"

    Thus will he bring our spirits down,
      And draw our ebbing comforts low,
    That, saved by grace, but not our own,
      We may not claim the praise we owe.

  [910] Judges vii. 2.


LVIII. TRUE AND FALSE COMFORTS.

    O God, whose favourable eye
      The sin-sick soul revives,
    Holy and heavenly is the joy
      Thy shining presence gives.

    Not such as hypocrites suppose,
      Who with a graceless heart
    Taste not of thee, but drink a dose,
      Prepared by Satan's art.

    Intoxicating joys are theirs,
      Who, while they boast their light,
    And seem to soar above the stars,
      Are plunging into night.

    Lull'd in a soft and fatal sleep,
      They sin, and yet rejoice;
    Were they indeed the Saviour's sheep,
      Would they not hear his voice?

    Be mine the comforts that reclaim
      The soul from Satan's power;
    That make me blush for what I am,
      And hate my sin the more.

    'Tis joy enough, my All in All,
      At thy dear feet to lie;
    Thou wilt not let me lower fall,
      And none can higher fly.


LIX. A LIVING AND A DEAD FAITH.

    The Lord receives his highest praise
      From humble minds and hearts sincere;
    While all the loud professor says
      Offends the righteous Judge's ear.

    To walk as children of the day,
      To mark the precepts' holy light,
    To wage the warfare, watch, and pray,
      Show who are pleasing in his sight.

    Not words alone it cost the Lord,
      To purchase pardon for his own;
    Nor will a soul, by grace restored,
      Return the Saviour words alone.

    With golden bells, the priestly vest,
      And rich pomegranates border'd round,[911]
    The need of holiness express'd,
      And call'd for fruit, as well as sound.

    Easy, indeed, it were to reach
      A mansion in the courts above,
    If swelling words and fluent speech
      Might serve, instead of faith and love.

    But none shall gain the blissful place,
      Or God's unclouded glory see,
    Who talks of free and sovereign grace,
      Unless that grace has made him free!

  [911] Exod. xxviii. 33.


LX. ABUSE OF THE GOSPEL.

    Too many, Lord, abuse thy grace,
      In this licentious day;
    And while they boast they see thy face,
      They turn their own away.

    Thy book displays a gracious light
      That can the blind restore;
    But these are dazzled by the sight,
      And blinded still the more.

    The pardon, such presume upon,
      They do not beg, but steal;
    And when they plead it at thy throne,
      Oh! where's the Spirit's seal?

    Was it for this, ye lawless tribe,
      The dear Redeemer bled?
    Is this the grace the saints imbibe
      From Christ the living head?

    Ah, Lord, we know thy chosen few
      Are fed with heavenly fare;
    But these, the wretched husks they chew
      Proclaim them what they are.

    The liberty our hearts implore
      Is not to live in sin;
    But still to wait at wisdom's door,
      Till mercy calls us in.


LXI. THE NARROW WAY.

    What thousands never knew the road!
      What thousands hate it when 'tis known!
    None but the chosen tribes of God
      Will seek or choose it for their own.

    A thousand ways in ruin end,
      One, only, leads to joys on high;
    By that my willing steps ascend,
      Pleased with a journey to the sky.

    No more I ask, or hope to find,
      Delight or happiness below;
    Sorrow may well possess the mind
      That feeds where thorns and thistles grow.

    The joy that fades is not for me,
      I seek immortal joys above;
    There glory without end shall be
      The bright reward of faith and love.

    Cleave to the world, ye sordid worms,
      Contented lick your native dust,
    But God shall fight with all his storms
      Against the idol of your trust.


LXII. DEPENDENCE.

      To keep the lamp alive,
      With oil we fill the bowl;
    'Tis water makes the willow thrive,
      And grace that feeds the soul.

      The Lord's unsparing hand
      Supplies the living stream;
    It is not at our own command,
      But still derived from him.

      Beware of Peter's word,[912]
      Nor confidently say,
    "I never will deny thee, Lord,"
      But, "Grant I never may!"

      Man's wisdom is to seek
      His strength in God alone;
    And e'en an angel would be weak,
      Who trusted in his own.

      Retreat beneath his wings,
      And in his grace confide;
    This more exalts the King of kings[913]
      Than all your works beside.

      In Jesus is our store,
      Grace issues from his throne;
    Whoever says, "I want no more,"
      Confesses he has none.

  [912] Matthew xxvi. 33.

  [913] John vi. 29.


LXIII. NOT OF WORKS.

    Grace, triumphant in the throne,
    Scorns a rival, reigns alone;
    Come and bow beneath her sway,
    Cast your idol works away.
    Works of man, when made his plea,
    Never shall accepted be;
    Fruits of pride (vain-glorious worm!)
    Are the best he can perform.

    Self, the god his soul adores,
    Influences all his powers;
    Jesus is a slighted name,
    Self-advancement all his aim:
    But when God the Judge shall come,
    To pronounce the final doom,
    Then for rocks and hills to hide
    All his works and all his pride!

    Still the boasting heart replies,
    What! the worthy and the wise,
    Friends to temperance and peace,
    Have not these a righteousness?
    Banish every vain pretence
    Built on human excellence;
    Perish every thing in man,
    But the grace that never can.


LXIV. PRAISE FOR FAITH.

    Of all the gifts thine hand bestows,
      Thou Giver of all good!
    Not heaven itself a richer knows
      Than my Redeemer's blood.

    Faith too, the blood-receiving grace,
      From the same hand we gain;
    Else, sweetly as it suits our case,
      That gift had been in vain.

    Till thou thy teaching power apply,
      Our hearts refuse to see,
    And weak, as a distemper'd eye,
      Shut out the view of thee.

    Blind to the merits of thy Son,
      What misery we endure!
    Yet fly that hand from which alone
      We could expect a cure.

    We praise thee, and would praise thee more,
      To thee our all we owe;
    The precious Saviour, and the power
      That makes him precious too.


LXV. GRACE AND PROVIDENCE.

    Almighty King! whose wondrous hand
    Supports the weight of sea and land,
    Whose grace is such a boundless store,
    No heart shall break that sighs for more.

    Thy providence supplies my food,
    And 'tis thy blessing makes it good;
    My soul is nourish'd by thy word,
    Let soul and body praise the Lord.

    My streams of outward comfort came
    From him who built this earthly frame;
    Whate'er I want his bounty gives,
    By whom my soul for ever lives.

    Either his hand preserves from pain,
    Or, if I feel it, heals again;
    From Satan's malice shields my breast,
    Or overrules it for the best.

    Forgive the song that falls so low
    Beneath the gratitude I owe!
    It means thy praise, however poor,
    An angel's song can do no more.


LXVI. I WILL PRAISE THE LORD AT ALL TIMES.

    Winter has a joy for me,
      While the Saviour's charms I read,
    Lowly, meek, from blemish free,
      In the snowdrop's pensive head.

    Spring returns, and brings along
      Life-invigorating suns:
    Hark! the turtle's plaintive song
      Seems to speak his dying groans!

    Summer has a thousand charms,
      All expressive of his worth;
    'Tis his sun that lights and warms,
      His the air that cools the earth.

    What! has Autumn left to say
      Nothing of a Saviour's grace?
    Yes, the beams of milder day
      Tell me of his smiling face.

    Light appears with early dawn,
      While the sun makes haste to rise;
    See his bleeding beauties drawn
      On the blushes of the skies.

    Evening with a silent pace,
      Slowly moving in the west,
    Shows an emblem of his grace,
      Points to an eternal rest.


LXVII. LONGING TO BE WITH CHRIST.

    To Jesus, the Crown of my hope,
      My soul is in haste to be gone:
    O bear me, ye cherubim, up,
      And waft me away to his throne!

    My Saviour, whom absent I love,
      Whom, not having seen, I adore;
    Whose name is exalted above
      All glory, dominion, and power;

    Dissolve thou these bonds, that detain
      My soul from her portion in thee;
    Ah! strike off this adamant chain
      And make me eternally free.

    When that happy era begins,
      When array'd in thy glories I shine,
    Nor grieve any more, by my sins,
      The bosom on which I recline:

    O then shall the veil be remov'd,
      And round me thy brightness be pour'd;
    I shall meet him whom absent I lov'd,
      I shall see whom unseen I ador'd.

    And then, never more shall the fears,
      The trials, temptations, and woes,
    Which darken this valley of tears,
      Intrude on my blissful repose.

    Or, if yet remember'd above,
      Remembrance no sadness shall raise;
    They will be but new signs of thy love,
      New themes for my wonder and praise.

    Thus the strokes which from sin and from pain
      Shall set me eternally free,
    Will but strengthen and rivet the chain,
      Which binds me, my Saviour, to thee.


LXVIII. LIGHT SHINING OUT OF DARKNESS.

    God moves in a mysterious way
      His wonders to perform;
    He plants his footsteps in the sea,
      And rides upon the storm.

    Deep in unfathomable mines
      Of never-failing skill,
    He treasures up his bright designs,
      And works his sovereign will.

    Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take,
      The clouds ye so much dread
    Are big with mercy, and shall break
      In blessings on your head.

    Judge not the Lord by feeble sense,
      But trust him for his grace:
    Behind a frowning providence
      He hides a smiling face.

    His purposes will ripen fast,
      Unfolding every hour;
    The bud may have a bitter taste,
      But sweet will be the flower.

    Blind unbelief is sure to err,[914]
      And scan his work in vain:
    God is his own interpreter,
      And he will make it plain.

  [914] John xiii. 7.




BRIEF ACCOUNT OF MADAME GUION,

AND OF

THE MYSTIC WRITERS.


The mystic writers, though the object of so much public attention
in France, towards the close of the seventeenth century, have never
attracted much notice in this country, and are known rather as a
matter of historical fact than of personal interest. It is to Cowper
that we are indebted for the translation of the Hymns of Madame
Guion, the founder, or rather reviver, of the Mystics; for it is
evident from ecclesiastical history that they existed so early as
in the third and fourth centuries, and that the habits of profound
contemplation and retirement from the world, in which they indulged,
led to the monastic seclusion of which St. Anthony was the most
eminent example. Dionysius the Areopagite is, however, generally
considered to be the founder of this sect in the fourth century.
Macarius and Hilarion are also included among its supporters. The
celebrated Thomas à Kempis, in the fifteenth century, adopted a kind
of purified mysticism. Molino, a Spanish priest, though resident
at Rome, still further extended these views; till at length Madame
Guion, in the reign of Louis XIV. embodied them in their present
form, which is known in France under the name of Quietism, from
the calm repose and indifference to external objects which is
characteristic of these principles.

The Mystics professed to elevate the soul above all sensible and
terrestrial objects, and to unite it to the Deity in an ineffable
manner; to inculcate a pure and absolutely disinterested love of
God, for his own sake, and on account of his adorable perfections;
to maintain a close and intimate communion with him by mortifying
all the senses, by a profound submission to his will, even under the
consciousness of perdition, and by an internal sanctity of heart,
strengthened by a holy and sublime contemplation. We shall shortly
examine this system, and inquire how far this indifference to
salvation, from a supposed conformity to the will of God, is founded
either on reason or Scripture; and whether the pure love of God,
independent of his love to us, and of our personal interest in the
blessings of redemption, is a state of mind to be generally attained.

But we shall first advert to the manner in which Madame Guoion was
led to embrace these views, and illustrate them by a reference to
her own writings. After endeavouring, by unceasing efforts, and
many acts of external piety, to raise her mind to a high tone of
religious perfection, without being able to attain it, she meets
with an ecclesiastic of the order of St. Francis, and requests him
to explain the cause of this failure. His reply, and the remarkable
consequences by which it was followed, is thus recorded by herself
in the narrative of her own life. "_It is, madam, because you seek
WITHOUT what you have WITHIN. Accustom yourself to seek God in your
heart, and you will there find him._"

"Having said these words, he left me. They were to me like the
stroke of a dart, which penetrated through my heart. I felt at this
instant a very deep wound, a wound so delightful that I desired
not to be cured. These words brought into my heart what I had been
seeking so many years; or rather, they discovered to me what was
there, and which I had not enjoyed for want of knowing it. Oh my
Lord! thou wast in my heart, and demandedst only a simple turning
of my mind inward, to make me perceive thy presence. Oh infinite
Goodness! How was I running hither and thither to seek thee; my life
was a burden to me, though my happiness was in myself. I was poor in
the midst of riches, and ready to perish with hunger, near a table
plentifully spread, and a continual feast. Oh Beauty, ancient and
new! Why have I known thee so late! Alas! I sought thee where thou
wast not, and did not seek thee where thou wast. It was for want of
understanding these words of thy gospel, 'The kingdom of God cometh
not with observation: neither shall they say, Lo here, or Lo there.
For behold the kingdom of God is within you.' This I experienced;
for thou becamest my king, and my heart thy kingdom, wherein thou
didst reign supreme, and perform all thy sacred will."

Hours, she observes, now passed away like moments, and she could
hardly do any thing else but pray. She enters at the same time upon
a strict course of penances, deprives herself of the most innocent
indulgences, and succeeds so far that she could scarcely prefer one
thing to another. Her senses are severely mortified, and kept under
uniform restraint. She aims at nothing less than the death of the
senses, and the utter extinction of self. "It is only by a total
death to self," she remarks, "that we can be lost in God."

At length these continual efforts become painful to her, and she
is far from realizing either inward peace or the grace of true
holiness. In describing her state of mind, she observes:

"I began to experience an insupportable weight, in that very piety
which had formerly been so easy and delightful to me; not that I did
not love it extremely, but I found myself defective in that noble
practice of it to which I aspired. The more I loved it, the more
I laboured to acquire what I saw I failed in. But alas! I seemed
continually to be overcome by that which was contrary to it. My
heart, indeed, was detached from all sensual pleasures. For these
several years past it has seemed to me that my mind is so detached
and absent from the body, that I do things as if I did them not.
If I eat or refresh myself, it is done with such an absence, or
separation, as I wonder at, and with an entire mortification of the
keenness of sensation in all the natural functions."

In addition to this dissatisfaction with herself, it is her lot
to be married to a man who is strongly opposed to her views and
principles. Her domestic trials aggravate her wretchedness, and she
enjoys peace neither in herself, in others, nor in God.

"I could now no longer pray as formerly. Heaven seemed shut to me,
and I thought justly too. I could get no consolation, nor make any
complaint thereupon; nor had I any creature on earth to apply to,
or to whom I might impart my condition. I found myself banished
from all beings, without finding a support or refuge in any thing.
I could no more practise any virtue with facility. Such as had
formerly been familiar to me seemed now to have left me. 'Alas!'
said I, 'is it possible that this heart, formerly all on fire,
should now become like ice?' Laden with a weight of past sins, and
a multitude of new ones, I could not think God would ever pardon
me, but looked on myself as a victim of hell. Whatever I tried
for a remedy, seemed only to increase the malady. I may say that
tears were my drink, and sorrow my food. I had within myself an
executioner who tortured me without respite."

We believe the case of Madame Guion to be by no means singular. Many
aim at high attainments in religion, with the utmost sincerity of
intention, but, being ignorant of the true way of peace, to which
a more scriptural view would infallibly lead them, they load the
conscience with heavy burdens, till it sinks under the weight of
the oppression. Peace of mind is not to be found in self-inflicted
austerities, in overstrained efforts, nor even in the way of
internal holiness. This is seeking the living among the dead. We
first find God, not by what we try to do for ourselves, but in a
firm reliance on what Christ the Lord has done for us. "He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities;
the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we
are healed." This is the only true ground of acceptance. This is the
foundation laid in Zion. "He is our peace." Holiness follows, but
does not go before; it is the effect, but not the cause. Mysticism
inverts the order, and seems to give more honour to the sanctifying
Spirit, than to a crucified Saviour and Redeemer.

However specious, therefore, the counsel given by the priest might
seem to be, and powerfully as she was impressed by it for a season,
yet it failed in imparting the whole truth. He led her to derive
peace from contemplating Christ _within_; but true peace can flow
only from contemplating Christ _without_. The "water" and the
"blood" are emblematical of a _double_ operation. Each is necessary,
Christ in the heart for sanctification, Christ on the cross for
justification and pardon of sin. To neglect the latter, and to fix
our inmost thoughts on the former only, what is it but to make a
Saviour of sanctification, and to render the cross of none effect?

In the midst of her internal disquietude, the husband of Madame
Guion dies. "At last," she writes, "after having passed twelve years
and four months in the crosses of marriage, as great as possible,
except poverty, which I never knew, though I had much desired it,
God drew me out of that state to give me still stronger crosses to
bear, and of such a nature as I had never met with before."

Her life from this period was a continual scene of trials and
persecutions, to which her views and principles uniformly exposed
her.

Relieved now from all external restraint, this devoted woman
dedicates herself to the Lord by a solemn surrender, which she calls
a marriage contract, and engages to live wholly to him and to his
glory for the remainder of her days.

Her state of mind, and the joy and happiness which it led to, are
thus expressed.

"At this time I found that I had the _perfect chastity_ of love
to God, mine being without any reserve, division, or view of
interest;--_perfect poverty_, by the total privation of every thing
that was mine both inwardly and outwardly;--_perfect obedience to
the will_ of God, _submission to the church_, _and honour to_ Jesus
Christ in loving himself only."

"The joy which such a soul possesses in its God is so great, that
it experiences the truth of those words of the royal prophet, 'All
they who are in thee, O Lord, are like persons ravished with
joy.' To such a soul the words of our Lord seem to be addressed,
'Your joy no man shall take from you.' John xvi. 22. It is as it
were plunged in a river of peace: its prayer is continual: nothing
can hinder it from praying to God, or from loving him. It amply
verifies these words in the Canticles, 'I sleep, but my heart
waketh;' for it finds that even sleep itself does not hinder it from
praying. Oh, unutterable happiness! Who could ever have thought
that a soul, which seemed to be in the utmost misery, should ever
find a happiness equal to this? Oh happy _poverty_, happy _loss_,
happy _nothingness_, which gives no less than God himself in his
own immensity, no more circumscribed to the limited manner of the
creature, but always drawing it out of that to plunge it wholly into
his own divine essence.

"What then renders this soul so perfectly content? It neither knows,
nor wants to know any thing but what God calls it to. Herein it
enjoys divine content, after a manner vast, immense, independent
of exterior events; more satisfied in its humiliation, and in the
opposition of all creatures, by the order of Providence, than on the
throne of its own choice.

"It is here that the apostolic life begins. But is every one called
to that state? Very few, indeed, as far as I can comprehend; and of
the few that are called to it fewer still walk in true purity."

This entire surrender of the soul to God, or self-abandonment, she
thus describes.

"Abandonment is a matter of the greatest importance in our process;
it is the key to the inner court; so that whosoever knoweth truly
how to abandon himself, soon becomes perfect. We must, therefore,
continue stedfast and immoveable therein, nor listen to the voice
of natural reason. Great faith produces great abandonment; we must
confide in God, 'hoping against hope.' (Rom. iv. 18.)

"Abandonment is the casting off all selfish care, that we may be
altogether at the Divine disposal. All Christians are exhorted to
this resignation; for it is said to all, 'Take no thought, saying,
What shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or, wherewithal shall we
be clothed? for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of
all these things.' (Matt. vi. 31, 32.) 'In all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy paths.' (Prov. iii. 6.) 'Commit thy
ways unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established.' (Prov.
xvi. 3.) 'Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he
shall bring it to pass.' (Psalm xxxvii. 5.)

"Our abandonment then should be as fully applied to external as
internal things, giving up all our concerns into the hands of God,
forgetting ourselves, and thinking only of him; by which the heart
will remain always disengaged, free, and at peace. It is practised
by continually losing our own will in the will of God; by renouncing
every particular inclination as soon as it arises, however good
it may appear, that we may stand in indifference with respect to
ourselves, and only will that which God from eternity had willed;
by being resigned in all things, whether for soul or body, whether
for time or eternity; by leaving what is past in oblivion, what is
to come to Providence, and devoting the present moment to God, which
brings with itself God's eternal order, and it is as infallible a
declaration to us of his will, as it is inevitable and common to
all; by attributing nothing that befalls us to the creature, but
regarding all things in God, and looking upon all, excepting only
our sins, as infallibly proceeding from him. Surrender yourselves,
then, to be led and disposed of just as God pleaseth, with respect
both to your outward and inward state."

There is also another term, of frequent occurrence in Madame Guion's
writings, called _the annihilation of the powers or senses_,
(anéantissement des puissances,) by which she means that all the
senses and passions are to be completely mortified and suppressed,
in order that the soul, freed from the heavy incumbrance, may aspire
to full and unrestrained communion with God.

Such is the outline of mysticism, which we have endeavoured to
illustrate in her own words. Indiscriminate censure would be no less
opposed to the real truth than indiscriminate praise.

The proselytes made to this doctrine in France were numerous,
consisting of names distinguished by their piety and rank. Among
these, she had the honour of including the great Fénélon, who,
though he had too much taste and judgment to adopt the extremes of
her system, listened with delight when she descanted before him, at
the Hôtel de Beauvilliers, on the pure and disinterested love of
God.[915]

  [915] Life of Fénélon.

It was in vain that the celebrated Bishop of Meaux[916] exposed her
doctrines with all the powers of his wit, aided by the splendour of
his eloquence. Her persecutions awakened new interest. She was sent
to the castle of Vincennes, as if she had been a prisoner of state.

  [916] Bossuet.

There she employed her lonely hours in pouring out the effusions
of her heart, in hymns expressive of her love to God, and of the
fervour of her devotion. Some of these compositions, written under
circumstances so interesting, we shall present to the reader. They
are indebted for their English dress to the poet Cowper, and to the
suggestion of the Rev. Mr. Bull of Newport Pagnell, who conceived
that the spirit which they breathe could not fail to be congenial to
a mind like his.

We shall now venture to offer a few remarks on this system.

What we admire in Madame Guion is, the purity of her heart, its
incessant aspirations after holiness, its secret and close communion
with God. These are qualifications in which there is reason to
believe that the great bulk of professing Christians are greatly
deficient. Religion, even among reflecting minds, partakes more
of a philosophical than a spiritual character. The fire is in the
intellect, the ice is in the heart. In the social circle, the essay,
or review, how often is spiritual religion branded with the title of
enthusiasm, and the wings of devotion clipped, lest she should soar
with too lofty an elevation, and pass beyond the limits which a cold
and calculating policy would prescribe.

Among others again, who are the professed followers of Christ, how
far do all fall short in the sublime and devotional feeling of
love to God! The higher attainments of Christian piety, the inward
fervency of spirit, and the entire surrender of the soul, are not
sufficiently realized. Men do not rise to the elevation of Bible
Christianity. Religion is considered too much in the light of a
struggle and a warfare, and too little as a state of inward repose
and joy unspeakable and full of glory.

It is in this respect that we think the devotional spirit of Madame
Guion may be contemplated with profit, if by a wise discrimination
we can adopt what is excellent, and reject what is overstrained,
legal, and visionary.

There is, however, a familiarity in her addresses to the Deity
incompatible with the reverence due to a sense of his majesty and
greatness. In exposing this objectionable part of her writings,
Bossuet beautifully apostrophizes the seraphs, and entreats them to
bring burning coals from the altar to purify his lips, lest they
should have been defiled by the impurities which he had been obliged
to record.[917]

  [917] See Butler's Life of Fenelon.

With respect to the distinguishing feature of mysticism, the pure
and disinterested love of God, for his own sake, and without any
consideration of _self_, that the mind may, at particular seasons,
rise to this degree of holy contemplation, we believe to be
possible; but we are persuaded that such a state of feeling cannot
be habitually sustained, and that it is beyond the general standard
and capacities of human nature. God's love to us is recorded in
the Scripture as the foundation of our love to him:--"We love him,
because he first loved us." Even glorified spirits, whose devotion
we may justly suppose to have attained its highest degree of
perfection, are represented as making their own salvation the theme
of adoring gratitude and praise. "For thou hast redeemed us to God
by thy blood, and hast made us unto our God kings and priests."
Besides, it is in the great work of redemption that the divine
attributes are so gloriously displayed; that the most affecting
appeals are made to our fears and hopes; and the most animating
motives held forth for our obedience. Man's personal interest is
therefore so interwoven with the display of the divine perfections,
that the former can never be excluded without obscuring the glory of
the very attributes which mysticism requires us to adore.

Again, the doctrine of the Mystics proposes the utter suppression of
the passions of hope and fear; the annihilation, as it is called, of
all our natural feelings, and an entire abstraction from the world.

The annihilation of our natural feelings, that the heart may be
wholly filled with the love and contemplation of the Deity, is
not possible, nor, if it were possible, would it be desirable, as
we should cease, in that case, to be men, without acquiring the
nature of angels. It is not the suppression, but the due control
and consecration of our feelings to the purest ends that the Bible
proposes; not the exclusion of what is human, but the admixture of
what is divine. The apostles, though gifted with the Holy Ghost from
heaven, were still "men of like passions with ourselves," and the
Saviour who was transfigured on Mount Tabor, thirsted at the well of
Sychar, and wept at the grave of Lazarus.

Nor is it abstraction from the world, but from its spirit, that
the Bible enjoins as a duty on the Christian. "Let us open this
wonderful book," observes an elegant writer, "where we may, we
meet no mystical abstraction. We feel _our whole mind_ to be
addressed at once; no faculty, active or passive, being left
without its provision. Human nature is every where made to furnish
the machinery, which may work most effectually on itself. To
withdraw the mind from sensible ideas while reading the Bible,
is absolutely impossible. It places real life before us, in all
its most interesting and most impressive forms; and obliges us to
converse with 'men of like passions with ourselves,' even while it
is teaching us the way of God most perfectly.

"Instead of abstracting us from the world, it makes it a school of
wisdom to us; and teaches us, by example as well as precept, to
proceed in making it so daily to ourselves. We discover that while
it is the scene of the devil's temptations, it is also the scene
of God's providence; and that, as on the former account we must be
ever vigilant against its seductions, so, on the latter account,
we cannot but be deeply interested in its various movements, past,
present, and future. To be regardless of these would be to overlook
the volume of prophecy, as well as that kingdom of the Messiah
upon earth, of whose gradual advancement the prophetic oracles
chiefly treat, and in whose final triumph all their brightest
rays concentre. It is not, therefore, a mystical escape from the
world to which the Christian is called. His vocation is much more
glorious; he is to keep himself 'unspotted from the world;' but
he is to remain in it, that he may maintain, as far as in him
lies, his Lord's right to it, and promote his interest in it. He
is taught this by the Redeemer's last prayer for his followers:
'I pray _not_ that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but
that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.' And he is still more
fully instructed by our Lord's own example; who made every walk of
human life the scene of his beneficence, and turned every object
and occurrence into a means of the most interesting and deepest
instruction."[918]

  [918] See "Remains of Alexander Knox, Esq." vol. i. pp. 303, 304.

There is one more feature in mysticism entitled to be considered,
because it was subsequently adopted by Fenelon, viz. the possibility
of the soul acquiescing in its own destruction, if such were the
will of God, from a profound submission to his will and a desire
to promote his glory. But this supposition involves a manifest
absurdity, because a profound submission to the will of God
is a gracious principle, and how can the soul, which is under
gracious impressions, ever be the object of perdition, or God be
glorified in its destruction? The case of Moses, who prayed to be
blotted out of the book which God had written, if the Israelites
might be spared,[919] or that of St. Paul, who wished that he
might be accursed, for the sake of his brethren, according to
the flesh,[920]--these passages might be quoted; but they are to
be considered as referring to the present and not to the future
life, in reference to the latter of which they would be obviously
repugnant to the justice and goodness of God.

  [919] Exodus xxxii. 32.

  [920] Scott and Henry both agree in this interpretation, viz. a
  willingness to be treated as an Anathema, and to be cut off from
  all church communion and privileges, but not to be eternally lost.

It is evident from what has been said, that the religious views of
Madame Guion, excellent as they were in their principle, in so far
as they inculcated the supreme love of God, profound submission
to his will, the calm retirement of the soul, and deadness to the
spirit of the world, were nevertheless too overstrained to be suited
to the character and constitution of human nature. Wesley translated
her life, and observes, "Such another Life as that of Madam Guion,
I doubt whether the world ever saw. It contains an abundance of
excellent things, uncommonly excellent; several things which are
utterly false and unscriptural; nay, such as are dangerously false.
As to Madam Guion herself, I believe she was not only a good woman,
but good in an eminent degree; deeply devoted to God, and often
favoured with uncommon communications of his Spirit."

The persecutions in which she was thus involved were unremitting and
painful. Her doctrines underwent a solemn inquiry at Issy, before
three commissioners appointed by Louis XIV. for that purpose: viz.
the Bishop of Meaux, the Bishop of Chartres, (afterwards Cardinal de
Noailles,) and M. Tronson, the Superior of the congregation of St.
Sulpice. After a discussion which lasted six months, her writings
received a formal condemnation, in which Fenelon refused to concur.
By this apparent sanction of her principles, and still more by his
celebrated "Maxims of the Saints," in which he incorporated the
more spiritual part of her system, he exposed himself to a series
of painful reverses. He was banished the court by Louis XIV., who
probably never read his book, nor comprehended his principles, but
who never forgave the author of Telemachus. By the same authority
he was removed from the office of preceptor to the Dukes of
Burgundy, Anjou, and Berri; and commanded to retire to Cambray,
which he embellished with his exalted virtues. But a further scene
of humiliation awaited him. His powerful opponent, the celebrated
Bossuet, not content with attacking his writings, endeavoured to
procure their condemnation at the court of Rome, which led to a
_bon-mot_ of the Pope, that "Fenelon was in fault for too great
love to God, and his enemies equally in fault for too little love
of their neighbour." The Brief was at length obtained, though not
without considerable delay and reluctance. Fenelon received this act
of censure with calm serenity, and in obedience to papal authority,
ascended his pulpit at Cambray with his Maxims in one hand and the
Brief in the other. He then read the condemnation of his own book,
amidst the tears and admiration of his congregation; thus evincing
a magnanimity which rendered him greater in his defeat than his
enemies appeared in their triumph.

Madame Guion spent ten years in prison, during which she composed
many hymns, with poems on various spiritual subjects, filling
no less than five octavo volumes. Speaking of the period of her
imprisonment at Vincennes, she observes, "I passed my time in great
peace, content to spend the rest of my life there, if such were
the will of God. I sang songs of joy, which the maid who served
me learned by heart, as fast as I made them: and we sang together
thy praises, O my God! The stones of my prison looked in my eyes
like rubies. I esteemed them more than all the gaudy brilliancies
of a vain world." We cannot state this fact without doing homage to
the virtues of Madame Guion. The piety that could convert a prison
into a sanctuary, and transform sufferings into an occasion for
joy and thanksgiving, must have been elevated and sincere, however
mingled with enthusiasm. Her doctrine of profound submission, under
circumstances the most adverse, was no speculative thesis; it was
evidently carried into the life and practice.

Who is not reminded by this act of what is recorded in the
apostolical times? "And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and
sang praises unto God." The rigour of her persecutions, in our
opinion, conveys a strong censure against her zealous but misguided
opponents. But the case is by no means solitary. The world is always
indulgent to the errors of our practice, but severe to the errors
of our creed. True policy and humanity would have suggested a
different course. Extravagances, when left to themselves, generally
work their own cure; but, when visited with persecution, acquire
dignity and importance, and never fail to awaken sympathy for the
sufferers.

After her long imprisonment, Madam Guion lived a retired life for
more than seven years at Blois, where she died June 9, 1717, in
the seventieth year of her age, celebrated for her misfortunes and
devotion, though her principles, which once convulsed France, and
awakened the thunders of the Vatican, are now nearly forgotten.

The following selection from her poems, executed by Cowper, is
highly devotional, and may be read with interest and edification. It
exhibits a happy specimen of her religious views in their best form;
and Cowper has given to them the charms of versification, united
with a taste and discrimination that ensure their popularity. The
poem on the Nativity is a sublime and bold composition, and proves
that the piety which warms the heart, seldom fails to enlarge and
invigorate the faculties of the mind.




TRANSLATIONS

FROM

THE FRENCH OF MADAME DE LA MOTHE GUION.


THE NATIVITY.

    'Tis folly all--let me no more be told
    Of Parian porticos, and roofs of gold;
    Delightful views of nature, dress'd by art,
    Enchant no longer this indifferent heart;
    The Lord of all things, in his humble birth,
    Makes mean the proud magnificence of earth;
    The straw, the manger, and the mouldering wall,
    Eclipse its lustre; and I scorn it all.
      Canals, and fountains, and delicious vales,
    Green slopes and plains, whose plenty never fails;
    Deep-rooted groves, whose heads sublimely rise,
    Earth-born, and yet ambitious of the skies;
    The abundant foliage of whose gloomy shades,
    Vainly the sun in all its power invades;
    Where warbled airs of sprightly birds resound,
    Whose verdure lives while Winter scowls around;
    Rocks, lofty mountains, caverns dark and deep,
    And torrents raving down the rugged steep;
    Smooth downs, whose fragrant herbs the spirits cheer;
    Meads crown'd with flowers; streams musical and clear.
    Whose silver waters, and whose murmurs, join
    Their artless charms, to make the scene divine;
    The fruitful vineyard, and the furrow'd plain,
    That seems a rolling sea of golden grain:
    All, all have lost the charms they once possess'd;
    An infant God reigns sovereign in my breast;
    From Bethlehem's bosom I no more will rove;
    There dwells the Saviour, and there rests my love.
      Ye mightier rivers, that, with sounding force,
    Urge down the valleys your impetuous course!
    Winds, clouds, and lightnings! and, ye waves, whose heads,
    Curl'd into monstrous forms, the seaman dreads!
    Horrid abyss, where all experience fails,
    Spread with the wreck of planks and shatter'd sails;
    On whose broad back grim Death triumphant rides,
    While havoc floats on all thy swelling tides,
    Thy shores a scene of ruin strew'd around
    With vessels bulged, and bodies of the drown'd!
      Ye fish, that sport beneath the boundless waves,
    And rest, secure from man, in rocky caves;
    Swift-darting sharks, and whales of hideous size,
    Whom all the aquatic world with terror eyes!
    Had I but faith immoveable and true,
    I might defy the fiercest storm, like you:
    The world, a more disturb'd and boisterous sea,
    When Jesus shows a smile, affrights not me;
    He hides me, and in vain the billows roar,
    Break harmless at my feet, and leave the shore.
      Thou azure vault where, through the gloom of night,
    Thick sown, we see such countless worlds of light!
    Thou moon, whose car, encompassing the skies,
    Restores lost nature to our wondering eyes;
    Again retiring, when the brighter sun
    Begins the course he seems in haste to run!
    Behold him where he shines! His rapid rays,
    Themselves unmeasured, measure all our days;
    Nothing impedes the race he would pursue,
    Nothing escapes his penetrating view,
    A thousand lands confess his quickening heat,
    And all he cheers are fruitful, fair, and sweet.
      Far from enjoying what these scenes disclose,
    I feel the thorn, alas! but miss the rose:
    Too well I know this aching heart requires
    More solid gold to fill its vast desires;
    In vain they represent his matchless might,
    Who call'd them out of deep primeval night;
    Their form and beauty but augment my woe,
    I seek the Giver of those charms they show:
    Nor, Him beside, throughout the world he made,
    Lives there in whom I trust for cure or aid.
      Infinite God, thou great unrivall'd One!
    Whose glory makes a blot of yonder sun;
    Compar'd with thine, how dim his beauty seems,
    How quench'd the radiance of his golden beams!
    Thou art my bliss, the light by which I move;
    In thee alone dwells all that I can love.
    All darkness flies when thou art pleased to appear,
    A sudden spring renews the fading year;
    Where'er I turn I see thy power and grace
    The watchful guardians of our heedless race;
    Thy various creatures in one strain agree,
    All, in all times and places, speak of thee;
    E'en I, with trembling heart and stammering tongue,
    Attempt thy praise, and join the general song.
      Almighty Former of this wondrous plan,
    Faintly reflected in thine image, man--
    Holy and just--the greatness of whose name
    Fills and supports this universal frame,
    Diffused throughout the infinitude of space,
    Who art thyself thine own vast dwelling place;
    Soul of our soul, whom yet no sense of ours
    Discerns, eluding our most active powers;
    Encircling shades attend thine awful throne,
    That veil thy face, and keep thee still unknown;
    Unknown, though dwelling in our inmost part,
    Lord of the thoughts, and Sovereign of the heart!
      Repeat the charming truth that never tires,
    No God is like the God my soul desires;
    He at whose voice heaven trembles, even He,
    Great as he is, knows how to stoop to me--
    Lo! there he lies--that smiling infant said,
    "Heaven, earth, and sea, exist!"--and they obey'd.
    E'en he, whose being swells beyond the skies,
    Is born of woman, lives, and mourns, and dies;
    Eternal and immortal, seems to cast
    That glory from his brows, and breathes his last.
    Trivial and vain the works that man has wrought,
    How do they shrink and vanish at the thought!
      Sweet solitude, and scene of my repose!
    This rustic sight assuages all my woes--
    That crib contains the Lord, whom I adore;
    And earth's a shade that I pursue no more.
    He is my firm support, my rock, my tower,
    I dwell secure beneath his sheltering power,
    And hold this mean retreat for ever dear,
    For all I love, my soul's delight is here.
    I see the Almighty swathed in infant bands,
    Tied helpless down the thunder-bearer's hands!
    And, in this shed, that mystery discern,
    Which faith and love, and they alone, can learn.
      Ye tempests, spare the slumbers of your Lord!
    Ye zephyrs, all your whisper'd sweets afford!
    Confess the God, that guides the rolling year;
    Heaven, do him homage; and thou, earth, revere!
    Ye shepherds, monarchs, sages, hither bring
    Your hearts an offering, and adore your King!
    Pure be those hearts, and rich in faith and love;
    Join, in his praise, the harmonious world above;
    To Bethlehem haste, rejoice in his repose,
    And praise him there for all that he bestows!
      Man, busy man, alas! can ill afford
    To obey the summons, and attend the Lord;
    Perverted reason revels and runs wild,
    By glittering shows of pomp and wealth beguiled;
    And, blind to genuine excellence and grace,
    Finds not her author in so mean a place.
    Ye unbelieving! learn a wiser part,
    Distrust your erring sense, and search your heart;
    There soon ye shall perceive a kindling flame
    Glow for that infant God, from whom it came;
    Resist not, quench not, that divine desire,
    Melt all your adamant in heavenly fire!
      Not so will I requite thee, gentle love!
    Yielding and soft this heart shall ever prove;
    And every heart beneath thy power should fall,
    Glad to submit, could mine contain them all.
    But I am poor, oblation I have none,
    None for a Saviour, but himself alone:
    Whate'er I render thee, from thee it came:
    And, if I give my body to the flame,
    My patience, love, and energy divine
    Of heart, and soul, and spirit, all are thine.
    Ah, vain attempt to expunge the mighty score!
    The more I pay, I owe thee still the more.
      Upon my meanness, poverty, and guilt,
    The trophy of thy glory shall be built;
    My self-disdain shall be the unshaken base,
    And my deformity its fairest grace;
    For destitute of good, and rich in ill,
    Must be my state and my description still.
      And do I grieve at such an humbling lot?
    Nay, but I cherish and enjoy the thought--
    Vain pageantry and pomp of earth, adieu!
    I have no wish, no memory for you;
    The more I feel my misery, I adore
    The sacred inmate of my soul the more;
    Rich in his love, I feel my noblest pride
    Spring from the sense of having nought beside.
      In Thee I find wealth, comfort, virtue, might;
    My wanderings prove thy wisdom infinite;
    All that I have I give thee; and then see
    All contrarieties unite in thee;
    For thou hast join'd them, taking up our woe,
    And pouring out thy bliss on worms below,
    By filling with thy grace and love divine
    A gulf of evil in this heart of mine.
    This is, indeed, to bid the valleys rise,
    And the hills sink--'tis matching earth and skies;
    I feel my weakness, thank thee, and deplore
    An aching heart, that throbs to thank thee more;
    The more I love thee, I the more reprove
    A soul so lifeless, and so slow to love;
    Till, on a deluge of thy mercy toss'd,
    I plunge into that sea, and there am lost.


GOD NEITHER KNOWN NOR LOVED BY THE WORLD.

    Ye linnets, let us try, beneath this grove,
    Which shall be loudest in our Maker's praise!
    In quest of some forlorn retreat I rove,
    For all the world is blind, and wanders from his ways.

    That God alone should prop the sinking soul.
    Fills them with rage against his empire now:
    I traverse earth in vain from pole to pole,
    To seek one simple heart, set free from all below.

    They speak of love, yet little feel its sway,
    While in their bosoms many an idol lurks;
    Their base desires, well satisfied, obey,
    Leave the Creator's hand, and lean upon his works.

    'Tis therefore I can dwell with man no more;
    Your fellowship, ye warblers! suits me best:
    Pure love has lost its price, though prized of yore,
    Profaned by modern tongues, and slighted as a jest.

    My God, who form'd you for his praise alone,
    Beholds his purpose well fulfill'd in you;
    Come, let us join the choir before his throne,
    Partaking in his praise with spirits just and true.

    Yes, I will always love; and, as I ought,
    Tune to the praise of love my ceaseless voice;
    Preferring love too vast for human thought,
    In spite of erring men, who cavil at my choice.

    Why have I not a thousand thousand hearts,
    Lord of my soul! that they might all be thine?
    If thou approve--the zeal thy smile imparts,
    How should it ever fail! can such a fire decline?

    Love, pure and holy, is a deathless fire;
    Its object heavenly, it must ever blaze:
    Eternal love a God must needs inspire,
    When once he wins the heart, and fits it for his praise.

    Self-love dismiss'd--'tis then we live indeed--
    In her embrace, death, only death is found:
    Come, then, one noble effort, and succeed,
    Cast off the chain of self with which thy soul is bound!

    Oh! I could cry, that all the world might hear,
    Ye self-tormentors, love your God alone;
    Let his unequall'd excellence be dear,
    Dear to your inmost souls, and make him all your own!

    They hear me not--alas! how fond to rove
    In endless chase of folly's specious lure!
    'Tis here alone, beneath this shady grove,
    I taste the sweets of truth--here only am secure.


THE SWALLOW.

    I am fond of the swallow--I learn from her flight,
    Had I skill to improve it, a lesson of love:
    How seldom on earth do we see her alight!
    She dwells in the skies, she is ever above.

    It is on the wing that she takes her repose,
    Suspended and poised in the regions of air,
    'Tis not in our fields that her sustenance grows,
    It is wing'd like herself, 'tis ethereal fare.

    She comes in the spring, all the summer she stays,
    And, dreading the cold, still follows the sun--
    So, true to our love, we should covet his rays,
    And the place where he shines not immediately shun.

    Our light should be love, and our nourishment prayer;
    It is dangerous food that we find upon earth;
    The fruit of this world is beset with a snare,
    In itself it is hurtful, as vile in its birth.

    'Tis rarely, if ever, she settles below,
    And only when building a nest for her young;
    Were it not for her brood, she would never bestow
    A thought upon any thing filthy as dung.

    Let us leave it ourselves, ('tis a mortal abode,)
    To bask every moment in infinite love;
    Let us fly the dark winter, and follow the road
    That leads to the dayspring appearing above.


THE TRIUMPH OF HEAVENLY LOVE DESIRED.

    Ah! reign, wherever man is found,
      My spouse, beloved and divine!
    Then I am rich, and I abound,
      When every human heart is thine.

    A thousand sorrows pierce my soul,
      To think that all are not thine own:
    Ah! be adored from pole to pole;
      Where is thy zeal? arise; be known!

    All hearts are cold, in every place,
      Yet earthly good with warmth pursue;
    Dissolve them with a flash of grace,
      Thaw these of ice, and give us new!


A FIGURATIVE DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE OF DIVINE LOVE

IN BRINGING A SOUL TO THE POINT OF SELF-RENUNCIATION AND ABSOLUTE
ACQUIESCENCE.

    'Twas my purpose, on a day,
    To embark, and sail away.
    As I climb'd the vessel's side,
    Love was sporting in the tide;
    "Come," he said,--"ascend--make haste,
    Launch into the boundless waste."

    Many mariners were there,
    Having each his separate care;
    They that row'd us held their eyes
    Fix'd upon the starry skies;
    Others steer'd, or turn'd the sails
    To receive the shifting gales.

    Love, with power divine supplied,
    Suddenly my courage tried;
    In a moment it was night,
    Ship and skies were out of sight;
    On the briny wave I lay,
    Floating rushes all my stay.

    Did I with resentment burn
    At this unexpected turn?
    Did I wish myself on shore,
    Never to forsake it more?
    No--"My soul," I cried, "be still;
    If I must be lost, I will."

    Next he hasten'd to convey
    Both my frail supports away;
    Seized my rushes; bade the waves
    Yawn into a thousand graves:
    Down I went, and sunk as lead,
    Ocean closing o'er my head.

    Still, however, life was safe;
    And I saw him turn and laugh:
    "Friend," he cried, "adieu! lie low,
    While the wintry storms shall blow;
    When the spring has calm'd the main,
    You shall rise and float again."

    Soon I saw him, with dismay,
    Spread his plumes, and soar away;
    Now I mark his rapid flight;
    Now he leaves my aching sight;
    He is gone whom I adore,
    'Tis in vain to seek him more.

    How I trembled then and fear'd,
    When my love had disappear'd!
    "Wilt thou leave me thus," I cried,
    "Whelm'd beneath the rolling tide?"
    Vain attempt to reach his ear!
    Love was gone, and would not hear.

    Ah! return, and love me still;
    See me subject to thy will;
    Frown with wrath, or smile with grace,
    Only let me see thy face!
    Evil I have none to fear,
    All is good, if thou art near.

    Yet he leaves me--cruel fate!
    Leaves me in my lost estate--
    Have I sinn'd? Oh say wherein;
    Tell me, and forgive my sin!
    King, and Lord, whom I adore,
    Shall I see thy face no more?

    Be not angry; I resign,
    Henceforth, all my will to thine:
    I consent that thou depart,
    Though thine absence breaks my heart;
    Go then, and for ever too:
    All is right that thou wilt do.

    This was just what Love intended,
    He was now no more offended;
    Soon as I became a child,
    Love return'd to me and smiled:
    Never strife shall more betide
    'Twixt the bridegroom and his bride.


A CHILD OF GOD LONGING TO SEE HIM BELOVED.

    There's not an echo round me,
      But I am glad should learn,
    How pure a fire has found me,
      The love with which I burn.

    For none attends with pleasure
      To what I would reveal;
    They slight me out of measure,
      And laugh at all I feel.

    The rocks receive less proudly
      The story of my flame;
    When I approach, they loudly
      Reverberate his name.
    I speak to them of sadness,
      And comforts at a stand;
    They bid me look for gladness,
      And better days at hand.

    Far from all habitation,
      I heard a happy sound;
    Big with the consolation,
      That I have often found.
    I said, "My lot is sorrow,
      My grief has no alloy;"
    The rocks replied--"To-morrow,
      To-morrow brings thee joy."

    These sweet and sacred tidings,
      What bliss it is to hear!
    For, spite of all my chidings,
      My weakness and my fear,
    No sooner I receive them,
      Than I forget my pain,
    And, happy to believe them,
      I love as much again.

    I fly to scenes romantic,
      Where never men resort;
    For in an age so frantic
      Impiety is sport.
    For riot and confusion
      They barter things above;
    Condemning, as delusion,
      The joy of perfect love.

    In this sequester'd corner,
      None hears what I express;
    Deliver'd from the scorner,
      What peace do I possess!
    Beneath the boughs reclining,
      Or roving o'er the wild,
    I live as undesigning
      And harmless as a child.

    No troubles here surprise me,
      I innocently play,
    While Providence supplies me,
      And guards me all the day:
    My dear and kind defender
      Preserves me safely here,
    From men of pomp and splendour,
      Who fill a child with fear.


ASPIRATIONS OF THE SOUL AFTER GOD.

    My Spouse! in whose presence I live,
      Sole object of all my desires,
    Who know'st what a flame I conceive,
      And canst easily double its fires!
    How pleasant is all that I meet!
      From fear of adversity free,
    I find even sorrow made sweet;
      Because 'tis assign'd me by thee.

    Transported I see thee display
      Thy riches and glory divine;
    I have only my life to repay,
      Take what I would gladly resign.
    Thy will is the treasure I seek,
      For thou art as faithful as strong;
    There let me, obedient and meek,
      Repose myself all the day long.

    My spirit and faculties fail;
      Oh finish what love has begun!
    Destroy what is sinful and frail,
      And dwell in the soul thou hast won!
    Dear theme of my wonder and praise,
      I cry, who is worthy as thou?
    I can only be silent and gaze!
      'Tis all that is left to me now.

    Oh glory in which I am lost,
      Too deep for the plummet of thought;
    On an ocean of Deity toss'd,
      I am swallow'd, I sink into nought.
    Yet, lost and absorb'd as I seem,
      I chant to the praise of my King;
    And, though overwhelm'd by the theme,
      Am happy whenever I sing.


GRATITUDE AND LOVE TO GOD.

    All are indebted much to thee,
      But I far more than all,
    From many a deadly snare set free,
      And raised from many a fall.
    Overwhelm me, from above,
    Daily, with thy boundless love.

    What bonds of gratitude I feel
      No language can declare;
    Beneath the oppressive weight I reel,
      'Tis more than I can bear:
    When shall I that blessing prove,
    To return thee love for love?

    Spirit of charity, dispense
      Thy grace to every heart;
    Expel all other spirits thence,
      Drive self from every part;
    Charity divine, draw nigh,
    Break the chains in which we lie!

    All selfish souls, whate'er they feign,
      Have still a slavish lot;
    They boast of liberty in vain,
      Of love, and feel it not.
    He whose bosom glows with thee,
    He, and he alone, is free.

    Oh blessedness, all bliss above,
      When thy pure fires prevail!
    Love only teaches what is love:
      All other lessons fail:
    We learn its name, but not its powers,
    Experience only makes it ours.


HAPPY SOLITUDE--UNHAPPY MEN.

    My heart is easy, and my burden light;
    I smile, though sad, when thou art in my sight:
    The more my woes in secret I deplore,
    I taste thy goodness, and I love thee more.

    There, while a solemn stillness reigns around,
    Faith, love, and hope within my soul abound;
    And, while the world suppose me lost in care,
    The joys of angels, unperceived, I share.

    Thy creatures wrong thee, O thou sovereign good!
    Thou art not loved, because not understood;
    This grieves me most, that vain pursuits beguile
    Ungrateful men, regardless of thy smile.

    Frail beauty and false honour are adored;
    While Thee they scorn, and trifle with thy word;
    Pass, unconcern'd, a Saviour's sorrows by;
    And hunt their ruin with a zeal to die.


LIVING WATER.

    The fountain in its source,
      No drought of summer fears;
    The farther it pursues its course,
      The nobler it appears.

    But shallow cisterns yield
      A scanty short supply;
    The morning sees them amply fill'd,
      At evening they are dry.


TRUTH AND DIVINE LOVE REJECTED BY THE WORLD.

    O love, of pure and heavenly birth!
    O simple truth, scarce known on earth!
    Whom men resist with stubborn will;
    And, more perverse and daring still,
    Smother and quench, with reasonings vain,
    While error and deception reign.

    Whence comes it, that, your power the same
    As His on high from whence you came,
    Ye rarely find a listening ear,
    Or heart that makes you welcome here?--
    Because ye bring reproach and pain,
    Where'er ye visit, in your train.

    The world is proud, and cannot bear
    The scorn and calumny ye share;
    The praise of men the mark they mean,
    They fly the place where ye are seen;
    Pure love, with scandal in the rear,
    Suits not the vain; it costs too dear.

    Then, let the price be what it may,
    Though poor, I am prepared to pay;
    Come shame, come sorrow; spite of tears,
    Weakness, and heart-oppressing fears;
    One soul, at least, shall not repine,
    To give you room; come, reign in mine!


DIVINE JUSTICE AMIABLE.

    Thou hast no lightnings, O thou Just!
      Or I their force should know;
    And, if thou strike me into dust,
      My soul approves the blow.

    The heart, that values less its ease
      Than it adores thy ways,
    In thine avenging anger sees
      A subject of its praise.

    Pleased I could lie, conceal'd and lost,
      In shades of central night;
    Not to avoid thy wrath, thou know'st,
      But lest I grieve thy sight.

    Smite me, O thou, whom I provoke!
      And I will love thee still:
    The well deserved and righteous stroke
      Shall please me, though it kill.

    Am I not worthy to sustain
      The worst thou canst devise;
    And dare I seek thy throne again,
      And meet thy sacred eyes?

    Far from afflicting, thou art kind;
      And, in my saddest hours,
    An unction of thy grace I find,
      Pervading all my powers.

    Alas! thou sparest me yet again;
      And, when thy wrath should move,
    Too gentle to endure my pain,
      Thou soothest me with thy love.

    I have no punishment to fear;
      But, ah! that smile from thee
    Imparts a pang far more severe
      Than woe itself would be.


THE SOUL THAT LOVES GOD FINDS HIM EVERY WHERE.

    Oh thou, by long experience tried,
    Near whom no grief can long abide;
    My love! how full of sweet content
    I pass my years of banishment!

    All scenes alike engaging prove
    To souls impress'd with sacred love!
    Where'er they dwell, they dwell in thee;
    In heaven, in earth, or on the sea.

    To me remains nor place nor time;
    My country is in every clime;
    I can be calm and free from care
    On any shore, since God is there.

    While place we seek, or place we shun,
    The soul finds happiness in none;
    But, with a God to guide our way,
    'Tis equal joy to go or stay.

    Could I be cast where thou art not,
    That were indeed a dreadful lot;
    But regions none remote I call,
    Secure of finding God in all.

    My country, Lord, art thou alone;
    Nor other can I claim or own;
    The point where all my wishes meet;
    My law, my love, life's only sweet!

    I hold by nothing here below;
    Appoint my journey and I go;
    Though pierced by scorn, oppress'd by pride,
    I feel thee good--feel nought beside.

    No frowns of men can hurtful prove
    To souls on fire with heavenly love;
    Though men and devils both condemn,
    No gloomy days arise from them.

    Ah then! to his embrace repair;
    My soul, thou art no stranger there;
    There love divine shall be thy guard,
    And peace and safety thy reward.


THE TESTIMONY OF DIVINE ADOPTION.

    How happy are the new-born race,
    Partakers of adopting grace;
      How pure the bliss they share!
    Hid from the world and all its eyes,
    Within their heart the blessing lies,
      And conscience feels it there.

    The moment we believe, 'tis ours;
    And if we love with all our powers
      The God from whom it came;
    And if we serve with hearts sincere,
    'Tis still discernible and clear,
      An undisputed claim.

    But, ah! if foul and wilful sin
    Stain and dishonour us within,
      Farewell the joy we knew;
    Again the slaves of nature's sway,
    In labyrinths of our own we stray,
      Without a guide or clue.

    The chaste and pure, who fear to grieve
    The gracious Spirit they receive,
      His work distinctly trace:
    And, strong in undissembling love,
    Boldly assert and clearly prove
      Their hearts his dwelling place.

    Oh messenger of dear delight,
    Whose voice dispels the deepest night,
      Sweet peace-proclaiming Dove!
    With thee at hand, to soothe our pains,
    No wish unsatisfied remains,
      No task but that of love.

    'Tis love unites what sin divides;
    The centre, where all bliss resides;
      To which the soul once brought,
    Reclining on the first great cause,
    From his abounding sweetness draws
      Peace passing human thought.

    Sorrow foregoes its nature there,
    And life assumes a tranquil air,
      Divested of its woes;
    There sovereign goodness soothes the breast,
    Till then incapable of rest,
      In sacred sure repose.


DIVINE LOVE ENDURES NO RIVAL.

    Love is the Lord whom I obey,
    Whose will transported I perform;
    The centre of my rest, my stay,
    Love's all in all to me, myself a worm.

    For uncreated charms I burn,
    Oppress'd by slavish fear no more,
    For One in whom I may discern,
    E'en when he frowns, a sweetness I adore.

    He little loves him who complains,
    And finds him rigorous and severe;
    His heart is sordid, and he feigns,
    Though loud in boasting of a soul sincere.

    Love causes grief, but 'tis to move
    And stimulate the slumbering mind;
    And he has never tasted love,
    Who shuns a pang so graciously design'd.

    Sweet is the cross, above all sweets,
    To souls enamour'd with thy smiles;
    The keenest woe life ever meets,
    Love strips of all its terrors, and beguiles.

    'Tis just that God should not be dear
    Where self engrosses all the thought,
    And groans and murmurs make it clear,
    Whatever else is loved, the Lord is not.

    The love of thee flows just as much
    As that of ebbing self subsides;
    Our hearts, their scantiness is such,
    Bear not the conflict of two rival tides.

    Both cannot govern in one soul;
    Then let self-love be dispossess'd;
    The love of God deserves the whole,
    And will not dwell with so despised a guest.


SELF-DIFFIDENCE.

    Source of love, and light of day,
    Tear me from myself away;
    Every view and thought of mine
    Cast into the mould of thine;
    Teach, O teach this faithless heart
    A consistent constant part;
    Or, if it must live to grow
    More rebellious, break it now!

    Is it thus that I requite
    Grace and goodness infinite?
    Every trace of every boon
    Cancell'd and erased so soon!
    Can I grieve thee, whom I love;
    Thee, in whom I live and move?
    If my sorrow touch thee still,
    Save me from so great an ill!

    Oh! the oppressive, irksome weight,
    Felt in an uncertain state;
    Comfort, peace, and rest, adieu,
    Should I prove at last untrue!
    Still I choose thee, follow still
    Every notice of thy will;
    But, unstable, strangely weak,
    Still let slip the good I seek.

    Self-confiding wretch, I thought
    I could serve thee as I ought,
    Win thee, and deserve to feel
    All the love thou canst reveal;
    Trusting self, a bruised reed,
    Is to be deceived indeed:
    Save me from this harm and loss,
    Lest my gold turn all to dross?

    Self is earthly--faith alone
    Makes an unseen world our own;
    Faith relinquish'd, how we roam,
    Feel our way, and leave our home!
    Spurious gems our hopes entice,
    While we scorn the pearl of price;
    And, preferring servants' pay,
    Cast the children's bread away.


THE ACQUIESCENCE OF PURE LOVE.

    Love! if thy destined sacrifice am I,
    Come, slay thy victim, and prepare thy fires;
    Plunged in thy depths of mercy, let me die
    The death which every soul that lives desires!

    I watch my hours, and see them fleet away;
    The time is long that I have languish'd here;
    Yet all my thoughts thy purposes obey,
    With no reluctance, cheerful and sincere.

    To me 'tis equal, whether love ordain
    My life or death, appoint me pain or ease;
    My soul perceives no real ill in pain;
    In ease or health no real good she sees.

    One good she covets, and that good alone,
    To choose thy will, from selfish bias free;
    And to prefer a cottage to a throne,
    And grief to comfort, if it pleases thee.

    That we should bear the cross is thy command,
    Die to the world, and live to self no more;
    Suffer, unmoved, beneath the rudest hand,
    As pleased when shipwreck'd as when safe on shore.


REPOSE IN GOD.

    Blest! who, far from all mankind
    This world's shadows left behind,
    Hears from heaven a gentle strain
    Whispering love, and loves again.

    Blest! who, free from self-esteem,
    Dives into the great Supreme,
    All desire beside discards,
    Joys inferior none regards.

    Blest! who in thy bosom seeks
    Rest that nothing earthly breaks,
    Dead to self and worldly things,
    Lost in thee, thou King of kings!

    Ye that know my secret fire,
    Softly speak and soon retire;
    Favour my divine repose,
    Spare the sleep a God bestows.


GLORY TO GOD ALONE.

    Oh loved! but not enough--though dearer far
    Than self and its most loved enjoyments are;
    None duly loves thee, but who, nobly free
    From sensual objects, finds his all in thee.

    Glory of God! thou stranger here below,
    Whom man nor knows, nor feels a wish to know;
    Our faith and reason are both shock'd to find
    Man in the post of honour--Thee behind.

    Reason exclaims--"Let every creature fall,
    Ashamed, abased, before the Lord of all;"
    And faith, o'erwhelm'd with such a dazzling blaze,
    Feebly describes the beauty she surveys.

    Yet man, dim-sighted man, and rash as blind,
    Deaf to the dictates of his better mind,
    In frantic competition dares the skies,
    And claims precedence of the Only wise.

    Oh lost in vanity, till once self-known!
    Nothing is great, or good, but God alone;
    When thou shalt stand before his awful face,
    Then, at the last, thy pride shall know his place.

    Glorious, Almighty, First, and without end!
    When wilt thou melt the mountains and descend?
    When wilt thou shoot abroad thy conquering rays,
    And teach these atoms, thou hast made, thy praise?

    Thy glory is the sweetest heaven I feel;
    And, if I seek it with too fierce a zeal,
    Thy love, triumphant o'er a selfish will,
    Taught me the passion, and inspires it still.

    My reason, all my faculties, unite,
    To make thy glory their supreme delight;
    Forbid it, fountain of my brightest days,
    That I should rob thee, and usurp thy praise!

    My soul! rest happy in thy low estate,
    Nor hope, nor wish, to be esteem'd or great;
    To take the impression of a will divine,
    Be that thy glory, and those riches thine.

    Confess him righteous in his just decrees,
    Love what he loves, and let his pleasure please;
    Die daily; from the touch of sin recede;
    Then thou hast crown'd him, and he reigns indeed.


SELF-LOVE AND TRUTH INCOMPATIBLE.

    From thorny wilds a monster came,
    That fill'd my soul with fear and shame;
    The birds, forgetful of their mirth,
    Droop'd at the sight, and fell to earth;
    When thus a sage address'd mine ear,
    Himself unconscious of a fear:
      "Whence all this terror and surprise,
    Distracted looks, and streaming eyes?
    Far from the world and its affairs,
    The joy it boasts, the pain it shares,
    Surrender, without guile or art,
    To God an undivided heart;
    The savage form, so fear'd before,
    Shall scare your trembling soul no more;
    For, loathsome as the sight may be,
    'Tis but the love of self you see.
    Fix all your love on God alone,
    Choose but his will, and hate your own:
    No fear shall in your path be found,
    The dreary waste shall bloom around,
    And you, through all your happy days,
    Shall bless his name, and sing his praise."
      Oh lovely solitude, how sweet
    The silence of this calm retreat!
    Here Truth, the fair whom I pursue,
    Gives all her beauty to my view;
    The simple, unadorn'd display
    Charms every pain and fear away.
    O Truth, whom millions proudly slight;
    O Truth, my treasure and delight;
    Accept this tribute to thy name,
    And this poor heart from which it came!


THE LOVE OF GOD, THE END OF LIFE.

    Since life in sorrow must be spent,
    So be it--I am well content,
    And meekly wait my last remove,
    Seeking only growth in love.

    No bliss I seek, but to fulfil
    In life, in death, thy lovely will;
    No succours in my woes I want,
    Save what thou art pleased to grant.

    Our days are number'd, let us spare
    Our anxious hearts a needless care:
    'Tis thine to number out our days;
    Ours to give them to thy praise.

    Love is our only business here,
    Love, simple, constant, and sincere;
    O blessed days, thy servants see,
    Spent, O Lord! in pleasing thee!


LOVE FAITHFUL IN THE ABSENCE OF THE BELOVED.

    In vain ye woo me to your harmless joys,
    Ye pleasant bowers, remote from strife and noise;
    Your shades, the witnesses of many a vow,
    Breathed forth in happier days, are irksome now;
    Denied that smile 'twas once my heaven to see,
    Such scenes, such pleasures, are all past with me.

    In vain he leaves me, I shall love him still;
    And, though I mourn, not murmur at his will;
    I have no cause--an object all divine,
    Might well grow weary of a soul like mine;
    Yet pity me, great God! forlorn, alone,
    Heartless and hopeless, life and love all gone.


LOVE PURE AND FERVENT.

    Jealous, and with love o'erflowing,
      God demands a fervent heart;
    Grace and bounty still bestowing,
      Calls us to a grateful part.

    Oh, then, with supreme affection
      His paternal will regard!
    If it cost us some dejection,
      Every sigh has its reward.

    Perfect love has power to soften
      Cares that might our peace destroy,
    Nay, does more--transforms them often,
      Changing sorrow into joy.

    Sovereign Love appoints the measure,
      And the number of our pains;
    And is pleased when we find pleasure
      In the trials he ordains.


THE ENTIRE SURRENDER.

    Peace has unveil'd her smiling face,
    And wooes thy soul to her embrace,
    Enjoy'd with ease, if thou refrain
    From earthly love, else sought in vain;
    She dwells with all who truth prefer,
    But seeks not them who seek not her.

    Yield to the Lord, with simple heart,
    All that thou hast, and all thou art;
    Renounce all strength but strength divine;
    And peace shall be for ever thine:
    Behold the path which I have trod,
    My path, till I go home to God.


THE PERFECT SACRIFICE.

    I place an offering at thy shrine,
      From taint and blemish clear,
    Simple and pure in its design,
      Of all that I hold dear.

    I yield thee back thy gifts again,
      Thy gifts which most I prize;
    Desirous only to retain
      The notice of thine eyes.

    But if, by thine adored decree,
      That blessing be denied;
    Resign'd, and unreluctant, see
      My every wish subside.

    Thy will in all things I approve,
      Exalted or cast down;
    Thy will in every state I love,
      And even in thy frown.


GOD HIDES HIS PEOPLE.

    To lay the soul that loves him low,
      Becomes the Only-wise:
    To hide, beneath a veil of woe,
      The children of the skies.

    Man, though a worm, would yet be great;
      Though feeble, would seem strong;
    Assumes an independent state,
      By sacrilege and wrong.

    Strange the reverse, which, once abased,
      The haughty creature proves!
    He feels his soul a barren waste,
      Nor dares affirm he loves.

    Scorn'd by the thoughtless and the vain,
      To God he presses near;
    Superior to the world's disdain,
      And happy in its sneer.

    Oh welcome, in his heart he says,
      Humility and shame!
    Farewell the wish for human praise,
      The music of a name!

    But will not scandal mar the good
      That I might else perform?
    And can God work it, if he would,
      By so despised a worm?

    Ah, vainly anxious!--leave the Lord
      To rule thee, and dispose;
    Sweet is the mandate of his word,
      And gracious all he does.

    He draws from human littleness
      His grandeur and renown;
    And generous hearts with joy confess
      The triumph all his own.

    Down then with self-exalting thoughts;
      Thy faith and hope employ,
    To welcome all that he allots,
      And suffer shame with joy.

    No longer, then, thou wilt encroach
      On his eternal right;
    And he shall smile at thy approach,
      And make thee his delight.


THE SECRETS OF DIVINE LOVE ARE TO BE KEPT.

    Sun! stay thy course, this moment stay--
    Suspend the o'erflowing tide of day,
    Divulge not such a love as mine,
    Ah! hide the mystery divine;
    Lest man, who deems my glory shame,
    Should learn the secret of my flame.

    O night! propitious to my views,
    Thy sable awning wide diffuse;
    Conceal alike my joy and pain,
    Nor draw thy curtain back again,
    Though morning, by the tears she shows,
    Seems to participate my woes.

    Ye stars! whose faint and feeble fires
    Express my languishing desires,
    Whose slender beams pervade the skies,
    As silent as my secret sighs,
    Those emanations of a soul,
    That darts her fires beyond the Pole;

    Your rays, that scarce assist the sight,
    That pierce, but not displace the night,
    That shine indeed, but nothing show
    Of all those various scenes below,
    Bring no disturbance, rather prove
    Incentives to a sacred love.

    Thou moon! whose never-failing course
    Bespeaks a providential force,
    Go, tell the tidings of my flame
    To Him who calls the stars by name;
    Whose absence kills, whose presence cheers;
    Who blots, or brightens, all my years.

    While, in the blue abyss of space,
    Thine orb performs its rapid race;
    Still whisper in his listening ears
    The language of my sighs and tears;
    Tell him, I seek him, far below,
    Lost in a wilderness of woe.

    Ye thought-composing, silent hours,
    Diffusing peace o'er all my powers;
    Friends of the pensive, who conceal,
    In darkest shades, the flames I feel;
    To you I trust, and safely may,
    The love that wastes my strength away.

    In sylvan scenes and caverns rude,
    I taste the sweets of solitude;
    Retired indeed, but not alone,
    I share them with a spouse unknown,
    Who hides me here from envious eyes,
    From all intrusion and surprise.

    Imbowering shades and dens profound!
    Where echo rolls the voice around;
    Mountains! whose elevated heads
    A moist and misty veil o'erspreads;
    Disclose a solitary bride
    To him I love--to none beside.

    Ye rills, that, murmuring all the way,
    Among the polish'd pebbles stray;
    Creep silently along the ground,
    Lest, drawn by that harmonious sound,
    Some wanderer, whom I would not meet,
    Should stumble on my loved retreat.

    Enamell'd meads, and hillocks green,
    And streams that water all the scene,
    Ye torrents, loud in distant ears,
    Ye fountains, that receive my tears,
    Ah! still conceal, with caution due,
    A charge I trust with none but you!

    If, when my pain and grief increase
    I seem to enjoy the sweetest peace,
    It is because I find so fair
    The charming object of my care,
    That I can sport and pleasure make
    Of torment suffer'd for his sake.

    Ye meads and groves, unconscious things!
    Ye know not whence my pleasure springs;
    Ye know not, and ye cannot know,
    The source from which my sorrows flow:
    The dear sole cause of all I feel,--
    He knows, and understands them well.

    Ye deserts, where the wild beasts rove,
    Scenes sacred to my hours of love;
    Ye forests, in whose shades I stray,
    Benighted under burning day;
    Ah! whisper not how blest am I,
    Nor while I live, nor when I die.

    Ye lambs, who sport beneath these shades,
    And bound along the mossy glades;
    Be taught a salutary fear,
    And cease to bleat when I am near:
    The wolf may hear your harmless cry,
    Whom ye should dread as much as I.

    How calm, amid these scenes, my mind!
    How perfect is the peace I find!
    Oh hush, be still, my every part,
    My tongue, my pulse, my beating heart!
    That love, aspiring to its cause,
    May suffer not a moment's pause.

    Ye swift-finn'd nations, that abide
    In seas, as fathomless as wide;
    And, unsuspicious of a snare,
    Pursue at large your pleasures there;
    Poor sportive fools! how soon does man
    Your heedless ignorance trepan.

    Away! dive deep into the brine,
    Where never yet sunk plummet line;
    Trust me, the vast leviathan
    Is merciful, compared with man;
    Avoid his arts, forsake the beach,
    And never play within his reach.

    My soul her bondage ill endures
    I pant for liberty like yours;
    I long for that immense profound,
    That knows no bottom and no bound;
    Lost in infinity, to prove
    The incomprehensible of love.

    Ye birds, that lessen as ye fly,
    And vanish in the distant sky;
    To whom yon airy waste belongs,
    Resounding with your cheerful songs;
    Haste to escape from human sight;
    Fear less the vulture and the kite.

    How blest and how secure am I,
    When, quitting earth, I soar on high;
    When lost, like you I disappear,
    And float in a sublimer sphere;
    Whence falling, within human view,
    I am ensnared, and caught like you!

    Omniscient God, whose notice deigns
    To try the heart and search the reins,
    Compassionate the numerous woes,
    I dare not, e'en to thee, disclose;
    Oh save me from the cruel hands
    Of men, who fear not thy commands!

    Love, all-subduing and divine,
    Care for a creature truly thine;
    Reign in a heart, disposed to own
    No sovereign but thyself alone;
    Cherish a bride who cannot rove,
    Nor quit thee for a meaner love!


THE VICISSITUDES EXPERIENCED IN THE CHRISTIAN LIFE.

    I suffer fruitless anguish day by day,
    Each moment, as it passes, marks my pain;
    Scarce knowing whither, doubtfully I stray,
    And see no end of all that I sustain.

    The more I strive the more I am withstood;
    Anxiety increasing every hour,
    My spirit finds no rest, performs no good,
    And nought remains of all my former power.

    My peace of heart is fled, I know not where;
    My happy hours, like shadows, pass'd away;
    Their sweet remembrance doubles all my care,
    Night darker seems, succeeding such a day.

    Dear faded joys and impotent regret,
    What profit is there in incessant tears?
    Oh thou, whom, once beheld, we ne'er forget,
    Reveal thy love, and banish all my fears!

    Alas he flies me--treats me as his foe,
    Views not my sorrows, hears not when I plead;
    Woe such as mine, despised, neglected woe,
    Unless it shortens life, is vain indeed.

    Pierced with a thousand wounds, I yet survive;
    My pangs are keen, but no complaint transpires;
    And, while in terrors of thy wrath I live,
    Hell seems to loose its less tremendous fires.

    Has hell a pain I would not gladly bear,
    So thy severe displeasure might subside?
    Hopeless of ease, I seem already there,
    My life extinguish'd, and yet death denied.

    Is this the joy so promised--this the love,
    The unchanging love, so sworn in better days?
    Ah! dangerous glories! shown me, but to prove
    How lovely thou, and I how rash to gaze.

    Why did I see them? had I still remain'd
    Untaught, still ignorant how fair thou art,
    My humbler wishes I had soon obtain'd,
    Nor known the torments of a doubting heart.

    Deprived of all, yet feeling no desires,
    Whence then, I cry, the pangs that I sustain?
    Dubious and uninform'd, my soul inquires,
    Ought she to cherish or shake off her pain.

    Suffering, I suffer not--sincerely love,
    Yet feel no touch of that enlivening flame;
    As chance inclines me, unconcern'd I move,
    All times, and all events, to me the same.

    I search my heart, and not a wish is there
    But burns with zeal that hated self may fall;
    Such is the sad disquietude I share,
    A sea of doubts, and self the source of all.

    I ask not life, nor do I wish to die;
    And, if thine hand accomplish not my cure,
    I would not purchase with a single sigh
    A free discharge from all that I endure.

    I groan in chains, yet want not a release;
    Am sick, and know not the distemper'd part;
    Am just as void of purpose as of peace;
    Have neither plan, nor fear, nor hope, nor heart.

    My claim to life, though sought with earnest care,
    No light within me, or without me, shows;
    Once I had faith, but now in self-despair
    Find my chief cordial and my best repose.

    My soul is a forgotten thing; she sinks,
    Sinks and is lost, without a wish to rise;
    Feels an indifference she abhors, and thinks
    Her name erased for ever from the skies.

    Language affords not my distress a name,--
    Yet it is real and no sickly dream;
    'Tis love inflicts it; though to feel that flame
    Is all I know of happiness supreme.

    When love departs, a chaos wide and vast,
    And dark as hell, is open'd in the soul;
    When love returns, the gloomy scene is past,
    No tempests shake her, and no fears control.

    Then tell me why these ages of delay?
    Oh love, all-excellent, once more appear;
    Disperse the shades, and snatch me into day,
    From this abyss of night, these floods of fear!

    No--love is angry, will not now endure
    A sigh of mine, or suffer a complaint;
    He smites me, wounds me, and withholds the cure;
    Exhausts my powers, and leaves me sick and faint.

    He wounds, and hides the hand that gave the blow;
    He flies, he re-appears, and wounds again--
    Was ever heart that loved thee treated so?
    Yet I adore thee, though it seem in vain.

    And wilt thou leave me, whom, when lost and blind,
    Thou didst distinguish and vouchsafe to choose,
    Before thy laws were written in my mind,
    While yet the world had all my thoughts and views?

    Now leave me, when, enamour'd of thy laws,
    I make thy glory my supreme delight?
    Now blot me from thy register, and cause
    A faithful soul to perish from thy sight?

    What can have caused the change which I deplore?
    Is it to prove me, if my heart be true?
    Permit me then, while prostrate I adore,
    To draw, and place its picture in thy view.

    'Tis thine without reserve, most simply thine;
    So given to thee, that it is not my own;
    A willing captive of thy grace divine;
    And loves, and seeks thee, for thyself alone.

    Pain cannot move it, danger cannot scare;
    Pleasure and wealth, in its esteem, are dust;
    It loves thee, e'en when least inclined to spare
    Its tenderest feelings, and avows thee just.

    'Tis all thine own; my spirit is so too,
    An undivided offering at thy shrine;
    It seeks thy glory with no double view,
    Thy glory, with no secret bent to mine.

    Love, holy love! and art thou not severe,
    To slight me, thus devoted, and thus fix'd?
    Mine is an everlasting ardour, clear
    From all self-bias, generous and unmix'd.

    But I am silent, seeing what I see--
    And fear, with cause, that I am self-deceived;
    Not e'en my faith is from suspicion free,
    And that I love seems not to be believed.

    Live thou, and reign for ever, glorious Lord!
    My last, least offering I present thee now--
    Renounce me, leave me, and be still adored!
    Slay me, my God, and I applaud the blow.


WATCHING UNTO GOD IN THE NIGHT SEASON.

    Sleep at last has fled these eyes,
    Nor do I regret his flight,
    More alert my spirits rise,
    And my heart is free and light.

    Nature silent all around,
    Not a single witness near;
    God as soon as sought is found;
    And the flame of love burns clear.

    Interruption, all day long,
    Checks the current of my joys;
    Creatures press me with a throng,
    And perplex me with their noise.

    Undisturb'd I muse all night,
    On the first Eternal Fair;
    Nothing there obstructs delight,
    Love is renovated there.

    Life, with its perpetual stir,
    Proves a foe to love and me;
    Fresh entanglements occur--
    Comes the night, and sets me free.

    Never more, sweet sleep, suspend
    My enjoyments, always new:
    Leave me to possess my friend;
    Other eyes and hearts subdue.

    Hush the world, that I may wake
    To the taste of pure delights;
    Oh the pleasures I partake--
    God, the partner of my nights!

    David, for the selfsame cause,
    Night preferr'd to busy day;
    Hearts whom heavenly beauty draws,
    Wish the glaring sun away.

    Sleep, self-lovers, is for you--
    Souls that love celestial know
    Fairer scenes by night can view
    Than the sun could ever show.


ON THE SAME.

    Season of my purest pleasure,
      Sealer of observing eyes!
    When, in larger, freer measure,
      I can commune with the skies;
    While, beneath thy shade extended,
      Weary man forgets his woes,
    I, my daily trouble ended,
      Find, in watching, my repose.

    Silence all around prevailing,
      Nature hush'd in slumber sweet,
    No rude noise mine ears assailing,
      Now my God and I can meet:
    Universal nature slumbers,
      And my soul partakes the calm,
    Breathes her ardour out in numbers,
      Plaintive song or lofty psalm.

    Now my passion, pure and holy
      Shines and burns without restraint;
    Which the day's fatigue and folly
      Cause to languish, dim and faint:
    Charming hours of relaxation!
      How I dread the ascending sun!
    Surely, idle conversation
      Is an evil match'd by none.

    Worldly prate and babble hurt me;
      Unintelligible prove;
    Neither teach me nor divert me;
      I have ears for none but love.
    Me they rude esteem, and foolish,
      Hearing my absurd replies;
    I have neither art's fine polish,
      Nor the knowledge of the wise.

    Simple souls, and unpolluted
      By conversing with the great,
    Have a mind and taste ill suited
      To their dignity and state;
    All their talking, reading, writing,
      Are but talents misapplied;
    Infants' prattle I delight in,
      Nothing human choose beside.

    'Tis the secret fear of sinning
      Checks my tongue, or I should say,
    When I see the night beginning,
      I am glad of parting day:
    Love this gentle admonition
      Whispers soft within my breast;
    "Choice befits not thy condition,
      Acquiescence suits thee best."

    Henceforth, the repose and pleasure
      Night affords me I resign;
    And thy will shall be the measure,
      Wisdom infinite! of mine:
    Wishing is but inclination
      Quarrelling with thy decrees;
    Wayward nature finds the occasion--
      'Tis her folly and disease.

    Night, with its sublime enjoyments,
      Now no longer will I choose;
    Nor the day, with its employments,
      Irksome as they seem, refuse;
    Lessons of a God's inspiring
      Neither time nor place impedes;
    From our wishing and desiring
      Our unhappiness proceeds.


ON THE SAME.

    Night! how I love thy silent shades,
      My spirits they compose;
    The bliss of heaven my soul pervades,
      In spite of all my woes.

    While sleep instils her poppy dews
      In every slumbering eye,
    I watch to meditate and muse,
      In blest tranquillity.

    And when I feel a God immense
      Familiarly impart,
    With every proof he can dispense,
      His favour to my heart;

    My native meanness I lament,
      Though most divinely fill'd
    With all the ineffable content
      That Deity can yield.

    His purpose and his course he keeps;
      Treads all my reasonings down;
    Commands me out of nature's deeps,
      And hides me in his own.

    When in the dust, its proper place,
      Our pride of heart we lay;
    'Tis then a deluge of his grace
      Bears all our sins away.

    Thou whom I serve, and whose I am,
      Whose influence from on high
    Refines, and still refines my flame,
      And makes my fetters fly;

    How wretched is the creature's state
      Who thwarts thy gracious power;
    Crush'd under sin's enormous weight,
      Increasing every hour!

    The night, when pass'd entire with thee,
      How luminous and clear!
    Then sleep has no delights for me,
      Lest thou shouldst disappear.

    My Saviour! occupy me still
      In this secure recess;
    Let reason slumber if she will,
      My joy shall not be less.

    Let reason slumber out the night;
      But if thou deign to make
    My soul the abode of truth and light,
      Ah, keep my heart awake!


THE JOY OF THE CROSS.

    Long plunged in sorrow, I resign
    My soul to that dear hand of thine,
      Without reserve or fear;
    That hand shall wipe my streaming eyes;
    Or into smiles of glad surprise
      Transform the falling tear.

    My sole possession is thy love;
    In earth beneath, or heaven above,
      I have no other store;
    And, though with fervent suit I pray,
    And importune thee night and day,
      I ask thee nothing more.

    My rapid hours pursue the course
    Prescribed them by love's sweetest force,
      And I thy sovereign will,
    Without a wish to escape my doom;
    Though still a sufferer from the womb,
      And doom'd to suffer still.

    By thy command, where'er I stray,
    Sorrow attends me all my way,
      A never-failing friend;
    And, if my sufferings may augment
    Thy praise, behold me well content--
      Let sorrow still attend!

    It cost me no regret, that she,
    Who follow'd Christ, should follow me,
      And though, where'er she goes,
    Thorns spring spontaneous at her feet,
    I love her, and extract a sweet
      From all my bitter woes.

    Adieu! ye vain delights of earth,
    Insipid sports, and childish mirth,
      I taste no sweets in you;
    Unknown delights are in the cross,
    All joy beside to me is dross;
      And Jesus thought so too.

    The cross! Oh ravishment and bliss--
    How grateful e'en its anguish is;
      Its bitterness how sweet!
    There every sense, and all the mind,
    In all her faculties refined,
      Tastes happiness complete.

    Souls once enabled to disdain
    Base sublunary joys, maintain
      Their dignity secure;
    The fever of desire is pass'd,
    And love has all its genuine taste,
      Is delicate and pure.

    Self-love no grace in sorrow sees,
    Consults her own peculiar ease;
      'Tis all the bliss she knows;
    But nobler aims true Love employ;
    In self-denial is her joy,
      In suffering her repose.

    Sorrow and love go side by side;
    Nor height nor depth can e'er divide
      Their heaven-appointed bands;
    Those dear associates still are one,
    Nor till the race of life is run
      Disjoin their wedded hands.

    Jesus, avenger of our fall,
    Thou faithful lover, above all
      The cross has ever borne!
    Oh tell me,--life is in thy voice--
    How much afflictions were thy choice,
      And sloth and ease thy scorn!

    Thy choice and mine shall be the same
    Inspirer of that holy flame,
      Which must for ever blaze!
    To take the cross and follow thee,
    Where love and duty lead, shall be
      My portion and my praise.


JOY IN MARTYRDOM.

    Sweet tenants of this grove!
      Who sing without design,
    A song of artless love,
      In unison with mine:
    These echoing shades return
      Full many a note of ours,
    That wise ones cannot learn,
      With all their boasted powers.

    O thou! whose sacred charms
      These hearts so seldom love,
    Although thy beauty warms
      And blesses all above;
    How slow are human things,
      To choose their happiest lot!
    All-glorious King of kings,
      Say why we love thee not?

    This heart, that cannot rest,
      Shall thine for ever prove;
    Though bleeding and distress'd,
      Yet joyful in thy love:
    'Tis happy though it breaks
      Beneath thy chastening hand;
    And speechless, yet it speaks,
      What thou canst understand.


SIMPLE TRUST.

      Still, still, without ceasing,
      I feel it increasing,
    This fervour of holy desire;
      And often exclaim,
      Let me die in the flame
    Of a love that can never expire!

      Had I words to explain
      What she must sustain
    Who dies to the world and its ways;
      How joy and affright,
      Distress and delight,
    Alternately chequer her days:

      Thou, sweetly severe!
      I would make thee appear,
    In all thou art pleased to award.
      Not more in the sweet
      Than the bitter I meet
    My tender and merciful Lord.

      This faith, in the dark,
      Pursuing its mark,
    Through many sharp trials of love,
      Is the sorrowful waste
      That is to be pass'd
    On the way to the Canaan above.


THE NECESSITY OF SELF-ABASEMENT.

    Source of love, my brighter sun,
    Thou alone my comfort art;
    See, my race is almost run;
    Hast thou left this trembling heart?

    In my youth thy charming eyes
    Drew me from the ways of men;
    Then I drank unmingled joys;
    Frown of thine saw never then.

    Spouse of Christ was then my name;
    And, devoted all to thee,
    Strangely jealous I became,
    Jealous of this self in me.

    Thee to love, and none beside,
    Was my darling, sole employ;
    While alternately I died,
    Now of grief, and now of joy.

    Through the dark and silent night
    On thy radiant smiles I dwelt;
    And to see the dawning light
    Was the keenest pain I felt.

    Thou my gracious teacher wert;
    And thine eye, so close applied,
    While it watch'd thy pupil's heart,
    Seem'd to look at none beside.

    Conscious of no evil drift,
    This, I cried, is love indeed--
    'Tis the giver, not the gift,
    Whence the joys I feel proceed.

    But, soon humbled and laid low,
    Stript of all thou hadst conferr'd,
    Nothing left but sin and woe,
    I perceived how I had err'd.

    Oh, the vain conceit of man,
    Dreaming of a good his own,
    Arrogating all he can,
    Though the Lord is good alone!

    He the graces thou hast wrought
    Makes subservient to his pride;
    Ignorant that one such thought
    Passes all his sin beside.

    Such his folly--proved, at last
    By the loss of that repose,
    Self-complacence cannot taste,
    Only love divine bestows.

    'Tis by this reproof severe,
    And by this reproof alone,
    His defects at last appear,
    Man is to himself made known.

    Learn, all earth! that feeble man,
    Sprung from this terrestrial clod,
    Nothing is, and nothing can;
    Life and power are all in God.


LOVE INCREASED BY SUFFERING.

    "I love the Lord," is still the strain
      This heart delights to sing:
    But I reply--your thoughts are vain,
      Perhaps 'tis no such thing.

    Before the power of love divine
      Creation fades away;
    Till only God is seen to shine
      In all that we survey.

    In gulfs of awful night we find
      The God of our desires;
    'Tis there he stamps the yielding mind,
      And doubles all its fires.

    Flames of encircling love invest,
      And pierce it sweetly through;
    'Tis fill'd with sacred joy, yet press'd
      With sacred sorrow too.

    Ah love! my heart is in the right--
      Amidst a thousand woes,
    To thee, its ever new delight,
      And all its peace it owes.

    Fresh causes of distress occur
      Where'er I look or move;
    The comforts I to all prefer
      Are solitude and love.

    Nor exile I nor prison fear;
      Love makes my courage great;
    I find a Saviour every where,
      His grace in every state.

    Nor castle walls, nor dungeons deep,
      Exclude his quickening beams;
    There I can sit, and sing, and weep,
      And dwell on heavenly themes.

    There sorrow, for his sake, is found
      A joy beyond compare;
    There no presumptuous thoughts abound,
      No pride can enter there.

    A Saviour doubles all my joys,
      And sweetens all my pains,
    His strength in my defence employs,
      Consoles me and sustains.

    I fear no ill, resent no wrong;
      Nor feel a passion move,
    When malice whets her slanderous tongue;
      Such patience is in love.


SCENES FAVOURABLE TO MEDITATION.

    Wilds horrid and dark with o'ershadowing trees,
      Rocks that ivy and briers infold,
    Scenes nature with dread and astonishment sees,
      But I with a pleasure untold;

    Though awfully silent, and shaggy, and rude,
      I am charm'd with the peace ye afford;
    Your shades are a temple where none will intrude,
      The abode of my lover and Lord.

    I am sick of thy splendour, O fountain of day,
      And here I am hid from its beams,
    Here safely contemplate a brighter display
      Of the noblest and holiest of themes.

    Ye forests, that yield me my sweetest repose,
      Where stillness and solitude reign,
    To you I securely and boldly disclose
      The dear anguish of which I complain.

    Here, sweetly forgetting and wholly forgot
      By the world and its turbulent throng,
    The birds and the streams lend me many a note
      That aids meditation and song.

    Here, wandering in scenes that are sacred to night,
      Love wears me and wastes me away,
    And often the sun has spent much of his light
      Ere yet I perceive it is day.

    While a mantle of darkness envelops the sphere,
      My sorrows are sadly rehearsed,
    To me the dark hours are all equally dear,
      And the last is as sweet as the first.

    Here I and the beasts of the deserts agree,
      Mankind are the wolves that I fear,
    They grudge me my natural right to be free,
      But nobody questions it here.

    Though little is found in this dreary abode
      That appetite wishes to find,
    My spirit is soothed by the presence of God,
      And appetite wholly resign'd.

    Ye desolate scenes, to your solitude led,
      My life I in praises employ,
    And scarce know the source of the tears that I shed,
      Proceed they from sorrow or joy.

    There's nothing I seem to have skill to discern,
      I feel out my way in the dark,
    Love reigns in my bosom, I constantly burn,
      Yet hardly distinguish the spark.

    I live, yet I seem to myself to be dead,
      Such a riddle is not to be found,
    I am nourish'd without knowing how I am fed,
      I have nothing, and yet I abound.

    Oh love! who in darkness art pleased to abide,
      Though dimly, yet surely I see
    That these contrarieties only reside
      In the soul that is chosen of thee.

    Ah! send me not back to the race of mankind,
      Perversely by folly beguiled,
    For where, in the crowds I have left, shall I find
      The spirit and heart of a child?

    Here let me, though fix'd in a desert, be free;
      A little one whom they despise,
    Though lost to the world, if in union with thee,
      Shall be holy, and happy, and wise.




TRANSLATIONS

OF THE

LATIN AND ITALIAN POEMS OF MILTON.


ELEGY I.

TO CHARLES DEODATI.

    At length, my friend, the far-sent letters come,
    Charged with thy kindness, to their destined home;
    They come, at length, from Deva's Western side,
    Where prone she seeks the salt Vergivian tide.
    Trust me, my joy is great that thou shouldst be,
    Though born of foreign race, yet born for me,
    And that my sprightly friend, now free to roam,
    Must seek again so soon his wonted home,
    I well content, where Thames with influent tide
    My native city laves, meantime reside,
    Nor zeal nor duty now my steps impel
    To reedy Cam, and my forbidden cell.
    Nor aught of pleasure in those fields have I,
    That to the musing bard all shade deny.
    'Tis time that I a pedant's threats disdain,
    And fly from wrongs my soul will ne'er sustain.
    If peaceful days, in letter'd leisure spent
    Beneath my father's roof, be banishment,
    Then call me banish'd, I will ne'er refuse
    A name expressive of the lot I choose.
    I would that, exiled to the Pontic shore,
    Rome's hapless bard had suffer'd nothing more.
    He then had equall'd even Homer's lays,
    And, Virgil! thou hadst won but second praise:
    For here I woo the muse, with no control,
    And here my books--my life--absorb me whole.
    Here too I visit, or to smile or weep,
    The winding theatre's majestic sweep;
    The grave or gay colloquial scene recruits
    My spirits, spent in learning's long pursuits;
    Whether some senior shrewd, or spendthrift heir,
    Suitor, or soldier, now unarm'd, be there,
    Or some coif'd brooder o'er a ten years' cause,
    Thunder the Norman gibberish of the laws.
    The lacquey, there, oft dupes the wary sire,
    And, artful, speeds the enamour'd son's desire.
    There, virgins oft, unconscious what they prove,
    What love is know not, yet, unknowing, love.
    Or, if impassion'd tragedy wield high
    The bloody sceptre, give her locks to fly,
    Wild as the winds, and roll her haggard eye,
    I gaze, and grieve, still cherishing my grief.
    At times, e'en bitter tears yield sweet relief,
    As, when from bliss untasted torn away,
    Some youth dies, hapless, on his bridal day;
    Or when the ghost, sent back from shades below,
    Fills the assassin's heart with vengeful woe;
    When Troy, or Argos, the dire scene affords,
    Or Creon's hall laments its guilty lords.
    Nor always city-pent, or pent at home,
    I dwell; but, when spring calls me forth to roam,
    Expatiate in our proud suburban shades
    Of branching elm that never sun pervades.
    Here many a virgin troop I may descry,
    Like stars of mildest influence, gliding by.
    Oh forms divine! oh looks that might inspire
    E'en Jove himself, grown old, with young desire,
    Oft have I gazed on gem-surpassing eyes,
    Out-sparkling every star that gilds the skies;
    Necks whiter than the ivory arm bestow'd
    By Jove on Pelops, or the milky road!
    Bright locks, love's golden snare! these falling low,
    Those playing wanton o'er the graceful brow!
    Cheeks, too, more winning sweet than after shower
    Adonis turn'd to Flora's favourite flower!
    Yield, heroines, yield, and ye who shared the embrace
    Of Jupiter in ancient times, give place!
    Give place, ye turban'd fair of Persia's coast!
    And ye, not less renown'd, Assyria's boast!
    Submit, ye nymphs of Greece! ye, once the bloom
    Of Ilion! and all ye, of haughty Rome,
    Who swept, of old, her theatres with trains
    Redundant, and still live in classic strains!
    To British damsels beauty's palm is due;
    Aliens! to follow them is fame for you.
    Oh city, founded by Dardanian hands,
    Whose towering front the circling realm commands,
    Too blest abode! no loveliness we see
    In all the earth, but it abounds in thee.
    The virgin multitude that daily meets,
    Radiant with gold and beauty, in thy streets,
    Outnumbers all her train of starry fires
    With which Diana gilds thy lofty spires.
    Fame says that, wafted hither by her doves,
    With all her host of quiver-bearing loves,
    Venus, preferring Paphian scenes no more,
    Has fix'd her empire on thy nobler shore.
    But, lest the sightless boy enforce my stay,
    I leave these happy walls while yet I may.
    Immortal Moly shall secure my heart
    From all the sorcery of Circæan art,
    And I will e'en repass Cam's reedy pools,
    To face once more the warfare of the schools.
    Meantime accept this trifle! rhymes though few,
    Yet such as prove thy friend's remembrance true!


ELEGY II.

ON THE DEATH OF THE UNIVERSITY BEADLE AT CAMBRIDGE.

    Thee, whose refulgent staff and summons clear
      Minerva's flock long time was wont to obey,
    Although thyself a herald, famous here,
      The last of heralds, death, has snatch'd away.
    He calls on all alike, nor even deigns
    To spare the office that himself sustains.

    Thy locks were whiter than the plumes display'd
      By Leda's paramour in ancient time;
    But thou wast worthy ne'er to have decay'd,
      Or, Æson-like, to know a second prime,
    Worthy, for whom some goddess should have won
    New life, oft kneeling to Apollo's son.

    Commission'd to convene with hasty call
      The gowned tribes, how graceful wouldst thou stand!
    So stood Cyllenius erst in Priam's hall,
      Wing-footed messenger of Jove's command!
    And so Eurybates, when he address'd
    To Peleus' son Atrides' proud behest.

    Dread queen of sepulchres! whose rigorous laws
      And watchful eyes run through the realms below,
    Oh, oft too adverse to Minerva's cause!
      Too often to the muse not less a foe!
    Choose meaner marks, and with more equal aim
    Pierce useless drones, earth's burden and its shame!

    Flow, therefore, tears for him from every eye,
      All ye disciples of the muses, weep!
    Assembling all in robes of sable dye,
      Around his bier lament his endless sleep!
    And let complaining Elegy rehearse
    In every school her sweetest, saddest verse.


ELEGY III.

ON THE DEATH OF THE BISHOP OF WINCHESTER.

    Silent I sat, dejected and alone,
    Making, in thought, the public woes my own,
    When first arose the image in my breast
    Of England's suffering by that scourge, the pest!
    How Death, his funeral torch and scythe in hand,
    Entering the lordliest mansions of the land,
    Has laid the gem-illumined palace low,
    And levell'd tribes of nobles at a blow.
    I next deplored the famed paternal pair,
    Too soon to ashes turn'd and empty air!
    The heroes next, whom snatch'd into the skies,
    All Belgia saw, and follow'd with her sighs;
    But thee far most I mourn'd, regretted most,
    Winton's chief shepherd, and her worthiest boast!
    Pour'd out in tears I thus complaining said:
    "Death, next in power to Him who rules the dead!
    Is it not enough that all the woodlands yield
    To thy fell force, and every verdant field;
    That lilies, at one noisome blast of thine,
    And e'en the Cyprian queen's own roses pine;
    That oaks themselves, although the running rill
    Suckle their roots, must wither at thy will;
    That all the winged nations, even those
    Whose heaven-directed flight the future shows,
    And all the beasts that in dark forests stray,
    And all the herds of Proteus are thy prey.
    Ah envious! arm'd with powers so unconfined!
    Why stain thy hands with blood of human kind?
    Why take delight, with darts that never roam,
    To chase a heaven-born spirit from her home?"
      While thus I mourn'd, the star of evening stood,
    Now newly risen above the western flood,
    And Phoebus from his morning goal again
    Had reach'd the gulfs of the Iberian main.
    I wish'd repose, and, on my couch reclined,
    Took early rest, to night and sleep resign'd:
    When--oh for words to paint what I beheld!
    I seem'd to wander in a spacious field,
    Where all the champaign glow'd with purple light,
    Like that of sunrise on the mountain height;
    Flowers over all the field, of every hue
    That ever Iris wore, luxuriant grew.
    Nor Chloris, with whom amorous Zephyrs play,
    E'er dress'd Alcinous' garden half so gay.
    A silver current, like the Tagus, roll'd
    O'er golden sands, but sands of purer gold;
    With dewy airs Favonius fann'd the flowers,
    With airs awaken'd under rosy bowers.
    Such, poets feign, irradiated all o'er
    The sun's abode on India's utmost shore.
      While I that splendour, and the mingled shade
    Of fruitful vines, with wonder fix'd, survey'd,
    At once, with looks that beam'd celestial grace,
    The seer of Winton stood before my face.
    His snowy vesture's hem descending low,
    His golden sandals swept, and, pure as snow
    New fallen, shone the mitre on his brow.
    Where'er he trod, a tremulous sweet sound
    Of gladness shook the flowery scene around:
    Attendant angels clap their starry wings,
    The trumpet shakes the sky, all ether rings;
    Each chants his welcome, folds him to his breast,
    And thus a sweeter voice than all the rest:
    "Ascend, my son! thy Father's kingdom share!
    My son! henceforth be freed from every care!"
      So spake the voice, and at its tender close
    With psaltery's sound the angelic band arose;
    Then night retired, and, chased by dawning day,
    The visionary bliss pass'd all away.
    I mourn'd my banish'd sleep with fond concern;
    Frequent to me may dreams like this return!


ELEGY IV.

TO HIS TUTOR, THOMAS YOUNG,

CHAPLAIN TO THE ENGLISH FACTORY AT HAMBURGH.

    Hence, my epistle--skim the deep--fly o'er
    Yon smooth expanse to the Teutonic shore!
    Haste--lest a friend should grieve for thy delay--
    And the gods grant that nothing thwart thy way!
    I will myself invoke the king who binds
    In his Sicanian echoing vault the winds,
    With Doris and her nymphs, and all the throng
    Of azure gods, to speed thee safe along.
    But rather, to ensure thy happier haste,
    Ascend Medea's chariot, if thou mayst;
    Or that whence young Triptolemus of yore
    Descended, welcome on the Scythian shore.
    The sands that line the German coast descried,
    To opulent Hamburga turn aside!
    So call'd, if legendary fame be true,
    From Hama, whom a club-arm'd Cimbrian slew!
    There lives, deep learn'd and primitively just,
    A faithful steward of his Christian trust,
    My friend, and favourite inmate of my heart,
    That now is forced to want its better part!
    What mountains now, and seas, alas! how wide!
    From me this other, dearer self divide,
    Dear as the sage renown'd for moral truth
    To the prime spirit of the Attic youth!
    Dear as the Stagyrite to Ammon's son,
    His pupil, who disdain'd the world he won!
    Nor so did Chiron, or so Phoenix shine
    In young Achilles' eyes, as he in mine.
    First led by him through sweet Aonian shade,
    Each sacred haunt of Pindus I survey'd;
    And, favoured by the muse, whom I implored,
    Thrice on my lip the hallow'd stream I pour'd.
    But thrice the sun's resplendent chariot roll'd
    To Aries, has new tinged his fleece with gold,
    And Chloris twice has dress'd the meadows gay,
    And twice has summer parch'd their bloom away,
    Since last delighted on his looks I hung
    Or my ear drank the music of his tongue:
    Fly, therefore, and surpass the tempest's speed;
    Aware thyself that there is urgent need!
    Him, entering, thou shalt haply seated see
    Beside his spouse, his infants on his knee;
    Or turning, page by page, with studious look,
    Some bulky father, or God's holy book;
    Or ministering (which is his weightiest care)
    To Christ's assembled flock their heavenly fare.
    Give him, whatever his employment be,
    Such gratulation as he claims from me!
    And, with a downcast eye, and carriage meek,
    Addressing him, forget not thus to speak:
      "If compass'd round with arms thou canst attend
    To verse, verse greets thee from a distant friend.
    Long due, and late, I left the English shore;
    But make me welcome for that cause the more!
    Such from Ulysses, his chaste wife to cheer,
    The slow epistle came, though late, sincere.
    But wherefore this? why palliate I the deed
    For which the culprit's self could hardly plead?
    Self-charged, and self-condemned, his proper part
    He feels neglected, with an aching heart;
    But thou forgive--delinquents, who confess,
    And pray forgiveness, merit anger less;
    From timid foes the lion turns away,
    Nor yawns upon or rends a crouching prey.
    E'en pike-wielding Thracians learn to spare,
    Won by soft influence of a suppliant prayer;
    And heaven's dread thunderbolt arrested stands
    By a cheap victim and uplifted hands.
    Long had he wish'd to write, but was withheld,
    And writes at last, by love alone compell'd,
    For fame, too often true, when she alarms,
    Reports thy neighbouring fields a scene of arms;
    Thy city against fierce besiegers barr'd,
    And all the Saxon chiefs for fight prepared.
    Enyo wastes thy country wide around,
    And saturates with blood the tainted ground;
    Mars rests contented in his Thrace no more,
    But goads his steeds to fields of German gore,
    The ever verdant olive fades and dies,
    And Peace, the trumpet-hating goddess, flies,
    Flies from that earth which justice long had left,
    And leaves the world of its last guard bereft."
      Thus horror girds thee round. Meantime alone
    Thou dwell'st, and helpless, in a soil unknown;
    Poor, and receiving from a foreign hand
    The aid denied thee in thy native land.
    Oh, ruthless country, and unfeeling more
    Than thy own billow-beaten chalky shore!
    Leavest thou to foreign care the worthies given
    By Providence to guide thy steps to heaven?
    His ministers, commissioned to proclaim
    Eternal blessings in a Saviour's name!
    Ah then most worthy, with a soul unfed,
    In Stygian night to lie for ever dead!
    So once the venerable Tishbite stray'd
    An exiled fugitive from shade to shade,
    When, flying Ahab and his fury wife,
    In lone Arabian wilds he shelter'd life;
    So from Philippa wander'd forth forlorn,
    Cilician Paul, with sounding scourges torn;
    And Christ himself, so left, and trod no more
    The thankless Gergesene's forbidden shore.
      But thou take courage! strive against despair!
    Quake not with dread, nor nourish anxious care!
    Grim war indeed on every side appears,
    And thou art menaced by a thousand spears;
    Yet none shall drink thy blood, or shall offend
    E'en the defenceless bosom of my friend.
    For thee the Ægis of thy God shall hide,
    Jehovah's self shall combat on thy side.
    The same who vanquish'd under Sion's towers
    At silent midnight all Assyria's powers,
    The same who overthrew in ages past
    Damascus' sons that laid Samaria waste!
    Their king he fill'd and them with fatal fears,
    By mimic sounds of clarions in their ears,
    Of hoofs, and wheels, and neighings from afar,
    Of clashing armour, and the din of war.
      Thou, therefore, (as the most afflicted may,)
    Still hope, and triumph o'er thy evil day!
    Look forth, expecting happier times to come,
    And to enjoy, once more, thy native home!


ELEGY V.

ON THE APPROACH OF SPRING.

    Time, never wandering from his annual round,
    Bids zephyr breathe the spring, and thaw the ground;
    Bleak winter flies, new verdure clothes the plain,
    And earth assumes her transient youth again.
    Dream I, or also to the spring belong
    Increase of genius, and new powers of song?
    Spring gives them, and, how strange soe'er it seems,
    Impels me now to some harmonious themes.
    Castalia's fountain, and the forked hill
    By day, by night, my raptured fancy fill;
    My bosom burns and heaves, I hear within
    A sacred sound that prompts me to begin.
    Lo! Phoebus comes, with his bright hair he blends
    The radiant laurel wreath; Phoebus descends!
    I mount, and undepress'd by cumbrous clay,
    Through cloudy regions win my easy way;
    Rapt through poetic shadowy haunts I fly:
    The shrines all open to my dauntless eye,
    My spirit searches all the realms of light,
    And no Tartarean gulfs elude my sight.
    But this ecstatic trance--this glorious storm
    Of inspiration--what will it perform?
    Spring claims the verse that with his influence glows,
    And shall be paid with what himself bestows.
      Thou, veil'd with opening foliage, lead'st the throng
    Of feather'd minstrels, Philomel! in song;
    Let us, in concert, to the season sing,
    Civic and sylvan heralds of the spring!
      With notes triumphant spring's approach declare!
    To spring, ye muses, annual tribute bear!
    The Orient left, and Ethiopia's plains,
    The sun now northward turns his golden reins;
    Night creeps not now; yet rules with gentle sway,
    And drives her dusky horrors swift away;
    Now less fatigued, on this ethereal plain
    Boötes follows his celestial wain;
    And now the radiant sentinels above,
    Less numerous, watch around the courts of Jove,
    For, with the night, force, ambush, slaughter fly,
    And no gigantic guilt alarms the sky.
    Now, haply says some shepherd, while he views,
    Recumbent on a rock, the reddening dews,
    This night, this, surely, Phoebus miss'd the fair,
    Who stops his chariot by her amorous care.
    Cynthia, delighted by the morning's glow,
    Speeds to the woodland, and resumes her bow;
    Resigns her beams, and, glad to disappear,
    Blesses his aid, who shortens her career.
    Come--Phoebus cries--Aurora, come--too late
    Thou lingerest, slumbering, with thy wither'd mate;
    Leave him, and to Hymettus' top repair!
    Thy darling Cephalus expects thee there.
    The goddess with a blush her love betrays,
    But mounts, and, driving rapidly, obeys.
    Earth now desires thee, Phoebus! and, to engage
    Thy warm embrace, casts off the guise of age;
    Desires thee, and deserves; for who so sweet
    When her rich bosom courts thy genial heat?
    Her breath imparts to every breeze that blows
    Arabia's harvest and the Paphian rose.
    Her lofty front she diadems around
    With sacred pines, like Ops on Ida crown'd;
    Her dewy locks with various flowers new blown
    She interweaves, various, and all her own;
    For Proserpine, in such a wreath attired,
    Tænarian Dis himself with love inspired.
    Fear not, lest, cold and coy, the nymph refuse!
    Herself, with all her sighing zephyrs, sues;
    Each courts thee, fanning soft his scented wing,
    And all her groves with warbled wishes ring.
    Nor, unendow'd and indigent, aspires
    The amorous Earth to engage thy warm desires,
    But, rich in balmy drugs, assists thy claim,
    Divine Physician! to that glorious name.
    If splendid recompence, if gifts, can move
    Desire in thee, (gifts often purchase love,)
    She offers all the wealth her mountains hide,
    And all that rests beneath the boundless tide.
    How oft, when headlong from the heavenly steep
    She sees thee playing in the western deep,
    How oft she cries--"Ah Phoebus, why repair
    Thy wasted force, why seek refreshment there?
    Can Tethys win thee? wherefore shouldst thou lave
    A face so fair in her unpleasant wave?
    Come, seek my green retreats, and rather choose
    To cool thy tresses in my crystal dews.
    The grassy turf shall yield thee sweeter rest;
    Come, lay thy evening glories on my breast,
    And breathing fresh, through many a humid rose,
    Soft whispering airs shall lull thee to repose!
    No fears I feel like Semele to die,
    Nor lest thy burning wheels approach too nigh,
    For thou canst govern them, here therefore rest,
    And lay thy evening glories on my breast!"
      Thus breathes the wanton Earth her amorous flame,
    And all her countless offspring feel the same;
    For Cupid now through every region strays,
    Brightening his faded fires with solar rays;
    His new-strung bow sends forth a deadlier sound,
    And his new-pointed shafts more deeply wound;
    Nor Dian's self escapes him now untried,
    Nor even Vesta at her altar-side;
    His mother too repairs her beauty's wane,
    And seems sprung newly from the deep again.
    Exulting youths the hymeneal sing,
    With Hymen's name roofs, rocks, and valleys ring;
    He, new-attired, and by the season drest,
    Proceeds, all fragrant, in his saffron vest.
    Now many a golden-cinctured virgin roves
    To taste the pleasures of the fields and groves,
    All wish, and each alike, some favourite youth
    Hers, in the bonds of hymeneal truth.
    Now pipes the shepherd through his reeds again,
    Nor Phillis wants a song that suits the strain;
    With songs the seaman hails the starry sphere,
    And dolphins rise from the abyss to hear:
    Jove feels himself the season, sports again
    With his fair spouse, and banquets all his train.
    Now too the satyrs, in the dusk of eve,
    Their mazy dance through flowery meadows weave,
    And, neither god nor goat, but both in kind,
    Silvanus, wreathed with cypress, skips behind.
    The dryads leave their hollow sylvan cells
    To roam the banks and solitary dells;
    Pan riots now; and from his amorous chafe
    Ceres and Cybele seem hardly safe,
    And Faunus, all on fire to reach the prize,
    In chase of some enticing oread flies;
    She bounds before, but fears too swift a bound,
    And hidden lies, but wishes to be found.
    Our shades entice the immortals from above,
    And some kind power presides o'er every grove;
    And long, ye powers, o'er every grove preside,
    For all is safe, and blest, where ye abide!
    Return, O Jove! the age of gold restore--
    Why choose to dwell where storms and thunder roar?
    At least thou, Phoebus! moderate thy speed!
    Let not the vernal hours too swift proceed,
    Command rough winter back, nor yield the pole
    Too soon to night's encroaching, long control!


ELEGY VI.

TO CHARLES DEODATI,

     Who, while he spent his Christmas in the country, sent the
     Author a poetical epistle, in which he requested that his
     verses, if not so good as usual, might be excused on account
     of the many feasts to which his friends invited him, and which
     would not allow him leisure to finish them as he wished.

    With no rich viands overcharged, I send
    Health, which perchance you want, my pamper'd friend.
    But wherefore should thy muse tempt mine away
    From what she loves, from darkness into day?
    Art thou desirous to be told how well
    I love thee, and in verse? verse cannot tell.
    For verse has bounds, and must in measure move;
    But neither bounds nor measure knows my love.
    How pleasant, in thy lines described, appear
    December's harmless sports and rural cheer!
    French spirits kindling with cærulean fires,
    And all such gambols as the time inspires!
      Think not that wine against good verse offends,
    The Muse and Bacchus have been always friends;
    Nor Phoebus blushes sometimes to be found
    With ivy, rather than with laurel, crown'd.
    The Nine themselves ofttimes have join'd the song
    And revels of the Bacchanalian throng;
    Not even Ovid could in Scythian air
    Sing sweetly--why?--no vine would flourish there.
    What in brief numbers sung Anacreon's muse?
    Wine, and the rose that sparkling wine bedews.
    Pindar with Bacchus glows--his every line
    Breathes the rich fragrance of inspiring wine,
    While, with loud crash o'erturned, the chariot lies,
    And brown with dust the fiery courser flies.
    The Roman lyrist steep'd in wine his lays
    So sweet in Glycera's and Chloe's praise.
    Now too the plenteous feast and mantling bowl
    Nourish the vigour of thy sprightly soul;
    The flowing goblet makes thy numbers flow,
    And casks not wine alone but verse bestow.
    Thus Phoebus favours, and the arts attend,
    Whom Bacchus and whom Ceres both befriend.
    What wonder, then, thy verses are so sweet,
    In which these triple powers so kindly meet!
    The lute now also sounds, with gold inwrought,
    And, touch'd with flying fingers nicely taught,
    In tapestried halls, high-roof'd, the sprightly lyre
    Directs the dancers of the virgin choir.
    If dull repletion fright the muse away,
    Sights gay as these may more invite her stay;
    And, trust me, while the ivory keys resound,
    Fair damsels sport, and perfumes steam around,
    Apollo's influence, like ethereal flame,
    Shall animate, at once, thy glowing frame,
    And all the muse shall rush into thy breast,
    By love and music's blended powers possest.
    For numerous powers light Elegy befriend,
    Hear her sweet voice, and at her call attend;
    Her, Bacchus, Ceres, Venus, all approve,
    And, with his blushing mother, gentle Love.
    Hence to such bards we grant the copious use
    Of banquets and the vine's delicious juice.
    But they who demigods and heroes praise,
    And feats perform'd in Jove's more youthful days,
    Who now the counsels of high heaven explore,
    Now shades that echo the Cerberean roar,
    Simply let these, like him of Samos, live,
    Let herbs to them a bloodless banquet give;
    In beechen goblets let their beverage shine,
    Cool from the crystal spring, their sober wine!
    Their youth should pass in innocence secure
    From stain licentious, and in manners pure,
    Pure as the priest, when robed in white he stands,
    The fresh lustration ready in his hands.
    Thus Linus lived, and thus, as poets write,
    Tiresias, wiser for his loss of sight;
    Thus exiled Chalcas, thus the Bard of Thrace,
    Melodious tamer of the savage race;
    Thus train'd by temperance, Homer led, of yore,
    His chief of Ithaca from shore to shore,
    Through magic Circe's monster-peopled reign,
    And shoals insidious with the syren train;
    And through the realms where grizzly spectres dwell,
    Whose tribes he fetter'd in a gory spell;
    For these are sacred bands, and from above
    Drink large infusions from the mind of Jove.
    Wouldst thou, (perhaps 'tis hardly worth thine ear,)
      Wouldst thou be told my occupation here?
    The promised King of Peace employs my pen,
    The eternal covenant made for guilty men,
    The new-born Deity, with infant cries
    Filling the sordid hovel where he lies;
    The hymning angels, and the herald star,
    That led the wise, who sought him from afar,
    And idols on their own unhallow'd shore
    Dash'd, at his birth, to be revered no more.
      This theme on reeds of Albion I rehearse:
    The dawn of that blest day inspired the verse;
    Verse that, reserved in secret, shall attend
    Thy candid voice, my critic and my friend!


ELEGY VII.

    As yet a stranger to the gentle fires
    That Amathusia's smiling queen inspires,
    Not seldom I derided Cupid's darts,
    And scorn'd his claim to rule all human hearts.
    "Go, child," I said, "transfix the timorous dove!
    An easy conquest suits an infant love;
    Enslave the sparrow, for such prize shall be
    Sufficient triumph to a chief like thee!
    Why aim thy idle arms at human kind?
    Thy shafts prevail not 'gainst the noble mind."
      The Cyprian heard, and, kindling into ire,
    (None kindles sooner) burn'd with double fire.
      It was the spring, and newly risen day
    Peep'd o'er the hamlets on the first of May;
    My eyes, too tender for the blaze of light,
    Still sought the shelter of retiring night,
    When Love approach'd, in painted plumes array'd,
    The insidious god his rattling darts betray'd,
    Nor less his infant features, and the sly,
    Sweet intimations of his threatening eye.
      Such the Sigeian boy is seen above,
    Filling the goblet for imperial Jove;
    Such he, on whom the nymphs bestow'd their charms,
    Hylas, who perish'd in a naiad's arms.
    Angry he seem'd, yet graceful in his ire,
    And added threats not destitute of fire.
    "My power," he said, "by others' pain alone,
    'Twere best to learn; now learn it by thy own!
    With those that feel my power, that power attest!
    And in thy anguish be my sway confest!
    I vanquish'd Phoebus, though returning vain
    From his new triumph o'er the Python slain,
    And, when he thinks on Daphne, even he
    Will yield the prize of archery to me.
    A dart less true the Parthian horseman sped,
    Behind him kill'd, and conquer'd as he fled:
    Less true the expert Cydonian, and less true
    The youth whose shaft his latent Procris slew.
    Vanquish'd by me see huge Orion bend,
    By me Alcides, and Alcides' friend.
    At me should Jove himself a bolt design,
    His bosom first should bleed, transfix'd by mine.
    But all thy doubts this shaft will best explain,
    Nor shall it reach thee with a trivial pain.
    Thy muse, vain youth! shall not thy peace ensure,
    Nor Phoebus' serpent yield thy wound a cure."
      He spoke, and, waving a bright shaft in air,
    Sought the warm bosom of the Cyprian fair.
      That thus a child should bluster in my ear.
    Provoked my laughter more than moved my fear.
    I shunn'd not, therefore, public haunts, but stray'd
    Careless in city or suburban shade,
    And, passing and repassing nymphs, that moved
    With grace divine, beheld where'er I roved.
    Bright shone the vernal day with double blaze
    As beauty gave new force to Phoebus' rays.
    By no grave scruples check'd, I freely eyed
    The dangerous show, rash youth my only guide,
    And many a look of many a fair unknown
    Met full, unable to control my own.
    But one I mark'd, (then peace forsook my breast,)
    One--Oh how far superior to the rest!
    What lovely features! such the Cyprian queen
    Herself might wish, and Juno wish her mien.
    The very nymph was she, whom, when I dared
    His arrows, Love had even then prepared!
    Nor was himself remote, nor unsupplied
    With torch well trimm'd and quiver at his side;
    Now to her lips he clung, her eyelids now,
    Then settled on her cheeks, or on her brow;
    And with a thousand wounds from every part
    Pierced and transpierced my undefended heart.
    A fever, new to me, of fierce desire
    Now seized my soul, and I was all on fire;
    But she, the while, whom only I adore,
    Was gone, and vanish'd, to appear no more.
    In silent sadness I pursue my way;
    I pause, I turn, proceed, yet wish to stay,
    And, while I follow her in thought, bemoan
    With tears my soul's delight so quickly flown.
    When Jove had hurl'd him to the Lemnian coast,
    So Vulcan sorrow'd for Olympus lost,
    And so OEclides, sinking into night,
    From the deep gulf look'd up to distant light.
      Wretch that I am, what hopes for me remain,
    Who cannot cease to love, yet love in vain?
    Oh could I once, once more, behold the fair,
    Speak to her, tell her of the pangs I bear;
    Perhaps she is not adamant; would show,
    Perhaps, some pity at my tale of woe.
    Oh inauspicious flame--'tis mine to prove
    A matchless instance of disastrous love.
    Ah, spare me, gentle power!--If such thou be,
    Let not thy deeds and nature disagree.
    Spare me, and I will worship at no shrine
    With vow and sacrifice save only thine.
    Now I revere thy fires, thy bow, thy darts:
    Now own thee sovereign of all human hearts.
    Remove! no--grant me still this raging woe!
    Sweet is the wretchedness that lovers know:
    But pierce hereafter (should I chance to see
    One destined mine) at once both her and me.
      Such were the trophies that, in earlier days,
    By vanity seduced, I toil'd to raise;
    Studious, yet indolent, and urged by youth,
    That worst of teachers, from the ways of truth;
    Till Learning taught me in his shady bower
    To quit love's servile yoke, and spurn his power.
    Then, on a sudden the fierce flame supprest,
    A frost continual settled on my breast,
    Whence Cupid fears his flame extinct to see,
    And Venus dreads a Diomede in me.


EPIGRAMS. ON THE INVENTOR OF GUNS.

    Praise in old time the sage Prometheus won,
    Who stole ethereal radiance from the sun;
    But greater he, whose bold invention strove
    To emulate the fiery bolts of Jove.

  [The poems on the subject of the Gunpowder Treason I have not
  translated, both because the matter of them is unpleasant,
  and because they are written with an asperity, which, however
  it might be warranted in Milton's day, would be extremely
  unseasonable now.]


TO LEONORA SINGING AT ROME.[921]

  [921] I have translated only two of the three poetical
  compliments addressed to Leonora, as they appear to me far
  superior to what I have omitted.

    Another Leonora once inspired
    Tasso with fatal love, to frenzy fired;
    But how much happier, lived he now, were he,
    Pierced with whatever pangs for love of thee!
    Since could he hear that heavenly voice of thine,
    With Adriana's lute of sound divine,
    Fiercer than Pentheus' though his eye might roll,
    Or idiot apathy benumb his soul,
    You still, with medicinal sounds might cheer
    His senses wandering in a blind career;
    And, sweetly breathing through his wounded breast,
    Charm, with soul-soothing song, his thoughts to rest.


TO THE SAME.

    Naples, too credulous, ah! boast no more
    The sweet-voiced syren buried on thy shore,
    That, when Parthenope deceased, she gave
    Her sacred dust to a Chalcidic grave,
    For still she lives, but has exchanged the hoarse
    Pausilipo for Tiber's placid course,
    Where, idol of all Rome, she now in chains
    Of magic song both gods and men detains.


THE COTTAGER AND HIS LANDLORD.

A FABLE.

    A peasant to his lord paid yearly court,
    Presenting pippins of so rich a sort,
    That he, displeased to have a part alone,
    Removed the tree, that all might be his own.
    The tree, too old to travel, though before
    So fruitful, wither'd, and would yield no more.
    The 'squire, perceiving all his labour void,
    Curs'd his own pains, so foolishly employ'd,
    And, "Oh," he cried, "that I had lived content
    With tribute, small indeed, but kindly meant!
    My avarice has expensive proved to me,
    Has cost me both my pippins and my tree."


TO CHRISTINA, QUEEN OF SWEDEN, WITH CROMWELL'S PICTURE.

    Christina, maiden of heroic mien!
    Star of the North! of northern stars the queen!
    Behold what wrinkles I have earn'd, and how
    The iron casque still chafes my veteran brow,
    While following Fate's dark footsteps, I fulfil
    The dictates of a hardy people's will.
    But soften'd in thy sight my looks appear,
    Not to all queens or kings alike severe.


ON THE DEATH OF THE VICE-CHANCELLOR, A PHYSICIAN.

    Learn, ye nations of the earth,
    The condition of your birth,
    Now be taught your feeble state!
    Know, that all must yield to fate!

    If the mournful rover, Death,
    Say but once--"Resign your breath!"
    Vainly of escape you dream,
    You must pass the Stygian stream.

    Could the stoutest overcome
    Death's assault, and baffle doom,
    Hercules had both withstood,
    Undiseased by Nessus' blood.

    Ne'er had Hector press'd the plain
    By a trick of Pallas slain,
    Nor the chief to Jove allied
    By Achilles' phantom died.

    Could enchantments life prolong,
    Circe, saved by magic song,
    Still had lived, and equal skill
    Had preserved Medea still.

    Dwelt in herbs and drugs a power
    To avert man's destined hour,
    Learn'd Machaon should have known
    Doubtless to avert his own:

    Chiron had survived the smart
    Of the hydra-tainted dart,
    And Jove's bolt had been, with ease,
    Foil'd by Asclepiades.

    Thou too, sage! of whom forlorn
    Helicon and Cirrha mourn,
    Still hadst fill'd thy princely place,
    Regent of the gowned race:

    Hadst advanced to higher fame
    Still thy much ennobled name,
    Nor in Charon's skiff explored
    The Tartarean gulf abhorr'd.

    But resentful Proserpine,
    Jealous of thy skill divine,
    Snapping short thy vital thread,
    Thee too number'd with the dead.

    Wise and good! untroubled be
    The green turf that covers thee!
    Thence, in gay profusion, grow
    All the sweetest flowers that blow!

    Pluto's consort bid thee rest!
    Æacus pronounce thee blest!
    To her home thy shade consign!
    Make Elysium ever thine!


ON THE DEATH OF THE BISHOP OF ELY.

    My lids with grief were tumid yet,
    And still my sullied cheek was wet
    With briny dews profusely shed
    For venerable Winton dead:
    When fame, whose tales of saddest sound,
    Alas! are ever truest found,
    The news through all our cities spread
    Of yet another mitred head
    By ruthless fate to death consign'd,
    Ely, the honour of his kind!
      At once a storm of passion heaved
    My boiling bosom, much I grieved;
    But more I raged, at every breath
    Devoting Death himself to death.
    With less revenge did Naso teem
    When hated Ibis was his theme;
    With less Archilochus denied
    The lovely Greek his promised bride.
      But lo! while thus I execrate,
    Incensed, the minister of fate,
    Wondrous accents, soft, yet clear,
    Wafted on the gale I hear.
      "Ah, much deluded! lay aside
    Thy threats and anger misapplied!
    Art not afraid with sounds like these
    To offend, where thou canst not appease?
    Death is not (wherefore dreamst thou thus?)
    The son of Night and Erebus:
    Nor was of fell Erynnis born
    On gulfs where Chaos rules forlorn;
    But, sent from God, his presence leaves,
    To gather home his ripen'd sheaves,
    To call encumber'd souls away
    From fleshly bonds to boundless day,
    (As when the winged hours excite,
    And summon forth the morning light,)
    And each to convoy to her place
    Before the Eternal Father's face.
    But not the wicked--them, severe
    Yet just, from all their pleasures here
    He hurries to the realms below,
    Terrific realms of penal woe!
    Myself no sooner heard his call,
    Than, 'scaping through my prison wall,
    I bade adieu to bolts and bars,
    And soar'd, with angels, to the stars,
    Like him of old, to whom 'twas given
    To mount on fiery wheels to heaven.
    Boötes' waggon, slow with cold,
    Appall'd me not; nor to behold
    The sword that vast Orion draws,
    Or e'en the Scorpion's horrid claws.
    Beyond the sun's bright orb I fly,
    And far beneath my feet descry
    Night's dread goddess, seen with awe,
    Whom her winged dragons draw.
    Thus, ever wondering at my speed,
    Augmented still as I proceed,
    I pass the planetary sphere,
    The milky way--and now appear
    Heaven's crystal battlements, her door
    Of massy pearl, and emerald floor.
      "But here I cease. For never can
    The tongue of once a mortal man
    In suitable description trace
    The pleasures of that happy place;
    Suffice it, that those joys divine
    Are all, and all for ever, mine!"


NATURE UNIMPAIRED BY TIME.

    Ah, how the human mind wearies herself
    With her own wanderings, and, involved in gloom
    Impenetrable, speculates amiss!
    Measuring in her folly things divine
    By human; laws inscribed on adamant
    By laws of man's device; and counsels fix'd
    For ever, by the hours that pass and die.
      How?--shall the face of nature then be plough'd
    Into deep wrinkles, and shall years at last
    On the great parent fix a sterile curse?
    Shall even she confess old age, and halt,
    And, palsy-smitten, shake her starry brows?
    Shall foul antiquity with rust, and drought,
    And famine, vex the radiant worlds above?
    Shall Time's unsated maw crave and ingulf
    The very heavens, that regulate his flight?
    And was the sire of all able to fence
    His works, and to uphold the circling worlds,
    But, through improvident and heedless haste
    Let slip the occasion?--so then--all is lost--
    And in some future evil hour, yon arch
    Shall crumble, and come thundering down, the poles
    Jar in collision, the Olympian king,
    Fall with his throne, and Pallas, holding forth
    The terrors of the Gorgon shield in vain,
    Shall rush to the abyss, like Vulcan hurl'd
    Down into Lemnos, through the gate of heaven.
    Thou also, with precipitated wheels,
    Phoebus! thy own son's fall shalt imitate,
    With hideous ruin shalt impress the deep
    Suddenly, and the flood shall reek, and hiss,
    At the extinction of the lamp of day.
    Then too shall Hæmus, cloven to his base,
    Be shatter'd, and the huge Ceraunian hills,
    Once weapons of Tartarean Dis, immersed
    In Erebus, shall fill himself with fear.
      No. The Almighty Father surer laid
    His deep foundations, and providing well
    For the event of all, the scales of fate
    Suspended in just equipoise, and bade
    His universal works, from age to age,
    One tenor hold, perpetual, undisturb'd.
      Hence the prime mover wheels itself about
    Continual, day by day, and with it bears,
    In social measure swift, the heavens around.
    Not tardier now is Saturn than of old,
    Nor radiant less the burning casque of Mars.
    Phoebus, his vigour unimpair'd, still shows
    The effulgence of his youth, nor needs the god
    A downward course, that he may warm the vales;
    But, ever rich in influence, runs his road,
    Sign after sign, through all the heavenly zone.
    Beautiful, as at first, ascends the star
    From odoriferous Ind, whose office is
    To gather home betimes the ethereal flock,
    To pour them o'er the skies again at eve,
    And to discriminate the night and day.
    Still Cynthia's changeful horn waxes and wanes
    Alternate, and with arms extended still
    She welcomes to her breast her brother's beams.
    Nor have the elements deserted yet
    Their functions; thunder with as loud a stroke
    As erst smites through the rocks and scatters them.
    The east still howls; still the relentless north
    Invades the shuddering Scythian, still he breathes
    The winter, and still rolls the storms along.
    The king of ocean, with his wonted force,
    Beats on Pelorus; o'er the deep is heard
    The hoarse alarm of Triton's sounding shell;
    Nor swim the monsters of the Ægean sea
    In shallows, or beneath diminished waves.
    Thou too, thy ancient vegetative power
    Enjoy'st, O Earth! Narcissus still is sweet;
    And Phoebus! still thy favourite, and still
    Thy favourite Cytherea! both retain
    Their beauty; nor the mountains, ore-enrich'd
    For punishment of man, with purer gold
    Teem'd ever, or with brighter gems the deep.
      Thus in unbroken series all proceeds;
    And shall, till wide involving either pole,
    And the immensity of yonder heaven,
    The final flames of destiny absorb
    The world, consumed in one enormous pyre!


ON THE PLATONIC IDEA AS IT WAS UNDERSTOOD BY ARISTOTLE.

    Ye sister powers, who o'er the sacred groves
    Preside, and thou, fair mother of them all,
    Mnemosyne! and thou who, in thy grot
    Immense, reclined at leisure, hast in charge
    The archives and the ordinances of Jove,
    And dost record the festivals of heaven,
    Eternity!--inform us who is He,
    That great original, by nature chosen
    To be the archetype of human kind,
    Unchangeable, immortal, with the poles
    Themselves coëval, one, yet every where,
    An image of the God who gave him being?
    Twin-brother of the goddess born from Jove,
    He dwells not in his father's mind, but, though
    Of common nature with ourselves, exists
    Apart, and occupies a local home--
    Whether, companion of the stars, he spend
    Eternal ages, roaming at his will
    From sphere to sphere the tenfold heavens, or dwell
    On the moon's side that nearest neighbours earth,
    Or torpid on the banks of Lethe sit
    Among the multitude of souls ordain'd
    To flesh and blood; or whether (as may chance)
    That vast and giant model of our kind
    In some far distant region of this globe
    Sequester'd stalk with lifted head on high
    O'ertowering Atlas, on whose shoulders rest
    The stars, terrific even to the gods.
    Never the Theban seer, whose blindness proved
    His best illumination, him beheld
    In secret vision; never him the son
    Of Pleione, amid the noiseless night
    Descending, to the prophet-choir reveal'd;
    Him never knew the Assyrian priest, who yet
    The ancestry of Ninus' chronicles,
    And Belus, and Osiris, far renown'd;
    Nor even thrice great Hermes, although skill'd
    So deep in mystery, to the worshippers
    Of Isis show'd a prodigy like him.
      And thou, who hast immortalized the shades
    Of Academus, if the schools received
    This monster of the fancy first from thee,
    Either recall at once thy banish'd bards
    To thy republic, or thyself, evinced
    A wilder fabulist, go also forth.


TO HIS FATHER.

    Oh that Pieria's spring would through my breast
    Pour its inspiring influence, and rush
    No rill, but rather an o'erflowing flood;
    That, for my venerable father's sake
    All meaner themes renounced, my muse, on wings
    Of duty borne, might reach a loftier strain!
    For thee, my father! howsoe'er it please,
    She frames this slender work; nor know I aught
    That may thy gifts more suitably requite:
    Though to requite them suitably would ask
    Returns much nobler, and surpassing far
    The meagre stores of verbal gratitude:
    But, such as I possess, I send thee all.
    This page presents thee in their full amount
    With thy son's treasures, and the sum is nought;
    Nought, save the riches that from airy dream
    In secret grottoes and in laurel bowers,
    I have, by golden Clio's gift, acquired.
      Verse is a work divine; despise not thou
    Verse therefore, which evinces (nothing more)
    Man's heavenly source, and which, retaining still
    Some scintillations of Promethean fire,
    Bespeaks him animated from above.
    The gods love verse; the infernal powers themselves
    Confess the influence of verse, which stirs
    The lowest deep, and binds in triple chains
    Of adamant both Pluto and the shades.
    In verse the Delphic priestess and the pale
    Tremulous sybil make the future known;
    And he who sacrifices, on the shrine
    Hangs verse, both when he smites the threatening bull
    And when he spreads his reeking entrails wide
    To scrutinize the fates enveloped there.
    We too, ourselves, what time we seek again
    Our native skies, and one eternal now
    Shall be the only measure of our being,
    Crown'd all with gold, and chanting to the lyre
    Harmonious verse, shall range the courts above,
    And make the starry firmament resound.
    And, even now, the fiery spirit pure
    That wheels yon circling orbs, directs himself
    Their mazy dance with melody of verse
    Unutterable, immortal, hearing which
    Huge Ophiuchus holds his hiss suppress'd;
    Orion, soften'd, drops his ardent blade,
    And Atlas stands unconscious of his load.
    Verse graced of old the feasts of kings, ere yet
    Luxurious dainties, destined to the gulf
    Immense of gluttony, were known, and ere
    Lyæus deluged yet the temperate board.
    Then sat the bard a customary guest
    To share the banquet, and, his length of locks
    With beechen honours bound, proposed in verse
    The characters of heroes and their deeds,
    To imitation; sang of chaos old,
    Of nature's birth, of gods that crept in search
    Of acorns fallen, and of the thunderbolt
    Not yet produced from Ætna's fiery cave.
    And what avails, at last, tune without voice,
    Devoid of matter? Such may suit perhaps
    The rural dance, but such was ne'er the song
    Of Orpheus, whom the streams stood still to hear,
    And the oaks follow'd. Not by chords alone
    Well touch'd, but by resistless accents more,
    To sympathetic tears the ghosts themselves
    He moved; these praises to his verse he owes.
      Nor thou persist, I pray thee, still to slight
    The sacred Nine, and to imagine vain
    And useless powers, by whom inspired, thyself
    Art skilful to associate verse with airs
    Harmonious, and to give the human voice
    A thousand modulations, heir by right
    Indisputable of Arion's fame.
    Now say, what wonder is it, if a son
    Of thine delight in verse, if, so conjoin'd
    In close affinity, we sympathize
    In social arts and kindred studies sweet?
    Such distribution of himself to us
    Was Phoebus' choice; thou hast thy gift, and I
    Mine also, and between us we receive,
    Father and son, the whole inspiring God.
      No! howsoe'er the semblance thou assume
    Of hate, thou hatest not the gentle muse,
    My father! for thou never badest me tread
    The beaten path, and broad, that leads right on
    To opulence, nor didst condemn thy son
    To the insipid clamours of the bar,
    To laws voluminous, and ill observed;
    But, wishing to enrich me more, to fill
    My mind with treasure, ledd'st me far away
    From city din to deep retreats, to banks
    And streams Aonian, and, with free consent,
    Didst place me happy at Apollo's side.
    I speak not now, on more important themes
    Intent, of common benefits, and such
    As nature bids, but of thy larger gifts,
    My father! who, when I had open'd once
    The stores of Roman rhetoric, and learn'd
    The full-ton'd language of the eloquent Greeks,
    Whose lofty music graced the lips of Jove,
    Thyself didst counsel me to add the flowers
    That Gallia boasts, those too, with which the smooth
    Italian his degenerate speech adorns,
    That witnesses his mixture with the Goth;
    And Palestine's prophetic songs divine.
    To sum the whole, whate'er the heaven contains,
    The earth beneath it, and the air between,
    The rivers and the restless deep, may all
    Prove intellectual gain to me, my wish
    Concurring with thy will; science herself,
    All cloud removed, inclines her beauteous head,
    And offers me the lip, if, dull of heart,
    I shrink not, and decline her gracious boon.
      Go now, and gather dross, ye sordid minds
    That covet it; what could my father more?
    What more could Jove himself, unless he gave
    His own abode, the heaven, in which he reigns?
    More eligible gifts than these were not
    Apollo's to his son, had they been safe
    As they were insecure, who made the boy
    The world's vice-luminary, bade him rule
    The radiant chariot of the day, and bind
    To his young brows his own all-dazzling wreath.
    I therefore, although last and least, my place
    Among the learned in the laurel grove
    Will hold, and where the conqueror's ivy twines,
    Henceforth exempt from the unletter'd throng
    Profane, nor even to be seen by such.
    Away then, sleepless care, complaint, away,
    And envy, with thy "jealous leer malign!"
    Nor let the monster calumny shoot forth
    Her venom'd tongue at me. Detested foes!
    Ye all are impotent against my peace,
    For I am privileged, and bear my breast
    Safe, and too high, for your viperean wound.
      But thou! my father, since to render thanks
    Equivalent, and to requite by deeds
    Thy liberality, exceeds my power,
    Suffice it, that I thus record thy gifts,
    And bear them treasured in a grateful mind!
    Ye, too, the favourite pastime of my youth,
    My voluntary numbers, if ye dare
    To hope longevity, and to survive
    Your master's funeral, not soon absorb'd
    In the oblivious Lethæan gulf,
    Shall to futurity perhaps convey
    This theme, and by these praises of my sire
    Improve the fathers of a distant age!


TO SALSILLUS, A ROMAN POET, MUCH INDISPOSED.

     The original is written in a measure called Scazon, which
     signifies limping, and the measure is so denominated, because,
     though in other respects Iambic, it terminates with a Spondee,
     and has, consequently, a more tardy movement.

     The reader will immediately see that this property of the Latin
     verse cannot be imitated in English.

    My halting muse, that dragg'st by choice along
    Thy slow, slow step, in melancholy song,
    And likest that pace, expressive of thy cares,
    Not less than Diopeia's sprightlier airs,
    When in the dance she beats with measured tread
    Heaven's floor, in front of Juno's golden bed;
    Salute Salsillus, who to verse divine
    Prefers, with partial love, such lays as mine.
    Thus writes that Milton, then, who, wafted o'er
    From his own nest on Albion's stormy shore,
    Where Eurus, fiercest of the Æolian band,
    Sweeps with ungovern'd rage the blasted land,
    Of late to more serene Ausonia came
    To view her cities of illustrious name,
    To prove, himself a witness of the truth,
    How wise her elders, and how learn'd her youth.
    Much good, Salsillus! and a body free
    From all disease, that Milton asks for thee,
    Who now endurest the langour and the pains
    That bile inflicts, diffused through all thy veins;
    Relentless malady! not moved to spare
    By thy sweet Roman voice and Lesbian air!
      Health, Hebe's sister, sent us from the skies,
    And thou, Apollo, whom all sickness flies,
    Pythius, or Pæan, or what name divine
    Soe'er thou choose, haste, heal a priest of thine!
    Ye groves of Faunus, and ye hills that melt
    With vinous dews, where meek Evander dwelt!
    If aught salubrious in your confines grow,
    Strive which shall soonest heal your poet's woe,
    That, render'd to the muse he loves, again
    He may enchant the meadows with his strain.
    Numa, reclined in everlasting ease
    Amid the shade of dark embowering trees,
    Viewing with eyes of unabated fire
    His loved Ægeria, shall that strain admire:
    So soothed, the tumid Tiber shall revere
    The tombs of kings, nor desolate the year,
    Shall curb his waters with a friendly rein,
    And guide them harmless, till they meet the main.


TO GIOVANNI BATTISTA MANSO,

MARQUIS OF VILLA.

MILTON'S ACCOUNT OF MANSO.

     Giovanni Battista Manso, Marquis of Villa, is an Italian
     nobleman of the highest estimation among his countrymen, for
     genius, literature, and military accomplishments. To him
     Torquato Tasso addressed his Dialogues on Friendship, for he was
     much the friend of Tasso, who has also celebrated him among the
     other princes of his country, in his poem entitled, Gerusalemme
     Conquistata, book xx.

    Fra cavalier magnanimi, e cortesi,
    Risplende il Manso.

     During the author's stay at Naples he received at the hands
     of the Marquis a thousand kind offices and civilities, and,
     desirous not to appear ungrateful, sent him this poem a short
     time before his departure from that city.

    These verses also to thy praise, the Nine,
    O Manso! happy in that theme, design,
    For, Gallus and Mæcenas gone, they see
    None such besides, or whom they love as thee;
    And if my verse may give the meed of fame,
    Thine too shall prove an everlasting name.
    Already such, it shines in Tasso's page
    (For thou wast Tasso's friend) from age to age,
    And, next, the muse consign'd (not unaware
    How high the charge) Marino to thy care,
    Who, singing to the nymphs Adonis' praise,
    Boasts thee the patron of his copious lays.
    To thee alone the poet would entrust
    His latest vows, to thee alone his dust;
    And thou with punctual piety hast paid,
    In labour'd brass, thy tribute to his shade.
    Nor this contented thee--but lest the grave
    Should aught absorb of theirs which thou could'st save,
    All future ages thou hast deign'd to teach
    The life, lot, genius, character of each,
    Eloquent as the Carian sage, who, true
    To his great theme, the life of Homer drew.
      I, therefore, though a stranger youth, who come
    Chill'd by rude blasts that freeze my northern home,
    Thee dear to Clio, confident proclaim,
    And thine, for Phoebus' sake, a deathless name.
    Nor thou, so kind, wilt view with scornful eye
    A muse scarce rear'd beneath our sullen sky,
    Who fears not, indiscreet as she is young,
    To seek in Latium hearers of her song.
    We too, where Thames with its unsullied waves
    The tresses of the blue-hair'd Ocean laves,
    Hear oft by night, or, slumbering, seem to hear,
    O'er his wide stream, the swan's voice warbling clear;
    And we could boast a Tityrus of yore
    Who trod, a welcome guest, your happy shore.
      Yes--dreary as we own our northern clime,
    E'en we to Phoebus raise the polish'd rhyme,
    We too serve Phoebus; Phoebus has received
    (If legends old may claim to be believed)
    No sordid gifts from us, the golden ear,
    The burnish'd apple, ruddiest of the year,
    The fragrant crocus, and, to grace his fane,
    Fair damsels chosen from the Druid train;
    Druids, our native bards in ancient time,
    Who gods and heroes praised in hallow'd rhyme!
    Hence, often as the maids of Greece surround
    Apollo's shrine with hymns of festive sound,
    They named the virgins who arrived of yore
    With British offerings on the Delian shore,
    Loxo, from giant Corineus sprung,
    Upis, on whose blest lips the future hung,
    And Hacaerge, with the golden hair,
    All deck'd with Pictish hues, and all with bosoms bare.
      Thou, therefore, happy sage, whatever clime
    Shall ring with Tasso's praise in after time,
    Or with Marino's, shalt be known their friend,
    And with an equal flight to fame ascend.
    The world shall hear how Phoebus and the Nine
    Were inmates once, and willing guests of thine.
    Yet Phoebus, when of old constrain'd to roam
    The earth, an exile from his heavenly home,
    Enter'd, no willing guest, Admetus' door,
    Though Hercules had ventured there before.
    But gentle Chiron's cave was near, a scene
    Of rural peace, clothed with perpetual green,
    And thither, oft as respite he required,
    From rustic clamours loud, the god retired.
    There, many a time, on Peneus' bank reclined
    At some oak's root, with ivy thick entwined,
    Won by his hospitable friend's desire,
    He soothed his pains of exile with the lyre.
    Then shook the hills, then trembled Peneus' shore,
    Nor OEta felt his load of forest more;
    The upland elms descended to the plain,
    And soften'd lynxes wonder'd at that strain.
      Well may we think, Oh, dear to all above!
    Thy birth distinguish'd by the smile of Jove,
    And that Apollo shed his kindliest power,
    And Maia's son, on that propitious hour.
    Since only minds so born can comprehend
    A poet's worth, or yield that worth a friend.
    Hence on thy yet unfaded cheek appears
    The lingering freshness of thy greener years;
    Hence in thy front and features we admire
    Nature unwither'd and a mind entire.
    O might so true a friend to me belong,
    So skill'd to grace the votaries of song,
    Should I recall hereafter into rhyme
    The kings and heroes of my native clime,
    Arthur the chief, who even now prepares,
    In subterraneous being, future wars,
    With all his martial knights, to be restored
    Each to his seat around the federal board;
    And oh, if spirit fail me not, disperse
    Our Saxon plunderers in triumphant verse!
    Then, after all, when, with the past content,
    A life I finish, not in silence spent;
    Should he, kind mourner, o'er my deathbed bend,
    I shall but need to say--"Be yet my friend!"
    He too, perhaps, shall bid the marble breathe
    To honour me, and with the graceful wreath
    Or of Parnassus or the Paphian isle
    Shall bind my brows--but I shall rest the while.
    Then also, if the fruits of faith endure,
    And virtue's promised recompence be sure,
    Born to those seats to which the blest aspire
    By purity of soul and virtuous fire,
    These rites, as fate permits, I shall survey
    With eyes illumined by celestial day,
    And, every cloud from my pure spirit driven,
    Joy in the bright beatitude of heaven!


ON THE DEATH OF DAMON.

THE ARGUMENT.

     Thyrsis and Damon, shepherds and neighbours, had always pursued
     the same studies, and had, from their earliest days, been
     united in the closest friendship. Thyrsis, while travelling for
     improvement, received intelligence of the death of Damon, and,
     after a time, returning and finding it true, deplores himself,
     and his solitary condition, in this poem.

     By Damon is to be understood Charles Deodati, connected with the
     Italian city of Lucca by his father's side, in other respects an
     Englishman; a youth of uncommon genius, erudition, and virtue.

    Ye Nymphs of Himera, (for ye have shed
    Erewhile for Daphnis, and for Hylas dead,
    And over Bion's long-lamented bier,
    The fruitless meed of many a sacred tear,)
    Now through the villas laved by Thames rehearse
    The woes of Thyrsis in Sicilian verse,
    What sighs he heaved, and how with groans profound
    He made the woods and hollow rocks resound,
    Young Damon dead; nor even ceased to pour
    His lonely sorrows at the midnight hour.
      The green wheat twice had nodded in the ear,
    And golden harvest twice enrich'd the year,
    Since Damon's lips had gasp'd for vital air
    The last, last time, nor Thyrsis yet was there;
    For he, enamour'd of the muse, remain'd
    In Tuscan Fiorenza long detain'd,
    But, stored at length with all he wish'd to learn,
    For his flock's sake, now hasted to return;
    And when the shepherd had resumed his seat
    At the elm's root, within his old retreat,
    Then 'twas his lot then all his loss to know,
    And from his burden'd heart he vented thus his woe:
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Alas! what deities shall I suppose
    In heaven, or earth, concerned for human woes,
    Since, oh my Damon! their severe decree
    So soon condemns me to regret of thee!
    Depart'st thou thus, thy virtues unrepaid
    With fame and honour, like a vulgar shade!
    Let him forbid it, whose bright rod controls,
    And separates sordid from illustrious souls,
    Drive far the rabble, and to thee assign
    A happier lot with spirits worthy thine!
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Whate'er befall, unless by cruel chance
    The wolf first give me a forbidding glance,
    Thou shalt not moulder undeplored, but long
    Thy praise shall dwell on every shepherd's tongue.
    To Daphnis first they shall delight to pay,
    And, after him, to thee the votive lay,
    While Pales shall the flocks and pastures love,
    Or Faunus to frequent the field or grove;
    At least, if ancient piety and truth,
    With all the learned labours of thy youth,
    May serve thee aught, or to have left behind
    A sorrowing friend, and of the tuneful kind.
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Who now my pains and perils shall divide,
    As thou wast wont, for ever at my side,
    Both when the rugged frost annoy'd our feet,
    And when the herbage all was parch'd with heat;
    Whether the grim wolf's ravage to prevent,
    Or the huge lion's, arm'd with darts we went;
    Whose converse now shall calm my stormy day,
    With charming song who now beguile my way?
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    In whom shall I confide? Whose counsel find
    A balmy medicine for my troubled mind?
    Or whose discourse with innocent delight
    Shall fill me now, and cheat the wintry night,
    While hisses on my hearth the pulpy pear,
    And blackening chestnuts start and crackle there,
    While storms abroad the dreary meadows whelm,
    And the wind thunders through the neighbouring elm?
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Or who, when summer suns their summit reach,
    And Pan sleeps hidden by the sheltering beech,
    When shepherds disappear, nymphs seek the sedge,
    And the stretch'd rustic snores beneath the hedge,
    Who then shall render me thy pleasant vein
    Of Attic wit, thy jests, thy smiles again?
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Where glens and vales are thickest overgrown
    With tangled boughs, I wander now alone,
    Till night descend, while blustering wind and shower
    Beat on my temples through the shatter'd bower.
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Alas! what rampant weeds now shame my fields,
    And what a mildew'd crop the furrow yields;
    My rambling vines unwedded to the trees,
    Bear shrivell'd grapes; my myrtles fail to please;
    Nor please me more my flocks: they, slighted turn
    Their unavailing looks on me, and mourn.
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Ægon invites me to the hazel grove,
    Amyntas, on the river's bank to rove,
    And young Alphesiboeus to a seat
    Where branching elms exclude the mid-day heat.
    'Here fountains spring--here mossy hillocks rise;
    Here zephyr whispers, and the stream replies.'--
    Thus each persuades, but, deaf to every call,
    I gain the thickets, and escape them all.
      "Go, seek your home, my lambs; my thoughts are due
    To other cares than those of feeding you.
    Then Mopsus said, (the same who reads so well
    The voice of birds, and what the stars foretell,
    For he by chance had noticed my return,)
    'What means thy sullen mood, this deep concern?
    Ah, Thyrsis, thou art either crazed with love,
    Or some sinister influence from above;
    Dull Saturn's influence oft the shepherds rue;
    His leaden shaft oblique has pierced thee through.'
      "Go, go, my lambs, unpastured as ye are,
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    The nymphs amazed, my melancholy see,
    And, 'Thyrsis!' cry--'what will become of thee?
    What wouldst thou, Thyrsis? such should not appear
    The brow of youth, stern, gloomy, and severe;
    Brisk youth should laugh and love--ah, shun the fate
    Of those, twice wretched mopes! who love too late!'
      "Go, go, my lambs, unpastured as ye are;
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    Ægle with Hyas came, to soothe my pain,
    And Baucis' daughter, Dryope, the vain,
    Fair Dryope, for voice and finger neat
    Known far and near, and for her self-conceit;
    Chloris too came, whose cottage on the lands
    That skirt the Idumanian current stands;
    But all in vain they came, and but to see
    Kind words, and comfortable, lost on me.
      "Go, go, my lambs, unpastured as ye are;
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    Ah blest indifference of the playful herd,
    None by his fellow chosen, or preferr'd!
    No bonds of amity the flocks inthral,
    But each associates, and is pleased with all;
    So graze the dappled deer in numerous droves,
    And all his kind alike the zebra loves;
    That same law governs, where the billows roar,
    And Proteus' shoals o'erspread the desert shore;
    The sparrow, meanest of the feather'd race,
    His fit companion finds in every place,
    With whom he picks the grain that suits him best,
    Flirts here and there, and late returns to rest,
    And whom, if chance the falcon makes his prey,
    Or hedger with his well aim'd arrow slay,
    For no such loss the gay survivor grieves,
    New love he seeks, and new delight receives.
    We only, an obdurate kind, rejoice,
    Scorning all others, in a single choice.
    We scarce in thousands meet one kindred mind,
    And if the long-sought good at last we find,
    When least we fear it, Death our treasure steals,
    And gives our heart a wound that nothing heals.
      "Go, go, my lambs, unpastured as ye are;
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    Ah, what delusion lured me from my flocks,
    To traverse Alpine snows and rugged rocks!
    What need so great had I to visit Rome,
    Now sunk in ruins, and herself a tomb?
    Or, had she flourish'd still, as when, of old,
    For her sake Tityrus forsook his fold,
    What need so great had I to incur a pause
    Of thy sweet intercourse for such a cause,
    For such a cause to place the roaring sea,
    Rocks, mountains, woods, between my friend and me?
    Else, had I grasp'd thy feeble hand, composed
    Thy decent limbs, thy drooping eyelids closed,
    And, at the last, had said--'Farewell--ascend--
    Nor even in the skies forget thy friend!'
      "Go, go, my lambs, untended homeward fare;
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    Although well pleased, ye tuneful Tuscan swains!
    My mind the memory of your worth retains,
    Yet not your worth can teach me less to mourn
    My Damon lost.--He too was Tuscan born,
    Born in your Lucca, city of renown!
    And wit possess'd, and genius, like your own.
    Oh how elate was I, when, stretch'd beside
    The murmuring course of Arno's breezy tide,
    Beneath the poplar grove I pass'd my hours,
    Now cropping myrtles, and now vernal flowers,
    And hearing, as I lay at ease along,
    Your swains contending for the prize of song!
    I also dared attempt (and, as it seems,
    Not much displeased attempting) various themes,
    For even I can presents boast from you,
    The shepherd's pipe, and ozier basket too,
    And Dati and Francini both have made
    My name familiar to the beechen shade,
    And they are learn'd, and each in every place
    Renown'd for song, and both of Lydian race.
      "Go, go, my lambs, untended homeward fare;
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    While bright the dewy grass with moonbeams shone,
    And I stood hurdling in my kids alone,
    How often have I said (but thou hadst found
    Ere then thy dark cold lodgment underground)
    Now Damon sings, or springes sets for hares,
    Or wickerwork for various use prepares!
    How oft, indulging fancy, have I plann'd
    New scenes of pleasure that I hoped at hand,
    Call'd thee abroad as I was wont, and cried--
    'What, hoa! my friend--come lay thy task aside;
    Haste, let us forth together, and beguile
    The heat beneath yon whispering shades awhile,
    Or on the margin stray of Colne's clear flood,
    Or where Cassibelan's grey turrets stood!
    There thou shalt cull me simples, and shalt teach
    Thy friend the name and healing powers of each,
    From the tall bluebell to the dwarfish weed,
    What the dry land, and what the marshes breed,
    For all their kinds alike to thee are known,
    And the whole art of Galen is thy own.'
    Ah, perish Galen's art, and wither'd be
    The useless herbs that gave not health to thee!
    Twelve evenings since, as in poetic dream,
    I meditating sat some statelier theme,
    The reeds no sooner touch'd my lip, though new,
    And unessay'd before, than wide they flew,
    Bursting their waxen bands, nor could sustain
    The deep-toned music of the solemn strain;
    And I am vain perhaps, but I will tell
    How proud a theme I chose--ye groves, farewell.
      "Go, go, my lambs, untended homeward fare;
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    Of Brutus, Dardan chief, my song shall be,
    How with his barks he plough'd the British sea,
    First from Rutupia's towering headland seen,
    And of his consort's reign, fair Imogen;
    Of Brennus and Belinus, brothers bold,
    And of Arviragus, and how of old
    Our hardy sires the Armorican controll'd,
    And of the wife of Gorloïs, who, surprised
    By Uther, in her husband's form disguised,
    (Such was the force of Merlin's art,) became
    Pregnant with Arthur of heroic fame.
    These themes I now revolve--and Oh--if Fate
    Proportion to these themes my lengthen'd date,
    Adieu my shepherd's reed--yon pine tree bough
    Shall be thy future home, there dangle thou
    Forgotten and disused, unless ere long
    Thou change thy Latian for a British song:
    A British?--even so--the powers of man
    Are bounded; little is the most he can;
    And it shall well suffice me, and shall be
    Fame and proud recompence enough for me,
    If Usa, golden-hair'd, my verse may learn,
    If Alain bending o'er his crystal urn,
    Swift-whirling Abra, Trent's o'ershadow'd stream,
    Thames, lovelier far than all in my esteem,
    Tamar's ore-tinctured flood, and, after these,
    The wave-worn shores of utmost Orcades.
      "Go, go, my lambs, untended homeward fare;
    My thoughts are all now due to other care.
    All this I kept in leaves of laurel rind
    Enfolded safe, and for thy view design'd,
    This--and a gift from Manso's hand beside,
    (Manso, not least his native city's pride,)
    Two cups that radiant as their giver shone,
    Adorn'd by sculpture with a double zone.
    The spring was graven there; here slowly wind
    The Red sea shores with groves of spices lined;
    Her plumes of various hues amid the boughs
    The sacred, solitary phoenix shows,
    And, watchful of the dawn, reverts her head
    To see Aurora leave her watery bed.
    --In other part, the expensive vault above,
    And there too, even there, the god of love;
    With quiver arm'd he mounts, his torch displays
    A vivid light, his gem-tipt arrows blaze,
    Around his bright and fiery eyes he rolls,
    Nor aims at vulgar minds or little souls,
    Nor deigns one look below, but, aiming high,
    Sends every arrow to the lofty sky;
    Hence forms divine, and minds immortal, learn
    The power of Cupid, and enamour'd burn.
      "Thou, also, Damon, (neither need I fear
    That hope delusive,) thou art also there;
    For whither should simplicity like thine
    Retire, where else should spotless virtue shine?
    Thou dwell'st not (thought profane) in shades below,
    Nor tears suit thee--cease then, my tears, to flow.
    Away with grief: on Damon ill bestow'd!
    Who, pure himself, has found a pure abode,
    Has pass'd the showery arch, henceforth resides
    With saints and heroes, and from flowing tides
    Quaffs copious immortality and joy
    With hallow'd lips!--Oh! blest without alloy,
    And now enrich'd with all that faith can claim,
    Look down, entreated by whatever name,
    If Damon please thee most (that rural sound
    Shall oft with echoes fill the groves around)
    Or if Deodatus, by which alone
    In those ethereal mansions thou art known.
    Thy blush was maiden, and thy youth the taste
    Of wedded bliss knew never, pure and chaste,
    The honours, therefore, by divine decree
    The lot of virgin worth, are given to thee:
    Thy brows encircled with a radiant band,
    And the green palm branch waving in thy hand,
    Thou in immortal nuptials shalt rejoice,
    And join with seraphs thy according voice,
    Where rapture reigns, and the ecstatic lyre
    Guides the blest orgies of the blazing quire."


AN ODE, ADDRESSED TO MR. JOHN ROUSE,

LIBRARIAN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,

On a lost Volume of my Poems, which he desired me to replace,
   that he might add them to my other Works deposited in the
   Library.

This ode is rendered without rhyme, that it might more adequately
represent the original, which, as Milton himself informs us, is of
no certain measure. It may possibly for this reason disappoint the
reader, though it cost the writer more labour than the translation
of any other piece in the whole collection.

    STROPHE.

      My twofold book! single in show
        But double in contents,
      Neat, but not curiously adorn'd,
          Which, in his early youth,
        A poet gave, no lofty one in truth,
      Although an earnest wooer of the muse--
        Say, while in cool Ausonian shades
          Or British wilds he roam'd,
        Striking by turns his native lyre,
          By turns the Daunian lute,
          And stepp'd almost in air--

ANTISTROPHE.

        Say, little book, what furtive hand
        Thee from thy fellow books convey'd,
        What time, at the repeated suit
            Of my most learned friend,
    I sent thee forth, an honour'd traveller,
    From our great city to the source of Thames,
               Cærulean sire!
    Where rise the fountains, and the raptures ring,
            Of the Aonian choir,
        Durable as yonder spheres,
        And through the endless lapse of years
            Secure to be admired?

STROPHE II.

          Now what god, or demi-god,
        For Britain's ancient genius moved,
            (If our afflicted land
        Have expiated at length the guilty sloth
            Of her degenerate sons)
          Shall terminate our impious feuds,
        And discipline with hallow'd voice recall?
          Recall the muses too,
          Driven from their ancient seats
    In Albion, and well nigh from Albion's shore,
          And, with keen Phoebean shafts
          Piercing the unseemly birds,
            Whose talons menace us,
    Shall drive the Harpy race from Helicon afar?

ANTISTROPHE.

        But thou, my book, though thou hast stray'd,
            Whether by treachery lost,
    Or indolent neglect, thy bearer's fault,
            From all thy kindred books,
        To some dark cell or cave forlorn,
            Where thou endurest, perhaps,
        The chafing of some hard untutor'd hand,
                    Be comforted--
    For lo! again the splendid hope appears
        That thou mayst yet escape
    The gulfs of Lethe, and on oary wings
    Mount to the everlasting courts of Jove!

STROPHE III.

        Since Rouse desires thee, and complains
            That, though by promise his,
            Thou yet appear'st not in thy place
    Among the literary noble stores
                Given to his care,
    But, absent, leavest his numbers incomplete.
        He, therefore, guardian vigilant
            Of that unperishing wealth,
    Calls thee to the interior shrine, his charge,
    Where he intends a richer treasure far
    Than Iön kept (Iön, Erectheus' son
    Illustrious, of the fair Creüsa born)
    In the resplendent temple of his god,
    Tripods of gold, and Delphic gifts divine.


ANTISTROPHE.

          Haste, then, to the pleasant groves,
            The muses' favourite haunt;
    Resume thy station in Apollo's dome,
                Dearer to him
    Than Delos, or the fork'd Parnassian hill!
                Exulting go,
    Since now a splendid lot is also thine,
    And thou art sought by my propitious friend;
          For there thou shalt be read
          With authors of exalted note,
    The ancient glorious lights of Greece and Rome.

EPODE.

    Ye, then, my works, no longer vain,
            And worthless deem'd by me!
        Whate'er this sterile genius has produced,
        Expect, at last, the rage of envy spent,
          An unmolested happy home,
    Gift of kind Hermes, and my watchful friend,
          Where never flippant tongue profane
            Shall entrance find,
    And whence the coarse unletter'd multitude
          Shall babble far remote.
        Perhaps some future distant age,
    Less tinged with prejudice, and better taught,
          Shall furnish minds of power
          To judge more equally.
        Then, malice silenced in the tomb,
          Cooler heads and sounder hearts,
          Thanks to Rouse, if aught of praise
    I merit, shall with candour weigh the claim.


TRANSLATIONS OF THE ITALIAN POEMS.

SONNET.

    Fair Lady! whose harmonious name the Rhine,
      Through all his grassy vale, delights to hear,
      Base were indeed the wretch who could forbear
    To love a spirit elegant as thine,
    That manifests a sweetness all divine,
      Nor knows a thousand winning acts to spare,
      And graces, which Love's bow and arrows are,
    Tempering thy virtues to a softer shine.
    When gracefully thou speak'st, or singest gay
      Such strains as might the senseless forest move,
    Ah then--turn each his eyes and ears away,
      Who feels himself unworthy of thy love!
    Grace can alone preserve him ere the dart
    Of fond desire yet reach his inmost heart.


SONNET.

    As on a hill-top rude, when closing day
      Imbrowns the scene, some pastoral maiden fair
      Waters a lovely foreign plant with care,
    Borne from its native genial airs away,
    That scarcely can its tender bud display,
      So, on my tongue these accents, new and rare,
      Are flowers exotic, which Love waters there.
    While thus, O sweetly scornful! I essay
      Thy praise in verse to British ears unknown,
      And Thames exchange for Arno's fair domain;
      So Love has will'd, and ofttimes Love has shown,
      That what he wills, he never wills in vain--
    Oh that this hard and sterile breast might be
    To Him, who plants from heaven, a soil as free!


CANZONE.

    They mock my toil--the nymphs and amorous swains--
    And whence this fond attempt to write, they cry,
    Love-songs in language that thou little know'st?
    How darest thou risk to sing these foreign strains?
    Say truly. Find'st not oft thy purpose cross'd,
    And that thy fairest flowers here fade and die?
    Then with pretence of admiration high--
    Thee other shores expect, and other tides,
    Rivers, on whose grassy sides
    Her deathless laurel leaf, with which to bind
    Thy flowing locks, already Fame provides;
    Why then this burden, better far declined?
      Speak, muse! for me--the fair one said, who guides
    My willing heart, and all my fancy's flights,
    "This is the language in which Love delights."


SONNET, TO CHARLES DEODATI.

    Charles--and I say it wondering--thou must know
      That I, who once assumed a scornful air
       And scoff'd at Love, am fallen in his snare,
    (Full many an upright man has fallen so:)
    Yet think me not thus dazzled by the flow
    Of golden locks, or damask cheek; more rare
    The heartfelt beauties of my foreign fair:
    A mien majestic, with dark brows that show
    The tranquil lustre of a lofty mind;
    Words exquisite, of idioms more than one,
    And song, whose fascinating power might bind,
    And from her sphere draw down the labouring moon;
    With such fire-darting eyes that, should I fill
    My ears with wax, she would enchant me still.


SONNET.

    Lady! It cannot be but that thine eyes
      Must be my sun, such radiance they display,
      And strike me e'en as Phoebus him whose way
    Through horrid Libya's sandy desert lies.
    Meantime, on that side steamy vapours rise
      Where most I suffer. Of what kind are they,
      New as to me they are, I cannot say,
    But deem them, in the lover's language--sighs.
    Some, though with pain, my bosom close conceals,
    Which, if in part escaping thence, they tend
    To soften thine, thy coldness soon congeals.
    While others to my tearful eyes ascend,
    Whence my sad nights in showers are ever drown'd,
    Till my Aurora comes, her brow with roses bound.


SONNET.

    Enamour'd, artless, young, on foreign ground,
      Uncertain whither from myself to fly;
      To thee, dear Lady, with an humble sigh
    Let me devote my heart, which I have found
    By certain proofs, not few, intrepid, sound,
      Good, and addicted to conceptions high:
      When tempests shake the world, and fire the sky,
    It rests in adamant self-wrapt around,
    As safe from envy as from outrage rude,
    From hopes and fears that vulgar minds abuse,
    As fond of genius, and fix'd fortitude,
    Of the resounding lyre and every muse.
    Weak you will find it in one only part,
    Now pierced by love's immedicable dart.


SIMILE IN PARADISE LOST.

    'So when, from mountain tops, the dusky clouds
    Ascending,' &c.

    . . . . . . .

    Quales aërii montis de vertice nubes
    Cum surgunt, et jam Boreæ tumida ora quiêrunt,
    Coelum hilares abdit, spissâ caligine, vultus:
    Tum, si jucundo tandem sol prodeat ore,
    Et croceo montes et pascua lumine tingat,
    Gaudent omnia, aves mulcent concentibus agros
    Balatuque ovium colles vallesque resultant.


TRANSLATION OF DRYDEN'S EPIGRAM ON MILTON.

    Tres tria, sed longè distantia, sæcula vates
      Ostentant tribus è gentibus eximios.
    Græcia sublimem, cum majestate disertum
      Roma tulit, felix Anglia utrique parem.
    Partubus ex binis Natura exhausta, coacta est,
      Tertius ut fieret, consociare duos.

  July, 1780.




TRANSLATIONS FROM VINCENT BOURNE.


I. THE GLOWWORM.

    Beneath the hedge, or near the stream,
      A worm is known to stray,
    That shows by night a lucid beam,
      Which disappears by day.

    Disputes have been, and still prevail,
      From whence his rays proceed;
    Some give that honour to his tail,
      And others to his head.

    But this is sure--the hand of night
      That kindles up the skies,
    Gives him a modicum of light
      Proportion'd to his size.

    Perhaps indulgent Nature meant,
      By such a lamp bestow'd,
    To bid the traveller, as he went,
      Be careful where he trod:

    Nor crush a worm, whose useful light
      Might serve, however small,
    To show a stumbling stone by night,
      And save him from a fall.

    Whate'er she meant, this truth divine
      Is legible and plain,
    'Tis power almighty bids him shine,
      Nor bids him shine in vain.

    Ye proud and wealthy, let this theme
      Teach humbler thoughts to you,
    Since such a reptile has its gem,
      And boasts its splendour too.


II. THE JACKDAW.

    There is a bird who, by his coat
    And by the hoarseness of his note,
      Might be supposed a crow;
    A great frequenter of the church,
    Where, bishop-like, he finds a perch,
      And dormitory too.

    Above the steeple shines a plate,
    That turns and turns, to indicate
      From what point blows the weather.
    Look up--your brains begin to swim,
    'Tis in the clouds--that pleases him,
      He chooses it the rather.

    Fond of the speculative height,
    Thither he wings his airy flight,
      And thence securely sees
    The bustle and the rareeshow,
    That occupy mankind below,
      Secure and at his ease.

    You think, no doubt, he sits and muses
    On future broken bones and bruises,
      If he should chance to fall.
    No; not a single thought like that
    Employs his philosophic pate,
      Or troubles it at all.

    He sees that this great roundabout,
    The world, with all its motley rout,
      Church, army, physic, law,
    Its customs and its businesses,
    Is no concern at all of his,
      And says--what says he?--Caw.

    Thrice happy bird! I too have seen
    Much of the vanities of men;
      And, sick of having seen 'em,
    Would cheerfully these limbs resign
    For such a pair of wings as thine
      And such a head between 'em.


III. THE CRICKET

    Little inmate, full of mirth,
    Chirping on my kitchen hearth,
    Wheresoe'er be thine abode,
    Always harbinger of good,
    Pay me for thy warm retreat
    With a song more soft and sweet;
    In return thou shalt receive
    Such a strain as I can give.

    Thus thy praise shall be express'd,
    Inoffensive, welcome guest!
    While the rat is on the scout,
    And the mouse with curious snout,
    With what vermin else infest
    Every dish, and spoil the best;
    Frisking thus before the fire,
    Thou hast all thine heart's desire.

    Though in voice and shape they be
    Form'd as if akin to thee,
    Thou surpassest, happier far,
    Happiest grasshoppers that are;
    Theirs is but a summer's song,
    Thine endures the winter long,
    Unimpair'd, and shrill, and clear,
    Melody throughout the year.

    Neither night nor dawn of day
    Puts a period to thy play:
    Sing, then--and extend thy span
    Far beyond the date of man.
    Wretched man, whose years are spent
    In repining discontent,
    Lives not, aged though he be,
    Half a span, compared with thee.



  [Illustration:

  _J. Gilbert fecit._

  _W. Greatbach sculp._


  THE PARROT.

  "IN PAINTED PLUMES SUPERBLY DRESS'D, A NATIVE OF THE GORGEOUS
  EAST"]


IV. THE PARROT.

    In painted plumes superbly dress'd,
    A native of the gorgeous east,
      By many a billow toss'd;
    Poll gains at length the British shore,
    Part of the captain's precious store,
      A present to his toast.

    Belinda's maids are soon preferr'd,
    To teach him now and then a word,
      As Poll can master it;
    But 'tis her own important charge,
    To qualify him more at large,
      And make him quite a wit.

    Sweet Poll! his doting mistress cries,
    Sweet Poll! the mimic bird replies,
      And calls aloud for sack.
    She next instructs him in the kiss;
    'Tis now a little one, like Miss,
      And now a hearty smack.

    At first he aims at what he hears;
    And, listening close with both his ears,
      Just catches at the sound;
    But soon articulates aloud,
    Much to the amusement of the crowd,
      And stuns the neighbours round.

    A querulous old woman's voice
    His humorous talent next employs,
      He scolds, and gives the lie.
    And now he sings, and now is sick,
    Here, Sally, Susan, come, come quick,
      Poor Poll is like to die!

    Belinda and her bird! 'tis rare
    To meet with such a well match'd pair,
      The language and the tone,
    Each character in every part
    Sustain'd with so much grace and art,
      And both in unison.

    When children first begin to spell,
    And stammer out a syllable,
      We think them tedious creatures;
    But difficulties soon abate,
    When birds are to be taught to prate,
      And women are the teachers.


THE THRACIAN.

    Thracian parents, at his birth,
      Mourn their babe with many a tear,
    But, with undissembled mirth,
      Place him breathless on his bier.

    Greece and Rome, with equal scorn,
      "O the savages!" exclaim,
    "Whether they rejoice or mourn,
      Well entitled to the name!"

    But the cause of this concern
      And this pleasure would they trace,
    Even they might somewhat learn
      From the savages of Thrace.


RECIPROCAL KINDNESS THE PRIMARY LAW OF NATURE.

    Androcles, from his injured lord, in dread
    Of instant death, to Lybia's desert fled,
    Tired with his toilsome flight, and parch'd with heat,
    He spied at length a cavern's cool retreat;
    But scarce had given to rest his weary frame,
    When, hugest of his kind, a lion came:
    He roar'd approaching: but the savage din
    To plaintive murmurs changed--arrived within,
    And with expressive looks, his lifted paw
    Presenting, aid implored from whom he saw.
    The fugitive, through terror at a stand,
    Dared not awhile afford his trembling hand;
    But bolder grown, at length inherent found
    A pointed thorn, and drew it from the wound.
    The cure was wrought; he wiped the sanious blood,
    And firm and free from pain the lion stood.
    Again he seeks the wilds, and day by day
    Regales his inmate with the parted prey.
    Nor he disdains the dole, though unprepared,
    Spread on the ground, and with a lion shared.
    But thus to live--still lost--sequester'd still--
    Scarce seem'd his lord's revenge a heavier ill.
    Home! native home! O might he but repair!
    He must--he will, though death attends him there.
    He goes, and doom'd to perish on the sands
    Of the full theatre unpitied stands:
    When lo! the selfsame lion from his cage
    Flies to devour him, famish'd into rage.
    He flies, but viewing in his purposed prey
    The man, his healer, pauses on his way,
    And, soften'd by remembrance into sweet
    And kind composure, crouches at his feet.
      Mute with astonishment, the assembly gaze:
    But why, ye Romans? Whence your mute amaze?
    All this is natural: nature bade him rend
    An enemy; she bids him spare a friend.


A MANUAL,

MORE ANCIENT THAN THE ART OF PRINTING, AND NOT TO BE FOUND IN ANY
CATALOGUE.

    There is a book, which we may call
      (Its excellence is such)
    Alone a library, though small;
      The ladies thumb it much.

    Words none, things numerous it contains:
      And things with words compared,
    Who needs be told, that has his brains,
      Which merits most regard?

    Ofttimes its leaves of scarlet hue
      A golden edging boast;
    And open'd, it displays to view
      Twelve pages at the most.

    Nor name, nor title, stamp'd behind,
      Adorns its outer part;
    But all within 'tis richly lined,
      A magazine of art.

    The whitest hands that secret hoard
      Oft visit: and the fair
    Preserve it in their bosoms stored,
      As with a miser's care.

    Thence implements of every size,
      And form'd for various use,
    (They need but to consult their eyes,)
      They readily produce.

    The largest and the longest kind
      Possess the foremost page;
    A sort most needed by the blind,
      Or nearly such, from age.

    The full charg'd leaf which next ensues,
      Presents in bright array
    The smaller sort, which matrons use,
      Not quite so blind as they.

    The third, the fourth, the fifth supply
      What their occasions ask,
    Who with a more discerning eye
      Perform a nicer task.

    But still with regular decrease,
      From size to size they fall,
    In every leaf grow less and less;
      The last are least of all.

    O! what a fund of genius, pent
      In narrow space is here!
    This volume's method and intent
      How luminous and clear!

    It leaves no reader at a loss
      Or posed, whoever reads:
    No commentator's tedious gloss,
      Nor even index needs.

    Search Bodley's many thousands o'er!
      No book is treasured there,
    Nor yet in Granta's numerous store,
      That may with this compare.

    No!--rival none in either host
      Of this was ever seen,
    Or, that contents could justly boast,
      So brilliant and so keen.


AN ENIGMA.

    A needle, small as small can be,
    In bulk and use surpasses me,
      Nor is my purchase dear;
    For little, and almost for nought,
    As many of my kind are bought
      As days are in the year.

    Yet though but little use we boast,
    And are procured at little cost,
      The labour is not light;
    Nor few artificers it asks,
    All skilful in their several tasks,
      To fashion us aright.

    One fuses metal o'er the fire,
    A second draws it into wire,
      The shears another plies;
    Who clips in length the brazen thread
    From him who, chafing every shred,
      Gives all an equal size.

    A fifth prepares, exact and round,
    The knob with which it must be crown'd;
      His follower makes it fast:
    And with his mallet and his file
    To shape the point, employs awhile
      The seventh and the last.

    Now, therefore, OEdipus! declare
    What creature, wonderful, and rare,
      A process that obtains
    Its purpose with so much ado
    At last produces!--tell me true,
      And take me for your pains!


SPARROWS SELF-DOMESTICATED IN TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

    None ever shared the social feast,
    Or as an inmate or a guest,
    Beneath the celebrated dome
    Where once Sir Isaac had his home,
    Who saw not (and with some delight
    Perhaps he view'd the novel sight)
    How numerous, at the tables there,
    The sparrows beg their daily fare.
    For there, in every nook and cell
    Where such a family may dwell,
    Sure as the vernal season comes
    Their nest they weave in hope of crumbs,
    Which kindly given, may serve with food
    Convenient their unfeather'd brood;
    And oft as with its summons clear
    The warning bell salutes their ear,
    Sagacious listeners to the sound,
    They flock from all the fields around,
    To reach the hospitable hall,
    None more attentive to the call.
    Arrived, the pensionary band,
    Hopping and chirping, close at hand,
    Solicit what they soon receive.
    The sprinkled, plenteous donative.
    Thus is a multitude, though large,
    Supported at a trivial charge;
    A single doit would overpay
    The expenditure of every day,
    And who can grudge so small a grace
    To suppliants, natives of the place?


FAMILIARITY DANGEROUS.

    As in her ancient mistress' lap
      The youthful tabby lay,
    They gave each other many a tap,
      Alike disposed to play.

    But strife ensues. Puss waxes warm,
      And with protruded claws
    Ploughs all the length of Lydia's arm,
      Mere wantonness the cause.

    At once, resentful of the deed,
      She shakes her to the ground
    With many a threat that she shall bleed
      With still a deeper wound.

    But, Lydia, bid thy fury rest:
      It was a venial stroke:
    For she that will with kittens jest
      Should bear a kitten's joke.


INVITATION TO THE REDBREAST.

    Sweet bird, whom the winter constrains--
        And seldom another it can--
    To seek a retreat while he reigns
        In the well-shelter'd dwellings of man,
    Who never can seem to intrude,
        Though in all places equally free,
    Come oft as the season is rude,
        Thou art sure to be welcome to me.

    At sight of the first feeble ray
        That pierces the clouds of the east,
    To inveigle thee every day
        My windows shall show thee a feast.
    For, taught by experience, I know,
        Thee mindful of benefit long;
    And that, thankful for all I bestow,
        Thou wilt pay me with many a song.

    Then, soon as the swell of the buds
        Bespeaks the renewal of spring,
    Fly hence, if thou wilt, to the woods,
        Or where it shall please thee to sing:
    And shouldst thou, compell'd by a frost,
        Come again to my window or door,
    Doubt not an affectionate host,
        Only pay as thou paid'st me before.

    This music must needs be confess'd
        To flow from a fountain above;
    Else how should it work in the breast
        Unchangeable friendship and love?
    And who on the globe can be found,
        Save your generation and ours,
    That can be delighted by sound,
        Or boasts any musical powers?


STRADA'S NIGHTINGALE.

    The shepherd touch'd his reed; sweet Philomel
      Essay'd, and oft essay'd to catch the strain,
    And treasuring, as on her ear they fell,
      The numbers, echo'd note for note again.

    The peevish youth, who ne'er had found before
      A rival of his skill, indignant heard,
    And soon (for various was his tuneful store)
      In loftier tones defied the simple bird.

    She dared the task, and, rising as he rose,
      With all the force that passion gives inspired,
    Return'd the sounds awhile, but in the close
      Exhausted fell, and at his feet expired.

    Thus strength, not skill prevail'd. O fatal strife,
      By thee, poor songstress, playfully begun;
    And, O sad victory, which cost thy life,
      And he may wish that he had never won!


ODE ON THE DEATH OF A LADY,

WHO LIVED ONE HUNDRED YEARS, AND DIED ON HER BIRTHDAY, 1728.

    Ancient dame, how wide and vast
      To a race like ours appears,
    Rounded to an orb at last,
      All thy multitude of years!

    We, the herd of human kind,
      Frailer and of feebler powers;
    We, to narrow bounds confined,
      Soon exhaust the sum of ours.

    Death's delicious banquet--we
      Perish even from the womb,
    Swifter than a shadow flee,
      Nourish'd but to feed the tomb.

    Seeds of merciless disease
      Lurk in all that we enjoy;
    Some that waste us by degrees,
      Some that suddenly destroy.

    And, if life o'erleap the bourn
      Common to the sons of men,
    What remains, but that we mourn,
      Dream, and dote, and drivel then?

    Fast as moons can wax and wane
      Sorrow comes; and, while we groan,
    Pant with anguish, and complain,
      Half our years are fled and gone.

    If a few (to few 'tis given),
      Lingering on this earthly stage,
    Creep and halt with steps uneven
      To the period of an age,

    Wherefore live they, but to see
      Cunning, arrogance, and force,
    Sights lamented much by thee,
      Holding their accustom'd course?

    Oft was seen, in ages past,
      All that we with wonder view;
    Often shall be to the last;
      Earth produces nothing new.

    Thee we gratulate, content
      Should propitious Heaven design
    Life for us as calmly spent,
      Though but half the length of thine.


THE CAUSE WON.

    Two neighbours furiously dispute;
    A field--the subject of the suit.
    Trivial the spot, yet such the rage
    With which the combatants engage,
    'Twere hard to tell who covets most
    The prize--at whatsoever cost.
    The pleadings swell. Words still suffice:
    No single word but has its price.
    No term but yields some fair pretence
    For novel and increased expense.
      Defendant thus becomes a name,
    Which he that bore it may disclaim,
    Since both in one description blended,
    Are plaintiffs--when the suit is ended.


THE SILKWORM.

    The beams of April, ere it goes,
    A worm, scarce visible, disclose;
    All winter long content to dwell
    The tenant of his native shell.
    The same prolific season gives
    The sustenance by which he lives,
    The mulberry leaf, a simple store,
    That serves him--till he needs no more!
    For, his dimensions once complete,
    Thenceforth none ever sees him eat;
    Though till his growing time be past
    Scarce ever is he seen to fast.
    That hour arrived, his work begins.
    He spins and weaves, and weaves and spins;
    Till circle upon circle, wound
    Careless around him and around,
    Conceals him with a veil, though slight,
    Impervious to the keenest sight.
    Thus self-enclosed, as in a cask,
    At length he finishes his task;
    And, though a worm when he was lost,
    Or caterpillar at the most,
    When next we see him, wings he wears,
    And in papilio pomp appears;
    Becomes oviparous; supplies
    With future worms and future flies
    The next ensuing year--and dies!
    Well were it for the world, if all
    Who creep about this earthly ball,
    Though shorter-lived than most he be,
    Were useful in their kind as he.


THE INNOCENT THIEF.

    Not a flower can be found in the fields,
      Or the spot that we till for our pleasure,
    From the largest to the least, but it yields
      The bee never wearied a treasure.

    Scarce any she quits unexplored
      With a diligence truly exact;
    Yet, steal what she may for her hoard
      Leaves evidence none of the fact.

    Her lucrative task she pursues,
      And pilfers with so much address,
    That none of their odour they lose,
      Nor charm by their beauty the less.

    Not thus inoffensively preys
      The cankerworm, in-dwelling foe!
    His voracity not thus allays
      The sparrow, the finch, or the crow.

    The worm, more expensively fed,
      The pride of the garden devours;
    And birds peck the seed from the bed,
      Still less to be spared than the flowers.

    But she with such delicate skill
      Her pillage so fits for her use,
    That the chemist in vain with his still
      Would labour the like to produce.

    Then grudge not her temperate meals,
      Nor a benefit blame as a theft;
    Since, stole she not all that she steals,
      Neither honey nor wax would be left.


DENNER'S OLD WOMAN.

    In this mimic form of a matron in years,
    How plainly the pencil of Denner appears!
    The matron herself, in whose old age we see
    Not a trace of decline, what a wonder is she!
    No dimness of eye, and no cheek hanging low,
    No wrinkle, or deep-furrow'd frown on the brow!
    Her forehead indeed is here circled around
    With locks like the ribbon with which they are bound;
    While glossy and smooth, and as soft as the skin
    Of a delicate peach, is the down of her chin;
    But nothing unpleasant, or sad, or severe,
    Or that indicates life in its winter--is here.
    Yet all is express'd with fidelity due,
    Nor a pimple or freckle conceal'd from the view.
      Many fond of new sights, or who cherish a taste
    For the labours of art, to the spectacle haste.
    The youths all agree, that, could old age inspire
    The passion of love, hers would kindle the fire,
    And the matrons with pleasure confess that they see
    Ridiculous nothing or hideous in thee.
    The nymphs for themselves scarcely hope a decline,
    O wonderful woman! as placid as thine.
      Strange magic of art! which the youth can engage
    To peruse, half enamour'd, the features of age;
    And force from the virgin a sigh of despair,
    That she when as old shall be equally fair!
    How great is the glory that Denner has gain'd,
    Since Apelles not more for his Venus obtain'd.


THE TEARS OF A PAINTER.

    Apelles, hearing that his boy
    Had just expired--his only joy!
    Although the sight with anguish tore him,
    Bade place his dear remains before him.
    He seized his brush, his colours spread;
    And--"Oh! my child, accept,"--he said,
    "('Tis all that I can now bestow,)
    This tribute of a father's woe!"
    Then, faithful to the twofold part,
    Both of his feelings and his art,
    He closed his eyes with tender care,
    And form'd at once a fellow pair.
    His brow with amber locks beset,
    And lips he drew not livid yet;
    And shaded all that he had done
    To a just image of his son.
      Thus far is well. But view again
    The cause of thy paternal pain!
    Thy melancholy task fulfil!
    It needs the last, last touches still.
    Again his pencil's powers he tries,
    For on his lips a smile he spies:
    And still his cheek unfaded shows
    The deepest damask of the rose.
    Then, heedful to the finish'd whole,
    With fondest eagerness he stole,
    Till scarce himself distinctly knew
    The cherub copied from the true.
      Now, painter, cease! Thy task is done.
    Long lives this image of thy son;
    Nor short-lived shall thy glory prove
    Or of thy labour or thy love.


THE MAZE.

    From right to left, and to and fro,
    Caught in a labyrinth you go,
    And turn, and turn, and turn again,
    To solve the mystery, but in vain;
    Stand still, and breathe, and take from me
    A clue, that soon shall set you free!
    Not Ariadne, if you met her,
    Herself could serve you with a better.
    You enter'd easily--find where--
    And make with ease your exit there!


NO SORROW PECULIAR TO THE SUFFERER.

    The lover, in melodious verses,
    His singular distress rehearses;
    Still closing with a rueful cry,
    "Was ever such a wretch as I!"
    Yes! thousands have endured before
    All thy distress; some, haply, more.
    Unnumber'd Corydons complain,
    And Strephons, of the like disdain;
    And if thy Chloe be of steel,
    Too deaf to hear, too hard to feel;
    Not her alone that censure fits,
    Nor thou alone hast lost thy wits.


THE SNAIL.

    To grass, or leaf, or fruit, or wall,
    The snail sticks close, nor fears to fall,
    As if he grew there, house and all
                                Together.

    Within that house secure he hides,
    When danger imminent betides
    Of storm, or other harm besides
                                Of weather.

    Give but his horns the slightest touch,
    His self-collecting power is such,
    He shrinks into his house, with much
                                Displeasure.

    Where'er he dwells, he dwells alone,
    Except himself has chattels none,
    Well satisfied to be his own
                                Whole treasure.

    Thus, hermit-like, his life he leads,
    Nor partner of his banquet needs,
    And if he meets one, only feeds
                                The faster.

    Who seeks him must be worse than blind,
    (He and his house are so combined,)
    If, finding it, he fails to find
                                Its master.


THE CANTAB.

    With two spurs or one, and no great matter which,
    Boots bought, or boots borrow'd, a whip or a switch,
    Five shillings or less for the hire of his beast,
    Paid part into hand;--you must wait for the rest.
    Thus equipt, Academicus climbs up his horse,
    And out they both sally for better or worse;
    His heart void of fear, and as light as a feather;
    And in violent haste to go not knowing whither.
    Through the fields and the towns; (see!) he scampers along:
    And is look'd at and laugh'd at by old and by young.
    Till, at length overspent, and his sides smear'd with blood,
    Down tumbles his horse, man and all in the mud.
    In a wagon or chaise, shall he finish his route?
    Oh! scandalous fate! he must do it on foot.
      Young gentlemen, hear!--I am older than you!
    The advice that I give I have proved to be true,
    Wherever your journey may be, never doubt it,
    The faster you ride, you're the longer about it.




TRANSLATIONS OF GREEK VERSES.


FROM THE GREEK OF JULIANUS.

    A Spartan, his companion slain,
        Alone from battle fled;
    His mother, kindling with disdain
        That she had borne him, struck him dead;
    For courage, and not birth alone,
    In Sparta, testifies a son!


ON THE SAME BY PALLADAS.

    A Spartan 'scaping from the fight,
    His mother met him in his flight,
    Upheld a falchion to his breast,
    And thus the fugitive address'd:
    "Thou canst but live to blot with shame
    Indelible thy mother's name,
    While every breath that thou shalt draw
    Offends against thy country's law;
    But, if thou perish by this hand,
    Myself indeed, throughout the land,
    To my dishonour, shall be known
    The mother still of such a son;
    But Sparta will be safe and free,
    And that shall serve to comfort me."


AN EPITAPH.

    My name--my country--what are they to thee!
    What, whether base or proud my pedigree?
    Perhaps I far surpass'd all other men--
    Perhaps I fell below them all--what then?
    Suffice it, stranger! that thou seest a tomb--
    Thou know'st its use--it hides--no matter whom.


ANOTHER.

    Take to thy bosom, gentle earth, a swain
    With much hard labour in thy service worn!
    He set the vines that clothe yon ample plain,
    And he these olives that the vale adorn.
    He fill'd with grain the glebe; the rills he led
    Through this green herbage, and those fruitful bowers;
    Thou, therefore, earth! lie lightly on his head,
    His hoary head, and deck his grave with flowers.


ANOTHER.

    Painter, this likeness is too strong,
    And we shall mourn the dead too long.


ANOTHER.

    At threescore winters' end I died
    A cheerless being sole and sad;
    The nuptial knot I never tied,
    And wish my father never had.


BY CALLIMACHUS.

    At morn we placed on his funeral bier
    Young Melanippus; and, at eventide,
    Unable to sustain a loss so dear,
    By her own hand his blooming sister died.
    Thus Aristippus mourn'd his noble race,
    Annihilated by a double blow,
    Nor son could hope nor daughter more to embrace,
    And all Cyrene sadden'd at his woe.


ON MILTIADES.

    Miltiades! thy valour best
    (Although in every region known)
    The men of Persia can attest,
    Taught by thyself at Marathon.


ON AN INFANT.

    Bewail not much, my parents! me, the prey
    Of ruthless Ades, and sepulchred here.
    An infant, in my fifth scarce finish'd year,
    He found all sportive, innocent, and gay,
    Your young Callimachus; and if I knew
    Not many joys, my griefs were also few.


BY HERACLIDES.

    In Cnidus born, the consort I became
    Of Euphron. Aretimias was my name.
    His bed I shared, nor proved a barren bride,
    But bore two children at a birth, and died.
    One child I leave to solace and uphold
    Euphron hereafter, when infirm and old.
    And one, for his remembrance' sake, I bear
    To Pluto's realm, till he shall join me there.


ON THE REED.

    I was of late a barren plant,
    Useless, insignificant,
    Nor fig, nor grape, nor apple bore,
    A native of the marshy shore;
    But, gather'd for poetic use,
    And plunged into a sable juice,
    Of which my modicum I sip
    With narrow mouth and slender lip,
    At once, although by nature dumb,
    All eloquent I have become,
    And speak with fluency untired,
    As if by Phoebus' self inspired.


TO HEALTH.

    Eldest born of powers divine!
    Bless'd Hygeia! be it mine
    To enjoy what thou canst give,
    And henceforth with thee to live:
    For in power if pleasure be,
    Wealth or numerous progeny,
    Or in amorous embrace,
    Where no spy infests the place;
    Or in aught that Heaven bestows
    To alleviate human woes,
    When the wearied heart despairs
    Of a respite from its cares;
    These and every true delight
    Flourish only in thy sight;
    And the sister graces three
    Owe, themselves, their youth to thee,
    Without whom we may possess
    Much, but never happiness.


ON INVALIDS.

    Far happier are the dead, methinks, than they
    Who look for death, and fear it every day.


ON THE ASTROLOGERS.

    The astrologers did all alike presage
    My uncle's dying in extreme old age;
    One only disagreed. But he was wise,
    And spoke not till he heard the funeral cries.


ON AN OLD WOMAN.

    Mycilla dyes her locks, 'tis said:
        But 'tis a foul aspersion;
    She buys them black; they therefore need
        No subsequent immersion.


ON FLATTERERS.

    No mischief worthier of our fear
        In nature can be found
    Than friendship, in ostent sincere,
        But hollow and unsound.
    For lull'd into a dangerous dream
        We close infold a foe,
    Who strikes, when most secure we seem,
        The inevitable blow.


ON A TRUE FRIEND.

    Hast thou a friend? thou hast indeed
        A rich and large supply,
    Treasure to serve your every need,
        Well managed, till you die.


ON THE SWALLOW.

    Attic maid! with honey fed,
        Bear'st thou to thy callow brood
    Yonder locust from the mead,
        Destined their delicious food?

    Ye have kindred voices clear,
        Ye alike unfold the wing,
    Migrate hither, sojourn here,
        Both attendant on the spring!

    Ah, for pity drop the prize;
        Let it not with truth be said
    That a songster gasps and dies,
        That a songster may be fed.


ON LATE ACQUIRED WEALTH.

    Poor in my youth, and in life's later scenes
      Rich to no end, I curse my natal hour,
    Who nought enjoy'd while young, denied the means;
      And nought when old enjoy'd, denied the power.


ON A BATH, BY PLATO.

    Did Cytherea to the skies
    From this pellucid lymph arise?
    Or was it Cytherea's touch,
    When bathing here, that made it such?


ON A FOWLER, BY ISIDORUS.

    With seeds and birdlime, from the desert air,
    Eumelus gather'd free, though scanty fare.
    No lordly patron's hand he deign'd to kiss,
    Nor luxury knew, save liberty, nor bliss.
    Thrice thirty years he lived, and to his heirs
    His seeds bequeath'd, his birdlime, and his snares.


ON NIOBE.

    Charon! receive a family on board,
      Itself sufficient for thy crazy yawl,
    Apollo and Diana, for a word
      By me too proudly spoken, slew us all.


ON A GOOD MAN.

    Traveller, regret not me; for thou shalt find
      Just cause of sorrow none in my decease,
    Who, dying, children's children left behind,
      And with one wife lived many a year in peace:
    Three virtuous youths espoused my daughters three,
      And oft their infants in my bosom lay,
    Nor saw I one of all derived from me,
      Touch'd with disease, or torn by death away.
    Their duteous hands my funeral rites bestow'd,
      And me, by blameless manners fitted well
    To seek it, sent to the serene abode
      Where shades of pious men for ever dwell.


ON A MISER.

    They call thee rich--I deem thee poor,
    Since, if thou darest not use thy store,
    But savest it only for thine heirs,
    The treasure is not thine, but theirs.


ANOTHER.

    A miser, traversing his house,
    Espied, unusual there, a mouse,
    And thus his uninvited guest
    Briskly inquisitive address'd:
    "Tell me, my dear, to what cause is it
    I owe this unexpected visit?"
    The mouse her host obliquely eyed,
    And, smiling, pleasantly replied:
    "Fear not, good fellow, for your hoard!
    I come to lodge, and not to board."


ANOTHER.

    Art thou some individual of a kind
    Long-lived by nature as the rook or hind?
    Heap treasure, then, for if thy need be such,
    Thou hast excuse, and scarce canst heap too much.
    But man thou seem'st, clear therefore from thy breast
    This lust of treasure--folly at the best!
    For why shouldst thou go wasted to the tomb,


ON FEMALE INCONSTANCY.

    Rich, thou hadst many lovers--poor, hast none,
      So surely want extinguishes the flame,
    And she who call'd thee once her pretty one,
      And her Adonis, now inquires thy name.

    Where wast thou born, Sosicrates, and where,
      In what strange country can thy parents live,
    Who seem'st, by thy complaints, not yet aware
      That want's a crime no woman can forgive?


ON THE GRASSHOPPER.

    Happy songster, perch'd above,
    On the summit of the grove,
    Whom a dewdrop cheers to sing
    With the freedom of a king.
    From thy perch survey the fields
    Where prolific nature yields
    Nought that, willingly as she,
    Man surrenders not to thee.
    For hostility or hate
    None thy pleasures can create.
    Thee it satisfies to sing
    Sweetly the return of spring,
    Herald of the genial hours,
    Harming neither herbs nor flowers.
    Therefore man thy voice attends
    Gladly--thou and he are friends;
    Nor thy never-ceasing strains,
    Phoebus or the muse disdains
    As too simple or too long,
    For themselves inspire the song.
    Earth-born, bloodless, undecaying,
    Ever singing, sporting, playing,
    What has nature else to show
    Godlike in its kind as thou?


ON HERMOCRATIA.

    Hermocratia named--save only one--
    Twice fifteen births I bore, and buried none;
    For neither Phoebus pierced my thriving joys,
    Nor Dian--she my girls, or he my boys.
    But Dian rather, when my daughters lay
    In parturition, chased their pangs away.
    And all my sons, by Phoebus' bounty, shared
    A vigorous youth, by sickness unimpair'd.
    O Niobe! far less prolific! see
    Thy boast against Latona shamed by me!


FROM MENANDER.

    Fond youth! who dream'st that hoarded gold
      Is needful, not alone to pay
    For all thy various items sold,
      To serve the wants of every day;

    Bread, vinegar, and oil, and meat,
      For savoury viands season'd high;
    But somewhat more important yet--
      I tell thee what it cannot buy.

    No treasure, hadst thou more amass'd
      Than fame to Tantalus assign'd,
    Would save thee from a tomb at last,
      But thou must leave it all behind.

    I give thee, therefore, counsel wise;
      Confide not vainly in thy store,
    However large--much less despise
      Others comparatively poor;

    But in thy more exalted state
      A just and equal temper show,
    That all who see thee rich and great,
      May deem thee worthy to be so.


ON PALLAS BATHING, FROM A HYMN OF CALLIMACHUS.

    Nor oils of balmy scent produce,
    Nor mirror for Minerva's use,
    Ye nymphs who lave her; she, array'd
    In genuine beauty, scorns their aid.
    Not even when they left the skies,
    To seek on Ida's head the prize
    From Paris' hand, did Juno deign,
    Or Pallas in the crystal plain
    Of Simois' stream her locks to trace,
    Or in the mirror's polish'd face,
    Though Venus oft with anxious care
    Adjusted twice a single hair.


TO DEMOSTHENES.

    It flatters and deceives thy view,
      This mirror of ill-polish'd ore;
    For, were it just, and told thee true,
      Thou wouldst consult it never more.

ON A SIMILAR CHARACTER.

    You give your cheeks a rosy stain,
      With washes dye your hair;
    But paint and washes both are vain
      To give a youthful air.

    Those wrinkles mock your daily toil,
      No labour will efface 'em,
    You wear a mask of smoothest oil,
      Yet still with ease we trace 'em.

    An art so fruitless then forsake,
      Which though you much excel in,
    You never can contrive to make
      Old Hecuba young Helen.


ON AN UGLY FELLOW.

    Beware, my friend! of crystal brook,
    Or fountain, lest that hideous hook,
      Thy nose, thou chance to see;
    Narcissus' fate would then be thine,
    And self-detested thou wouldst pine,
      As self-enamour'd he.


ON A BATTERED BEAUTY.

    Hair, wax, rouge, honey, teeth you buy,
      A multifarious store!
    A mask at once would all supply
      Nor would it cost you more.


ON A THIEF.

    When Aulus, the nocturnal thief, made prize
    Of Hermes, swift-wing'd envoy of the skies,
    Hermes, Arcadia's king, the thief divine,
    Who when an infant stole Apollo's kine,
    And whom, as arbiter and overseer
    Of our gymnastic sports, we planted here;
    "Hermes," he cried, "you meet no new disaster;
    Ofttimes the pupil goes beyond his master."


ON PEDIGREE.

FROM EPICHARMUS.

    MY mother! if thou love me, name no more
    My noble birth! Sounding at every breath
    My noble birth, thou kill'st me. Thither fly,
    As to their only refuge, all from whom
    Nature withholds all good besides; they boast
    Their noble birth, conduct us to the tombs
    Of their forefathers, and, from age to age
    Ascending, trumpet their illustrious race:
    But whom hast thou beheld, or canst thou name,
    Derived from no forefathers? Such a man
    Lives not; for how could such be born at all?
    And, if it chance that, native of a land
    Far distant, or in infancy deprived
    Of all his kindred, one, who cannot trace
    His origin, exist, why deem him sprung
    From baser ancestry than theirs who can?
    My mother! he whom nature at his birth
    Endow'd with virtuous qualities, although
    An Æthiop and a slave, is nobly born.


ON ENVY.

    Pity, says the Theban bard,
    From my wishes I discard;
    Envy, let me rather be,
    Rather far, a theme for thee.
    Pity to distress is shown,
    Envy to the great alone--
    So the Theban--But to shine
    Less conspicuous be mine!
    I prefer the golden mean,
    Pomp and penury between;
    For alarm and peril wait
    Ever on the loftiest state,
    And the lowest to the end
    Obloquy and scorn attend.


BY MOSCHUS.

    I slept when Venus enter'd: to my bed
    A Cupid in her beauteous hand she led,
    A bashful seeming boy, and thus she said:
      "Shepherd, receive my little one! I bring
    An untaught love, whom thou must teach to sing."
    She said, and left him. I, suspecting nought,
    Many a sweet strain my subtle pupil taught,
    How reed to reed Pan first with osier bound,
    How Pallas form'd the pipe of softest sound,
    How Hermes gave the lute, and how the quire
    Of Phoebus owe to Phoebus' self the lyre.
    Such were my themes; my themes nought heeded he,
    But ditties sang of amorous sort to me,
    The pangs that mortals and immortals prove
    From Venus' influence and the darts of love.
    Thus was the teacher by the pupil taught;
    His lessons I retain'd, he mine forgot.


BY PHILEMON.

    Oft we enhance our ills by discontent,
    And give them bulk beyond what nature meant.
    A parent, brother, friend deceased, to cry--
    "He's dead indeed, but he was born to die"--
    Such temperate grief is suited to the size
    And burden of the loss; is just and wise.
    But to exclaim, "Ah! wherefore was I born,
    Thus to be left for ever thus forlorn?"
    Who thus laments his loss invites distress,
    And magnifies a woe that might be less,
    Through dull despondence to his lot resign'd,
    And leaving reason's remedy behind.




TRANSLATIONS FROM THE FABLES OF GAY.


LEPUS MULTIS AMICUS.

    Lusus amicitia est, uni nisi dedita, ceu fit,
      Simplice ni nexus foedere, lusus amor.
    Incerto genitore puer, non sæpe paternæ
      Tutamen novit, deliciasque domûs:
    Quique sibi fidos fore multos sperat, amicus
      Mirum est huic misero si ferat ullus opem.
    Comis erat, mitisque, et nolle et velle paratus
      Cum quovis, Gaii more modoque, Lepus.
    Ille, quot in sylvis et quot spatiantur in agris
      Quadrupedes, nôrat conciliare sibi;
    Et quisque innocuo, invitoque lacessere quenquam
      Labra tenus saltem fidus amicus erat.
    Ortum sub lucis dum pressa cubilia linquit,
      Rorantes herbas, pabula sueta, petens,
    Venatorum audit clangores ponè sequentem,
      Fulmineumque sonum territus erro fugit.
    Corda pavor pulsat, sursum sedet, erigit aures,
      Respicit, et sentit jam prope adesse necem.
    Utque canes fallat latè circumvagus, illuc,
      Unde abiit, mirâ calliditate redit;
    Viribus at fractis tandem se projicit ultro
      In mediâ miserum semianimemque viâ.
    Vix ibi stratus, equi sonitum pedis audit, et, oh spe
      Quam lætâ adventu cor agitatur equi!
    Dorsum (inquit) mihi, chare, tuum concede, tuoque
      Auxilio nares fallere, vimque canum.
    Me meus, ut nosti, pes prodit--fidus amicus
      Fert quodcunque, lubens, nec grave sentit, onus.
    Belle, miselle lepuscule, (equus respondet) amara
      Omnia quæ tibi sunt, sunt et amara mihi.
    Verum age--sume animos--multi, me pone, bonique
      Adveniunt, quorum sis citò salvus ope.
    Proximus armenti dominus bos solicitatus
      Auxilium his verbis se dare posse negat:
    Quando quadrupedum, quot vivunt, nullus amicum
      Me nescire potest usque fuisse tibi,
    Libertate æquus, quam cedit amicus amico,
      Utar, et absque metu ne tibi displiceam;
    Hinc me mandat amor. Juxta istum messis acervum
      Me mea, præ cunctis chara, juvenca manet;
    Et quis non ultro quæcunque negotia linquit,
      Pareat ut dominæ cum vocat ipsa suæ?
    Nec me crudelem dicas--discedo--sed hircus,
      Cujus ope effugias integer, hircus adest.
    Febrem (ait hircus) habes. Heu, sicca ut lumina languent!
      Utque caput, collo deficiente, jacet!
    Hirsutum mihi tergum; et forsan læserit ægrum,
      Vellere eris melius fultus, ovisque venit.
    Me mihi fecit onus natura, ovis inquit, anhelans
      Sustineo lanæ pondera tanta meæ;
    Me nec velocem nec fortem jacto, solentque
      Nos etiam sævi dilacerare canes.
    Ultimus accedit vitulus, vitulumque precatur,
      Ut periturum alias ocyus eripiat.
    Remne ergo, respondet vitulus, suscepero tantam,
      Non depulsus adhuc ubere, natus heri?
    Te, quem maturi canibus validique relinquunt,
      Incolumem potero reddere parvus ego?
    Præterea tollens quem illi aversantur, amicis
      Forte parum videar consuluisse meis.
    Ignoscas oro. Fidissima dissociantur
      Corda, et tale tibi sat liquet esse meum.
    Ecce autem ad calces canis est! te quanta perempto
      Tristitia est nobis ingruitura!--Vale!


AVARUS ET PLUTUS.

    Icta fenestra Euri flatu stridebat, avarus
      Ex somno trepidus surgit, opumque memor.
    Lata silenter humi ponit vestigia, quemque
      Respicit ad sonitum, respiciensque tremit;
    Angustissima quæque foramina lampade visit,
      Ad vectes, obices, fertque refertque manum.
    Dein reserat crebris junctam compagibus arcam
      Exultansque omnes conspicit intus opes.
    Sed tandem furiis ultricibus actus ob artes
      Queis sua res tenuis creverat in cumulum.
    Contortis manibus nunc stat, nunc pectora pulsans
      Aurum execratur, perniciemque vocat;
    O mihi, ait, misero mens quam tranquilla fuisset,
      Hoc celasset adhuc si modo terra malum!
    Nunc autem virtus ipsa est venalis; et aurum
      Quid contra vitii tormina sæva valet?
    O inimicum aurum? O homini infestissima pestis;
      Cui datur illecebras vincere posse tuas?
    Aurum homines suasit contemnere quicquid honestum est,
      Et præter nomen nil retinere boni.
    Aurum cuncta mali per terras semina sparsit;
      Aurum nocturnis furibus arma dedit.
    Bella docet fortes, timidosque ad pessima ducit,
      Foedifragas artes, multiplicesque dolos,
    Nec vitii quicquam est, quod non inveneris ortum
      Ex malesuadâ auri sacrilegâque fame.
    Dixit, et ingemuit; Plutusque suum sibi numen
      Ante oculos, irâ fervidus, ipse stetit.
    Arcam clausit avarus, et ora horrentia rugis
      Ostendens; tremulum sic Deus increpuit.
    Questibus his raucis mihi cur, stulte, obstrepis aures?
      Ista tui similis tristia quisque canit.
    Commaculavi egone humanum genus, improbe? Culpa,
      Dum rapis, et captas omnia, culpa tua est.
    Mene execrandum censes, quia tam pretiosa
      Criminibus fiunt perniciosa tuis?
    Virtutis specie, pulchro ceu pallio amictus
      Quisque catus nebulo sordida facta tegit.
    Atque suis manibus commissa potentia, durum
      Et dirum subito vergit ad imperium.
    Hinc, nimium dum latro aurum detrudit in arcam.
      Idem aurum latet in pectore pestis edax.
    Nutrit avaritiam et fastum, suspendere adunco
      Suadet naso inopes, et vitium omne docet.
    Auri et larga probo si copia contigit, instar
      Roris dilapsi ex æthere cuncta beat:
    Tum, quasi numen inesset, alit, fovet, educat orbos,
      Et viduas lacrymis ora rigare vetat.
    Quo sua crimina jure auro derivet avarus,
      Aurum animæ pretium qui cupit atque capit?
    Lege pari gladium incuset sicarius atrox
      Cæso homine, et ferrum judicet esse reum.


PAPILIO ET LIMAX.

    Qui subito ex imis rerum in fastigia surgit,
      Nativas sordes, quicquid agatur, olet.




EPIGRAMS TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN OF OWEN.


ON ONE IGNORANT AND ARROGANT.

    Thou mayst of double ignorance boast,
    Who know'st not that thou nothing know'st.


PRUDENT SIMPLICITY.

    That thou mayst injure no man, dove-like be,
    And serpent-like, that none may injure thee!


TO A FRIEND IN DISTRESS.

    I wish thy lot, now bad, still worse, my friend;
    For when at worst, they say, things always mend.


RETALIATION.

    The works of ancient bards divine,
      Aulus, thou scorn'st to read;
    And should posterity read thine,
      It would be strange indeed!
    When little more than boy in age,
    I deem'd myself almost a sage:
    But now seem worthier to be styled,
    For ignorance, almost a child.


SUNSET AND SUNRISE.

    Contemplate, when the sun declines,
      Thy death with deep reflection!
    And when again he rising shines,
      The day of resurrection!




TRANSLATIONS

FROM

VIRGIL, OVID, HORACE, AND HOMER.


THE SALAD, BY VIRGIL.

    The winter night now well nigh worn away,
    The wakeful cock proclaim'd approaching day,
    When Simulus, poor tenant of a farm
    Of narrowest limits, heard the shrill alarm,
    Yawn'd, stretch'd his limbs, and anxious to provide
    Against the pangs of hunger unsupplied,
    By slow degrees his tatter'd bed forsook,
    And, poking in the dark, explored the nook
    Where embers slept with ashes heap'd around,
    And with burnt fingers' ends the treasure found.
      It chanced that from a brand beneath his nose,
    Sure proof of latent fire some smoke arose;
    When, trimming with a pin the incrusted tow,
    And stooping it towards the coals below,
    He toils, with cheeks distended, to excite
    The lingering flame, and gains at length a light.
    With prudent heed he spreads his hand before
    The quivering lamp, and opes his granary door.
    Small was his stock, but taking for the day
    A measured stint of twice eight pounds away,
    With these his mill he seeks. A shelf at hand,
    Fix'd in the wall, affords his lamp a stand:
    Then baring both his arms--a sleeveless coat
    He girds, the rough exuviæ of a goat:
    And with a rubber, for that use design'd,
    Cleansing his mill within--begins to grind;
    Each hand has its employ; labouring amain,
    This turns the winch, while that supplies the grain.
    The stone, revolving rapidly, now glows,
    And the bruised corn a mealy current flows;
    While he, to make his heavy labour light,
    Tasks oft his left hand to relieve his right;
    And chants with rudest accent, to beguile
    His ceaseless toil, as rude a strain the while.
    And now, "Dame Cybale, come forth!" he cries;
    But Cybale, still slumbering, nought replies.
      From Afric she, the swain's sole serving-maid,
    Whose face and form alike her birth betray'd.
    With woolly locks, lips tumid, sable skin,
    Wide bosom, udders flaccid, belly thin,
    Legs slender, broad and most misshapen feet,
    Chapp'd into chinks, and parch'd with solar heat.
    Such, summon'd oft, she came; at his command
    Fresh fuel heap'd, the sleeping embers fann'd,
    And made in haste her simmering skillet steam,
    Replenish'd newly from the neighbouring stream.
      The labours of the mill perform'd, a sieve
    The mingled flour and bran must next receive,
    Which shaken oft shoots Ceres through refined,
    And better dress'd, her husks all left behind.
    This done, at once his future plain repast
    Unleaven'd on a shaven board he cast,
    With tepid lymph first largely soak'd it all,
    Then gather'd it with both hands to a ball,
    And spreading it again with both hands wide,
    With sprinkled salt the stiffen'd mass supplied;
    At length the stubborn substance, duly wrought,
    Takes from his palms impress'd the shape it ought,
    Becomes an orb--and quarter'd into shares,
    The faithful mark of just division bears,
    Last, on his hearth it finds convenient space,
    For Cybale before had swept the place,
    And there, with tiles and embers overspread,
    She leaves it--reeking in its sultry bed.
      Nor Simulus, while Vulcan thus alone
    His part perform'd, proves heedless of his own,
    But sedulous, not merely to subdue
    His hunger, but to please his palate too,
    Prepares more savoury food. His chimney side
    Could boast no gammon, salted well and dried
    And hook'd behind him; but sufficient store
    Of bundled anise and a cheese it bore;
    A broad round cheese, which, through its centre strung
    With a tough broom twig, in the corner hung;
    The prudent hero, therefore, with address
    And quick despatch, now seeks another mess.
      Close to his cottage lay a garden ground.
    With reeds and osiers sparely girt around:
    Small was the spot, but liberal to produce;
    Nor wanted aught to serve a peasant's use,
    And sometimes e'en the rich would borrow thence,
    Although its tillage was its sole expense.
    For oft as from his toils abroad he ceased,
    Home-bound by weather, or some stated feast,
    His debt of culture here he duly paid,
    And only left the plough to wield the spade.
    He knew to give each plant the soil it needs,
    To drill the ground and cover close the seeds;
    And could with ease compel the wanton rill
    To turn and wind obedient to his will.
    There flourish'd star-wort, and the branching beet,
    The sorrel acid, and the mallow sweet,
    The skirret, and the leek's aspiring kind,
    The noxious poppy--quencher of the mind!
    Salubrious sequel of a sumptuous board,
    The lettuce, and the long huge-bellied gourd;
    But these (for none his appetite controll'd
    With stricter sway) the thrifty rustic sold;
    With broom twigs neatly bound, each kind apart,
    He bore them ever to the public mart:
    Whence laden still, but with a lighter load,
    Of cash well earn'd he took his homeward road,
    Expending seldom, ere he quitted Rome,
    His gains in flesh-meat for a feast at home.
    There, at no cost, on onions, rank and red,
    Or the curl'd endive's bitter leaf, he fed:
    On scallions sliced, or, with a sensual gust,
    On rockets--foul provocatives of lust!
    Nor even shunn'd with smarting gums to press
    Nasturtium--pungent face-distorting mess!
      Some such regale now also in his thought,
    With hasty steps his garden ground he sought;
    There, delving with his hands, he first displaced
    Four plants of garlick, large, and rooted fast;
    The tender tops of parsley next he culls,
    Then the old rue bush shudders as he pulls;
    And coriander last to these succeeds,
    That hangs on slightest threads her trembling seeds.
      Placed near his sprightly fire, he now demands
    The mortar at his sable servant's hands;
    When, stripping all his garlick first, he tore
    The exterior coats, and cast them on the floor,
    Then cast away with like contempt the skin,
    Flimsier concealment of the cloves within.
    These, search'd, and perfect found, he one by one
    Rinsed, and disposed within the hollow stone.
    Salt added, and a lump of salted cheese,
    With his injected herbs he cover'd these,
    And, tucking with his left his tunic tight,
    And seizing fast the pestle with his right,
    The garlick bruising first he soon express'd,
    And mix'd the various juices of the rest.
    He grinds, and by degrees his herbs below,
    Lost in each other, their own powers forego,
    And with the cheese in compound, to the sight
    Nor wholly green appear nor wholly white.
    His nostrils oft the forceful fume resent,
    He cursed full oft his dinner for its scent;
    Or, with wry faces, wiping as he spoke
    The trickling tears, cried, "Vengeance on the smoke!"
    The work proceeds: not roughly turns he now
    The pestle, but in circles smooth and slow;
    With cautious hand, that grudges what it spills,
    Some drops of olive oil he next instils,
    Then vinegar with caution scarcely less,
    And gathering to a ball the medley mess,
    Last, with two fingers frugally applied,
    Sweeps the small remnant from the mortar's side.
    And, thus complete in figure and in kind,
    Obtains at length the salad he design'd.
      And now black Cybale before him stands,
    The cake drawn newly glowing in her hands,
    He glad receives it, chasing far away
    All fears of famine for the passing day;
    His legs enclosed in buskins, and his head
    In its tough casque of leather, forth he led
    And yoked his steers, a dull obedient pair,
    Then drove afield, and plunged the pointed share.

  June, 1799.


TRANSLATION FROM VIRGIL.

ÆNEID, BOOK VIII. LINE 18.

    This Italy was moved--nor did the chief
    Æneas in his mind less tumult feel.
    On every side his anxious thought he turns,
    Restless, unfix'd, not knowing what to choose.
    And as a cistern that in brim of brass
    Confines the crystal flood, if chance the sun
    Smite on it, or the moon's resplendent orb,
    The quivering light now flashes on the walls,
    Now leaps uncertain to the vaulted roof:
    Such were the wavering motions of his mind.
    'Twas night--and weary nature sunk to rest.
    The birds, the bleating flocks, were heard no more.
    At length, on the cold ground, beneath the damp
    And dewy vault, fast by the river's brink,
    The father of his country sought repose.
    When lo! among the spreading poplar boughs,
    Forth from his pleasant stream, propitious rose
    The god of Tiber: clear transparent gauze
    Infolds his loins, his brows with reeds are crown'd:
    And these his gracious words to soothe his care:
      "Heaven-born, who bring'st our kindred home again,
    Rescued, and givest eternity to Troy,
    Long have Laurentum and the Latian plains
    Expected thee; behold thy fix'd abode.
    Fear not the threats of war, the storm is past,
    The gods appeased. For proof that what thou hear'st
    Is no vain forgery or delusive dream,
    Beneath the grove that borders my green bank,
    A milk-white swine, with thirty milk-white young,
    Shall greet thy wondering eyes. Mark well the place;
    For 'tis thy place of rest, there end thy toils:
    There, twice ten years elapsed, fair Alba's walls
    Shall rise, fair Alba, by Ascanius' hand.
    Thus shall it be--now listen, while I teach
    The means to accomplish these events at hand.
    The Arcadians here, a race from Pallas sprung,
    Following Evander's standard and his fate,
    High on these mountains, a well chosen spot,
    Have built a city, for their grandsire's sake
    Named Pallanteum. These perpetual war
    Wage with the Latians: join'd in faithful league
    And arms confederate, add them to your camp.
    Myself between my winding banks will speed
    Your well oar'd barks to stem the opposing tide.
    Rise, goddess born, arise; and with the first
    Declining stars seek Juno in thy prayer,
    And vanquish all her wrath with suppliant vows.
    When conquest crowns thee, then remember me.
    I am the Tiber, whose cærulean stream
    Heaven favours; I with copious flood divide
    These grassy banks, and cleave the fruitful meads.
    My mansion, this--and lofty cities crown
    My fountain head."--He spoke and sought the deep,
    And plunged his form beneath the closing flood.
    Æneas at the morning dawn awoke,
    And, rising, with uplifted eye beheld
    The orient sun, then dipp'd his palms, and scoop'd
    The brimming stream, and thus address'd the skies:
    "Ye nymphs, Laurentian nymphs, who feed the source
    Of many a stream, and thou, with thy blest flood,
    O Tiber, hear, accept me, and afford,
    At length afford, a shelter from my woes.
    Where'er in secret cavern under ground
    Thy waters sleep, where'er they spring to light,
    Since thou hast pity for a wretch like me,
    My offerings and my vows shall wait thee still:
    Great horned Father of Hesperian floods,
    Be gracious now, and ratify thy word."
    He said, and chose two galleys from his fleet,
    Fits them with oars, and clothes the crew in arms.
    When lo! astonishing and pleasing sight,
    The milk-white dam, with her unspotted brood,
    Lay stretch'd upon the bank, beneath the grove.
    To thee, the pious Prince, Juno, to thee
    Devotes them all, all on thine altar bleed.
    That live-long night old Tiber smooth'd his flood,
    And so restrain'd it that it seem'd to stand
    Motionless as a pool, or silent lake,
    That not a billow might resist their oars.
    With cheerful sound of exhortation soon
    Their voyage they begin; the pitchy keel
    Slides through the gentle deep, the quiet stream
    Admires the unwonted burden that it bears,
    Well polish'd arms, and vessels painted gay.
    Beneath the shade of various trees, between
    The umbrageous branches of the spreading groves,
    They cut their liquid way, nor day nor night
    They slack their course, unwinding as they go
    The long meanders of the peaceful tide.
      The glowing sun was in meridian height,
    When from afar they saw the humble walls,
    And the few scatter'd cottages, which now
    The Roman power has equall'd with the clouds;
    But such was then Evander's scant domain.
    They steer to shore, and hasten to the town.
      It chanced the Arcadian monarch on that day,
    Before the walls, beneath a shady grove,
    Was celebrating high, in solemn feast,
    Alcides and his tutelary gods.
    Pallas, his son, was there, and there the chief
    Of all his youth; with these, a worthy tribe,
    His poor but venerable senate, burnt
    Sweet incense, and their altars smoked with blood.
    Soon as they saw the towering masts approach,
    Sliding between the trees, while the crew rest
    Upon their silent oars, amazed they rose,
    Not without fear, and all forsook the feast.
    But Pallas undismay'd, his javelin seized,
    Rush'd to the bank, and from a rising ground
    Forbade them to disturb the sacred rites.
    "Ye stranger youth! What prompts you to explore
    This untried way? and whither do ye steer?
    Whence, and who are ye? Bring ye peace or war?"
    Æneas from his lofty deck holds forth
    The peaceful olive branch, and thus replies:
    "Trojans and enemies to the Latian state,
    Whom they with unprovoked hostilities
    Have driven away, thou seest. We seek Evander--
    Say this--and say beside, the Trojan chiefs
    Are come, and seek his friendship and his aid."
    Pallas with wonder heard that awful name,
    And "Whosoe'er thou art," he cried, "come forth:
    Bear thine own tidings to my father's ear,
    And be a welcome guest beneath our roof."
    He said, and press'd the stranger to his breast:
    Then led him from the river to the grove,
    Where, courteous, thus Æneas greets the king:
    "Best of the Grecian race, to whom I bow
    (So wills my fortune) suppliant, and stretch forth
    In sign of amity this peaceful branch,
    I fear'd thee not, although I knew thee well
    A Grecian leader, born in Arcady,
    And kinsman of the Atridæ. Me my virtue,
    That means no wrong to thee--the Oracles,
    Our kindred families allied of old,
    And thy renown diffused through every land,
    Have all conspired to bind in friendship to thee,
    And send me not unwilling to thy shores.
    Dardanus, author of the Trojan state,
    (So say the Greeks,) was fair Electra's son;
    Electra boasted Atlas for her sire,
    Whose shoulders high sustain the ethereal orbs.
    Your sire is Mercury, whom Maia bore,
    Sweet Maia, on Cyllene's hoary top.
    Her, if we credit aught tradition old,
    Atlas of yore, the self-same Atlas, claim'd
    His daughter. Thus united close in blood,
    Thy race and ours one common sire confess.
    With these credentials fraught, I would not send
    Ambassadors with artful phrase to sound
    And win thee by degrees--but came myself--
    Me, therefore, me thou seest; my life the stake:
    'Tis I, Æneas, who implore thine aid.
    Should Daunia, that now aims the blow at thee,
    Prevail to conquer us, nought then, they think,
    Will hinder, but Hesperia must be theirs,
    All theirs, from the upper to the nether sea.
    Take then our friendship, and return us thine.
    We too have courage, we have noble minds,
    And youth well tried, and exercised in arms."
      Thus spoke Æneas--He with fix'd regard
    Survey'd him speaking, features, form, and mien.
    Then briefly thus--"Thou noblest of thy name,
    How gladly do I take thee to my heart,
    How gladly thus confess thee for a friend!
    In thee I trace Anchises; his thy speech,
    Thy voice, thy countenance. For I well remember
    Many a day since, when Priam journey'd forth
    To Salamis, to see the land where dwelt
    Hesione, his sister, he push'd on
    E'en to Arcadia's frozen bounds. 'Twas then
    The bloom of youth was glowing on my cheek;
    Much I admired the Trojan chiefs, and much
    Their king, the son of great Laomedon.
    But most Anchises, towering o'er them all.
    A youthful longing seized me to accost
    The hero, and embrace him; I drew near,
    And gladly led him to the walls of Pheneus.
    Departing, he distinguish'd me with gifts,
    A costly quiver stored with Lycian darts,
    A robe inwove with gold, with gold imboss'd
    Two bridles, those which Pallas uses now.
    The friendly league thou hast solicited
    I give thee, therefore, and to-morrow all
    My chosen youth shall wait on your return.
    Meanwhile, since thus in friendship ye are come,
    Rejoice with us, and join to celebrate
    These annual rites, which may not be delay'd,
    And be at once familiar at our board."
      He said, and bade replace the feast removed;
    Himself upon a grassy bank disposed
    The crew; but for Æneas order'd forth
    A couch spread with a lion's tawny shag,
    And bade him share the honours of his throne.
    The appointed youth with glad alacrity
    Assist the labouring priest to load the board
    With roasted entrails of the slaughter'd beeves,
    Well kneaded bread and mantling bowls. Well pleased,
    Æneas and the Trojan youth regale
    On the huge length of a well pastured chine.
      Hunger appeased, and tables all despatch'd,
    Thus spake Evander: "Superstition here,
    In this old solemn feasting, has no part.
    No, Trojan friend, from utmost danger saved,
    In gratitude this worship we renew.
    Behold that rock which nods above the vale,
    Those bulks of broken stone dispersed around,
    How desolate the shatter'd cave appears,
    And what a ruin spreads the incumber'd plain.
    Within this pile, but far within, was once
    The den of Cacus; dire his hateful form
    That shunn'd the day, half monster and half man.
    Blood newly shed stream'd ever on the ground
    Smoking, and many a visage pale and wan
    Nail'd at his gate, hung hideous to the sight.
    Vulcan begot the brute: vast was his size,
    And from his throat he belch'd his father's fires.
    But the day came that brought us what we wish'd,
    The assistance and the presence of a God.
    Flush'd with his victory, and the spoils he won
    From triple-form'd Geryon lately slain,
    The great avenger, Hercules, appear'd.
    Hither he drove his stately bulls, and pour'd
    His herds along the vale. But the sly thief
    Cacus, that nothing might escape his hand
    Of villainy or fraud, drove from the stalls
    Four of the lordliest of his bulls, and four
    The fairest of his heifers; by the tail
    He dragg'd them to his den, that, there conceal'd,
    No footsteps might betray the dark abode.
    And now, his herd with provender sufficed,
    Alcides would be gone: they as they went
    Still bellowing loud, made the deep echoing woods
    And distant hills resound: when, hark! one ox,
    Imprison'd close within the vast recess,
    Lows in return, and frustrates all his hope.
    Then fury seized Alcides, and his breast
    With indignation heaved: grasping his club
    Of knotted oak, swift to the mountain top
    He ran, he flew. Then first was Cacus seen
    To tremble, and his eyes bespoke his fears.
    Swift as an eastern blast, he sought his den,
    And dread, increasing, winged him as he went.
    Drawn up in iron slings above the gate,
    A rock was hung enormous. Such his haste,
    He burst the chains, and dropp'd it at the door,
    Then grappled it with iron work within
    Of bolts and bars by Vulcan's art contrived.
    Scarce was he fast, when, panting for revenge,
    Came Hercules; he gnash'd his teeth with rage,
    And quick as lightning glanced his eyes around
    In quest of entrance. Fiery red and stung
    With indignation, thrice he wheeled his course
    About the mountain; thrice, but thrice in vain,
    He strove to force the quarry at the gate,
    And thrice sat down o'erwearied in the vale.
    There stood a pointed rock, abrupt and rude,
    That high o'erlook'd the rest, close at the back
    Of the fell monster's den, where birds obscene
    Of ominous note resorted, choughs and daws.
    This, as it lean'd obliquely to the left,
    Threatening the stream below, he from the right
    Push'd with his utmost strength, and to and fro
    He shook the mass, loosening its lowest base;
    Then shoved it from its seat; down fell the pile;
    Sky thunder'd at the fall; the banks give way,
    The affrighted stream flows upward to his source.
    Behold the kennel of the brute exposed,
    The gloomy vault laid open. So, if chance
    Earth yawning to the centre should disclose
    The mansions, the pale mansions of the dead,
    Loathed by the gods, such would the gulf appear,
    And the ghosts tremble at the sight of day.
    The monster braying with unusual din
    Within his hollow lair, and sore amazed
    To see such sudden inroads of the light,
    Alcides press'd him close with what at hand
    Lay readiest, stumps of trees, and fragments huge
    Of millstone size. He, (for escape was none,)
    Wondrous to tell! forth from his gorge discharged
    A smoky cloud that darken'd all the den;
    Wreath after wreath he vomited amain,
    The smothering vapour mix'd with fiery sparks.
    No sight could penetrate the veil obscure.
    The hero, more provoked, endured not this,
    But with a headlong leap he rush'd to where
    The thickest cloud enveloped his abode.
    There grasp'd he Cacus, spite of all his fires,
    Till, crush'd within his arms, the monster shows
    His bloodless throat, now dry with panting hard,
    And his press'd eyeballs start. Soon he tears down
    The barricade of rock, the dark abyss
    Lies open; and the imprison'd bulls, the theft
    He had with oaths denied, are brought to light;
    By the heels the miscreant carcass is dragg'd forth,
    His face, his eyes, all terrible, his breast
    Beset with bristles, and his sooty jaws
    Are view'd with wonder never to be cloy'd.
    Hence the celebrity thou seest, and hence
    This festal day Potitius first enjoin'd
    Posterity: these solemn rites he first,
    With those who bear the great Pinarian name,
    To Hercules devoted; in the grove
    This altar built, deem'd sacred in the highest
    By us, and sacred ever to be deem'd.
    Come, then, my friends, and bind your youthful brows
    In praise of such deliverance, and hold forth
    The brimming cup; your deities and ours
    Are now the same, then drink and freely too."
      So saying, he twisted round his reverend locks
    A variegated poplar wreath, and fill'd
    His right hand with a consecrated bowl.
    At once all pour libations on the board,
    All offer prayer. And now, the radiant sphere
    Of day descending, eventide drew near.
    When first Potitius with the priests advanced,
    Begirt with skins, and torches in their hands.
    High piled with meats of savoury taste, they ranged
    The chargers, and renew'd the grateful feast.
    Then came the Salii, crown'd with poplar too,
    Circling the blazing altars; here the youth
    Advanced, a choir harmonious, there were heard
    The reverend seers responsive; praise they sung,
    Much praise in honour of Alcides' deeds;
    How first with infant gripe two serpents huge
    He strangled, sent from Juno; next they sung,
    How Troja and OEchalia he destroy'd,
    Fair cities both, and many a toilsome task
    Beneath Eurystheus (so his stepdame will'd)
    Achieved victorious. Thou, the cloud-born pair,
    Hylæus fierce and Pholus, monstrous twins,
    Thou slew'st the minotaur, the plague of Crete,
    And the vast lion of the Nemean rock,
    Thee hell, and Cerberus, hell's porter, fear'd,
    Stretch'd in his den upon his half-gnaw'd bones.
    Thee no abhorred form, not e'en the vast
    Typhoeus could appal, though clad in arms.
    Hail, true-born son of Jove, among the gods
    At length enroll'd, nor least illustrious thou,
    Haste thee propitious, and approve our songs.
    Thus hymn'd the chorus; above all they sing
    The cave of Cacus, and the flames he breathed.
    The whole grove echoes, and the hills rebound.
      The rites perform'd, all hasten to the town.
    The king, bending with age, held as he went
    Æneas and his Pallas by the hand,
    With much variety of pleasing talk
    Shortening the way. Æneas, with a smile,
    Looks round him, charm'd with the delightful scene
    And many a question asks, and much he learns
    Of heroes far renown'd in ancient times.
    Then spake Evander. These extensive groves,
    Were once inhabited by fauns and nymphs,
    Produced beneath their shades, and a rude race
    Of men, the progeny uncouth of elms
    And knotted oaks. They no refinement knew
    Of laws or manners civilized, to yoke
    The steer, with forecast provident to store
    The hoarded grain, or manage what they had,
    But browsed like beasts upon the leafy boughs,
    Or fed voracious on their hunted prey.
    An exile from Olympus, and expell'd
    His native realm by thunder-bearing Jove,
    First Saturn came. He from the mountains drew
    This herd of men untractable and fierce,
    And gave them laws: and call'd his hiding-place,
    This growth of forests, Latium. Such the peace
    His land possess'd, the golden age was then,
    So famed in story; till by slow degrees
    Far other times, and of far different hue,
    Succeeded, thirst of gold and thirst of blood.
    Then came Ausonian bands, and armed hosts
    From Sicily, and Latium often changed
    Her master and her name. At length arose
    Kings, of whom Tybris of gigantic form
    Was chief; and we Italians since have call'd
    The river by his name; thus Albula
    (So was the country call'd in ancient days)
    Was quite forgot. Me from my native land
    An exile, through the dangerous ocean driven,
    Resistless fortune and relentless fate
    Placed where thou seest me. Phoebus, and
    The nymph Carmentis, with maternal care
    Attendant on my wanderings, fix'd me here.

[Ten lines omitted.]

    He said, and show'd him the Tarpeian rock,
    And the rude spot where now the Capitol
    Stands all magnificent and bright with gold,
    Then overgrown with thorns. And yet e'en then
    The swains beheld that sacred scene with awe;
    The grove, the rock, inspired religious fear.
    This grove, he said, that crowns the lofty top
    Of this fair hill, some deity, we know,
    Inhabits, but what deity we doubt.
    The Arcadians speak of Jupiter himself,
    That they have often seen him, shaking here
    His gloomy Ægis, while the thunder storms
    Came rolling all around him. Turn thine eyes,
    Behold that ruin; those dismantled walls,
    Where once two towns, Janiculum ----,
    By Janus this, and that by Saturn built,
    Saturnia. Such discourse brought them beneath
    The roof of poor Evander; thence they saw,
    Where now the proud and stately forum stands,
    The grazing herds wide scatter'd o'er the field.
    Soon as he enter'd--Hercules, he said,
    Victorious Hercules, on his threshold trod,
    These walls contain'd him, humble as they are.
    Dare to despise magnificence, my friend,
    Prove thy divine descent by worth divine,
    Nor view with haughty scorn this mean abode.
    So saying, he led Æneas by the hand,
    And placed him on a cushion stuff'd with leaves,
    Spread with the skin of a Lybistian bear.

[The Episode of Venus and Vulcan omitted.]

    While thus in Lemnos Vulcan was employ'd,
    Awaken'd by the gentle dawn of day,
    And the shrill song of birds beneath the eaves
    Of his low mansion, old Evander rose.
    His tunic, and the sandals on his feet,
    And his good sword well girded to his side,
    A panther's skin dependent from his left,
    And over his right shoulder thrown aslant,
    Thus was he clad. Two mastiffs follow'd him,
    His whole retinue and his nightly guard.


OVID, TRIST. BOOK V. ELEG. XII.

  Scribis, ut oblectem.

    You bid me write to amuse the tedious hours,
    And save from withering my poetic powers;
    Hard is the task, my friend, for verse should flow
    From the free mind, not fetter'd down by woe;
    Restless amidst unceasing tempests tost,
    Whoe'er has cause for sorrow, I have most.
    Would you bid Priam laugh, his sons all slain,
    Or childless Niobe from tears refrain,
    Join the gay dance, and lead the festive train?
    Does grief or study most befit the mind
    To this remote, this barbarous nook confined?
    Could you impart to my unshaken breast
    The fortitude by Socrates possess'd,
    Soon would it sink beneath such woes as mine,
    For what is human strength to wrath divine?
    Wise as he was, and Heaven pronounced him so,
    My sufferings would have laid that wisdom low.
    Could I forget my country, thee and all,
    And e'en the offence to which I owe my fall,
    Yet fear alone would freeze the poet's vein,
    While hostile troops swarm o'er the dreary plain.
    Add that the fatal rust of long disuse
    Unfits me for the service of the muse.
    Thistles and weeds are all we can expect
    From the best soil impoverish'd by neglect;
    Unexercised, and to his stall confined,
    The fleetest racer would be left behind;
    The best built bark that cleaves the watery way,
    Laid useless by, would moulder and decay--
    No hope remains that time shall me restore
    Mean as I was, to what I was before.
    Think how a series of desponding cares
    Benumbs the genius and its force impairs.
    How oft, as now, on this devoted sheet,
    My verse, constrain'd to move with measured feet,
    Reluctant and laborious limps along,
    And proves itself a wretched exile's song.
    What is it tunes the most melodious lays?
    'Tis emulation and the thirst of praise,
    A noble thirst, and not unknown to me,
    While smoothly wafted on a calmer sea.
    But can a wretch like Ovid pant for fame?
    No, rather let the world forget my name.
    Is it because that world approved my strain,
    You prompt me to the same pursuit again?
    No, let the Nine the ungrateful truth excuse,
    I charge my hopeless ruin on the muse,
    And, like Perillus, meet my just desert,
    The victim of my own pernicious art;
    Fool that I was to be so warn'd in vain,
    And, shipwreck'd once, to tempt the deep again.
    Ill fares the bard in this unletter'd land,
    None to consult, and none to understand.
    The purest verse has no admirers here,
    Their own rude language only suits their ear.
    Rude as it is, at length familiar grown,
    I learn it, and almost unlearn my own--
    Yet to say truth, e'en here the muse disdains
    Confinement, and attempts her former strains,
    But finds the strong desire is not the power,
    And what her taste condemns the flames devour.
    A part, perhaps, like this, escapes the doom,
    And though unworthy, finds a friend at Rome;
    But oh the cruel art, that could undo
    Its votary thus! would that could perish too!


HORACE, BOOK I. ODE IX.

  Vides, ut altá stet nive candidum
  Soracte; . . . . .

    Seest thou yon mountain laden with deep snow,
    The groves beneath their fleecy burden bow,
      The streams, congeal'd, forget to flow,
    Come, thaw the cold, and lay a cheerful pile
          Of fuel on the hearth;
    Broach the best cask, and make old winter smile
          With seasonable mirth.

    This be our part--let Heaven dispose the rest;
      If Jove command, the winds shall sleep,
      That now wage war upon the foamy deep,
    And gentle gales spring from the balmy west.

        E'en let us shift to-morrow as we may,
          When to-morrow's pass'd away,
          We at least shall have to say,
          We have lived another day;
    Your auburn locks will soon be silver'd o'er,
    Old age is at our heels, and youth returns no more.


HORACE, BOOK I. ODE XXXVIII.

  Persicos odi, puer, apparatus.

    Boy, I hate their empty shows,
      Persian garlands I detest,
    Bring not me the late-blown rose,
      Lingering after all the rest.
    Plainer myrtle pleases me,
      Thus outstretch'd beneath my vine;
    Myrtle more becoming thee,
      Waiting with thy master's wine.


HORACE, BOOK I. ODE XXXVIII.

    Boy! I detest all Persian fopperies,
    Fillet-bound garlands are to me disgusting;
    Task not thyself with any search, I charge thee,
        Where latest roses linger.
    Bring me alone (for thou wilt find that readily)
    Plain myrtle. Myrtle neither will disparage
    Thee occupied to serve me, or me drinking
        Beneath my vine's cool shelter.


HORACE, BOOK II. ODE X.

    Receive, dear friend, the truths I teach,
    So shalt thou live beyond the reach
      Of adverse fortune's power;
    Not always tempt the distant deep,
    Nor always timorously creep
      Along the treacherous shore.

    He that holds fast the golden mean,
    And lives contentedly between
      The little and the great,
    Feels not the wants that pinch the poor,
    Nor plagues that haunt the rich man's door,
      Imbittering all his state.

    The tallest pines feel most the power
    Of wintry blasts; the loftiest tower
      Comes heaviest to the ground;
    The bolts that spare the mountain's side
    His cloudcapt eminence divide,
      And spread the ruin round.

    The well-inform'd philosopher,
    Rejoices with a wholesome fear,
      And hopes in spite of pain;
    If Winter bellow from the north,
    Soon the sweet Spring comes dancing forth,
      And Nature laughs again.

    What if thine heaven be overcast,
    The dark appearance will not last;
      Expect a brighter sky.
    The God that strings the silver bow
    Awakes sometimes the muses too,
      And lays his arrows by.

    If hindrances obstruct thy way,
    Thy magnanimity display,
      And let thy strength be seen:
    But O! if Fortune fill thy sail
    With more than a propitious gale,
      Take half thy canvas in.


A REFLECTION ON THE FOREGOING ODE.

    And is this all? Can Reason do no more
    Than bid me shun the deep, and dread the shore?
    Sweet moralist! afloat on life's rough sea,
    The Christian has an art unknown to thee:
    He holds no parley with unmanly fears;
    Where Duty bids he confidently steers,
    Faces a thousand dangers at her call,
    And, trusting in his God, surmounts them all.


HORACE, BOOK II. ODE XVI.

  Otium Divos rogat in patenti.

    Ease is the weary merchant's prayer,
      Who ploughs by night the Ægean flood,
    When neither moon nor stars appear,
      Or faintly glimmer through the cloud.

    For ease the Mede with quiver graced,
      For ease the Thracian hero sighs,
    Delightful ease all pant to taste,
      A blessing which no treasure buys.

    For neither gold can lull to rest,
      Nor all a Consul's guard beat off
    The tumults of a troubled breast,
      The cares that haunt a gilded roof.

    Happy the man whose table shows
      A few clean ounces of old plate,
    No fear intrudes on his repose,
      No sordid wishes to be great.

    Poor short-lived things, what plans we lay
      Ah, why forsake our native home?
    To distant climates speed away;
      For self sticks close where'er we roam.

    Care follows hard, and soon o'ertakes
      The well-rigg'd ship, the warlike steed;
    Her destined quarry ne'er forsakes--
      Not the wind flies with half her speed.

    From anxious fears of future ill
      Guard well the cheerful, happy now;
    Gild e'en your sorrows with a smile,
      No blessing is unmix'd below.

    Thy neighing steeds and lowing herds,
      Thy numerous flocks around thee graze,
    And the best purple Tyre affords
      Thy robe magnificent displays.

    On me indulgent Heaven bestow'd
      A rural mansion, neat and small;
    This lyre;--and as for yonder crowd,
      The happiness to hate them all.


THE FIFTH SATIRE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE.

A HUMOROUS DESCRIPTION OF THE AUTHOR'S JOURNEY FROM ROME TO
BRUNDUSIUM.

    'Twas a long journey lay before us,
    When I and honest Heliodorus,
    Who far in point of rhetoric
    Surpasses every living Greek,
    Each leaving our respective home,
    Together sallied forth from Rome.
      First at Aricia we alight,
    And there refresh, and pass the night,
    Our entertainment rather coarse
    Than sumptuous, but I've met with worse.
    Thence o'er the causeway soft and fair
    To Appii Forum we repair.
    But as this road is well supplied
    (Temptation strong!) on either side
    With inns commodious, snug, and warm,
    We split the journey, and perform
    In two days' time what's often done
    By brisker travellers in one.
    Here, rather choosing not to sup
    Than with bad water mix my cup,
    After a warm debate in spite
    Of a provoking appetite,
    I sturdily resolved at last
    To balk it, and pronounce a fast,
    And in a moody humour wait,
    While my less dainty comrades bait.
      Now o'er the spangled hemisphere
    Diffused the starry train appear,
    When there arose a desperate brawl;
    The slaves and bargemen, one and all,
    Rending their throats (have mercy on us!)
    As if they were resolved to stun us.
    "Steer the barge this way to the shore;
    I tell you we'll admit no more;
    Plague! will you never be content?"
    Thus a whole hour at least is spent,
    While they receive the several fares,
    And kick the mule into his gears.
    Happy, these difficulties past,
    Could we have fallen asleep at last!
    But, what with humming, croaking, biting,
    Gnats, frogs, and all their plagues uniting,
    These tuneful natives of the lake
    Conspired to keep us broad awake.
    Besides, to make the concert full,
    Two maudlin wights, exceeding dull,
    The bargeman and a passenger,
    Each in his turn, essay'd an air
    In honour of his absent fair.
    At length the passenger, opprest
    With wine, left off, and snored the rest.
    The weary bargeman too gave o'er,
    And, hearing his companion snore,
    Seized the occasion, fix'd the barge,
    Turn'd out his mule to graze at large,
    And slept forgetful of his charge.
    And now the sun o'er eastern hill
    Discover'd that our barge stood still;
    When one, whose anger vex'd him sore,
    With malice fraught, leaps quick on shore;
    Plucks up a stake, with many a thwack
    Assails the mule and driver's back.
      Then slowly moving on with pain,
    At ten Feronia's stream we gain,
    And in her pure and glassy wave
    Our hands and faces gladly lave.
    Climbing three miles, fair Anxur's height
    We reach, with stony quarries white.
    While here, as was agreed, we wait,
    Till, charged with business of the state,
    Mæcenas and Cocceius come,
    The messengers of peace from Rome.
    My eyes, by watery humours blear
    And sore, I with black balsam smear.
    At length they join us, and with them
    Our worthy friend Fonteius came;
    A man of such complete desert,
    Antony loved him at his heart.
    At Fundi we refused to bait,
    And laugh'd at vain Aufidius' state,
    A prætor now, a scribe before,
    The purple-border'd robe he wore,
    His slave the smoking censer bore.
    Tired, at Muræna's we repose,
    At Formia sup at Capito's.
      With smiles the rising morn we greet,
    At Sinuessa pleased to meet
    With Plotius, Varius, and the bard
    Whom Mantua first with wonder heard.
    The world no purer spirits knows;
    For none my heart more warmly glows.
    O! what embraces we bestow'd,
    And with what joy our breasts o'erflow'd!
    Sure, while my sense is sound and clear,
    Long as I live, I shall prefer
    A gay, good-natured, easy friend
    To every blessing Heaven can send.
    At a small village, the next night,
    Near the Vulturnus we alight;
    Where, as employ'd on state affairs,
    We were supplied by the purveyors,
    Frankly at once, and without hire,
    With food for man and horse, and fire.
    Capua next day betimes we reach,
    Where Virgil and myself, who each
    Labour'd with different maladies,
    His such a stomach, mine such eyes,
    As would not bear strong exercise,
    In drowsy mood to sleep resort;
    Mæcenas to the tennis-court.
    Next at Cocceius' farm we're treated,
    Above the Caudian tavern seated;
    His kind and hospitable board
    With choice of wholesome food was stored.
      Now, O ye Nine, inspire my lays!
    To nobler themes my fancy raise!
    Two combatants, who scorn to yield
    The noisy, tongue-disputed field,
    Sarmentus and Cicirrus, claim
    A poet's tribute to their fame;
    Cicirrus of true Oscian breed,
    Sarmentus, who was never freed,
    But ran away. We don't defame him;
    His lady lives, and still may claim him.
    Thus dignified, in harder fray
    These champions their keen wit display,
    And first Sarmentus led the way.
    "Thy locks," quoth he, "so rough and coarse,
    Look like the mane of some wild horse."
    We laugh; Cicirrus undismay'd--
    "Have at you!"--cries, and shakes his head.
    "'Tis well," Sarmentus says, "you've lost
    That horn your forehead once could boast;
    Since, maim'd and mangled as you are,
    You seem to butt." A hideous scar
    Improved, 'tis true, with double grace
    The native horrors of his face.
    Well, after much jocosely said
    Of his grim front, so fiery red,
    (For carbuncles had blotch'd it o'er
    As usual on Campania's shore,)
    "Give us," he cried, "since you're so big,
    A sample of the Cyclop's jig!
    Your shanks methinks no buskins ask,
    Nor does your phiz require a mask."
    To this Cicirrus: "In return
    Of you, sir, now I fain would learn,
    When 'twas, no longer deem'd a slave,
    Your chains you to the Lares gave?
    For though a scrivener's right you claim,
    Your lady's title is the same.
    But what could make you run away,
    Since, pigmy as you are, each day
    A single pound of bread would quite
    O'erpower your puny appetite?"
    Thus joked the champions, while we laugh'd,
    And many a cheerful bumper quaff'd.
      To Beneventum next we steer;
    Where our good host by over care
    In roasting thrushes lean as mice
    Had almost fallen a sacrifice.
    The kitchen soon was all on fire,
    And to the roof the flames aspire;
    There might you see each man and master
    Striving, amidst this sad disaster,
    To save the supper. Then they came
    With speed enough to quench the flame.
    From hence we first at distance see
    The Apulian hills, well known to me,
    Parch'd by the sultry western blast;
    And which we never should have past,
    Had not Trivicius by the way
    Received us at the close of day.
    But each was forced at entering here
    To pay the tribute of a tear,
    For more of smoke than fire was seen--
    The hearth was piled with logs so green.
    From hence in chaises we were carried
    Miles twenty-four, and gladly tarried
    At a small town, whose name my verse
    (So barbarous is it) can't rehearse.
    Know it you may by many a sign,
    Water is dearer far than wine;
    There bread is deem'd such dainty fare,
    That every prudent traveller
    His wallet loads with many a crust;
    For at Canusium you might just
    As well attempt to gnaw a stone
    As think to get a morsel down:
    That too with scanty streams is fed;
    Its founder was brave Diomed.
    Good Varius (ah, that friends must part!)
    Here left us all with aching heart.
    At Rubi we arrived that day,
    Well jaded by the length of way,
    And sure poor mortals ne'er were wetter:
    Next day no weather could be better;
    No roads so bad; we scarce could crawl
    Along to fishy Barium's wall.
    The Egnatians next, who by the rules
    Of common sense are knaves or fools,
    Made all our sides with laughter heave,
    Since we with them must needs believe
    That incense in their temples burns,
    And without fire to ashes turns.
    To circumcision's bigots tell
    Such tales! for me, I know full well
    That in high heaven, unmoved by care,
    The gods eternal quiet share:
    Nor can I deem their spleen the cause,
    While fickle Nature breaks her laws.
    Brundusium last we reach: and there
    Stop short the muse and traveller.

  1759.


THE NINTH SATIRE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE.

DESCRIPTION OF AN IMPERTINENT. ADAPTED TO THE PRESENT TIMES, 1759.

    Sauntering along the street one day,
    On trifles musing by the way--
    Up steps a free familiar wight,
    (I scarcely knew the man by sight.)
    "Carlos," he cried, "your hand, my dear;
    Gad, I rejoice to meet you here!
    Pray Heaven I see you well?" "So, so;
    E'en well enough as times now go:
    The same good wishes, sir, to you."
    Finding he still pursued me close--
    "Sir, you have business I suppose."
    "My business, sir, is quickly done,
    'Tis but to make my merit known.
    Sir, I have read"--"O learned sir,
    You and your learning I revere."
    Then sweating with anxiety,
    And sadly longing to get free,
    Gods, how I scamper'd, scuffled for't,
    Ran, halted, ran again, stopp'd short,
    Beckon'd my boy, and pull'd him near,
    And whisper'd nothing in his ear.
      Teased with his loose unjointed chat--
    "What street is this? What house is that?"
    O Harlow, how I envied thee
    Thy unabash'd effrontery,
    Who darest a foe with freedom blame,
    And call a coxcomb by his name!
    When I return'd him answer none,
    Obligingly the fool ran on,
    "I see you're dismally distress'd,
    Would give the world to be released.
    But by your leave, Sir, I shall still
    Stick to your skirts, do what you will.
    Pray which way does your journey tend?"
    "O, 'tis a tedious way, my friend;
    Across the Thames, the Lord knows where,
    I would not trouble you so far."
    "Well, I'm at leisure to attend you."
    "Are you?" thought I, "the Deil befriend you."
    No ass with double panniers rack'd,
    Oppress'd, o'erladen, broken-back'd,
    E'er look'd a thousandth part so dull
    As I, nor half so like a fool.
    "Sir, I know little of myself,
    (Proceeds the pert conceited elf)
    If Gray or Mason you will deem
    Than me more worthy your esteem.
    Poems I write by folios
    As fast as other men write prose;
    Then I can sing so loud, so clear,
    That Beard cannot with me compare.
    In dancing too I all surpass,
    Not Cooke can move with such a grace."
    Here I made shift with much ado
    To interpose a word or two.--
    "Have you no parents, sir, no friends,
    Whose welfare on your own depends?"
    "Parents, relations, say you? No.
    They're all disposed of long ago."--
    "Happy to be no more perplex'd!
    My fate too threatens, I go next.
    Despatch me, sir, 'tis now too late,
    Alas! to struggle with my fate!
    Well, I'm convinced my time is come--
    When young, a gipsy told my doom.
    The beldame shook her palsied head,
    As she perused my palm, and said:
    "Of poison, pestilence, and war,
    Gout, stone, defluxion, or catarrh,
    You have no reason to beware.
    Beware the coxcomb's idle prate;
    Chiefly, my son, beware of that.
    Be sure, when you behold him, fly
    Out of all earshot, or you die."
      To Rufus' Hall we now draw near
    Where he was summoned to appear,
    Refute the charge the plaintiff brought,
    Or suffer judgment by default.
    "For Heaven's sake, if you love me, wait
    One moment! I'll be with you straight."
    Glad of a plausible pretence--
    "Sir, I must beg you to dispense
    With my attendance in the court.
    My legs will surely suffer for't."
    "Nay, prithee, Carlos, stop awhile!"
    "Faith, sir, in law I have no skill.
    Besides, I have no time to spare,
    I must be going you know where."
    "Well, I protest I'm doubtful now
    Whether to leave my suit or you!"
    "Me without scruple!" I reply,
    "Me by all means, sir!"--"No, not I.
    Allons, Monsieur!" 'Twere vain, you know,
    To strive with a victorious foe.
    So I reluctantly obey,
    And follow where he leads the way.
      "You and Newcastle are so close,
    Still hand and glove, sir--I suppose."
    "Newcastle, let me tell you, sir,
    Has not his equal every where."
    "Well. There indeed your fortune's made:
    Faith, sir, you understand your trade.
    Would you but give me your good word:
    Just introduce me to my lord,
    I should serve charmingly by way
    Of second fiddle, as they say:
    What think you, sir? 'twere a good jest.
    'Slife, we should quickly scout the rest."
    "Sir, you mistake the matter far,
    We have no second fiddles there--
    Richer than I some folks may be;
    More learned, but it hurts not me.
    Friends though he has of different kind,
    Each has his proper place assign'd."
    "Strange matters these alleged by you!"
    "Strange they may be, but they are true."
    "Well then, I vow, 'tis mighty clever,
    Now I long ten times more than ever
    To be advanced extremely near
    One of his shining character.
    Have but the will--there wants no more,
    'Tis plain enough you have the power.
    His easy temper (that's the worst)
    He knows, and is so shy at first."--
    "But such a cavalier as you--
    Lord, sir, you'll quickly bring him to!"
    "Well; if I fail in my design,
    Sir, it shall be no fault of mine.
    If by the saucy servile tribe
    Denied, what think you of a bribe?
    Shut out to-day, not die with sorrow,
    But try my luck again to-morrow;
    Never attempt to visit him
    But at the most convenient time;
    Attend him on each levee day,
    And there my humble duty pay--
    Labour, like this, our want supplies;
    And they must stoop who mean to rise."
      While thus he wittingly harangued,
    For which you'll guess I wish'd him hang'd,
    Campley, a friend of mine, came by--
    Who knew his humour more than I;
    We stop, salute, and--"Why so fast,
    Friend Carlos? Whither all this haste?"--
    Fired at the thought of a reprieve,
    I pinch him, pull him, twitch his sleeve,
    Nod, beckon, bite my lips, wink, pout,
    Do every thing but speak plain out:
    While he, sad dog, from the beginning
    Determined to mistake my meaning,
    Instead of pitying my curse,
    By jeering made it ten times worse.
    "Campley, what secret (pray!) was that
    You wanted to communicate?"
    "I recollect. But 'tis no matter.
    Carlos, we'll talk of that hereafter.
    E'en let the secret rest. 'Twill tell
    Another time, sir, just as well."
      Was ever such a dismal day?
    Unlucky cur, he steals away,
    And leaves me, half bereft of life,
    At mercy of the butcher's knife;
    When sudden, shouting from afar,
    See his antagonist appear!
    The bailiff seized him quick as thought,
    "Ho, Mr. Scoundrel! Are you caught?
    Sir, you are witness to the arrest."
    "Ay, marry, sir, I'll do my best."
    The mob huzzas. Away they trudge,
    Culprit and all, before the judge.
    Meanwhile I luckily enough
    (Thanks to Apollo) got clear off.


TRANSLATION OF AN EPIGRAM FROM HOMER.[922]

  [922] No title is prefixed to this piece, but it appears to be a
  translation of one of the Επιγραμματα of Homer called Ο Καμινος,
  or The Furnace. Herodotus, or whoever was the author of the Life
  of Homer ascribed to him, observes, "certain potters, while
  they were busied in baking their ware, seeing Homer at a small
  distance, and having heard much said of his wisdom, called to
  him, and promised him a present of their commodity, and of such
  other things as they could afford, if he would sing to them, when
  he sang as follows."

    Pay me my price, potters! and I will sing.
    Attend, O Pallas! and with lifted arm
    Protect their oven; let the cups and all
    The sacred vessels blacken well, and, baked
    With good success, yield them both fair renown
    And profit, whether in the market sold
    Or streets, and let no strife ensue between us.
    But, oh ye potters! if with shameless front
    Ye falsify your promise, then I leave
    No mischief uninvoked to avenge the wrong.
    Come, Syntrips, Smaragus, Sabactes, come,
    And Asbetus, nor let your direst dread,
    Omodamus, delay! Fire seize your house,
    May neither house nor vestibule escape,
    May ye lament to see confusion mar
    And mingle the whole labour of your hands,
    And may a sound fill all your oven, such
    As of a horse grinding his provender,
    While all your pots and flagons bounce within.
    Come hither, also, daughter of the sun,
    Circe the sorceress, and with thy drugs
    Poison themselves, and all that they have made!
    Come, also, Chiron, with thy numerous troop
    Of centaurs, as well those who died beneath
    The club of Hercules, as who escaped,
    And stamp their crockery to dust; down fall
    Their chimney; let them see it with their eyes,
    And howl to see the ruin of their art,
    While I rejoice; and if a potter stoop
    To peep into his furnace, may the fire
    Flash in his face and scorch it, that all men
    Observe, thenceforth, equity and good faith.

  Oct. 1790.




COWPER'S LATIN POEMS.


MONTES GLACIALES, IN OCEANO GERMANICO NATANTES.

    En, quæ prodigia, ex oris allata remotis,
    Oras adveniunt pavefacta per æquora nostras!
    Non equidem priscæ sæclum rediisse videtur
    Pyrrhæ, cum Proteus pecus altos visere montes
    Et sylvas, egit. Sed tempora vix leviora
    Adsunt, evulsi quando radicitus alti
    In mare descendunt montes, fluctusque pererrant.
    Quid vero hoc monstri est magis et mirabile visu?
    Splendentes video, ceu pulchro ex ære vel auro
    Conflatos, rutilisque accinctos undique gemmis,
    Baccâ cærulea, et flammas imitante pyropo.
    Ex oriente adsunt, ubi gazas optima tellus
    Parturit omnigenas, quibus æva per omnia sumptu
    Ingenti finxere sibi diademata reges?
    Vix hoc crediderim. Non fallunt talia acutos
    Mercatorum oculos: prius et quam littora Gangis
    Liquissent, avidis gratissima præda fuissent.
    Ortos unde putemus? An illos Ves'vius atrox
    Protulit, ignivomisve ejecit faucibus Ætna?
    Luce micant propria, Phoebive, per aëra purum
    Nunc stimulantis equos, argentea tela retorquent?
    Phoebi luce micant. Ventis et fluctibus altis
    Appulsi, et rapidis subter currentibus undis,
    Tandem non fallunt oculos. Capita alta videre est
    Multa onerata nive et canis conspersa pruinis.
    Cætera sunt glacies. Procul hinc, ubi Bruma fere omnes
    Contristat menses, portenta hæc horrida nobis
    Illa strui voluit. Quoties de culmine summo
    Clivorum fluerent in littora prona, solutæ
    Sole, nives, propero tendentes in mare cursu,
    Illa gelu fixit. Paulatim attollere sese
    Mirum coepit opus; glacieque ab origine rerum
    In glaciem aggesta sublimes vertice tandem
    Æquavit montes, non crescere nescia moles.
    Sic immensa diu stetit, æternumque stetisset
    Congeries, hominum neque vi neque mobilis arte,
    Littora ni tandem declivia deseruisset,
    Pondere victa suo. Dilabitur. Omnia circum
    Antra et saxa gemunt, subito concussa fragore,
    Dum ruit in pelagum, tanquam studiosa natandi,
    Ingens tota strues. Sic Delos dicitur olim,
    Insula, in Ægæo fluitasse erratica ponto.
    Sed non ex glacie Delos; neque torpida Delum
    Bruma inter rupes genuit nudum sterilemque.
    Sed vestita herbis erat illa, ornataque nunquam
    Decidua lauro; et Delum dilexit Apollo.
    At vos, errones horrendi, et caligine digni
    Cimmeria, Deus idem odit. Natalia vestra,
    Nubibus involvens frontem, non ille tueri
    Sustinuit. Patrium vos ergo requirite coelum!
    Ite! Redite! Timete moras; ni leniter austro
    Spirante, et nitidas Phoebo jaculante sagittas
    Hostili vobis, pereatis gurgite misti!

  March 11, 1799.


ON THE ICE ISLANDS SEEN FLOATING IN THE GERMAN OCEAN.

    What portents, from what distant region, ride,
    Unseen till now in ours, the astonish'd tide?
    In ages past, old Proteus, with his droves
    Of sea-calves, sought the mountains and the groves.
    But now, descending whence of late they stood,
    Themselves the mountains seem to rove the flood.
    Dire times were they, full charged with human woes;
    And these, scarce less calamitous than those.
    What view we now? More wondrous still! Behold!
    Like burnish'd brass they shine, or beaten gold;
    And all around the pearl's pure splendour show,
    And all around the ruby's fiery glow.
    Come they from India, where the burning earth,
    All bounteous, gives her richest treasures birth;
    And where the costly gems, that beam around
    The brows of mightiest potentates, are found?
    No. Never such a countless dazzling store
    Had left unseen the Ganges' peopled shore.
    Rapacious hands, and ever watchful eyes,
    Should sooner far have mark'd and seized the prize.
    Whence sprang they then? Ejected have they come
    From Vesuvius', or from Ætna's burning womb?
    Thus shine they self-illumed, or but display
    The borrow'd splendours of a cloudless day?
    With borrow'd beams they shine. The gales that breathe
    Now landward, and the current's force beneath,
    Have borne them nearer: and the nearer sight,
    Advantaged more, contemplates them aright.
    Their lofty summits crested high they show,
    With mingled sleet, and long-incumbent snow.
    The rest is ice. Far hence, where, most severe,
    Bleak winter well nigh saddens all the year,
    Their infant growth began. He bade arise
    Their uncouth forms, portentous in our eyes.
    Oft as dissolved by transient suns, the snow
    Left the tall cliff, to join the flood below;
    He caught, and curdled with a freezing blast
    The current, ere it reach'd the boundless waste.
    By slow degrees uprose the wondrous pile,
    And long successive ages roll'd the while;
    Till, ceaseless in its growth, it claim'd to stand,
    Tall as its rival mountains on the land.
    Thus stood, and, unremovable by skill
    Or force of man, had stood the structure still,
    But that, though firmly fix'd, supplanted yet
    By pressure of its own enormous weight,
    It left the shelving beach--and, with a sound
    That shook the bellowing waves and rocks around,
    Self-launch'd, and swiftly, to the briny wave,
    As if instinct with strong desire to lave,
    Down went the ponderous mass. So bards of old
    How Delos swam the Ægean deep have told.
    But not of ice was Delos. Delos bore
    Herb, fruit, and flower. She, crown'd with laurel, wore,
    E'en under wintry skies, a summer smile;
    And Delos was Apollo's favourite isle.
    But, horrid wanderers of the deep, to you
    He deems Cimmerian darkness only due.
    Your hated birth he deign'd not to survey,
    But, scornful, turn'd his glorious eyes away.
    Hence, seek your home, nor longer rashly dare
    The darts of Phoebus and a softer air;
    Lest ye regret, too late, your native coast,
    In no congenial gulf for ever lost!

  March 19, 1799.


MONUMENTAL INSCRIPTION TO WILLIAM NORTHCOT.

            Hic sepultus est
          Inter suorum lacrymas
            GULIELMUS NORTHCOT,
        GULIELMI et MARIÆ filius
          Unicus, unice dilectus,
    Qui floris ritu succisus est semihiantis,
            Aprilis die septimo,
              1780. Æt. 10.

    Care, vale! Sed non æternum, care, valeto!
      Namque iterum tecum, sim modo dignus, ero.
    Tum nihil amplexus poterit divellere nostros,
      Nec tu marcesces, nec lacrymabor ego.


TRANSLATION.

    Farewell! "But not for ever," Hope replies,
    Trace but his steps and meet him in the skies!
    There nothing shall renew our parting pain,
    Thou shalt not wither, nor I weep again.


IN SEDITIONEM HORRENDAM,

CORRUPTELIS GALLICIS, UT FERTUR, LONDINI NUPER EXORTAM.

    Perfida, crudelis, victa et lymphata furore,
      Non armis, laurum Gallia fraude petit.
    Venalem pretio plebem conducit, et urit
      Undique privatas patriciasque domos.
    Nequicquam conata sua, foedissima sperat
      Posse tamen nostra nos superare manu.
    Gallia, vana struis! Precibus nunc utere! Vinces,
      Nam mites timidis, supplicibusque sumus.


TRANSLATION.

    False, cruel, disappointed, stung to the heart,
    France quits the warrior's for the assassin's part,
    To dirty hands a dirty bribe conveys,
    Bids the low street and lofty palace blaze.
    Her sons too weak to vanquish us alone,
    She hires the worst and basest of our own.
    Kneel, France! a suppliant conquers us with ease,
    We always spare a coward on his knees.


MOTTO ON A CLOCK.

WITH A TRANSLATION BY HAYLEY.

    Quæ lenta accedit, quam velox præterit hora!
      Ut capias, patiens esto, sed esto vigil!

    Slow comes the hour; its passing speed how great!
    Waiting to seize it--vigilantly wait!


A SIMILE LATINIZED.

    Sors adversa gerit stimulum, sed tendit et alas:
      Pungit api similis, sed velut ista fugit.


ON THE LOSS OF THE ROYAL GEORGE.

WRITTEN WHEN THE NEWS ARRIVED.

_To the March in Scipio._

    Toll for the brave!
      The brave that are no more
    All sunk beneath the wave,
      Fast by their native shore!

    Eight hundred of the brave,
      Whose courage well was tried,
    Had made the vessel heel,
      And laid her on her side.

    A land-breeze shook the shrouds,
      And she was overset;
    Down went the Royal George,
      With all her crew complete.

    Toll for the brave!
      Brave Kempenfelt is gone;
    His last sea-fight is fought;
      His work of glory done.

    It was not in the battle;
      No tempest gave the shock;
    She sprang no fatal leak;
      She ran upon no rock.

    His sword was in its sheath;
      His fingers held the pen,
    When Kempenfelt went down
      With twice four hundred men.

    Weigh the vessel up,
      Once dreaded by our foes!
    And mingle with our cup
      The tear that England owes.

    Her timbers yet are sound,
      And she may float again,
    Full charged with England's thunder,
      And plough the distant main.

    But Kempenfelt is gone,
      His victories are o'er;
    And he and his eight hundred
      Shall plough the wave no more.

  Sept. 1782.


IN SUBMERSIONEM NAVIGII, CUI GEORGIUS REGALE NOMEN INDITUM.

    Plangimus fortes. Periêre fortes,
    Patrium propter periêre littus
    Bis quatèr centum; subitò sub alto
            Æquore mersi.

    Navis, innitens lateri, jacebat,
    Malus ad summas trepidabat undas,
    Cùm levis, funes quatiens, ad imum
            Depulit aura.

    Plangimus fortes. Nimis, heu, caducam
    Fortibus vitam voluêre parcæ,
    Nec sinunt ultrà tibi nos recentes
             Nectere laurus,

    Magne, qui nomen, licèt incanorum,
    Traditum ex multis atavis tulisti!
    At tuos olim memorabit ævum
            Omne triumphos.

    Non hyems illos furibunda mersit,
    Non mari in clauso scopuli latentes,
    Fissa non rimis abies, nec atrox
            Abstulit ensis.

    Navitæ sed turn nimium jocosi
    Voce fallebant hilari laborem,
    Et quiescebat, calamoque dextram im-
            pleverat heros.

    Vos, quibus cordi est grave opus piumque,
    Humidum ex alto spolium levate,
    Et putrescentes sub aquis amicos
            Reddite amicis!

    Hi quidem (sic dîs placuit) fuêre:
    Sed ratis, nondum putris, ire possit
    Rursus in bellum, Britonumque nomen
            Tollere ad astra.


IN BREVITATEM VITÆ SPATII HOMINIBUS CONCESSI.

BY DR. JORTIN.

    Hei mihi! lege ratâ sol occidit atque resurgit,
    Lunaque mutatæ reparat dispendia formæ,
    Astraque, purpurei telis extincta diei,
    Rursus nocte vigent. Humiles telluris alumni.
    Graminis herba virens, et florum picta propago,
    Quos crudelis hyems lethali tabe peredit,
    Cum Zephyri vox blanda vocat, rediitque sereni
    Temperies anni, foecundo è cespite surgunt.
    Nos domini rerum, nos, magna et pulchra minati,
    Cum breve ver vitæ robustaque transiit ætas,
    Deficimus; nec nos ordo revolubilis auras
    Reddit in æthereas, tumuli neque claustra resolvit.


ON THE SHORTNESS OF HUMAN LIFE.

TRANSLATION OF THE FOREGOING.

    Suns that set, and moons that wane,
    Rise and are restored again;
    Stars, that orient day subdues,
    Night at her return renews.
    Herbs and flowers, the beauteous birth
    Of the genial womb of earth,
    Suffer but a transient death
    From the winter's cruel breath.
    Zephyr speaks; serener skies
    Warm the glebe, and they arise.
    We, alas! earth's haughty kings,
    We, that promise mighty things,
    Losing soon life's happy prime,
    Droop, and fade, in little time.
    Spring returns, but not our bloom;
    Still 'tis winter in the tomb.

  Jan. 1784.


THE LILY AND THE ROSE.

    The nymph must lose her female friend,
      If more admired than she--
    But where will fierce contention end,
      If flowers can disagree?

    Within the garden's peaceful scene
      Appear'd two lovely foes,
    Aspiring to the rank of queen,
      The Lily and the Rose.

    The Rose soon redden'd into rage,
      And, swelling with disdain,
    Appeal'd to many a poet's page
      To prove her right to reign.

    The Lily's height bespoke command,
      A fair imperial flower;
    She seem'd design'd for Flora's hand
      The sceptre of her power.

    This civil bickering and debate
      The goddess chanced to hear,
    And flew to save, ere yet too late
      The pride of the parterre.

    Yours is, she said, the nobler hue,
      And yours the statelier mien;
    And, till a third surpasses you,
      Let each be deem'd a queen.

    Thus soothed and reconciled, each seeks
      The fairest British fair;
    The seat of empire is her cheeks,
      They reign united there.


IDEM LATINE REDDITUM.

    Heu inimicitias quoties parit æmula forma,
      Quam raro pulchræ pulchra placere potest!
    Sed fines ultra solitos discordia tendit,
      Cum flores ipsos bilis et ira movent.

    Hortus ubi dulces præbet tacitosque recessus,
      Se rapit in partes gens animosa duas;
    Hic sibi regales Amaryllis candida cultus,
      Illic purpureo vindicat ore Rosa.

    Ira Rosam et meritis quæsita superbia tangunt,
      Multaque ferventi vix cohibenda sinu,
    Dum sibi fautorum ciet undique nomina vatum,
      Jusque suum, multo carmine fulta, probat.

    Altior emicat illa, et celso vertice nutat,
      Ceu flores inter non habitura parem,
    Fastiditque alios, et nata videtur in usus
      Imperii, sceptrum, Flora quod ipsa gerat.

    Nec Dea non sensit civilis murmura rixæ,
      Cui curæ est pictas pandere ruris opes.
    Deliciasque suas nunquam non prompta tueri,
      Dum licet et locus est, ut tueatur, adest.

    Et tibi forma datur procerior omnibus, inquit,
      Et tibi, principibus qui solet esse, color,
    Et donec vincat quædam formosior ambas,
      Et tibi reginæ nomen, et esto tibi.

    His ubi sedatus furor est, petit utraque nympham,
      Qualem inter Veneres Anglia sola parit;
    Hanc penes imperium est, nihil optant amplius, hujus
      Regnant in nitidis, et sine lite, genis.


THE POPLAR FIELD.

    The poplars are fell'd, farewell to the shade,
    And the whispering sound of the cool colonnade;
    The winds play no longer and sing in the leaves,
    Nor Ouse on his bosom their image receives.

    Twelve years had elapsed since I last took a view
    Of my favourite field, and the bank where they grew;
    And now in the grass behold they are laid,
    And the tree is my seat that once lent me a shade.

    The blackbird has fled to another retreat,
    Where the hazels afford him a screen from the heat,
    And the scene where his melody charm'd me before
    Resounds with his sweet-flowing ditty no more.

    My fugitive years are all hasting away,
    And I must ere long lie as lowly as they,
    With a turf on my breast, and a stone at my head,
    Ere another such grove shall arise in its stead.

    'Tis a sight to engage me, if any thing can,
    To muse on the perishing pleasures of man;
    Though his life be a dream, his enjoyments, I see,
    Have a being less durable even than he.[923]

  [923] Cowper afterwards altered this last stanza in the following
  manner:--

  The change both my heart and my fancy employs,
  I reflect on the frailty of man, and his joys;
  Short-lived as we are, yet our pleasures, we see,
  Have a still shorter date, and die sooner than we.


    IDEM LATINE REDDITUM.

    Populeæ cecidit gratissima copia silvæ,
    Conticuêre susurri, omnisque evanuit umbra.
    Nullæ jam levibus se miscent frondibus auræ,
    Et nulla in fluvio ramorum ludit imago.

    Hei mihi! bis senos dum luctu torqueor annos,
    His cogor silvis suetoque carere recessu,
    Cum serò rediens, stratasque in gramine cernens,
    Insedi arboribus, sub queîs errare solebam.

    Ah ubi nunc merulæ cantus? Felicior illum
    Silva tegit, duræ nondum permissa bipenni;
    Scilicet exustos colles camposque patentes
    Odit, et indignans et non rediturus abivit.

    Sed qui succisas doleo succidar et ipse,
    Et priùs huic parilis, quàm creverit altera silva,
    Flebor, et, exequiis parvis donatus, habebo
    Defixum lapidem tumulique cubantis acervum.

    Tam subitò periisse videns tam digna manere,
    Agnosco humanas sortes et tristia fata--
    Sit licèt ipse brevis, voluerique simillimus umbræ!
    Est homini brevior citiùsque obitura voluptas.


VOTUM.

    O matutini rores, auræque salubres,
    O nemora, et lætæ rivis felicibus herbæ,
    Graminei colles, et amoenæ in vallibus umbræ!
    Fata modò dederint quas olim in rure paterno
    Delicias, procul arte, procul formidine novi,
    Quam vellem ignotus, quod mens mea semper avebat,
    Ante larem proprium placidam expectare senectam.
    Tum demùm, exactis non infeliciter annis,
    Sortiri tacitum lapidem, aut sub cespite condi!


TRANSLATION OF PRIOR'S CHLOE AND EUPHELIA.

    Mercator, vigiles oculos ut fallere possit,
      Nomine sub ficto trans mare mittit opes;
    Lenè sonat liquidumque meis Euphelia chordis,
      Sed solam exoptant te, mea vota, Chlöe.

    Ad speculum ornabat nitidos Euphelia crines,
      Cum dixit, mea lux, heus, cane, sume lyram.
    Namque lyram juxtà positam cum carmine vidit,
      Suave quidem carmen dulcisonamque lyram.

    Fila lyræ vocemque paro, suspiria surgunt,
      Et miscent numeris murmura moesta meis,
    Dumque tuæ memoro laudes, Euphelia, formæ,
      Tota anima intereà pendet ab ore Chlöes.

    Subrubet illa pudore, et contrahit altera frontem,
      Me torquet mea mens conscia, psallo, tremo;
    Atque Cupidineâ dixit Dea cincta coronâ,
      Heu! fallendi artem quam didicere parum.


VERSES TO THE MEMORY OF DR. LLOYD.

SPOKEN AT THE WESTMINSTER ELECTION NEXT AFTER HIS DECEASE.

    Our good old friend is gone; gone to his rest,
    Whose social converse was itself a feast.
    O ye of riper years, who recollect
    How once ye loved, and eyed him with respect,
    Both in the firmness of his better day,
    While yet he ruled you with a father's sway,
    And when, impair'd by time, and glad to rest,
    Yet still with looks in mild complacence drest,
    He took his annual seat, and mingled here
    His sprightly vein with yours--now drop a tear!
    In morals blameless, as in manners meek,
    He knew no wish that he might blush to speak,
    But, happy in whatever state below,
    And richer than the rich in being so,
    Obtain'd the hearts of all, and such a meed
    At length from one[924] as made him rich indeed.
    Hence then, ye titles, hence, not wanted here!
    Go! garnish merit in a higher sphere,
    The brows of those, whose more exalted lot
    He could congratulate, but envied not!
    Light lie the turf, good senior, on thy breast;
    And tranquil, as thy mind was, be thy rest.
    Though, living, thou hadst more desert than fame,
    And not a stone now chronicles thy name!

  [924] He was usher and under-master of Westminster near fifty years,
  and retired from his occupation when he was near seventy, with a
  handsome pension from the king.

    Abiit senex. Periit senex amabilis,
        Quo non fuit jucundior.
    Lugete vos, ætas quibus maturior
        Senem colendum præstitit;
    Seu quando, viribus valentioribus
        Firmoque fretus pectore,
    Florentiori vos juventute excolens
        Curâ fovebat patriâ;
    Seu quando, fractus, jamque donatus rude
        Vultu sed usque blandulo,
    Miscere gaudebat suas facetias
        His annuis leporibus.
    Vixit probus, purâque simplex indole,
        Blandisque comis moribus,
    Et dives æquâ mente, charus omnibus,
        Unius auctus munere.
    Ite, tituli! Meritis beatioribus
        Aptate laudes debitas!
    Nec invidebat ille, si quibus favens
        Fortuna plus arriserat.
    Placide senex, levi quiescas cespite,
        Etsi superbum nec vivo tibi
    Decus sit inditum, nec mortuo
        Lapis notatus nomine!

As Cowper's Version of Homer is not included in this Edition of his
Works, it seems necessary to assign the reasons which have led to
the omission.

Distinguished as this Version unquestionably is, beyond any
preceding attempt, for its fidelity and close adherence to the
Grecian Bard, as well as for other excellences which have already
been specified, it has still failed in securing an adequate
reception from the British public. In the religious portion of the
community it is well known that a very general sentiment of regret
exists that the author of the Task, whose muse was capable of such
high moral flights, should have consumed so many years in this
laborious enterprise. Under these circumstances, its re-publication
here, appeared to be undesirable, especially as it would have added
_one-third to the cost_ of the present Edition, and as editions of
Cowper's Homer are already before the public, and accessible to all
who attach an interest to this portion of the Poet's Works.




THREE PAPERS, BY COWPER,

INSERTED IN THE CONNOISSEUR.


"During Cowper's visit to Eartham, he kindly pointed out to me,"
Hayley observes, "three of his papers in the last volume of the
'Connoisseur.'--I inscribed them with his name at the time; and
imagine that the readers of his Life may be gratified in seeing
them inserted here. I find other numbers of that work ascribed to
him, but the three following I print as his, on his own explicit
authority. Number 119, Thursday, May 6, 1756--Number 134, Thursday,
August 19,--Number 138, Thursday, Sept. 16."


No. CXIX.

  Plenus rimarum sum, huc et illuc perfluo.

  TER.

    Leaky at bottom; if those chinks you stop,
    In vain--the secret will run o'er at top.

There is no mark of our confidence taken more kindly by a friend
than the entrusting him with a secret, nor any which he is so likely
to abuse. Confidants in general are like crazy firelocks, which
are no sooner charged and cocked than the spring gives way, and
the report immediately follows. Happy to have been thought worthy
the confidence of one friend, they are impatient to manifest their
importance to another; till, between them and their friend and their
friend's friend, the whole matter is presently known _to all our
friends round the Wrekin_. The secret catches as it were by contact,
and like electrical matter breaks forth from every link in the
chain, almost at the same instant. Thus the whole Exchange may be
thrown into a buzz to-morrow, by what was whispered in the middle
of Marlborough Downs this morning; and in a week's time the streets
may ring with the intrigue of a woman of fashion, bellowed out from
the foul mouths of the hawkers, though at present it is known to no
creature living but her gallant and her waiting maid.

As the talent of secresy is of so great importance to society,
and the necessary commerce between individuals cannot be securely
carried on without it, that this deplorable weakness should be so
general is much to be lamented. You may as well pour water into a
funnel or sieve, and expect it to be retained there, as commit any
of your concerns to so slippery a companion. It is remarkable that,
in those men who have thus lost the faculty of retention, the desire
of being communicative is always most prevalent where it is least
justified. If they are entrusted with a matter of no great moment,
affairs of more consequence will perhaps in a few hours shuffle it
entirely out of their thoughts; but if any thing be delivered to
them with an earnestness, a low voice, and the gesture of a man
in terror for the consequence of its being known; if the door is
bolted, and every precaution taken to prevent surprise, however they
may promise secresy, and however they may intend it, the weight upon
their minds will be so extremely oppressive, that it will certainly
put their tongues in motion.

This breach of trust, so universal amongst us, is perhaps, in great
measure owing to our education. The first lesson our little masters
and misses are taught is to become blabs and tell-tales: they are
bribed to divulge the petty intrigues of the family below stairs
to papa and mamma in the parlour, and a doll or hobby-horse is
generally the encouragement of a propensity, which could scarcely
be atoned for by a whipping. As soon as children can lisp out the
little intelligence they have picked up in the hall or the kitchen,
they are admired for their wit; if the butler has been caught
kissing the housekeeper in his pantry, or the footman detected in
romping with the chamber-maid, away flies little Tommy or Betsy with
the news; the parents are lost in admiration of the pretty rogue's
understanding, and reward such uncommon ingenuity with a kiss or a
sugar-plum.

Nor does an inclination to secresy meet with less encouragement at
school. The gouvernantes at the boarding-school teach miss to be a
good girl, and tell them every thing she knows: thus, if any young
lady is unfortunately discovered eating a green apple in a corner:
if she is heard to pronounce a naughty word, or is caught picking
the letters out of another miss's sampler; away runs the chit
who is so happy as to get the start of the rest, screams out her
information as she goes; and the prudent matron chucks her under the
chin, and tells her that she is a good girl and every body will love
her.

The management of our young gentlemen is equally absurd; in most of
our schools, if a lad is discovered in a scrape, the impeachment
of an accomplice, as at the Old Bailey, is made the condition of a
pardon. I remember a boy, engaged in robbing an orchard, who was
unfortunately taken prisoner in an apple-tree, and conducted, under
the strong guard of the farmer and his dairy-maid to the master's
house. Upon his absolute refusal to discover his associates, the
pedagogue undertook to lash him out of his fidelity; but, finding it
impossible to scourge the secret out of him, he at last gave him up
for an obstinate villain, and sent him to his father, who told him
he was ruined, and was going to disinherit him for not betraying his
school-fellows.

I must own I am not fond of thus drubbing our youths into treachery;
and am much pleased with the request of Ulysses, when he went
to Troy, who begged of those who were to have the care of young
Telemachus, that they would above all things teach him to be just,
sincere, faithful, and to keep a secret.

Every man's experience must have furnished him with instances of
confidants who are not to be relied on, and friends who are not to
be trusted; but few perhaps have thought it a character so well
worth their attention, as to have marked out the different degrees
into which it may be divided, and the different methods by which
secrets are communicated.

Ned Trusty is a tell-tale of a very singular kind. Having some
sense of his duty, he hesitates a little at the breach of it. If he
engages never to utter a syllable, he most punctually performs his
promise; but then he has the knack of insinuating by a nod, and a
shrug well-timed, or a seasonable leer, as much as others can convey
in express terms. It is difficult, in short, to determine whether
he is more to be admired for his resolution in not mentioning, or
his ingenuity in disclosing, a secret. He is also excellent at a
doubtful phrase, as Hamlet calls it, or ambiguous giving out, and
his conversation consists chiefly of such broken inuendoes as--"well
I know--or I could--and if I would--or, if I list to speak--or there
be, and if there might," &c.

Here he generally stops; and leaves it to his hearers to draw proper
inferences from these piecemeal premises. With due encouragement
however he may be prevailed on to slip the padlock from his lips,
and immediately overwhelms you with a torrent of secret history,
which rushes forth with more violence for having been so long
confined.

Poor Meanwell, though he never fails to transgress, is rather to be
pitied than condemned. To trust him with a secret is to spoil his
appetite, to break his rest, and to deprive him for a time of every
earthly enjoyment. Like a man who travels with his whole fortune in
his pocket, he is terrified if you approach him, and immediately
suspects that you come with a felonious intention to rob him of his
charge. If he ventures abroad, it is to walk in some unfrequented
place, where he is least in danger of an attack. At home, he shuts
himself up from his family, paces to and fro his chamber, and has no
relief but from muttering over to himself what he longs to publish
to the world; and would gladly submit to the office of town-crier,
for the liberty of proclaiming it in the market-place. At length,
however, weary of his burden, and resolved to bear it no longer, he
consigns it to the custody of the first friend he meets, and returns
to his wife with a cheerful aspect, and wonderfully altered for the
better.

Careless is perhaps equally undesigning, though not equally
excusable. Entrust him with an affair of the utmost importance, on
the concealment of which your fortune and happiness depend, he hears
you with a kind of half attention, whistles a favourite air, and
accompanies it with the drumming of his fingers upon the table. As
soon as your narration is ended, or perhaps in the middle of it, he
asks your opinion of his swordknot--condemns his tailor for having
dressed him in a snuff-coloured coat instead of a pompadour, and
leaves you in haste to attend an auction, where, as if he meant
to dispose of his intelligence to the best bidder, he divulges it
with a voice as loud as an auctioneer's; and, when you tax him with
having played you false, he is heartily sorry for it, but never knew
that it was to be a secret.

To these I might add the character of the open and unreserved, who
thinks it a breach of friendship to conceal any thing from his
intimates; and the impertinent, who, having by dint of observation
made himself master of your secret, imagines he may lawfully publish
the knowledge it cost him so much labour to obtain, and considers
that privilege as the reward due to his industry. But I shall leave
these, with many other characters which my reader's own experience
may suggest to him, and conclude with prescribing, as a short remedy
for this evil, that no man may betray the counsel of his friend--let
every man keep his own.


No. CXXXIV.

    Delicta majorum immeritus lues,
    Romane, donec templa refeceris
    Ædesque labentes Deorum, et
    Foeda nigro simulacra fumo.--HOR.

    The tott'ring tow'r and mould'ring wall repair,
    And fill with decency the house of pray'r;
    Quick to the needy curate bring relief,
    And deck the parish-church without a brief.


MR. VILLAGE TO MR. TOWN.

Dear Cousin,--The country at present, no less than the metropolis,
abounding with politicians of every kind, I begin to despair of
picking up any intelligence that might possibly be entertaining
to your readers. However, I have lately visited some of the most
distant parts of the kingdom with a clergyman of my acquaintance:
I shall not trouble you with an account of the improvements that
have been made in the seats we saw, according to the modern taste,
but proceed to give you some reflections which occurred to us in
observing several country churches, and the behaviour of their
congregations.

The ruinous condition of some of these edifices gave me great
offence; and I could not help wishing that the honest vicar,
instead of indulging his genius for improvements, by enclosing
his gooseberry-bushes with a Chinese rail, and converting half an
acre of his glebe land into a bowling-green, would have applied
part of his income to the more laudable purpose of sheltering his
parishioners from the weather during their attendance on divine
service. It is no uncommon thing to see the parsonage-house well
thatched, and in exceeding good repair, while the church, perhaps,
has scarce any other roof than the ivy that grows over it. The noise
of owls, bats, and magpies, makes the principal part of the church
music in many of these ancient edifices; and the walls, like a large
map, seem to be portioned out into capes, seas, and promontories, by
the various colours by which the damps have stained them. Sometimes,
the foundation being too weak to support the steeple any longer, it
has been found expedient to pull down that part of the building, and
to hang the bells under a wooden shed on the ground beside it. This
is the case in a parish in Norfolk, through which I lately passed,
and where the clerk and the sexton, like the two figures of St.
Dunstan's, serve the bells in the capacity of clappers, by striking
them alternately with a hammer.

In other churches, I have observed that nothing unseemly or ruinous
is to be found, except in the clergyman, and the appendages of
his person. The 'squire of the parish, or his ancestors, perhaps
to testify their devotion and leave a lasting monument of their
magnificence, have adorned the altar-piece with the richest crimson
velvet, embroidered with vine-leaves and ears of wheat; and have
dressed up the pulpit with the same splendour and expense; while the
gentleman who fills it, is exalted in the midst of all this finery,
with a surplice as dirty as a farmer's frock, and a periwig that
seems to have transferred its faculty of curling to the band which
appears in full buckle beneath it.

But if I was concerned to see several distressed pastors, as well
as many of our country churches in a tottering condition, I was
more offended with the indecency of worship in others. I could wish
that the clergy would inform their congregations, that there is no
occasion to scream themselves hoarse in making their responses; that
the town-crier is not the only person qualified to pray with true
devotion; and that he who bawls the loudest, may nevertheless be
the wickedest fellow in the parish. The old women too in the aisle
might be told, that their time would be better employed in attending
to the sermon, than in fumbling over their tattered Testaments
till they have found the text; by which time the discourse is near
drawing to a conclusion: while a word or two of instruction might
not be thrown away upon the younger part of the congregation, to
teach them that making posies in summer-time, and cracking nuts in
autumn, is no part of the religious ceremony.

The good old practice of psalm-singing is indeed wonderfully
improved in many country churches, since the days of Sternhold
and Hopkins; and there is scarce a parish clerk who has so little
taste as not to pick his staves out of the new version. This has
occasioned great complaints in some places, where the clerk has been
forced to bawl by himself, because the rest of the congregation
cannot find the psalm at the end of their prayer books; while others
are highly disgusted at the innovation, and stick as obstinately to
the old version as to the old style.

The tunes themselves have also been new set to jiggish measures, and
the sober drawl, which used to accompany the two first staves of the
hundredth psalm, with the 'Gloria Patri,' is now split into as many
quavers as an Italian air. For this purpose there is in every county
an itinerant band of vocal musicians, who make it their business to
go round to all the churches in their turns, and, after a prelude
with a pitch-pipe, astonish the audience with hymns set to the new
Winchester measure, and anthems of their own composing.

As these new-fashioned psalmodists are necessarily made up of young
men and maids, we may naturally suppose that there is a perfect
concord and symphony between them; and, indeed, I have known it
happen, that these sweet singers have more than once been brought
into disgrace by too close a unison between the thorough-base and
the treble.

It is a difficult matter to decide which is looked upon as the
greatest man in a country church, the parson or his clerk. The
latter is most certainly held in the higher veneration, where the
former happens to be only a poor curate, who rides post every
sabbath from village to village, and mounts and dismounts at the
church door. The clerk's office is not only to tag the prayers
with an amen, or usher in the sermon with a stave, but he is also
the universal father to give away the brides, and the standing
god-father to all the new-born bantlings. But in many places there
is still a greater man belonging to the church than either the
parson or the clerk himself. The person I mean is the 'squire;
who, like the king, may be styled the head of the church in his
own parish. If the benefice be in his own gift, the vicar is his
creature, and of consequence entirely at his devotion: or, if the
care of the church be left to a curate, the Sunday fees, roast beef
and plum-pudding, and the liberty to shoot in the manor, will bring
him as much under the 'squire's command as his dogs and horses.

For this reason the bell is often kept tolling, and the people
waiting in the churchyard an hour longer than the usual time; nor
must the service begin till the 'squire has strutted up the aisle
and seated himself in the great pew in the chancel. The length of
the sermon is also measured by the will of the 'squire, as formerly
by the hourglass, and I know one parish where the preacher has
always the complaisance to conclude his discourse, however abruptly,
the minute that the 'squire gives the signal by rising up after his
nap.

In a village church, the 'squire's lady, or the vicar's wife, are
perhaps the only females that are stared at for their finery; but in
the large cities and towns, where the newest fashions are brought
down weekly by the stage-coach or wagon, all the wives and daughters
of the most topping tradesmen vie with each other every Sunday in
the elegance of their apparel. I could even trace their gradations
in their dress according to the opulence, the extent, and the
distance of the place from London. I was at a church in a populous
city in the north, where the mace-bearer cleared the way for Mrs.
Mayoress, who came sideling after him in an enormous fan-hoop,
of a pattern which had never been seen before in those parts. At
another church in a corporation town, I saw several _Négligées_ with
furbelowed aprons, which had long disputed the prize of superiority;
but these were most wofully eclipsed by a burgess's daughter just
come from London, who appeared in a _Trollope_ or _Slammerkin_ with
treble ruffles to the cuffs, pinked and gimped, and the sides of
the petticoat drawn up in festoons. In some lesser borough towns,
the contest I found lay between three or four black and green
bibs and aprons; at one, a grocer's wife attracted our eyes by a
new-fashioned cap called a _Joan_, and at another, they were wholly
taken up by a mercer's daughter in a nun's hood.

I need not say any thing of the behaviour of the congregation in
these more polite places of religious resort; as the same genteel
ceremonies are practised there as at the most fashionable churches
in town. The ladies, immediately on their entrance, breathe a pious
ejaculation through their fan-sticks, and the beaux very gravely
address themselves to the haberdashers' bills, glewed upon the
lining of their hats. This pious duty is no sooner performed, than
the exercise of bowing and courtseying succeeds: the locking and
unlocking of the pews drowns the reader's voice at the beginning
of the service; and the rustling of silks, added to the whispering
and tittering of so much good company, renders him totally
unintelligible to the very end of it.

  I am, dear cousin, yours, &c.


No. CXXXVIII.

    Servatâ semper lege et ratione loquendi.--JUV.

    Your talk to decency and reason suit,
    Nor prate like fools, or gabble like a brute!

In the comedy of "The Frenchman in London," which, we are told, was
acted at Paris with universal applause for several nights together,
there is a character of a rough Englishman, who is represented as
quite unskilled in the graces of conversation, and his dialogue
consists almost entirely of a repetition of the common salutation
of--"How do you do?--How do you do?" Our nation has, indeed,
been generally supposed to be of a sullen and uncommunicative
disposition; while, on the other hand, the loquacious French have
been allowed to possess the art of conversing beyond all other
people. The Englishman requires to be wound up frequently, and stops
very soon; but the Frenchman runs on in a continued alarum. Yet it
must be acknowledged, that, as the English consist of very different
humours, their manner of discourse admits of great variety; but
the whole French nation converse alike, and there is no difference
in their address between a marquis and a valet-de-chambre. We may
frequently see a couple of French barbers accosting each other in
the street, and paying their compliments with the same volubility
of speech, the same grimace and action, as two courtiers in the
Tuileries.

I shall not attempt to lay down any particular rules for
conversation, but rather point out such faults in discourse and
behaviour as render the company of half mankind rather tedious than
amusing. It is in vain, indeed, to look for conversation, where we
might expect to find it in the greatest perfection, among persons of
fashion; there it is almost annihilated by universal card-playing;
insomuch that I have heard it given as a reason why it is impossible
for our present writers to succeed in the dialogue of genteel
comedy, that our people of quality scarce ever meet but to game. All
their discourse turns upon the odd trick and the four honours, and
it is no less a maxim with the votaries of whist than with those of
Bacchus, that talking spoils company.

Every one endeavours to make himself as agreeable to society as he
can; but it often happens, that those who most aim at shining in
conversation overshoot their mark. Though a man succeeds, he should
not (as is frequently the case) engross the whole talk to himself;
for that destroys the very essence of conversation, which is talking
together. We should try to keep up conversation like a ball bandied
to and fro from one to another, rather than seize it ourselves, and
drive it before us like a football. We should likewise be cautious
to adapt the matter of our discourse to our company, and not talk
Greek before ladies, or of the last new furbelow to a meeting of
country justices.

But nothing throws a more ridiculous air over our conversations
than certain peculiarities, easily acquired, but very difficultly
conquered and discarded. In order to display these absurdities in
a truer light, it is my present purpose to enumerate such of them
as are most commonly to be met with; and first to take notice of
those buffoons in society, the attitudinarians and face-makers.
These accompany every word with a peculiar grimace or gesture; they
assent with a shrug, and contradict with a twisting of the neck; are
angry with a wry mouth, and pleased in a caper or a minuet step.
They may be considered as speaking harlequins, and their rules
of eloquence are taken from the posture-master. These should be
condemned to converse only in dumb show with their own person in the
looking-glass; as well as the smirkers and smilers, who so prettily
set off their faces, together with their words, by a je-ne-sçai-quoi
between a grin and a dimple. With these we may likewise rank the
affected tribe of mimics, who are constantly taking off the peculiar
tone of voice or gesture of their acquaintance; though they are such
wretched imitators, that (like bad painters) they are frequently
forced to write the name under the picture, before we can discover
any likeness.

Next to these, whose elocution is absorbed in action, and who
converse chiefly with their arms and legs, we may consider the
professed speakers. And first, the emphatical; who squeeze, and
press, and ram down every syllable with excessive vehemence and
energy. These orators are remarkable for their distinct elocution
and force of expression; they dwell on the important particles _of_
and _the_, and the significant conjunctive _and_, which they seem to
hawk up with much difficulty out of their own throats, and to cram
them with no less pain into the ears of their auditors.

These should be suffered only to syringe, as it were, the ears
of a deaf man, through a hearing-trumpet; though I must confess,
that I am equally offended with whisperers or low speakers, who
seem to fancy all their acquaintance deaf, and come up so close
to you, that they may be said to measure noses with you, and
frequently overcome you with the exhalations of a powerful breath.
I would have these oracular gentry obliged to talk at a distance
through a speaking-trumpet, or apply their lips to the walls of
a whispering-gallery. The wits who will not condescend to utter
any thing but a bon-mot, and the whistlers or tune-hummers, who
never articulate at all, may be joined very agreeably together in
concert; and to these tinkling cymbals I would also add the sounding
brass--the bawler, who inquires after your health with the bellowing
of a town-crier.

The tattlers, whose pliable pipes are admirably adapted to the "soft
parts of conversation," and sweetly "prattling out of fashion,"
make very pretty music from a beautiful face and a female tongue;
but from a rough manly voice and coarse features, mere nonsense is
as harsh and dissonant as a jig from a hurdy-gurdy. The swearers
I have spoken of in a former paper; but the half-swearers, who
split, and mince, and fritter their oaths into _Gad's but_, _ad's
fish_, and _demme_, the Gothic humbuggers, and those who "nick-name
God's creatures," and call a man a cabbage, a crab, a queer cub,
an odd fish, and an unaccountable _muskin_, should never come into
company without an interpreter. But I will not tire my reader's
patience by pointing out all the pests of conversation; nor dwell
particularly on the sensibles, who pronounce dogmatically on the
most trivial points, and speak in sentences;--the wonderers, who are
always wondering what o'clock it is, or wondering whether it will
rain or no, or wondering when the moon changes; the phraseologists,
who explain a thing by _all that_, or enter into particulars with
_this_, _that_, and _t'other_; and lastly, the silent men, who
seem afraid of opening their mouths lest they should catch cold,
and literally observe the precept of the gospel, by letting their
conversation be only yea, yea, and nay, nay.

The rational intercourse kept up by conversation is one of our
principal distinctions from brutes. We should, therefore, endeavour
to turn this peculiar talent to our advantage, and consider the
organs of speech as the instruments of understanding. We should be
very careful not to use them as the weapons of vice, or tools of
folly, and do our utmost to unlearn any trivial or ridiculous habits
which tend to lessen the value of such an inestimable prerogative.
It is indeed imagined by some philosophers, that even birds and
beasts (though without the power of articulation) perfectly
understand one another by the sounds they utter; and that dogs and
cats, &c., have each a particular language to themselves, like
different nations. Thus it may be supposed that the nightingales of
Italy have as fine an ear for their own native wood notes, as any
signor or signora for an Italian air; that the boars of Westphalia
gruntle as expressively through the nose as the inhabitants in
High German; and that the frogs in the dykes of Holland croak as
intelligibly as the natives jabber their Low Dutch. However this may
be, we may consider those whose tongues hardly seem to be under
the influence of reason, and do not keep up the proper conversation
of human creatures, as imitating the language of different animals:
thus, for instance, the affinity between chatterers and monkeys, and
praters and parrots, is too obvious not to occur at once: grunters
and growlers may be justly compared to hogs; snarlers are curs;
and the _spitfire passionate_ are a sort of wild cats, that will
not bear stroking, but will pur when they are pleased. Complainers
are screech-owls; and story-tellers, always repeating the same
dull note, are cuckoos. Poets that prick up their ears at their
own hideous braying are no better than asses; critics in general
are venomous serpents that delight in hissing; and some of them,
who have got by heart a few technical terms, without knowing their
meaning, are no other than magpies. I myself, who have crowed to the
whole town for near three years past, may perhaps put my readers in
mind of a dunghill cock; but as I must acquaint them that they will
hear the last of me on this day fortnight, I hope they will then
consider me as a swan, who is supposed to sing sweetly in his dying
moments.




  73, CHEAPSIDE, LONDON,
  JANUARY, 1847.


  A
  SELECT CATALOGUE OF BOOKS,
  ADAPTED
  For the use of Public Schools,
  INCLUDING
  MANY OF STANDARD VALUE,
  TO WHICH IS ADDED A LIST OF BOOKS SUITABLE FOR SCHOOL PRIZES.


.*. _Please to give Orders for the Genuine Editions published by
MESSRS. WILLIAM TEGG & CO., 73, CHEAPSIDE, LONDON, who supply
Booksellers, Schoolmasters, and all Orders for Exportation, however
large, with correctness and despatch._

A LIBERAL ALLOWANCE TO SCHOOLS, AND ALSO TO MERCHANTS, FOR
EXPORTATION.


ADAM'S Roman Antiquities; or, an Account of the Manners and Customs
of the Romans: designed to illustrate the Latin Classics, by
explaining Words and Phrases from the Rites and Customs to which
they refer. A New Edition (the Twelfth), with Numerous Notes,
improved Indices, and Analytical Questions, by JAMES BOYD, LL.D.
7_s._ cloth.

ÆSCHYLUS.--Popular English Specimens of the Greek Dramatic Poets;
with Introductory Essay, and Explanatory Notes (ÆSCHYLUS). 18mo.
5_s._

ÆSOP'S Fables, with upwards of One Hundred and Fifty Engravings.
Chiswick Edition. 3_s._ 6_d._

AIKIN'S Calendar of Nature, designed for the instruction of young
persons, with numerous Cuts. A New and Improved Edition. 18mo, half
bound. 1_s._ 6_d._

AIKIN AND BARBAULD'S Evenings at Home; a Variety of Miscellaneous
Pieces for the Instruction of the Young. 18mo. 4_s._

AINSWORTH.--A new Abridgment of Ainsworth's Dictionary, English
and Latin, for the use of Grammar Schools. Into this edition are
introduced several alterations and improvements, for the special
purpose of facilitating the labour and increasing the knowledge of
the young scholar. By JOHN DYMOCK, LL.D. Twenty-ninth Edition, 18mo.
7_s._ 6_d._ roan.

ANTHON'S Q. Horatii Flacci Poemata. The Works of Horace, with
Explanatory Notes selected from the larger Edition. By CHARLES
ANTHON, LL.D., Rector of the Grammar School, Columbia College. A New
Edition, edited by JAMES BOYD, LL.D., one of the Masters of the High
School, Edinburgh. 12mo. 7s_._ 6_d._ roan.

ANTHON'S Select Orations of Cicero; with an English Commentary, and
Historical, Geographical, and Legal Indices. A New Edition, with
additions and emendations, by JAMES BOYD, LL.D. 6_s._ roan.

ANTHON'S C. Crispi Sallusti de Catilinæ Conjuratione Belloque
Jugurthino Historiæ Animadversionibus illustravit CAROLUS ANTHON,
LL.D., Editio octava; accedunt Notulæ quaedam et Quaestiones cura
JACOBI BOYD, LL.D. 5_s._ roan.

ANTHON'S Greek Reader, selected principally from the Work of
Professor FREDERIC JACOBS; with English Notes, Critical and
Explanatory, a Metrical Index to Homer and Anacreon, and a Copious
Lexicon. A New Edition, revised and corrected, by REV. JAMES BOYD,
LL.D. 7_s._ 6_d._ roan.

ANTHON'S Cæsar's Commentaries of the Gallic War; and the First
Book of the Greek Paraphrase; with English Notes, critical and
explanatory, Plans of Battles, Sieges, &c., and Historical,
Geographical, and Archæological Indices. The Fourth Edition, with a
Map and many Cuts. 6_s._ roan.

ANTHON'S P. VIRGILII MARONIS ÆNEIS.--The Æneid of Virgil, with
English Notes, Critical and Explanatory; a Metrical Clavis; and an
Historical, Geographical, and Mythological Index. By CHARLES ANTHON,
LL.D., Jay Professor of the Greek and Latin Languages in Columbia
College, New York, and Rector of the Grammar School. Edited, with
considerable alterations, and adapted to the use of English Schools
and Colleges, by the REV. W. TROLLOPE, M.A. 12mo, roan, 7_s._ 6_d._

ANTHON'S Homer's Iliad--(the First Three Books)--according to
the ordinary text, and also with the restoration of the Digamma;
to which are appended English Notes, Critical and Explanatory, a
Metrical Index and Homeric Glossary. A New Edition by BENJAMIN
DAVIES, Ph.D. Lips. 12mo, roan, 7_s._ 6_d._

ANTHON'S First Latin Lessons, containing the most important parts
of the Grammar of the Latin Language. Together with appropriate
Exercises in the translating and writing of Latin, for the use of
Beginners. The Second Edition, edited by Rev. W. HAYES, B.A., one of
the Classical Masters, King's College, London. 4_s._ roan.

ANTHON'S Grammar of the Greek Language, for the Use of Schools and
Colleges. The Second Edition, revised and corrected, by Rev. J. R.
MAJOR, D.D., Head Master, King's College, London. 4_s._ roan.

ANTHON'S System of Greek Prosody and Metre, for the Use of Schools
and Colleges, together with the Choral Scanning of the Prometheus
Vinctus of Æschylus, and the Ajax and OEdipus Tyrannus of Sophocles.
A New Edition, revised and corrected, by Rev. J. R. MAJOR, D.D.,
Head Master of King's College, London. 2_s._ 6_d._ roan.

BALDWIN'S History of Rome, from the Building of the City to the Ruin
of the Republic, with Maps and Plates. Seventh Edition, roan, 3_s._
6_d._

BALDWIN'S History of Greece, from the Earliest Records of that
Country to the time in which it was reduced into a Roman Province.
The Third Edition, for the use of Schools, roan, 3_s._ 6_d._

BALDWIN'S Fables, Ancient and Modern; adapted for the use of
Children. The Eleventh Edition, roan, 4_s._

BALDWIN'S Pantheon; or, Ancient History of the Gods of Greece and
Rome; for the use of Schools and Young Persons of both sexes. The
Eighth Edition, roan, 5_s._

BARROW'S (Sir John) Memoir of the Life of Peter the Great. Cloth,
5_s._

BONNYCASTLE'S Scholar's Guide to Arithmetic; with Notes containing
the proof of each Rule, together with some of the most useful
properties of Numbers. A New Edition, enlarged and improved, by REV.
E. C. TYSON, M.A. Roan, 3_s._ 6_d._

BONNYCASTLE.--A Key to Bonnycastle's Guide to Arithmetic. A New
Edition, enlarged and improved. By REV. E. C. TYSON, M.A. Roan,
4_s._ 6_d._

BONNYCASTLE'S Introduction to Algebra, designed for the use of
Schools and other places of Public Education. A New Edition,
enlarged and improved. By REV. E. C. TYSON, M.A. Roan, 4_s._

BONNYCASTLE.--A Key to Bonnycastle's Algebra. A New Edition. By REV.
E. C. TYSON, M.A. Roan, 4_s._ 6_d._

BONNYCASTLE'S Introduction to Practical Geometry and Mensuration. A
New Edition, revised and improved. By REV. E. C. TYSON, M.A. Roan,
5_s._

BONNYCASTLE.--A Key to Bonnycastle's Mensuration. A New Edition,
improved. By REV. E. C. TYSON, M.A. Roan, 5_s._

BOTANY.--The Child's Botany; Pleasing and Instructive Information
concerning the Properties, Habits, and Classification of British and
Foreign Plants, expressed in a style adapted to the understandings
of young persons, with Plates. Square 16mo. half bound. 2_s._

BROOKES'S General Gazetteer in Miniature, or Compendious
Geographical Dictionary containing Descriptions of every Country
in the known world, illustrated by Maps, originally compiled by R.
BROOKES, M.D. The whole revised and corrected to the present time,
by A. G. FINDLAY. 18mo. 7_s._ 6_d._, roan.

BUCHANAN'S Technological Dictionary, explaining the Terms of the
Arts, Sciences, Literature, Professions, and Trades. 18mo, 7_s._

BUFFON.--Nouveaux Morceaux Choisis de Buffon. Avec des Notes
instructives, par VENTOUILLAC. 18mo, cloth. 2_s._ 6_d._

BURGESS'S Rudiments of Hebrew Grammar, in Two Parts. Part I. A
Table of Roots, with the Formation, Inflection, and Composition of
Words. Part II. Treating of the Verb Regular and Irregular; with a
Vocabulary of Nouns, Verbs, and Participles; and an Introduction to
Reading with Points. Third Edition, by BURGESS, LORD BISHOP OF ST.
DAVID'S, 12mo. 7_s._

BURGESS'S Hebrew Elements; a Practical Introduction to the Reading
of the Hebrew Scriptures, in Four Parts, viz., 1. Hebrew Primer; 2.
Syllabarium Hebraicum; 3. Hebrew Reader, Part 1; 4. Hebrew Reader,
Part 2, for the Use of Schools. Fourth Edition. By BURGESS, LORD
BISHOP OF ST. DAVID'S. 12mo. 6_s._

CAMPBELL'S Lives of the British Admirals, and Naval History of Great
Britain, from the time of Cæsar to the Chinese War of 1841. With
Engravings, 12mo. 7_s._ cloth.

CARPENTER'S Comprehensive Dictionary of English Synonymes. Third
Edition, greatly enlarged. 18mo. 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

CICERO.--Select Orations of Cicero, translated into English; with
Notes, Historical, Critical, and Explanatory. By WILLIAM DUNCAN. New
Edition (Oxford), 8vo, cloth, 7_s._

COBBINS.--Pictorial School Hand-book to the Holy Bible, with Wood
Engravings. 18mo. cloth, 2_s._

COTTIN'S Elisabeth, ou Les Exilés de Sibérie. Nouvelle Edition, par
VENTOUILLAC. 18mo. Cloth. 2_s._ 6_d._

CRABB'S Dictionary of General Knowledge; or, an Explanation of Words
and Things connected with the Arts and Sciences, illustrated with
580 Woodcuts. Fourth Edition, greatly enlarged. Cloth, 7_s._

DAVENPORT'S Walker's Pronouncing Dictionary and Expositor of the
English Language; in which the meaning of every word is clearly
explained, and the sound of every syllable distinctly shown,
exhibiting the principles of a pure and correct pronunciation. A New
Edition, revised and enlarged. 18mo. Cloth, 5_s._

DEMOSTHENES.--ΔΗΜΟΣΘΕΝΟΥΣ ΦΙΛΙΠΠΙΚΟΙ ΚΑΙ ΣΥΜΒΟΥΛΕΥΤΙΚΟΙ. Cum Notis
Variorum Wolfii, Dounæi, Mounteneii, Hockii, Augeri, aliorumque
congestis. Textus appositu est Lectio Reiskiana. 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._

DUNCAN'S New Hebrew-English and English-Hebrew Lexicon, in Three
Parts; to which is appended a New Hebrew Grammar. 18mo. Cloth, 7_s._

ENFIELD'S Speaker; or, Miscellaneous Pieces, selected from the best
English Writers, and disposed under proper heads, with a view to
facilitate the improvement of youth in reading and speaking. 12mo.
Bound, 3_s._ 6_d._

ENFIELD'S Progressive Spelling Book; or, a New Introduction to
Spelling and Reading; arranged in easy lessons, and adapted to the
capacities of youth. Bound, 1_s._ 3_d._

ENTICK'S New Spelling Dictionary, in which the Parts of Speech are
accurately distinguished, and the Syllables accented according
to the just and natural Pronunciation of each Word, with a
Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. Square, 2_s._ 6_d._
bound.

EUCLID.--The Elements of Euclid, viz., the First 14 Books, together
with the Eleventh and Twelfth, printed with a few variations and
improvements. From the text of Dr. SIMSON. A New Edition, corrected
and revised. By WILLIAM RUTHERFORD, F.R.A.S. 5_s._

ELLIS'S Collection of English Exercises, translated from the
writings of Cicero only, for Schoolboys to re-translate into
Latin; and adapted to the principal Rules in the Syntax of the
Eton, Ruddiman's, and other Grammars. A New Edition, corrected and
carefully revised, by REV. G. N. WRIGHT. Cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

FINDLAY'S Modern Atlas: forming a complete Compendium of Geography,
exhibiting in Thirty Maps, the Extent, Divisions, Physical and
Political Arrangements of every Country in the known world; and
containing the Latest Discoveries in the Polar Regions, Africa,
Polynesia, &c.; with an Introduction, explaining the Construction
and Use of Maps, and a Copious Index for reference to the Maps,
showing the Latitude and Longitude of every Place contained in
the Atlas. Royal 8vo.; for the use of Schools and Young Persons.
Half-bound, 12_s._

_A List of the Maps in FINDLAY'S GENERAL ATLAS, any of which may be
had separately, viz.:--_

  1. Eastern Hemisphere.
  2. Western Hemisphere.
  3. Europe.
  4. England and Wales.
  5. Scotland.
  6. Ireland.
  7. France.
  8. Holland and Belgium.
  9. Germany.
  10. Prussia.
  11. Austria.
  12. Sweden, Norway, and Denmark.
  13. Russia in Europe.
  14. Spain and Portugal.
  15. Switzerland.
  16. Italy.
  17. Turkey in Europe, and Greece.
  18. Asia.
  19. Turkey in Asia.
  20. India.
  21. China.
  22. Oceanica.
  23. New South Wales.
  24. Tasmania, or Van Diemen's Land.
  25. Africa.
  26. North America.
  27. Canada.
  28. United States.
  29. West Indies.
  30. South America.

FINDLAY'S Collection of Thirty Outline Maps for Geographical
Exercises, adapted to facilitate the Study of Geography, and
intended as Practical Lessons for Pupils to fill up. Imperial
Quarto. 5_s._

FINDLAY'S Ancient Atlas according to the latest Discoveries. Royal
8vo. half-bound. 12_s._

_List of Maps in FINDLAY'S CLASSICAL ATLAS FOR ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY:--_

  1. Orbis veteribus notus.
  2. Roma.
  3. Italia septentrionalis.
  4. Italia media.
  5. Italia meridionalis.
  6. Athenæ.
  7. Peloponnesus et Attica.
  8. Græcia septentrionalis.
  9. Insulæ Maris Ægæi et Creta.
  10. Macedonia, Thracia, Illyria, Moesia et Dacia.
  11. Britannia.
  12. Insulæ Britannicæ.
  13. Gallia.
  14. Germania.
  15. Vindelicia, Noricum, Rhætia, Pannonia et Illyricum.
  16. Hispania.
  17. Africa septentrionalis.
  18. Ægyptus.
  19. Asia Minor.
  20. Palæstina.
  21. Syria.
  22. Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria et Babylonia.
  23. Arabia.
  24. Imperium Persicum.
  25. Indiæ.

FLORIAN.--Numa Pompilius, Second Roi de Rome. Par FLORIAN. Nouvelle
Edition, par VENTOUILLAC. 18mo, cloth. 5_s._

GARTLEY'S Murray's Grammar and Exercises abridged, comprising the
substance of his large Grammar and Exercises, with additional Notes
and Illustrations. By G. GARTLEY, Teacher of English Grammar, &c.,
Glasgow. 2_s._

GEOGRAPHY and History, selected by a Lady for the use of her own
Children. Enlarged and continued to the present time. By the Rev. G.
N. WRIGHT, M.A. A New Edition, roan. 4_s._ 6_d._

GOLDSMITH'S Grammar of Geography for the Use of Schools, with Maps
and Illustrations. A New Edition, by the Rev. G. N. WRIGHT, M.A.
Roan 3_s._ 6_d._

GOLDSMITH'S Key to Goldsmith's Geography, 18mo, sewed, 9_d._

GOLDSMITH'S History of England, from the Earliest Times to the Death
of George the Second. Chiswick Edition, 12mo. 6_s._

GRAHAM'S Histories from Scripture, for Children, exemplified by
appropriate Domestic Tales. Square 16mo. 3_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

GRIESBACH'S Novum Testamentum Græce, ex Editione Griesbachii
Emendante, HENRICO A. AITTON. Glasguæ. 5_s._

GUTHRIE'S Geographical, Historical, and Commercial Grammar,
exhibiting the Present State of the World; to which is added a
Geographical Index, &c. The Astronomical part by JAMES FERGUSON,
Esq. A New Edition, revised, greatly enlarged, and brought down to
the present time. By R. A. DAVENPORT, with numerous Maps. 18mo,
cloth. 5_s._

HOLLINGS'S Life of Gustavus Adolphus, surnamed The Great, King of
Sweden. 18mo. 5_s._ cloth.

HOLLINGS'S Life of Marcus Tullius Cicero. 18mo. 5_s._ cloth.

HOMER'S (Rev. P.) Introduction to the Greek Tongue, for the Use of
Schools, with Notes, intended to explain the Principles on which
many of the Rules were established. 12mo, roan, 4_s._

HUTTON'S Course of Mathematics, composed for the use of the Royal
Military Academy. A New and carefully corrected Edition, entirely
remodelled and adapted to the course of Instruction now pursued in
the Royal Military Academy, by W. RUTHERFORD, F.R.A.S. 8vo, cloth.
16_s._

HUTTON'S Recreations in Mathematics and Natural Philosophy. A New
and Revised Edition, with numerous additions, and Illustrated with
upwards of 400 Cuts. By EDWARD RIDDLE, Master of the Mathematical
School, Royal Hospital, Greenwich. Cloth. 16_s._

JOHNSON'S English Dictionary in miniature, with the Addition of
several Thousand Words, and the Pronunciation in the manner of
Walker, adapted for the use of Schools. 18mo, 1_s._ 6_d._

JOYCE'S System of Practical Arithmetic, applicable to the present
State of Trade and Money Transactions, illustrated by numerous
examples under each Rule, for the use of Schools. A New Edition,
revised, corrected, and enlarged, by FRANCIS POTTER. Cloth. 3_s._

JOYCE'S Scientific Dialogues, intended for the instruction and
entertainment of young people, in which the first Principles of
Natural and Experimental Philosophy are fully explained. A New
Edition, with 185 cuts, 12mo, cloth. 2_s._ 6_d._

JOYCE'S Familiar Introduction to the Arts and Sciences, with
original Introductory Essays upon the Subject of each Lesson, for
the Use of Schools. Divided into Lessons, with Questions subjoined
to each for the examination of pupils. A New Edition, revised,
corrected, and enlarged, 12mo, cloth. 3_s._ 6_d._

KEITH'S Treatise on the Use of the Globes, or a Philosophical View
of the Earth and Heavens, designed for the use of Schools and Young
Persons. A New Edition, enlarged and improved, by the Rev. G. N.
WRIGHT. 12mo, roan. 6_s._ 6_d._

LEMPRIERE'S Bibliotheca Classica, or a Classical Dictionary;
containing a copious Account of all the Proper Names mentioned in
Ancient Authors. A New Edition, revised and corrected, with numerous
additions and improvements, by W. PARK, M.A. 18mo, cloth. 7_s._

LENNIE'S English Grammar, comprising the substance of all the most
approved English Grammars extant, briefly defined, and neatly
arranged, with copious Exercises in Parsing and Syntax. Twenty-sixth
Edition, 18mo. 1_s._ 6_d._ bound.

LIVY.--Excerpta ex Livio, cum J. B. L. Crevierii, Notis integris
Aliorumque Selectissimus in usum Scholarum. 12mo. 4_s._ bound.

LOCKE'S Essay on the Human Understanding. Twenty-ninth Edition,
with the Author's last Additions and Corrections; also, Notes and
Illustrations, and an Analysis of Mr. Locke's Doctrine of Ideas.
8vo. 9_s._ cloth.

MADAN'S Juvenal and Persius, Literally Translated; with copious
Explanatory Notes, by which these difficult satirists are rendered
easy and familiar to the reader. A New Edition, revised and
corrected. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 14_s._

MANGNALL'S Historical and Miscellaneous Questions for the Use of
Young People, with a Selection of British and General Biography, &c.
A New Edition, corrected and enlarged, and continued to the present
time, by the Rev. G. N. WRIGHT, M.A. With 41 Illustrations. Roan.
4_s._ 6_d._

MARMONTEL'S Choix des Contes Moraux. Nouvelle Edition, par
VENTOUILLAC. 18mo, cloth. 2_s._ 6_d._

MAVOR'S English Spelling Book, accompanied by a Progressive Series
of Easy and Familiar Lessons, intended as an Introduction to the
Reading and Spelling of the English Language. _Tegg's New and
Improved Edition._ 1_s._ 3_d._

MEADOWS'S New French and English Pronouncing Dictionary, on the
basis of Nugent's, with many New Words in general use; to which
are prefixed, Principles of French Pronunciation, and an Abridged
Grammar. 18mo. Twenty-third Edition. 7_s._

MEADOWS'S New Italian and English Dictionary, in Two Parts, to
which is prefixed a New and Concise Grammar, to render easy the
acquirement of the Italian Language. 18mo. Eighth Edition, cloth.
7_s._

MEADOWS'S New Spanish and English Dictionary, in Two Parts, with
the addition of many New Words; at the end of both Parts is affixed
a List of usual Christian and Proper Names, Names of Countries,
Nations, &c. 18mo, cloth. 7_s._

MEADOWS'S New Grammar of the SPANISH LANGUAGE, comprehending, in a
most simple, easy, and concise manner, everything necessary for its
complete acquirement. 18mo, 1_s._ 6_d._

MITCHELL'S Portable Encyclopædia, or Dictionary of Arts and
Sciences, comprehending the latest Improvements in every Branch of
Useful Knowledge, with numerous Engravings. 8vo. 14_s._

MORRISON'S Complete System of Practical Book-keeping, in Five Sets
of Books, applicable to all kinds of Business; of Individual and
Partnership concerns; by Single Entry, double Entry, in present
practice; and a New Method which obtains the same result by two
Entries as the present practice by four. The Seventh Edition, 8vo,
half-bound. 8_s._

MOFFATT'S Boy's Book of Science; a Familiar Introduction to the
Principles of Natural Philosophy, adapted to the comprehension of
young persons. Square 16mo. 7_s._ 6_d._

MURRAY'S English Grammar, adapted to the different classes of
Learners, with an Appendix of Rules and Observations. A New Edition,
with corrections and additions, by the Rev. E. C. TYSON, M.A. 12mo,
roan. 4_s._

MURRAY'S English Grammar, Abridged, with an Appendix, containing
Exercises in Orthography, &c., designed for the younger classes of
Learners. _Tegg's Edition._ 18mo. 1_s._

MURRAY'S English Exercises, adapted to Murray's English Grammar;
designed for the benefit of private Learners as well as Schools. A
New Edition, edited by the Rev. E. C. TYSON, M.A. Bound. 2_s._ 6_d._

MURRAY'S Key to the Exercises, adapted to Murray's English
Grammar, calculated to enable private Learners to become their own
Instructors in Grammar and Composition. A New Edition. Edited by the
Rev. E. C. TYSON, M.A. Bound, 2_s._ 6_d._

MURRAY'S Introduction to the English Reader, or a Selection of
Pieces in Prose and Poetry; calculated to improve the Younger
Classes of Learners in Reading, and to imbue their minds with the
love of virtue. A New Edition. Edited by Rev. E. C. TYSON, M.A. 2_s._

MURRAY'S English Reader, or Pieces in Prose and Poetry, selected
from the best Writers, designed to assist young persons to read with
propriety and effect, to improve their language and sentiments, and
to inculcate some of the most important principles of Piety and
Virtue. A New Edition. Edited by Rev. E. C. TYSON, M.A. Roan. 4_s._

NUTTALL'S Classical and Archæological Dictionary of the Manners,
Customs, Laws, Institutions, Arts, &c., of the celebrated Nations of
Antiquity, and of the Middle Ages. 8vo. 7_s._

PARLEY'S Universal History; on the Basis of Geography. For the use
of Families and Schools, illustrated by Maps. The Fourth Edition,
cloth. 4_s._ 6_d._

PARLEY'S Grammar of Modern Geography. With Maps and numerous
Engravings. The Third Edition, greatly enlarged, cloth. 4_s._ 6_d._

PARLEY'S Tales about Rome and Modern Italy. A New and improved
Edition, with numerous Engravings, cloth. 4_s._ 6_d._

PARLEY'S Tales about Greece. The Second Edition, greatly improved,
with numerous Engravings, cloth. 4_s._ 6_d._

PARLEY'S Tales about the Mythology of Greece and Rome. A New
Edition, with Engravings on Wood, cloth. 4_s._ 6_d._

PASCAL'S Choix des Pensées de Pascal. Nouvelle Edition, par
VENTOUILLAC. 18mo. 2_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

PEARSON'S Vetus Testamentum ex versione Septuaginta interpretum,
juxta exemplar Valicanum. Ex Editione, HOLMESII ET LAMBERTI. Bos
cum præfatione parænetica JOANNIS PEARSON, D.D. Editio Nova, 2 tom.
12_s._

PERRIN'S Elements of French Conversation, with familiar and easy
Dialogues; each preceded by a suitable Vocabulary in French and
English, designed for the use of Schools. A New Edition, revised and
corrected by CHARLOTTE WRIGHT. Bound. 1_s._ 6_d._

PERRIN'S Fables Amusantes, avec une Fable générale et Particulière
des Mots, et de leur Signification in Anglais, selon l'ordre des
Fables. Revue et corrigée par CHARLOTTE WRIGHT. Bound. 2_s._ 6_d._

PERRIN'S New Method of learning the Spelling and Pronunciation of
the French Language, in Two Parts. A new Edition, by CHARLOTTE
WRIGHT. 2_s._

PINNOCK'S History of England, from the Invasion of Julius Cæsar to
the Death of George the Third; with a Continuation to the present
time; Questions for Examination, Notes, &c. Bound. 5_s._ 6_d._

POTTER'S Archæologia Græca, or the Antiquities of Greece. A New
Edition, with numerous Notes and improved Indices, by JAMES BOYD,
LL.D., illustrated with 150 Engravings, 9_s._

RAMSHORN'S Dictionary of Latin Synonymes for the use of Schools and
Private Students, with a Complete Index. From the German of FRANCIS
LIEBER. Cloth. 7_s._

REID'S Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind; an Enquiry
into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense; and an Essay
on Quantity. With Notes, Sectional Heads, and a Synoptical Table of
Contents, by Rev. G. N. WRIGHT. 8vo. 12_s._ cloth.

REID'S Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man; to which is
annexed, an Analysis of Aristotle's Logic. With Notes and Questions
for Examination, by Rev. G. N. WRIGHT, M.A. 8vo. 12_s._ cloth.

ROBINSON'S Greek and English Lexicon of the New Testament. A New
Edition, carefully revised. 8vo. 8_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

SOUTHEY'S Life of Lord Nelson. The Eighth Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 5_s._
cloth.

ST. PIERRE'S La Chaumière Indienne, le Café de Surate, &c. Par J. H.
BERNARDIN DE SAINT PIERRE. Nouvelle Edition, par VENTOUILLAC. 18mo.
cloth. 2_s._ 6_d._

TEGG'S First Book for Children, designed for the Use of Schools:
containing easy and progressive Lessons of Reading and Spelling,
adapted to the infant mind, and by their arrangement calculated to
ensure improvement. Twenty-second Edition. Neatly bound. 6_d._

TERENCE.--The Andrian, Heautontimorumenos, and Hecyra of Terence. By
JONATHAN ADAIR PHILLIPS. 8vo. 8_s._

TOM TELESCOPE.--The Newtonian Philosophy and Natural Philosophy in
General explained and illustrated by familiar objects, in a series
of entertaining Lectures, by TOM TELESCOPE, M.A. Cloth. 4_s._ 6_d._

TOOKE'S ΕΠΕΑ ΠΤΕΡΟΕΝΤΑ, or the Diversions of Purley, by JOHN HORNE
TOOKE, with numerous Additions from the Copy prepared by the Author
for republication; to which are annexed his Letter to JOHN DUNNING,
Esq. A New Edition, with additional Notes, by RICHARD TAYLOR,
F.S.A., F.L.S. 8vo, cloth. 14_s._

TRIMMER'S Description and a Set of Prints to Roman History,
contained in a Set of Easy Lessons. 2 vols. Bound. 5_s._

TRIMMER'S Description and a Set of Prints of Ancient History,
contained in a Set of Easy Lessons. 2 vols. Bound. 5_s._

TROLLOPE'S Η ΚΑΙΝΗ ΔΙΑΘΗΚΗ. The New Testament, in Greek, chiefly
from the text of MILL, with copious English Notes, adapted to the
Use of Schools and Universities, and to the purposes of General
Reference; to which are annexed, a Chronological Harmony, and Three
Indices. By REV. WILLIAM TROLLOPE, M.A. 8vo. 14_s._ cloth.

TYTLER'S Universal History, from the Creation of the World to the
Beginning of the Eighteenth Century. By the HON. ALEXANDER FRASER
TYTLER, LORD WOODHOUSELEE. The Fourth Edition. 6 vols. 12mo. cloth.
Price 30_s._

VALPY'S Delectus Tentintiarum et Historiarum ad usum Tironum
accommodatus Auctore R. VALPY, D.D. Editio Nova cui accedunt Notulæ
et Dictionarum cura, G. N. WRIGHT, M.A. Cloth. 2_s._ 6_d._

WALKER'S Critical Pronouncing Dictionary and Expositor of the
English Language, to which are prefixed Principles of English
Pronunciation; the whole interspersed with Observations,
Etymological, Critical, and Grammatical. A New Edition, 8vo, cloth.
7_s._

WALKER'S Key to the Classical Pronunciation of Greek, Latin, and
Scripture Proper Names; in which the Words are Accented, and divided
into Syllables, exactly as they ought to be pronounced, according to
Rules drawn from analogy and the best usage. 18mo, cloth. 1_s._ 6_d._

WALKINGHAME'S Tutor's Assistant; being a Compendium of Arithmetic
and a Complete Question Book. A New Edition, with many additions and
corrections, by EDWIN BARKER. Bound. 2_s._

WANOSTROCHT'S Recueil Choisi de Traits Historiques et des contes
moraux, avec la Signification des Mots en Anglais au bas de chaque
Page à l'usage des jeunes gens de l'un et de l'autre sexe qui
veulent apprendre le Français. Revue, corrigée, et augmenté de
noveau, par CHARLOTTE WRIGHT. 12mo, roan. 3_s._ 6_d._

WATTS'S Short View of the Whole Scripture History, with a
Continuation of the Jewish affairs from the Old Testament till the
time of Christ. A New Edition, revised and corrected. 4_s._

WILLIAMS'S Life and Actions of Alexander the Great. The Third
Edition. 18mo. 5_s._ cloth.

WRIGHT'S Cream of Scientific Knowledge; a Note-Book of General
Information, so clear and easy, that an hour's perusal may supply a
Stock of Useful Intelligence on almost Every Subject. A New Edition,
Enlarged. 18mo. 3_s._ cloth.

WRIGHT'S Greek and English Lexicon, on a plan entirely new, in
Four Parts. Greek-English difficult inflexions; English-Greek and
proper names; the interpretation of all the words which occur in
Greek classic authors, the Septuagint, and New Testament: and an
Introduction, comprising an explanation of the more important Greek
Terminations. 18mo. 7_s._


Books for Presents, School Prizes, &c.

ELEGANTLY BOUND IN MOROCCO.

AIKIN AND BARBAULD'S EVENINGS AT HOME; or the Juvenile Budget
opened, for the Amusement and Instruction of the Young. 18mo, 7_s._
6_d._

ÆSOP'S FABLES, with One Hundred and Fifty spirited Engravings on
Wood. Chiswick Press. 32mo, 5_s._ 6_d._

ALEXANDER THE GREAT (The Life and Actions of). By REV. JOHN
WILLIAMS, M.A. Third Edition. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

BARROW'S EVENTFUL HISTORY OF THE MUTINY AND PIRATICAL SEIZURE OF
H.M.S. BOUNTY. Illustrated from Original Drawings by BATTY. Third
Edition. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

BACON'S (LORD) ESSAYS--MORAL, ECONOMICAL, AND POLITICAL. 16mo.
WESTALL'S Plates (SHARPE). 6_s._

BLUNT'S (REV. T.) SKETCHES OF THE REFORMATION IN ENGLAND. Eighth
Edition. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

BREWSTER'S (SIR DAVID) LETTERS ON NATURAL MAGIC; addressed to SIR
WALTER SCOTT, BART. Engravings on Wood. Fifth Edition. Foolscap 8vo,
8_s._

BREWSTER'S (SIR DAVID) LIFE OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON. Portrait and
Woodcuts. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

BUCK'S ANECDOTES--RELIGIOUS, MORAL, AND ENTERTAINING; interspersed
with a variety of Useful Observations. Tenth Edition. Foolscap 8vo,
9_s._ 6_d._

BUFFON'S NATURAL HISTORY OF THE GLOBE, AND OF MAN, BEASTS, BIRDS,
FISHES, REPTILES, AND INSECTS. By J. WRIGHT, F.Z.S. 4 vols. Royal
18mo, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._

BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, with MASON'S Notes, and Life of the
Author by DR. ADAM CLARKE, 18mo, 6_s._

BYRON'S WORKS, complete in One Handsome Volume; the last and best
Edition. With Notes by MOORE, SCOTT, ROGERS, CAMPBELL, LOCKHART, and
MILMAN. Royal 8vo, 25_s._

BYRON'S LIFE, LETTERS, AND JOURNALS. By T. MOORE. Uniform with the
Works. Royal 8vo, 25_s._

CHILD'S (THE) OWN BOOK. Illustrated with Three Hundred spirited
Engravings on Wood. The Seventh Edition. Square 16mo, 12_s._

CHRONICLES OF LONDON BRIDGE. By AN ANTIQUARY. Embellished with
Numerous Beautiful Cuts. Foolscap 8vo. Second Edition. 8_s._

CLARKE (SAMUEL) ON THE PROMISES OF SCRIPTURE. By CARPENTER. Fifth
Edition. 32mo, 4_s._

COURT AND CAMP OF BUONAPARTE. With a whole-length Portrait of Prince
Talleyrand, and other Portraits. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

COWPER'S POEMS. A New and Complete Edition, by GRIMSHAWE, in One
Volume 18mo, with a Vignette Title and Portrait, 7_s._ 6_d._

---- Royal 18mo, Plates, 12_s._

CRABB'S DICTIONARY OF GENERAL KNOWLEDGE. With Five Hundred and
Eighty Wood Engravings. Fourth Edition. 12mo, 12_s._

CREAM (THE) OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE; a Note-Book of General
Information, with Diagrams, &c. New Edition, by REV. G. N. WRIGHT,
M.A. 18mo, 7_s._

CROKER'S FAIRY LEGENDS AND TRADITIONS OF THE SOUTH OF IRELAND.
Numerous Spirited Woodcuts. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

DE FOE'S JOURNAL OF THE PLAGUE YEAR, with Historical Notes, by E. W.
BRAGLEY, F.S.A. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

EVANS'S SKETCH OF ALL RELIGIONS. New Edition, brought down to the
Present Time. By the REV. T. H. BRANSBY. Royal 18mo, 10_s._

FRENCH CLASSICS, with NOTES and MEMOIR OF EACH AUTHOR; by PROFESSOR
L. T. VENTOUILLAC. 18 mo.

  ELIZABETH                        MADAME COTTIN. 6_s._
  NUMA POMPILIUS                   FLORIAN. 8_s._
  NOUVEAUX MORCEAUX CHOISIS DE     BUFFON. 6_s._
  LA CHAUMIÈRE INDIENNE            ST. PIERRE. 6_s._
  CHOIX DES CONTES MORAUX DE       MARMONTEL. 6_s._
  HISTOIRE DE PIERRE LE GRAND      VOLTAIRE. 8_s._
  PENSÉES DE                       PASCAL. 6_s._

GEMS FROM THE POETS: containing Living Poets; CHAUCER to GOLDSMITH,
FALCONER to CAMPBELL; SHAKSPEARE; Sacred Poetry and American Poets.
6 vols. 32mo, 1_l._ 4_s._

GRAY'S POETICAL WORKS. Foolscap 8vo. Plates (SHARPE'S). 7_s._ 6_d._

GIRL'S (THE) OWN BOOK. By MRS. CHILD. New Edition. With numerous new
Engravings on Wood. The Thirteenth Edition. 8_s._ 6_d._

HEAD'S (MAJOR F. B.) LIFE OF BRUCE, the Abyssinian Traveller.
Portrait and Maps. Fourth Edition. 12mo, 8_s._

HISTORY OF THE ANGLO-SAXONS. By SIR FRANCIS PALGRAVE. Maps, and
numerous Wood Engravings. 12mo, 8_s._

HISTORY OF THE EXPEDITION TO RUSSIA UNDERTAKEN BY THE EMPEROR
NAPOLEON. By GENERAL COUNT PHILIP DE SEGUR. Two fine Portraits.
Eighth Edition, 2 vols., foolscap 8vo, 16_s._

HOWARD'S BEAUTIES OF BYRON. 18mo, 5_s._

KIRKE WHITE'S POEMS AND LETTERS; with a Memoir of the Author. 18mo,
6_s._

IRVING'S (WASHINGTON) SKETCH-BOOK. Two Plates, 2 vols., 12mo.,
16_s._

IRVING'S (WASHINGTON) LIFE AND VOYAGES OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS. With
Portraits, Maps, &c. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

IRVING'S (WASHINGTON) VOYAGES AND DISCOVERIES OF THE COMPANIONS OF
COLUMBUS. Map. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

LIVES (THE) OF EMINENT MEN WHO RAISED THEMSELVES FROM POVERTY TO
EMINENCE OR FORTUNE. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

LIFE (THE) OF MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO. By J. F. HOLLINGS. Foolscap
8vo, 8_s._

LIFE OF GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS, SURNAMED THE GREAT, KING OF SWEDEN. By J.
F. HOLLINGS. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

LIFE OF NAPOLEON BUONAPARTE. With Fifteen Engravings on Steel and
Wood, by FINDEN and THOMSON; the Woodcuts from Designs by GEORGE
CRUIKSHANK. 2 Vols., Foolscap 8vo, 16_s._

LIFE AND TIMES OF RICHARD THE FIRST, SURNAMED COEUR DE LION, KING OF
ENGLAND. By WILLIAM E. AYTOUN. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

LIVES AND EXPLOITS OF BANDITTI AND ROBBERS IN ALL PARTS OF THE
WORLD. By C. MACFARLANE, Esq. With Plates. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

MASON'S TREATISE ON SELF-KNOWLEDGE. 32mo, 5_s._

MILTON'S POETICAL WORKS. 18mo, 6_s._ 6_d._

MILTON'S POETICAL WORKS. Illustrated with Twelve Plates. Royal 18mo,
15_s._

MILTON'S POETICAL WORKS, with LIFE of the Author, and Notes by
SIR E. BRYDGES. New Edition. Plates, after _Turner's_ celebrated
Designs. 8vo, 24_s._

MORE'S (HANNAH) PRACTICAL PIETY. Twelfth Edition. Royal 32mo, 6_s._

MORE'S (HANNAH) CHRISTIAN MORALS. Sixth Edition. Royal 32mo, 6_s._

MORE'S (HANNAH) SACRED DRAMAS;--SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS, and ESSAYS
ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS. Royal 32mo, 6_s._

PHILOSOPHY (THE) OF NATURAL HISTORY. By WILLIAM SMELLIE. With an
Introduction, by T. WARE, D.D. 18mo, 6_s._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT EUROPE, ASIA, AFRICA, and AMERICA, One
Hundred and Thirty-five Engravings, square, 12_s._

PETER PARLEY'S GRAMMAR OF GEOGRAPHY, with Maps and numerous
Engravings, square, 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT GREECE, Ancient and Modern, embellished
with Ninety-eight beautiful Engravings, square, 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S UNIVERSAL HISTORY, on the Basis of GEOGRAPHY, for the
Use of Families, with Maps, square, 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S MYTHOLOGY OF GREECE AND ROME, Cuts, square, 8_s._
6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT PLANTS, Edited by Mrs. LOUDON, Engravings
on Wood, 16mo, 12_s._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT ROME AND MODERN ITALY, illustrated by One
Hundred Engravings on Wood, by THOMPSON, &c., square, 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES OF THE SEA, Embellished with numerous
Engravings, square, 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT THE SUN, MOON, STARS, and COMETS, with
One Hundred and Thirty Woodcuts, square, 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT THE UNITED STATES, numerous Woodcuts,
square. 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S LIVES OF WASHINGTON AND FRANKLIN, embellished with
Engravings, 8_s._ 6_d._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT ANIMALS, Ninth Edition, with about Five
Hundred Fine Cuts, square 16mo, 12_s._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT CHRISTMAS, with numerous Engravings,
square, 12_s._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT ENGLAND, IRELAND, SCOTLAND, and WALES,
many Engravings, square, 12_s._

PETER PARLEY'S TALES ABOUT SHIPWRECKS, numerous Wood Engravings,
square. 8_s._ 6_d._

PHILIP'S (UNCLE) CONVERSATIONS ABOUT THE WHALE FISHERY AND THE POLAR
SEAS, numerous Cuts, square, 8_s._ 6_d._

PHILIP'S (UNCLE) CONVERSATIONS WITH CHILDREN ABOUT THE TRADES AND
TOOLS OF INFERIOR ANIMALS, Cuts, square, 8_s._ 6_d._

  These two popular works are uniform with Peter Parley's.

QUARLES' EMBLEMS DIVINE AND MORAL, AND SCHOOL OF THE HEART, numerous
Wood Engravings, 2 vols. in _one_ square royal, 32mo, 14_s._

SHAKSPEARE'S DRAMATIC WORKS. Complete in One Volume. Diamond
Edition. Foolscap 8vo, 12_s._

SCOTT'S (SIR WALTER) MINSTRELSY OF THE SCOTTISH BORDER. Printed
uniform with BYRON'S Works. 8vo, 15_s._

STRIFE AND PEACE; or, SCENES IN NORWAY. By F. BREMER. 32mo, 4_s._
6_d._

SOUTHEY'S LIFE OF LORD NELSON. With beautiful Wood Engravings after
_George Cruikshank_. Eighth Edition. Foolscap 8vo, 8_s._

TRIMMER'S (MRS.) FABULOUS HISTORY; or, THE HISTORIES OF THE ROBINS.
With Twelve Illustrations. 18mo, 6_s._

TEGG'S PRESENT FOR AN APPRENTICE. To which is added, FRANKLIN'S WAY
TO WEALTH. 16mo, 8_s._ 6_d._

WATTS ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE MIND. 18mo, 6_s._

WILBERFORCE'S PRACTICAL VIEW OF CHRISTIANITY. 32mo, 4_s._ 6_d._

YOUNG MAN'S AID TO KNOWLEDGE, VIRTUE, AND HAPPINESS. By the Rev. H.
WINSLOW. Third Edition. 24mo, 6_s._

YOUNG'S NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LIFE, DEATH, AND IMMORTALITY. 18mo, 6_s._

---- Royal 18mo, 7_s._ 6_d._


Bradbury & Evans, Printers, Whitefriars.