CHAPTER XIII
THE FEDERAL ELECTIONS BILL

In December, 1889, the Republican Party succeeded to the legislative
power in the country for the first time in sixteen years.
Since 1873 there had been a Democratic President for four
years, and a Democratic House or Senate or both for the rest
of the time.  There was a general belief on the part of the
Republicans, that the House of Representatives, as constituted
for fourteen years of that time, and that the Presidency itself
when occupied by Mr. Cleveland, represented nothing but usurpation,
by which, in large districts of the country, the will of the
people had been defeated.  There were some faint denials at
the time when these claims were made in either House of Congress
as to elections in the Southern States.  But nobody seems
to deny now, that the charges were true.  Mr. Senator Tillman
of South Carolina stated in my hearing in the Senate:

"We took the Government away.  We stuffed ballot boxes.  We
shot them.  We are not ashamed of it.  The Senator from Wisconsin
would have done the same thing.  I see it in his eye right
now.  He would have done it.  With that system--force, tissue
ballots, etc.--we got tired ourselves.  So we called a Constitutional
Convention, and we eliminated, as I said, all of the colored
people whom we could under the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments.

"I want to call your attention to the remarkable change that
has come over the spirit of the dream of the Republicans;
to remind you, gentlemen of the North, that your slogans of
the past--brotherhood of man and fatherhood of God--have gone
glimmering down the ages.  The brotherhood of man exists no
longer, because you shoot negroes in Illinois, when they come
in competition with your labor, and we shoot them in South
Carolina, when they come in competition with us in the matter
of elections.  You do not love them any better than we do.
You used to pretend that you did; but you no longer pretend
it, except to get their votes.

"You deal with the Filipinos just as you deal with the negroes,
only you treat them a heap worse."

No Democrat rose to deny his statement, and, so far as I know,
no Democratic paper contradicted it.  The Republicans, who
had elected President Harrison and a Republican House in 1888,
were agreed, with very few exceptions, as to the duty of providing
a remedy for this great wrong.  Their Presidential Convention,
held at Chicago in 1888, passed a resolution demanding, "effective
legislation to secure integrity and purity of elections, which
are the fountains of all public authority," and charged that
the "present Administration and the Democratic majority in
Congress owe their existence to the suppression of the ballot
by a criminal nullification of the Constitution and the laws
of the United States."

In the Senate at the winter session of 1888 and at the beginning
of the December session of 1889, a good many Bills were introduced
for the security of National elections.  Similar Bills were
introduced in the House.  A special Committee was appointed
there to deal with that subject.  I had, myself, no doubt
of the Constitutional authority of Congress, and of its duty,
if it were able, to pass an effective law for that purpose.

I was the Chairman of the Committee on Privileges and Elections,
and it was my duty to give special attention to that subject.
I had carefully prepared a Bill in the vacation, based on
one introduced by Mr. Sherman, providing for holding, under
National authority, separate registrations and elections for
Members of Congress.  But when I got to Washington, I found,
on consultation with every Republican Senator except one,
that a large majority were averse to an arrangement which
would double the cost of elections throughout the country,
and which, in States where personal registration every year
is required, would demand from every citizen his presence
at the place of polling or registration four times every alternate
year.  That is, in the years when there were Congressmen to
be elected he must go twice to be registered--once for the
State election, and once for the Congressional--and twice
to vote.  So I drew another Bill.  I say I drew it.  But I
had the great advantage of consultation with Senator Spooner
of Wisconsin, a very able lawyer who had lately come to the
Senate, and I can hardly say that the Bill, as it was finally
drafted, was more mine or his.  This Bill provided, in substance,
that there should be National officers of both parties who
should be present at the registration and election of Members
of Congress, and at the count of the vote, and who should
know and report everything which should happen, so that all
facts affecting the honesty of the election and the return
might be before the House of Representatives.  To this were
added some section providing for the punishment of bribery,
fraud and misconduct of election officers.

In the meantime the House of Representatives had appointed
a special Committee charged with a similar duty.  Members
of that Committee saw me, and insisted, with a good deal of
reason, that a measure which concerned the election of members
of the House of Representatives, should originate in that
body.  Accordingly the Senate Committee held back its Bill,
and awaited the action of the House, which sent a Bill to
the Senate, July 15, 1890.  The House Bill dealt not only
with the matter of elections, but also with the selection
of juries, and some other important kindred subjects.  Our
Committee struck out from it everything that did not bear
directly on elections; mitigated the severity of the penalties,
and reduced the bulk of the Bill very considerably.  The measure
was reported in a new draft by way of substitute.  It remained
before the Senate until the beginning of the next Session,
when it was taken up for action.  It was a very simple measure.

It only extended the law which, with the approbation of both
parties, had been in force in cities of more than twenty
thousand inhabitants, to Congressional districts, when there
should be an application to the Court, setting forth the
necessity for its protection.  That law had received the
commendation of many leading Democrats, including S. S. Cox,
Secretary Whitney, the four Democratic Congressmen who represented
Brooklyn, and General Slocum, then Representative at large
from the State of New York.  It had been put in force on the
application of Democrats quite as often as on that of Republicans.
We added to our Bill a provision that in case of a dispute
concerning an election certificate, the Circuit Court of the
United States in which the district was situated should hear
the case and should award a certificate entitling the member
to be placed on the Clerk's roll, and to hold his seat until
the House itself should act on the case.  That provision was
copied from the English law of 1868 which has given absolute
public satisfaction there.  This was the famous Force Bill,
and the whole of it--a provision that, if a sufficient petition
were made to the court for that purpose, officers, appointed
by the court, belonging to both parties should be present
and watch the election; that the Judge of the Circuit Court
should determine, in case of dispute, what name should be
put on the roll of the House of Representatives, in the beginning,
subject to the Constitutional power of the House to correct
it, and that a moderate punishment for bribery, intimidation
and fraud, on indictment and conviction by a jury of the vicinage,
should be imposed.  That was the whole of it.

But the Southern Democratic leaders, with great adroitness,
proceeded to repeat the process known as "firing the Southern
heart."  They persuaded their people that there was an attempt
to control elections by National authority.  They realized
that the waning power of their party at the South, many of
whose business men saw that the path of prosperity for the
South as well as for the North lay in the adoption of Republican
policies, might be reestablished by exciting the fear of negro
domination.  The Northern Democrats, either very ignorantly
or wilfuly, united in the outcry.  Governor William E. Russell
of Massachusetts, a gentleman of large influence and popularity
with both parties, telegraphed to President Cleveland a pious
thanksgiving for the defeat of this "wicked Bill."

Some worthy Republican Senators became alarmed.  They thought,
with a good deal of reason, that it was better to allow existing
evils and conditions to be cured by time, and the returning
conscience and good sense of the people, rather than have
the strife, the result of which must be quite doubtful, which
the enactment and enforcement of this law, however moderate
and just, would inevitably create.

On reflection, I came myself to the conclusion that, while
the Bill was reasonable and there was no reasonable doubt
of the power of Congress to enact it, yet the attempt to pass
it, if it were to fail, would do the cause infinite mischief.  It
would be an exhibition of impotence, always injurious to
a political party.  It would drive back into the Democratic
Party many men who were afraid of negro domination; who looked
with great dislike on the assertion of National power over
elections, and whom other considerations would induce to act
with the Republicans.  So I thought it was best to ascertain
carefully the prevailing opinion and see if we were likely
to get the Bill through, and, if we found that unlikely, not
to proceed far enough to have a debate in either House.

Accordingly I visited the House of Representatives, saw several
of my Massachusetts colleagues and some other leaders.  They
agreed that, if I found that the Bill could not, in all probability,
pass the Senate, it should be arranged to lay it aside in
the House without making any serious movement for it there.
After that arrangement was made there was a Senate caucus.
I brought up the matter and moved the appointment of a Committee
to consider the whole question of legislation with reference
to the security of elections.  A gentleman who had recently
become a Member of the Senate rose and quite angrily objected
to taking up the matter for consideration.  He declared that
he would not consent to have the subject introduced in a
Republican caucus.  The proceedings of such caucuses are
supposed to be kept from the public.  But they are pretty
sure to leak out.  I could not very well get up and say that
my reason for asking for a committee was to see whether the
law should be suppressed or not.  So I did not urge my motion.
But I did the best I could.

Before reporting the Bill I saw every Republican Senator
and obtained his opinion upon it.  I have in my possession
the original memoranda of the various answers.  Not only a
majority of the Republican Senators, but a majority of the
whole Senate declared emphatically for an Election Bill.  I
further consulted them whether the authority, in case of a
disputed election, to order, upon hearing, the name of the
person found to be elected to be placed on the roll should
be lodged in the United States Courts, or in some special
tribunal.  Two or three preferred that the court should not
be invoked.  But a majority of the whole Senate favored vesting
the power in the courts, and those who preferred another way
stated that they were willing to abide by the judgment of
the Committee.

When the House Bill came up, it was, on the 7th of August,
1890, reported favorably with my Bill as a substitute.  Meantime
the McKinley Tariff Bill, which Mr. Cleveland had made, so
far as he could, the sole issue in the late election, had
been matured and reported.  It affected all the business interests
of the country.  They were in a state of uncertainty and alarm.
Mr. Quay of Pennsylvania proposed a resolution to the effect
that certain enumerated measures, not including the Election
Bill, should be considered at that session, and that all others
should be postponed.  That, I suppose, would have had the
entire Democratic support and Republicans enough to give it
a majority.  It would have postponed the Election Bill without
giving any assurance of its consideration at the short session.
So a conference of Republicans was held at which an agreement
was made, which I drew up, and signed by a majority of the
entire Senate.  It entitled the friends of the Election Bill to
be assured that it would be brought to a vote and passed at
the short session, if there were then a majority in its favor.
This is the agreement, of which I have the original, with
the original signatures annexed, in my possession.

"We will vote:  1.  To take up for consideration on the first
day of the next session the Federal Election Bill, and to
keep it before the Senate to the exclusion of other legislative
business, until it shall be disposed of by a vote.  2.  To
make such provision as to the time and manner of taking the
vote as shall be decided, by a majority of the Republican
Senators, to be necessary in order to secure such vote, either
by a general rule like that proposed by Mr. Hoar, and now
pending before the committee on rules, or by special rule of
the same purport, applicable only to the Election Bill."

At the next December session the Bill was taken up for consideration
and, after a few days' debate, there was a motion to lay it
aside.  Since the measure had been first introduced, the sentiment
in certain parts of the country in favor of the free coinage
of silver had been strengthened.  Several of the Republican
Senators were among its most zealous advocates.  There was
a motion to lay aside the Election Bill which was adopted
by a bare majority--the Democrats voting for it and several
of the Silver Republican Senators, so-called.  All but one
of these had signed their names to the promise I have printed.
I never have known by what process of reasoning they reconciled
their action with their word.  But I know that in heated political
strife men of honor, even men of ability, sometimes deceive
themselves by a casuistic reasoning which would not convince
them at other times.

The Election Bill deeply excited the whole country.  Its
supporters were denounced by the Democratic papers everywhere,
North and South, with a bitterness which I hardly knew before
that the English language was capable of expressing.  My mail
was crowded with letters, many of them anonymous, the rest
generally quite as anonymous, even if the writer's name were
signed, denouncing me with all the vigor and all the scurrility
of which the writers were capable.  I think this is the last
great outbreak of anger which has spread through the American
people.

I got, however, a good deal of consolation from the stanch
friendship and support of the Republicans of Massachusetts,
which never failed me during the very height of this storm.
Whittier sent me a volume of poetry which he had just published,
with the inscription written on the blank leaf in his own
hand, "To George F. Hoar, with the love of his old friend,
John G. Whittier."  I think I would have gone through ten
times as much objurgation as I had to encounter for those
few words.

There has never since been an attempt to protect National
elections by National authority.  The last vestige of the
National statute for securing purity of elections was repealed
in President Cleveland's second Administration, under the
lead of Senator Hill of New York.  I have reflected very carefully
as to my duty in that matter.  I am clearly of the opinion
that Congress has the power to regulate the matter of elections
of Members of the House of Representatives and to make suitable
provisions for honest elections and an honest ascertainment
of the result, and that such legislation ought to be enacted
and kept on the statute book and enforced.  But such legislation,
to be of any value whatever, must be permanent.  If it only
be maintained in force while one political party is in power,
and repealed when its antagonist comes in, and is to be constant
matter of political strife and sectional discussion, it is
better, in my judgment, to abandon it than to keep up an incessant,
fruitless struggle.  It is like legislation to prohibit by law
the selling of liquor.  I believe that it would be wise to
prohibit the sale of liquor, with the exceptions usually made
in prohibitory laws.  But if we are to have in any State,
as we have had in so many States, a prohibitory law one year,
another with different provisions the next, a license law
the next, and the difficulty all the time in enforcing any
of them, it is better to give the attempt at prohibition
up and to adopt a local option, or high license, or some
other policy.  In other words, it is better to have the second
best law kept permanently on the statute book than to have
the best law there half the time.

So, after Senator Hill's repealing act got through the Senate,
I announced that, so far as I was concerned, and so far as
I had the right to express the opinion of Northern Republicans,
I thought the attempt to secure the rights of the colored
people by National legislation would be abandoned until there
were a considerable change of opinion in the country, and
especially in the South, and until it had ceased to be a matter
of party strife.  To that announcement, Senator Chandler of
New Hampshire, who had been one of the most zealous advocates
of the National laws, expressed his assent.  That statement
has been repeated once or twice on the floor of the Senate.
So far as I know, no Republican has dissented from it.  Certainly
there has been no Bill for that purpose introduced in either
House of Congress, or proposed, so far as I know, in the Republican
press, or in any Republican platform since.

The question upon which the policy of all National election
laws depends is, At whose will do you hold your right to be
an American citizen?  What power can you invoke if that right
be withheld from you?  If you hold the right at will of your
State, then you can invoke no power but the State for its
vindication.  If you hold it at the will of the Nation, as
expressed by the people of the whole Nation under the Constitution
of the United States, then you are entitled to invoke the
power of the United States for its enforcement whenever necessary.
If you hold it at the will of the white Democracy of any State
or neighborhood then, as unfortunately seems to be the case
in a good many States, you will be permitted to exercise it
only if you are a white man, and then only so long as you
are a Democrat.

I have had during my whole life to deal with that most difficult
of all political problems, the relation to each other, in
a Republic, of men of different races.  It is a question
which has vexed the American people from the beginning of
their history.  It is, if I am not much mistaken, to vex
them still more hereafter.  First the Indian, then the Negro,
then the Chinese, now the Filipino, disturb our peace.  In
the near future will come the Italian and the Pole and the
great population of Asia, with whom we are soon to be brought
into most intimate and close relation.

In my opinion, in all these race difficulties and troubles,
the fault has been with the Anglo-Saxons.  Undoubtedly the
Indian has been a savage; the Negro has been a savage; the
lower order of Chinamen have been gross and sometimes bestial.
The inhabitants of the Philippine Islands, in their natural
rights, which, as we had solemnly declared to be a self-evident
truth, were theirs beyond question, have committed acts of
barbarism.  But in every case, these inferior and alien races,
if they had been dealt with justly, in my opinion, would have
been elevated by quiet, peaceful and Christian conduct on
our part to a higher plane, and brought out of their barbarism.
The white man has been the offender.

I have no desire to recall the story of the methods by which
the political majorities, consisting in many communities
largely of negroes and led by immigrants from the North, were
subdued.

This is not a sectional question.

It is not a race question.  The suffrage was conferred on
the negro by the Southern States themselves.  They can always
make their own rules.  If the negro be ignorant, you may define
ignorance and disfranchise that.  If the negro be vicious,
you may define vice and disfranchise that.  If the negro be
poor, you may define poverty and disfranchise that.  If the
negro be idle, you may define idleness and disfranchise that.
If the negro be lazy, you may define laziness and disfranchise
that.  If you will only disfranchise him for the qualities
which you say unfit him to vote and not for his race or the
color of his skin there is no Constitutional obstacle in your
way.

So it was not wholly a race or color problem.  It was largely
a question of party supremacy.  In three states, Alabama,
South Carolina and Florida, white Democrats charged each other
with stifling the voice of the majority by fraudulent election
processes, and in Alabama they claimed that a majority of
white men were disfranchised by a false count of negro votes
in the black belt.

It was not wholly unnatural that the men who, in dealing
with each other, were men of scrupulous honor and of undoubted
courage should have brought themselves to do such things,
or at any rate to screen and sympathize with the more hot-
headed men who did them.  The proof in the public records
of those public crimes is abundant.  With the exception of
Reverdy Johnson of Maryland there is no record of a single
manly remonstrance, or expression of disapproval from the
lips of any prominent Southern man.  But they had persuaded
themselves to believe that a contest for political power with
a party largely composed of negroes was a contest for their
civilization itself.  They thought it like a fight for life
with a pack of wolves.  In some parts of the South there were
men as ready to murder a negro who tried to get an office
as to kill a fox they found prowling about a hen roost.  These
brave and haughty men who had governed the country for half
a century, who had held the power of the United States at
bay for four years, who had never doffed their hats to any
prince or noble on earth, even in whose faults or vices there
was nothing mean or petty, never having been suspected of
corruption, who as Macaulay said of the younger Pitt, "If
in an hour of ambition they might have been tempted to ruin
their country, never would have stooped to pilfer from her,"
could not brook the sight of a Legislature made up of ignorant
negroes who had been their own slaves, and of venal carpet-
baggers.  They could not endure that men, some of whom had
been bought and sold like chattels in the time of slavery,
and others ready to sell themselves, although they were freemen,
should sit to legislate for their States with their noble
and brave history.  I myself, although I have always maintained,
and do now, the equal right of all men of whatever color or
race to a share in the government of the country, felt a thrill
of sadness when I saw the Legislature of Louisiana in session
in the winter of 1873.

There was a good deal to provoke them also in the character
of some of the Northern men who had gone to the South to take
an active part in political affairs.  Some of them were men
of the highest character and honor, actuated by pure and unselfish
motives.  If they had been met cordially by the communities
where they took up their abode they would have brought to
them a most valuable quality of citizenship.  If Northern
immigration and Northern capital had been welcomed at the
South it would have had as helpful and influence as it had
in California and Oregon.  But the Southern men treated them
all alike.  I incline to think that a large number of the
men who got political office in the South, when the men who
had taken part in the Rebellion were still disfranchised,
and the Republicans were still in power, were of a character
that would not have been tolerated in public office in the
North.  General Willard Warner of Alabama, a brave Union soldier,
a Republican Senator from that State, was one of the best
and bravest men who ever sat in that body.  Governor Packard
of Louisiana was I believe a wise and honest man.  But in
general it was impossible not to feel a certain sympathy with
a people, who whatever else had been their faults never were
guilty of corruption or meanness, or the desire to make money
out of public office, in the intolerable loathing which they
felt for these strangers who had taken possession of the high
places in their States.

President Grant gave the influence and authority of his Administration
toward maintaining in power the lawfully chosen Republican
State Governments.  But in spite of all he could do they had
all been overthrown but two when the Presidential election
was held in 1876.  Those two were South Carolina and Louisiana.
The people of those two States had chosen Republican Governors
at the State election held on the same day with the election
of the President.  But these Governors could not hold their
power twenty-four hours without the support of the National
administration.  When that was withdrawn the negro and carpet-
bag majority was powerless as a flock of sheep before a pack
of wolves to resist their brave and unscrupulous Democratic
enemy, however inferior the latter in numbers.

In attempting to give a dispassionate account of the history
of this great question which has entered so deeply into the
political and social life of the American people almost from
the beginning, it is hard to measure the influence of race
prejudice, of sectional feeling, and of that other powerful
motive, eagerness for party supremacy.

Suffrage was conferred upon the negro by the Southern States
themselves.  Under the Constitution every State can prescribe
its own qualifications for suffrage, with the single exception
that no State can deny or abridge the right of a citizen of
the United States to vote on account of race, color or previous
condition of servitude.

But I am bound to say, indeed it is but to repeat what I have
said many times, that my long conflict with their leaders
has impressed me with an ever-increasing admiration of the
great and high qualities of our Southern people.  I said at
Chicago in February, 1903, what I said, in substance, twenty
years before in Faneuil Hall, and at about the same time in
the Senate:

"Having said what I thought to say on this question, perhaps
I may be indulged in adding that although my life, politically
and personally, has been a life of almost constant strife
with the leaders of the Southern people, yet as I grow older
I have learned, not only to respect and esteem, but to love
the great qualities which belong to my fellow citizens of
the Southern States.  They are a noble race.  We may well
take pattern from them in some of the great virtues which
make up the strength, as they make the glory, of Free States.
Their love of home; their chivalrous respect for women; their
courage; their delicate sense of honor; their constancy, which
can abide by an opinion or a purpose or an interest of their
States through adversity and through prosperity, through the
years and through the generations, are things by which the
people of the more mercurial North may take a lesson.  And
there is another thing--covetousness, corruption, the low
temptation of money has not yet found any place in our Southern
politics.

"Now, my friends, we cannot afford to live, we don't wish
to live, and we will not live, in a state of estrangement from
a people who possess these qualities.  They are our kindred;
bone of our bone; flesh of our flesh; blood of our blood,
and whatever may be the temporary error of any Southern State
I, for one, if I have a right to speak for Massachusetts,
say to her, 'Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to return from
following after thee.  For where thou goest I will go, and
where thou stayest, I will stay also.  And they people shall
be my people, and thy God my God.'"

In July, 1898, I was invited to deliver an address before
the Virginia Bar Association.  I was received by that company
of distinguished gentlemen with a hospitality like that I
had found in Charleston the year before.  Certainly the old
estrangements are gone.  I took occasion in my address to
appeal to the Virginia bar to give the weight of their great
influence in sustaining the dignity and authority of the Supreme
Court, in spite of their disappointment at some of its decisions
of Constitutional questions.  They received what I had to
say, although they knew I differed from them on some of the
gravest matters which concerned the State, and had been an
anti-slavery man from my youth, with a respect and courtesy
which left nothing to be desired.  At the banquet which followed
the address, this toast was given by William Wirt Henry, a
grandson of Patrick Henry, himself one of the foremost lawyers
and historians of the South.  I prize very highly the original
which I have in his handwriting.

  "Massachusetts and Virginia.
  "Foremost in planting the English Colonies in America;
  "Foremost in resisting British tyranny;
  "Foremost in the Revolution which won our Independence
  and established our free institutions;
  "May the memories of the past be the bond of the future."

My own endeavor, during my long public life, has been to
maintain the doctrine of the Declaration of Independence,
which declares the right of every man to political equality
by virtue of his manhood, and of every people to self-government
by virtue of its character as a people.  This our fathers
meant to lay down as the fundamental law of States and of
the United States, having its steadfast and immovable foundation
in the law of God.  It was never their purpose to declare
that ignorance or vice or want of experience of the institutions
of a country should not disqualify men from a share in the
Government.  Those things they meant to leave to the discretion
of the power, whether State or National, which was to prescribe
the qualifications of suffrage.  But they did not mean that
the accident of birthplace, or the accident of race, or the
accident of color, should enter into the question at all.
To this doctrine I have, in my humble way, endeavored to adhere.
In dealing with the Chinese, or any class of immigrants, I
would prescribe as strict a rule as the strictest for ascertaining
whether the immigrant meant in good faith to be an American
citizen, whether he meant to end his life here, to bring his
wife and children with him, whether he loved American institutions,
whether he was fit to understand the political problems with
which the people had to deal, whether he had individual worth,
or health of body or mind.  I would make, if need be, ten
years or twenty years, as the necessary period of residence
for naturalization.

I would deal with the Negro or the German or the Frenchman
or the Italian on the same principle.  But the one thing
I have never consented to is that a man shall be kept out of
this country, or kept in a position of inferiority, while he is
in it, because of his color, because of his birthplace, or
because of his race.

One matter in connection with the management of the Elections
Bill I have never been able to think of since without a shudder.
The Democrats in the Senate, led by Mr. Gorman, the most
skilful of their leaders, endeavored to defeat the bill by
the tactics of delay.  If the debate could be prolonged so
that it was impossible to get a vote without the loss of the
great Appropriations Bills, or some of them, the bill, of
course, must be laid aside.  So the Republicans, on the other
hand, as is usual in such cases, refrained from debate, leaving
their antagonists to take up the time.  Every afternoon at
about five o'clock some Democrat would come to me saying that
he was to take the floor, but that he did not feel well, or
was not quite ready with some material, and ask me as a personal
favor to let the matter go over until the next morning.  This
happened so often that I became satisfied it was a concerted
scheme, and made up my mind that I would not yield to such
a request again.

But one afternoon Senator Wilson of Maryland, a quiet and
most estimable gentleman, whom I had known very well, and
for whom I had a high regard, came to me and said he felt
quite unwell; he could go on that afternoon, if I insisted
upon it; but he would like much better to put off speaking
till the next day.  I was just beginning my answer to the
effect that I had heard that so often that I had determined I
would not yield again to the request.  But I said to myself,
It cannot be possible that this man would undertake to deceive
me.  He is a gentleman of high character, absolutely honorable
and incapable of falsehood.  So I answered, Of course, Mr.
Wilson, if you are ill, I will consent to your desire.  Mr.
Wilson made his speech the next day.  This was December 15.
A few weeks after, on the 24th of February, Mr. Wilson died
suddenly of heart disease.  It was an affection of which he
had been conscious for some years, and which he had for some
time expected would cause sudden death.  I dare say if he
had been compelled to proceed with his speech that day it
would have been fatal.  In that case my life would have been
embittered by the memory.

We had a meeting of the Republican members of the Committee,
for consultation, before we reported the Bill.  Mr. Evarts,
while he approved the principle of the measure, shared very
strongly my own hesitation, caused by the fear of the political
effect of the defeat of a measure likely to excite so much
angry strife throughout the country.  After hearing the opinion
of those who favored going on with the Bill, Mr. Evarts said:
"I spent a Sunday with Judge Kent on the Hudson a good many
years ago, with several New York lawyers.  We all went to
the Episcopal church in the forenoon, and dined with the Judge
after church.  During the service one of the company kept
far behind in the responses, which annoyed the Judge a good
deal.  At dinner he broke out, 'Davis, why can't you descend
into hell with the rest of the congregation?' I will descend
into hell with the rest of the congregation."

Mr. Evarts made the descent and stood loyally by the measure
in the debate to the best of his great ability.


CHAPTER XIV
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS AND THE PRESIDENTIAL
SUCCESSION BILL

When I entered the Senate, I found one very serious inconvenience
and one very great public danger in existing conditions.

The great inconvenience grew out of the fact that by the Constitution
the session of Congress must end on the fourth of March every
other year.  A third of the Senate goes out at the same time,
and every fourth year the Presidential term ends.  That session
of Congress meets, according to our usage, on the first Monday
of December.  The meeting cannot well come much earlier without
preventing the members of the two Houses of Congress from
taking part in the political campaign, where they are justly
expected by the people to give an account of their stewardship,
and to discuss the questions to be considered by the people
in the election.  So there are but thirteen weeks in which
to pass fourteen or fifteen great Appropriation Bills, making
it impossible to deal with any other great subject except by
unanimous consent.  The result is also that the Appropriation
Bills are put in the power of a very few men indeed.  The
House has to submit to the dictation of the Appropriation
Committee, and cannot be allowed to debate, or even to have
a separate vote on matters which nearly the whole House would
like to accomplish, if there were time, but which the Chairman
of the Appropriation Committee, who is usually omnipotent
with his associates, may happen to dislike.  On the other
hand, in the Senate, where there is no cloture rule, any single
member, or at best, a very few members, can defeat an Appropriation
Bill and compel an extra session by exercising their right
of uncontrolled debate.

Besides; people from all parts of the country like to attend
the inauguration of a new President.  The fourth of March
is at an inclement season, and is apt to be an inclement day,
and it may come on Saturday or Sunday or Monday.  So persons
who attend may be obliged to be away from home over Sunday,
and a great many persons have lost their health or life from
exposure in witnessing the inauguration.

I prepared a Constitutional amendment providing that the inauguration
should take place on the last Thursday in April.  I have reported
this to the Senate several times.  It has always passed that
body with scarcely a dissenting vote, on debate and explanation.
If that had been adopted, if the session were to begin in
the middle of November, a week after the November elections--
which could be accomplished by an act of Congress--instead
of thirteen weeks, to which the session is now limited, there
would be a session of twenty-three or twenty-four weeks.  This
would give time for the consideration of such legislation
as might be needful.  It would probably, also, permit the
shortening somewhat of the long session, which not infrequently
extends to July or August.  But the plan has never found
much favor in the House.  Speaker Reed, when he was in power,
said rather contemptuously, that "Congress sits altogether
too long as it is.  The less we have of Congress, the better."

The public danger is found in the fact that there is no provision
in the Constitution for the case where the President-elect
dies before inauguration.  The provision is:

"In case of the Removal of the President from Office, or
of his Death, Resignation, or Inability to discharge the
Powers and Duties of the said Office, the same shall devolve
on the Vice-President, and the Congress may by Law provide
for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability,
both of the President and Vice-President, declaring what Officer
shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly,
until the Disability shall be removed, or a President shall
be elected."

Strictly construed, it is only in the case of the death,
inability, etc., of a President, that a Vice-President can
succeed, or in the case of the death, inability, etc., of the President
and Vice-President both, that Congress has power to declare
on whom the office shall devolve.  It must be a President
and Vice-President that die; not merely a President and Vice-
President-elect.  That his is not an imaginary danger is shown
by the fact of the well-known scheme to assassinate Lincoln
on his way to the seat of the Government, and also by the
fact that either the President or the Vice-President has died
in office so many times in the recollection of men now living.
President Harrison died during his term; President Taylor
died during his term; Vice-President King died during Pierce's
term; Vice-President Wilson died during Grant's term; President
Garfield died during his term; Vice-President Hendricks died
during Cleveland's term; Vice-President Hobart died during
McKinley's term, and President McKinley during his own second
term.  So within sixty years eight of these high officials
have died in office; five of them within thirty years; four
of them within twenty years.

I have also drawn and repeatedly procured the passage through
the Senate of an amendment to the Constitution to protect
the country against this danger.  That also has failed of
attention in the House.  I suppose it is likely that nothing
will be done about the matter until the event shall happen,
as is not unlikely, that both President and Vice-President-
elect shall become incapacitated between the election and
the time for entering upon office.

I was more successful in providing against another situation
that might prove quite awkward.  In Washington's Administration
Congress exercised, as far as it could, the power given by
the Constitution to provide against the death or disability
of both the President and Vice-President, if it should happen
after they had entered upon office, as follows:

"In case of removal, death, resignation or inability of both
the President and the Vice-President of the United States,
the President of the Senate, or, if there is none, then the
Speaker of the House, for the time being, shall act as President,
until the disability is removed or a President elected."

There is a tradition that when this awkward arrangement was
made, the proposition that the Secretary of State should succeed
in the case of such vacancy was defeated by the suggestion
that Mr. Jefferson had too much power and consequence already.
The arrangement seemed to me clearly objectionable.  In the
first place the Vice-President, who, it is supposed, has died
or become incapable, is the Constitutional President of the
Senate.  The Senate, under the practice and construction of
its power which prevailed down to a very recent period, only
elected a President pro tempore when the Vice-President vacated
the chair.  His office terminated when the Vice-President
resumed it, and there was no Constitutional obligation on
the Senate to elect a President pro tempore at all.  So it
was quite uncertain whether there would be a President pro
tempore of the Senate at any particular time, especially when
the Senate was not in session.  There have been two instances
where the President of the Senate has refused to vacate the
chair, for the reason that he did not desire to have a President
pro tempore elected, and thereby have an honor conferred on
a member of another party than his own.  That happened once
in the case of Vice-President Gerry, and again, within my
personal knowledge, in the case of Vice-President Arthur.
When he succeeded to the Presidency there was no President
of the Senate who would have taken his place if he too had
happened to be assassinated.  So of the Speaker of the House.
For a great many years the first session of a newly-elected
House of Representatives has begun in December.  There is
no Speaker from the previous fourth of March until that time.
Beside, the Senate, whose members hold office for six years
and of whom only one-third goes out every two years, is very
apt to have a majority whose political opinions are opposed
to those which have prevailed in the last Presidential election.
So, if the President and Vice-President both die before taking
their seats, the President of the Senate is quite likely to
bring into the Executive Office opinions which the people
have just rejected in the election.

On the other hand, the Secretary of State is always a member
of the party that has prevailed in the last election, and
is usually the member of the party, next to the President
himself, highest in its confidence.  Our Secretaries of State,
with rare exceptions, have been among the very ablest public
men of the country.  Among them have been Timothy Pickering,
John Marshall, James Madison, James Monroe, John Quincy Adams,
Henry Clay, Martin Van Buren, Edward Livingston, Louis McLane,
John Forsyth, Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun, James Buchanan,
John M. Clayton, Edward Everett, Elihu B. Washburne, Hamilton
Fish, William M. Evarts, James G. Blaine, Thomas F. Bayard,
John Sherman, and John Hay.  These men, with scarcely an exception,
have been among the very foremost statesmen of their time.
Several of them have been Presidents of the United States,
and a good many more of them have been prominent candidates
for the Presidency.  On the other hand, the list of Presidents
of the Senate contains few names of any considerable distinction.
Another objection to the arrangement was the fact that the
President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House might
be changed at the will of the body that elected them.  So
the acting President might be displaced at the will of a political
body.  There is a good deal of reason, also, for claiming
that if Congress declare that the officer shall act as President,
he must discharge the duties of his office and the duties
of the President at the same time, a burden which would be
very hard for one man to support.  Accordingly I drew and
introduced the existing law, which reads as follows:

_"Be it enacted, etc.,_ That in case of removal, death, resignation
or inability of both the President and Vice-President of the
United States, the Secretary of State, or if there be none,
or in case of his removal, death, resignation or inability,
then the Secretary of the Treasury, or if there be none, or
in the case of his removal, death, resignation or inability,
then the Secretary of War, or if there be none, or in case
of his removal, death, resignation or inability, then the
Attorney-General, or if there be none, or in case of his
removal, death, resignation or inability, then the Secretary of
the Interior, shall act as President until the disability of the
President or Vice-President is removed or a President shall
be elected:

"_Provided,_ That whenever the powers and duties of the office
of President of the United States shall devolve upon any of
the person named herein, if Congress be not then in session,
or if it would not meet in accordance with law within twenty
days thereafter, it shall be the duty of the person upon whom
said powers and duties shall devolve to issue a proclamation
convening Congress in extraordinary session, giving twenty
days' notice of time of meeting.

"Sec. 2.  That the preceding section shall only be held to
describe and apply to such officers as shall have been appointed
by the advice and consent of the Senate to the offices therein
named, and such as are eligible to the office of President
under the Constitution, and not under impeachment by the House
of Representatives of the United States at the time the powers
and duties of the office shall devolve upon them respectively.

"Sec. 3.  That sections one hundred and forty-six, one hundred
and forty-seven, one hundred and forty-eight, one hundred
and forty-nine and one hundred and fifty of the Revised Statutes
are hereby repealed.  (_January_ 19, 1886)."

There was some objection to it at first.  It was resisted very
strenuously to the end by Senator Edmunds.  But after full
discussion it passed the Senate with few dissenting votes.

In the House Mr. Reed, afterward Speaker, appealed without
success to the political feeling of his associates, demanding
to know if they would rather have Mr. Bayard, who was then
Secretary of State, than John Sherman, who then happened to
be President of the Senate, for President of the United States.
But the House, also, by a large majority, passed the measure.


CHAPTER XV
PRESIDENT CLEVELAND'S JUDGES

I earnestly supported William B. Hornblower against the opposition
of Senator Hill, when he was nominated by Mr. Cleveland for
Judge of the Supreme Court of the United States.  I was then
on the Judiciary Committee.  I made very careful inquiry,
and had reason to believe that the best lawyers in New York
thought highly of him.  Judge Gray told me that Mr. Hornblower
had argued a case in the Court not long before, and that as
the Judges walked out Judge Blatchford said to him: "I hope
you have as good a man in your Circuit to succeed you, when
the time comes, as we have in ours in Mr. Hornblower to succeed
me."

I did not, however, support Mr. Wheeler H. Peckham.  The newspapers
circulated the story extensively that--to use the phrase of
one of them--I "led the opposition." That was not true.  I
expected to vote for Mr. Peckham until just before the vote
was taken.  I had communicated my expectation to support him
to Senator Vilas, who had charge of the case.  I thought before
the vote was taken it was my duty to tell him I had changed
my mind.  So I went round to his seat and told him.  Nobody
else knew my purpose till I voted.

I had no political sympathy with Senator Hill, still less
with the claim often imputed to the Senate by writers of
newspapers, but of which I have never seen the slightest
evidence, that Senators have the right to dictate such appointments.
But I thought Mr. Cleveland ought not to have made such an
appointment without consulting Mr. Hill, who was a lawyer
of eminence and knew the sentiment of the majority of the
Democratic Party.  Mr. Cleveland had nominated in succession
two persons to an office which ought to be absolutely non-
partisan, who belonged to a very small company of men devoted
to his personal fortunes, who had bitterly attacked Mr. Hill.
I should not, however, have deemed this objection sufficient
to justify a vote against Mr. Peckham, but for the fact that
I became satisfied he was a man of strong prejudices, with
little of the judicial temper or quality about him, and quite
likely to break down under the strain of heavy responsibility.

I urged Mr. Vilas to ask President Cleveland to send in the
name of Mr. Hornblower again, having some hope that the Senate
would reconsider its action in his case.  But President Cleveland
solved the difficulty quite skilfully by sending in the name
of Senator White of Louisiana, a most admirable gentleman
and Judge, and afterward, when there came another vacancy,
that of Rufus W. Peckham of New York, both of whom were confirmed,
I believe, without an objection.

I just referred to Senator William F. Vilas, of Wisconsin.
I should like to put on record my great esteem for his character
as a man, and the excellence of his service as a Senator.
He was on the Judiciary Committee while I was Chairman, and
also for a time when his party had the majority.  He was industrious,
wise, conservative, courteous, and fair, a most admirable
lawyer, full of public spirit, well acquainted with the mechanism
of the Government, and doing always much more than his full
share of the work of the Committee and of the Senate.  I hope
the country may have again the benefit of his great ability
in some department of the public service.

Chief Justice Fuller said with singular felicity:

"Mr. Justice Lamar always underrated himself.  This tendency
plainly sprung from a vivid imagination.  With him the splendid
passions attendant upon youth never faded into the light of
common day, but they kept before him as an ideal, the impossibility
of whose realization, as borne in upon him from time to time,
opposed him with a sense of failure.  Yet the conscientiousness
of his work was not lessened, nor was the acuteness of his
intellect obscured by these natural causes of his discontent;
nor did a certain Oriental dreaminess of the temperament ever
allure him to abandon the effort to accomplish something that
would last after his lips were dumb."

Matthew Arnold says in one of his essays that Americans lack
distinction.  I have a huge liking for Matthew Arnold.  He
had a wonderful intellectual vision.  I do not mean to say
that his three lectures on translating Homer are the greatest
literary work of our time.  But I think, on the whole, that
I should rather have the pair of intellectual eyes which can
see Homer as he saw him, than any other mental quality I can
think of.  But Mr. Arnold has never seemed to me to be fortunate
in his judgment about Americans.  He allows this quality of
distinction to Grant, but denies it, for all the world, to
Abraham Lincoln.  The trouble with Mr. Arnold is that he
never travelled in the United States, when on this side the
Atlantic.  He spent his time with a few friends who had little
love for things American.  He visited a great city or two,
but never made himself acquainted with the American people.
He never knew the sources of our power, or the spirit of our
people.

Yet there is a good deal of truth in what he says of the
Americans of our time.  It is still more true of the Englishmen
of our time.  The newspaper, and the telegraph, and the telephone,
and the constant dissemination of news, the public library
and the common school and college mix up all together and
tend to make us, with some rare and delightful exceptions,
eminently commonplace.  Certainly the men who are sent to
Congress do not escape this wearying quality.  I know men
who have been in public office for more than a generation,
who have had enormous power and responsibility, to whom the
country is indebted for safety and happiness, who never said
a foolish thing, and rarely ever when they had the chance
failed to do a wise one, who are utterly commonplace.  You
could not read the story of their public career without going
to sleep.  They never said anything worth quoting, and never
did anything that any other equally good and sensible man
would not have done in their place.  I have a huge respect
for them.  I can never myself attain to their excellence.
Yet I would as lief spend my life as an omnibus horse as live
theirs.

But we have occasionally some delightful exceptions.  It
so happens that some of the best, most attractive men I have
known, were from the South.  They are men who stood by the
Southern people through thick and thin during the Rebellion,
and in resisting every attempt on the part of the victorious
Northern majority to raise the colored people to a political
equality.  They have all of them, I believe, been Free Traders.
In general they have opposed the construction of the Constitution
which has prevailed in New England and throughout the North,
and in which I have myself always believed.

I have never had much personal intimacy with any of them.
I have had some vigorous conflicts with one or two of them.
Yet I have had from each before our association ended, assurances
of their warm personal regard.  One of them, perhaps, on the
whole, the most conspicuous, is Lucius Q. C. Lamar.  His
very name, Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus, indicates that his
father must have looked for his example for his son to follow
far away from the American life about him.

Lamar was one of the most delightful of men.  His English
style, both in conversation and in public speaking, was fresh
and original, well adapted to keep his hearers expectant and
alert, and to express the delicate and subtle shades of meaning
that were required for the service of his delicate and subtle
thought.

He had taken the part of the South with great zeal.  He told
me shortly before he left the Senate that he thought it was
a great misfortune for the world that the Southern cause had
been lost.  He stood by his people, as he liked to call them,
in their defeat and in their calamity without flinching or
reservation.  While he would, I am sure, have done nothing
himself not scrupulously honorable, and while there was nothing
in his nature of cruelty, still less of brutality, yet he
did not stop to inquire into matters of right and wrong when
a Southerner had got into trouble, by reason of anything a
white Democrat had done in conflict with the National authority.
Yet Mr. Lamar desired most sincerely the reconciliation of
the sections, that the age-long strife should come to an end
and be forgotten, and that the whole South should share the
prosperity and wealth and refinement and contentment, which
submission to the new order of things would bring.

He was a far-sighted man.  He was not misled by temporary
excitement or by deference to the majority of his political
friends who were less far-sighted than he, into any mistakes.
When there was an attempt to break faith in regard to what
was called the Wheeler compromise in the Democratic House,
Mr. Lamar interposed and prevented it.  Just after the count
under the Electoral Commission had been completed, there was
a very dangerous movement to delay action on the returns from
Vermont, which would have prevented the completion of the
work before the 4th of March.  Mr. Lamar put forth all his
powerful influence among his Democratic associates on the
floor of the House, and saved the peace of the country.  He
knew very well that the cause of the South, as he would have
called it, and the cause of the Democratic Party itself, would
not be promoted by a new civil convulsion, still less by any
breach of faith.

He voted against the free coinage of silver in spite of the
fact that the people of his State earnestly favored it, and
against the express instructions of its Legislature.  In 1874,
at a time when the passions of the Civil War seemed to blaze
higher, and the angry conflict between the sections seemed
to blaze higher even than during the war itself, he astonished
and shocked the people of the South by pronouncing a tender
and affectionate eulogy on Charles Sumner.  He testified to
Sumner's high moral qualities, to his intense love of liberty,
to his magnanimity, and to his incapacity for a personal
animosity, and regretted that he had restrained the impulse
which had been strong on him to go to Mr. Sumner and offer
him his hand and his heart with it.  It would have been almost
impossible for any other man who had done either of these
things to go back to Mississippi and live.  But it never shook
for a moment the love for Lamar of a people who knew so well
his love for them.

Afterward Mr. Lamar was made an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States.  I voted against him--in which
I made a mistake--not because I doubted his eminent integrity
and ability, but because I thought that he had little professional
experience and no judicial experience, and that his health--
he was then beginning to show signs of the disease which
ended his life shortly after--was not sufficient for undertaking
the great study and the labor which the new office would require.
He was not long on the Bench, and was not greatly distinguished
as a Judge.  But he wrote a few opinions which showed his
great intellectual capacity for dealing with the most complicated
legal questions, especially such are apt to arise in patent
cases.

He was a delightful man in ordinary conversation.  He had
an infinite wit and great sense of humor.  He used to tell
delightful stories of queer characters and events that had
come within his own observation.  My relations to him for a
good while were entirely antagonistic.  We had some very
sharp controversies.  He would never tolerate any expression,
in his presence, of disrespect to Jefferson Davis.  He would
always meet the statement that Mr. Davis was a traitor with
a vigorous denial.  When I made a motion excepting Jefferson
Davis from the benefit of the bill to pension the soldiers
of the Mexican War, Mr. Lamar compared him to Prometheus,
and me to the vulture preying upon his liver.  He was the
last person from whom I should have expected an expression
of compliment, or even of kindness in those days.  Yet when
the question of my reelection was pending in 1883 and the
correspondent of a newspaper which was among my most unrelenting
and unscrupulous opponents thought he might get some material
which would help him in his attacks, called upon Mr. Lamar
in the Democratic cloak room, and asked him what he thought
of me, Mr. Lamar replied in language which seems almost ridiculous
to quote, and which was inspired only by his indignation
at the attempt to use him for such a purpose:  "Sir, Massachusetts
has never been more powerfully represented in the Senate,
not even in the time of Daniel Webster, than by Mr. Hoar."

It was with feeling of great pleasure that in 1886 I saw
Harvard confer her highest honor on this delightful Mississippian.

He was, in his time, I think, the ablest representative,
certainly among the ablest, of the opinions opposed to mine.
He had a delightful and original literary quality which, if
the lines of his life had been cast amid other scenes than
the tempest of a great Revolution and Civil War, might have
made him a dreamer like Montaigne; and a chivalrous quality
that might have made him a companion of Athos and D'Artagnan.

His eulogy on Calhoun, with whom in general he sympathized,
was a masterpiece of eloquence, but his eulogy on Charles
Sumner, which probably no other man in the South could have
uttered without political death, was greater still.  It was
a good omen for the country.  At the moment he uttered it,
I suppose Charles Sumner was hated throughout the South with
an intensity which in this day of reconciliation it is almost
impossible to conceive.  Yet Mr. Lamar in his place in the
House of Representatives dared to utter these sentences:

"Charles Sumner was born with an instinctive love of freedom,
and was educated from his earliest infancy to the belief that
freedom is the natural and indefeasible right of every intelligent
being having the outward form of man.  In him, in fact, this
creed seems to have been something more than a doctrine imbibed
from teachers, or a result of education.  To him it was a
grand intuitive truth, inscribed in blazing letters upon the
tablet of his inner consciousness, to deny which would have
been for him to deny that he himself existed.  And along with
the all-controlling love of freedom he possessed a moral sensibility
keenly intense and vivid, a conscientiousness which would
never permit him to swerve by the breadth of a hair from what
he pictured to himself as the path of duty.  Thus were combined
in him the characteristics which have in all ages given to
religion her martyrs, and to patriotism her self-sacrificing
heroes."

After speaking of the kindness of Mr. Sumner to the South,
and his spirit of magnanimity, he added:

"It was my misfortune, perhaps my fault, personally never
to have known this eminent philanthropist and statesman.
The impulse was often strong upon me to go to him and offer
him my hand, and my heart with it, and to express to him my
thanks for his kind and considerate course toward the people
with whom I am identified.  If I did not yield to that impulse,
it was because the thought occurred that other days were coming
in which such a demonstration might be more opportune and less
liable to misconstruction.  Suddenly and without premonition,
a day as come at last to which, for such a purpose, there
is no to-morrow.  My regret is therefore intensified by the
thought that I failed to speak of him out of the fulness of
my heart while there was yet time."

That Mr. Lamar well understood what was to be the effect
of this wonderful speech upon the whole country is shown
by his letter to his wife the next day, in which he says:  "I
never in all my life opened my lips with a purpose more single
to the interests of our Southern people than when I made this
speech."

I said of this speech in an article in the _North American
Review:_

"The eloquent words of Mr. Lamar so touched the hearts of
the people of the North that they may fairly be said to have
been of themselves an important influence in mitigating the
estrangements of a generation."

The following letter explains my absence from the Senate
when Judge Lamar's death was announced:

WASHINGTON, D. C., January 29, 1893

_My Dear Madam:_

I was kept in bed, under the orders of my physician, the
day the death of your husband was announced to the Senate.
I regret exceedingly that I could not be in my place to express
my sense of the great public loss and my warm personal admiration
for his great qualities of intellect and of heart.  I served
with him in the House of Representatives for more than four
years, and in the Senate for more than eight years.  It was
a stormy and exciting time.  We differed widely on very grave
questions, and this difference was more than once very sharply
manifested in public; but the more I knew him, the more satisfied
I became of the sincerity of his patriotism, of his profound
and far-sighted wisdom, of the deep fountain of tenderness
in his affectionate and simple heart, and of his brave and
chivalrous quality of soul.  I was more than once indebted
to him for very great kindness indeed, under circumstances
when I do not think he supposed it would ever come to my knowledge.

Some of his judgments on the Supreme Bench are characterized
by marvellous beauty and felicity of style.  He maintained
his place on that great tribunal to the satisfaction of his
friends and that admiration of his countrymen, in spite of
failing health and of the fact that the best years of his life
had been given to other studies than that of the law.

It is a good omen for our country that the friends and disciples
of Charles Sumner unite with the people of Mississippi in
their reverence for this noble and manly character.

  I am faithfully yours,
  GEORGE F. HOAR
  Mrs. Lamar.


CHAPTER XVI
SOME SOUTHERN SENATORS

Another most delightful Democrat, with whom it was my pleasure
to form quite intimate relations, was Senator Howell E. Jackson
of Tennessee.  He had been in the Confederate service.  I
think he did not approve Secession, but like most others who
dwelt in the South, thought his allegiance primarily due to
his State.  He was an admirable lawyer, faithful, industrious,
clear-headed and learned in the law.  He had been a Whig before
the war, and, like other Southern Whigs, favored a moderate
protective tariff.  He was anxious to have the South take
her place as a great manufacturing community, for which her
natural resources of iron and coal and her great water power
gave her such advantages.  He was opposed to the Republican
measures of Reconstruction and to placing the negro on a political
equality with the whites.  But he also discountenanced and
condemned any lawless violence or fraud.

Senator Jackson was appointed Judge of the United States Circuit
Court by President Cleveland.  He held that office when a
vacancy on the Bench of the Supreme Court came by the death
of Justice Lamar.  The election of 1892 had resulted in the
choice of President Cleveland.  The Democrats in the Senate
were determined that no Republican who should be nominated
by President Harrison should be confirmed, and did not mean,
if they could help it, that the place should be filled during
the December session.  The only way to get such a confirmation
would be for the Republican majority to put the question ahead
of all other subjects, to go into Executive session every
day as soon as the Senate met, and remain there until the
judgeship was disposed of.  The Democrats must then choose
between defeating the Appropriation Bills, and compelling
an extra session, which the in-coming Administration would
not like.  In order to do that, however, the small Republican
majority must hold together firmly, and be willing to take
the risk of an extra session.

I called on President Harrison and urged upon him the appointment
of Judge Jackson.  I represented that it was desirable that
there should be some Democrats upon the Bench, and that they
should be men who had the confidence of their own part of
the country and of the country at large; that Judge Jackson
was a man of admirable judicial quality; that he had the public
confidence in a high degree, and that it would be impossible
for the Democratic Party to object to his selection, while
it would strengthen the Bench.  So I thought that even if
we could put one of our men there without difficulty, it would
be wise to appoint Jackson.

President Harrison was very unwilling, indeed, to take this
view.  He answered me at first in his rough impulsive way,
and seemed very unwilling even to take the matter into consideration.
But after a considerable discussion he asked me to ascertain
whether the Republicans would be willing, if he sent in a
Republican name, to adopt the course above suggested, and
transact no other business until the result was secured, even
at the risk of defeating the Appropriation Bills and causing
an extra session.  I went back to the Senate and consulted
a good many Senators.  Nearly all of them said they would
not agree to such a struggle; that they thought it very undesirable
indeed; that the effect would be bad.  So it was clear that
nothing could be accomplished in that way.  I went back to
the White House and reported.  I got the authority of the
gentlemen I had consulted to tell the President what they
said.  The result was the appointment of Judge Jackson, to
the great satisfaction of the country.  He was a very industrious
and faithful Judge.  But his useful life came to an end soon
afterward, I suppose largely as the result of overwork in his
important and laborious office.

The Attorney-General said of Mr. Justice Jackson:  "He was
not so much a Senator who had been appointed Judge, as a Judge
who had served for a time as a Senator."

I served with Senator Jackson on the Committee on Claims,
and on the Committee on the Judiciary.  We did not meet often
in social life.  He rarely came to my room.  I do not remember
that I ever visited him in his home.  But we formed a very
cordial and intimate friendship.  I have hardly known a nature
better fitted, morally or intellectually, for great public
trusts, either judicial or political, than his.  In the beginning,
I think the framers of the Constitution intended the Senate
to be a sort of political Supreme Court, in which, as a court
of final resort, the great conflicts which had stirred the
people, and stirred the Representatives of the people in the
lower House, should be decided without heat and without party
feeling.  It was, I have been told, considered a breach of
propriety to allude to party divisions in early debates in
the Senate, as it would be now deemed a breach of propriety
to allude to such divisions in the Supreme Court of the United
States.

Howell E. Jackson had this ancient Senatorial temperament.
He never seemed to me to be thinking of either party or section
or popular opinion, or of the opinion of other men; but only
of public duty.

He never flinched from uttering and maintaining his opinions.
He never caressed or cajoled his political antagonists.  It
is a great tribute to his personal quality that he owed his
election as Senator to his political opponents who, when his
own party was divided, joined a majority of his party to elect
him.  He also, as has been said, owed his appointment as Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court to the impression which his probity
and ability had made on his political opponents.  When sick
with a fatal illness he left a sick bed to take his place
upon the Bench at the call of duty when the Income Tax case
was to be decided.  There is no doubt that the effort hastened
his death.  I do not agree with the conclusion to which he
came on that great occasion.  But the fact that he came to
that conclusion is enough to make me feel sure that there
were strong reasons for it, which might well convince the
clearest understanding, and be reconciled with the most conscientious
desire to do right.

No list of the remarkable Senators of my time would be complete
which did not contain the name of Senator Vest of Missouri.
He was not a very frequent speaker, and never spoke at great
length.  But his oratoric powers are of a very high order.
On some few occasions he has made speeches, always speaking
without notes, and I suppose without previous preparation
so far as expression and style go, which have very deeply
moved the Senate, though made up of men who have been accustomed
to oratory and not easily stirred to emotion.  Mr. Vest is
a brave, sincere, spirited and straightforward man.  He has
a good many of the prejudices of the old Southern Secessionist.
I think those prejudices would long ago have melted away in
the sunshine of our day of returning good feeling and affection,
but for the fact that his chivalrous nature will not permit
him to abandon a cause or an opinion to which he has once
adhered, while it is unpopular.  He is like some old cavalier who
supported the Stuarts, who lived down into the days of the
House of Hanover, but still toasted the King over the water.

Among the most interesting characters with whom it has been
my fortune to serve is Senator John W. Daniel of Virginia.
Our ways of life, and in many particulars our ways of thinking,
are far apart.  But I have been led to form a great respect
for his intellectual qualities, and for his sincere and far-
sighted patriotism.

Mr. Daniel came into the Senate in 1887.  He had been known
as a very eminent lawyer at the Virginia Bar, author of two
excellent law books.  He had served a single term in the National
House of Representatives.  He had won a National reputation
there by a very beautiful and brilliant speech at the completion
of the Washington Monument.  There were two notable orations
at the time, one by Mr. Daniel and one by Robert C. Winthrop.
These gentlemen were selected for the purpose as best representing
two sections of the country.  Mr. Winthrop was, beyond all
question, the fittest man in the North for such a task.  I
have a special admiration for the spirit and eloquence with
which he performed such duties.  To my mind no higher praise
could be given Mr. Daniel's address than that it is worthy
of that company.

I had occasion to look at Mr. Winthrop's address some little
time ago, and, opening the volume containing it in the middle,
I read a page or two with approval and delight thinking it
was Mr. Winthrop's.  But I found, on looking back to the beginning
that it was Senator Daniel's.

Mr. Daniel speaks too rarely in the Senate.  He is always
listened to with great attention.  He speaks only on important
questions, to which he always makes an important contribution.
He has the old-fashioned Virginia method of speech, now nearly
passed away,--grave, deliberate, with stately periods and
sententious phrases, such, I suppose, as were used in the
Convention that adopted the Constitution, or in that which
framed or revised the Constitution of Virginia.

Mr. Daniel was a Confederate soldier.  He is a Virginian
to his heart's core.  He looks with great alarm on the possibility
that the ancient culture and nobility of the South, and the
lofty character of the Virginian as he existed in the time
of Washington and Marshall and Patrick Henry may be degraded
by raising what he thinks an inferior race to social or even
political equality.

But he retains no bitterness or hate or desire for revenge
by reason of the conflict of the Civil War.  He delivered an
address before the President of the United States, the Supreme
Court, the representatives of foreign Governments, the two
Houses of Congress and the Governors of twenty-one States
and Territories, on the 12th of December, 1900, on the occasion
of the celebration of the Centennial Anniversary of establishing
the seat of Government at Washington.  That remarkable address
was full of wise counsel to his countrymen.  Coming from a
representative of Virginia, who had borne arms and been badly
wounded in the Civil War, it had a double value and significance.
Mr. Daniel declared the cheering and hopeful truth that great
races are made of a mixture of races, and that the best and
bravest blood of the world's great races is mixed in the
American.  He appealed eloquently to the circumstances which
should stir the heart of the whole people to a new and loftier
love of country.  He pointed out that the differences in forty-
five great Commonwealths are not greater than ought to be
expected, and indeed not greater than is healthy.  He pointed
out the National strength, the power of our great Republic
stands at the dawn of a new century, with every man under
its flag a freeman and ready to defend it.  He called upon
his countrymen to stand by the Monroe Doctrine, to be ready
to defend it, if need be, in arms.  He then specially appealed
to the people to foster the inventive genius of the country,
and repeated Mr. Jefferson's lofty prophecy that in some future
day--

"The farthest star in the heavens will bear the name of Washington,
and the city he founded be the Capital of the universal Republic."

Isham G. Harris entered the Senate the same day I did.  I
counted him always among my friends, although we had some
sharp passages.  I cannot describe him better than by reprinting
here what I said of him in the Senate after his death.

"Mr. President, the great career of Senator Harris is well
known to his countrymen.  He has been for more than a generation
a striking and conspicuous figure in our public life.  His
colleague, his successor, the men of his own political faith,
the people of the great State which he served and honored
and loved so long, will, each in their own way, portray his
character and record their esteem and affection.

"My tribute must be that of a political opponent.  So far
as I have been able to exert any influence upon the history
of my country during the long conflict now happily past, it
has been in opposition to him, to the party to which he belonged,
to the opinions which he held, I am sure, quite as zealously
and conscientiously as I hold my own.

"We entered the Senate on the same day.  He was a Southerner,
a Democrat and a Confederate.  I was born and bred in New
England, a Republican, and an Abolitionist.  We rarely spoke
in the same debate except on different sides.  Yet I have
no memory of him that is not tender and affectionate, and
there is nothing that I can honestly say of him except words
of respect and of honor.

"He was a typical Southerner.  He had the virtues and the
foibles that belonged to that character in the generation
the last of whom are now passing from the stage of public
action.  He was a man of very simple and very high qualities.
He was a man of absolute frankness in public behavior and
in private dealing.  The thought that was in his heart corresponded
absolutely with the utterance of his lips.  He had nothing
to conceal.  I was about to say he was a man without the gift
of diplomacy; but he was a man with the gift of the highest
diplomacy--directness, simplicity, frankness, courage--qualities
which make always their way to their mark and to their goal
over all circumlocutions and ambiguities.

"He was a man of brief, clear and compact speech.  He would
sum up in a few vigorous and ringing sentences the argument
to which other men would give hours or days.  He had an instinct
for the hinge or turning point of a debate.

"He was a man of absolute integrity and steadfastness.  What
he said, that he would do.  Where you left him, there, so
long as he lived, you would find him when you came back.
He was a man of unflinching courage.  He was not afraid of
any antagonist, whether in the hall of debate or on the field
of battle.

"He was an acknowledged master of parliamentary law, a system
upon which not only the convenient procedure of legislative
bodies largely depends, but which has close relations to Constitutional
Liberty itself.  How often a few simple and clear sentences
of his have dispersed the clouds and brought order out of
confusion in this Chamber.

"His great legislative experience made him invaluable as
a servant of his own State, of the country and as a counsellor
to his younger associates.

"He was a pleasant man in private intercourse.  He had great
sense of humor, a gift of portraiture, a good memory.  So
he brought out of the treasure-house of his varied experience
abundant matter for the delight of young and old.  There is
no man left in the Senate who was better company in hours
of recreation.

"His influence will be felt here for a long time.  His striking
figure will still seem to be hovering about the Senate Chamber,
still sitting, still deliberating, still debating.

"Mr. President, it is delightful to think how, during the
lives of the men who took part in the great conflict which
preceded and followed the Civil War and the greater conflict
of the war itself, the old bitterness and estrangements are
all gone.  Throughout the whole land the word 'countryman'
has at last become a title of endearment.  The memory of the
leaders of that great conflict is preserved as tenderly by
the men who fought with them as by the men who followed them.
Massachusetts joins with Tennessee in laying a wreath on the
tomb of her great soldier, her great Governor, her great Senator.
He was faithful to truth as he saw it; to duty as he understood
it; to Constitutional Liberty as he conceived it.

"If, as some of us think, he erred, his error was that of a
brave man ready to give life and health and hope to the unequal
struggle.

  To his loved cause he offered, free from stain,
  Courage and faith; vain faith and courage vain.

"And, Mr. President, when he returned to his allegiance,
he offered to the service of his reunited country the same
zeal and devotion he had given to the Confederacy.  There
was no reserved or half-hearted loyalty.  We could have counted
on his care for the honor and glory of his country, on his
wise and brave counsel, in this hour of anxiety, with an unquestioning
confidence.  So Massachusetts to-day presses the hand of Tennessee
and mourns with her for her great citizen who has departed."

James B. Eustis of Louisiana was of old Massachusetts stock.
His father was graduated at Harvard, and went to New Orleans,
where he acquired great distinction at the bar, and as Chief
Justice of that State.  Senator Eustis's great-uncle was General
Eustis, an eminent solider of the Revolutionary War, and afterward
Governor of Massachusetts.

Senator Eustis seemed somewhat indolent, and to take very
little interest indeed in what was going on, except on some
few occasions when he bore himself in debate with remarkable
ability.  I think his grave, scholarly style, and his powerful
reasoning, the propriety, dignity and moderation with which
he dealt with important subjects, made him nearly the finest
example of Senatorial behavior I have ever known.  He once
made a speech in Executive session, on a topic which was suggested
suddenly and he could not have anticipated, on the character
and history of French diplomacy, which was marvellous alike
for his profound and accurate knowledge of the subject and
the beauty and grace of his discourse.

I was not intimate with him in Washington.  But I met him
in Paris, while he was Ambassador there under President Cleveland's
Administration.  I have delightful memories of his hospitality,
especially of one breakfast, where there was but one other
guest beside myself, in a beautiful room overlooking the Seine
and the Place de la Concorde.

If I were to select the one man of all others with whom I
have served in the Senate, who seems to me the most perfect
example of the quality and character of the American Senator,
I think it would be Edward C. Walthall of Mississippi.  I
knew him personally very little.  I do not now remember that
I ever saw him, except in the Capitol, or in the Capitol grounds.
I had, I dare say, some pleasant talks with him in the Senate
Chamber, or the cloak room.  But I remember little of them
now.  He rarely took part in debate.  He was a very modest
man.  He left to his associates the duty of advocating his
and their opinions, unless he was absolutely compelled by
some special reason to do it himself.  When he did speak the
Senate listened to a man of great ability, eloquence and dignity.
I once heard him encounter William M. Evarts in debate.  Evarts
made a prepared speech upon a measure which he had in charge.
Walthall's reply must have been unpremeditated and wholly
unexpected to him.  I think Evarts was in the right and Walthall
in the wrong.  But the Mississippian certainly got the better
of the encounter.

It is a remarkable truth, which impresses itself upon me more
and more the longer I live, that men who are perfectly sincere
and patriotic may differ from each other on what seem the
clearest principles of morals and duty, and yet both sides
be conscientious and patriotic.  There is hardly a political
question among the great questions that have excited the American
people for the last half century on which we did not differ
from each other.  The difference was not only as to the interpretation
of the Constitution, and the welfare of the people, but seemed
to go down to the very roots of the moral law.

Yet what I have just said about him is without exaggeration.
I have the right to believe that he entertained the kindliest
and most cordial feeling of regard for me.  Not long before
he died, President McKinley sent for me to come to the White
House.  He wished to talk with me about what he should do
in dealing with Cuba.  He was then holding back the popular
feeling, and resisting a demand which manifested itself among
Republicans in both Houses of Congress for immediate and vigorous
action which would without doubt have brought on the war with
Spain without delay.  He hoped then that the war might be
avoided.  I had to go to the Capitol before complying with
the President's request, as it was shortly before the time
for the session.  As I was leaving the Capitol to go to the
White House, I met Senator Walthall.  He said, "You seem to
be going the wrong way this morning," or something like that.
I said, "Yes, I am going to see the President." Senator Walthall
said;  "I wish you would be good enough to say to him from
me that he may depend upon the support of the Democrats in
the Senate, with only one or two exceptions," whom he named,
"to support him in his efforts to avoid war, and to accomplish
a peaceful solution of the difficulties in regard to Cuba."
I undertook to give the message.  And just as we were parting,
Senator Walthall turned and said to me that he wished to tell
me how highly he regarded me, and how sensible he was, notwithstanding
my very strong Northern feeling, of my appreciation of the
character of the Southern people, and my desire to do them
full justice.  He added that he regarded it one of the most
pleasant things that had happened to him in life that he had
had the pleasure of serving with me.  I do not now remember
that I ever spoke to him again.  He did not come to the Senate
Chamber very often afterward.  I have thought since that this
unwonted expression of deep feeling from a gentleman not
wont to wear his heart upon his sleeve toward his political
opponent, and a man with whom he so often disagreed, was
due to a premonition, of which he was perhaps unconscious,
that the end of his life was near, and to the kindly and
gentle emotions which in a brave and affectionate heart like
his the approach of death is apt to bring.

I could hardly venture to repeat this story, to which there
is no other witness than my own, but for some letters in my
possession from Mr. Walthall's daughter and friends in which
the writers quote even stronger expressions of his regard.

I heard a great deal of him from Senator Lamar, who loved
him as a brother, and almost worshipped him as a leader.  Senator
Lamar told me that he thought Walthall the ablest military
genius of the Confederacy, with the exception of Lee, and,
I think, of Stonewall Jackson.  Indeed, I think he expressed
doubt whether either exception could be made.  He said that
if anything had happened to Lee, Walthall would have succeeded
to the chief command of the Confederate forces.  General Walthall
seemed to me the perfect type of the gentleman in character
and speech.  He was modest, courteous and eager to be of service
to his friends or his country.  The description of the young
Knight given us by Chaucer, the morning star of English poetry,
still abides as the best definition of the gentleman.

  Curteis he was, lowly and serviceable.

His colleague, Mr. Williams of Mississippi, after Walthall's
death, described the Southern gentleman of our time in a sentence
which deserves to stand by the side of Chaucer's:

"The ideal gentleman was always honest; spoke the truth;
faced his enemy; fought him, if necessary; never quarrelled
with him nor talked about him; rode well; shot well; used
chaste and correct English; insulted no man--bore no insult
from any; was studiously kind to his inferiors, especially
to his slaves; cordial and hospitable to his equals; courteous
to his superiors, if he acknowledged any; he scorned a demagogue,
but loved his people."

I do not undertake to draw his portraiture.  I suppose that
whoever does that must describe a great soldier and a great
lawyer, as well as a great Senator.  I only state what I saw
of him in the Senate Chamber.  It was said of him by an eminent
Republican Senator, his associate on the Committee on Military
Affairs, that in dealing with questions which affected the
right of Union soldiers, or growing out of service to the
Union during the Civil War, no stranger could have discovered
on which side of that great war he had ranged himself.


CHAPTER XVII
CUSHMAN KELLOGG DAVIS

I reprint here a paper read before the American Antiquarian
Society shortly after Mr. Davis's death.

Cushman Kellogg Davis was born at Henderson, Jefferson County,
New York, June 16, 1838, and died at St. Paul, Minnesota,
November 27, 1900.  On his mother's side he was descended
from Robert Cushman and Mary Allerton, the last survivor of
the company which came over in the Mayflower.  He was graduated
at the University of Michigan in 1857, and admitted to the
Bar shortly before the breaking out of the Civil War.  He
enlisted at the beginning of the War and served as First Lieutenant
of Company B, Eighth Wisconsin Regiment, until 1864, when
he was compelled by physical infirmity to resign his commission.
He was an excellent soldier.  He sustained an injury to one
of his eyes, which caused him much pain through life, until
a few years before his death he lost the sight of that eye
altogether.

After his return from the war, he began the practice of the
law anew, in which he gained great distinction.  For many
years, and until his death, he was the acknowledged leader
of the Bar of his State.  He was a member of the State Legislature
of Minnesota in 1867, United States District Attorney from
1868 till 1873, and Governor of the State in 1874 and 1875.
He was one of the Regents of the State University of Minnesota
from 1892 to 1898.  In 1887 he was elected United States Senator,
and reelected in 1893 and 1899.  He held the office of Senator
until his death.  He was Chairman of the Committee on Foreign
Relations from March, 1897, till his death.  He was one of
the Commissioners who negotiated the Treaty of Paris with
Spain.

He was a great lover of books, of which he had a costly collection.
He knew Shakespeare very thoroughly, and was the author of
a book called "The Law of Shakespeare."

He was also a zealous and thorough student of the career
of Napoleon, whose civic and military career he greatly admired.
His mind was a marvellous storehouse of literary gems which
were unknown to most scholars, but rewarded his diligent search
and loving study of his books.

Many good stories are told by his companions of the Bar and
in public life of his apt quotations.  It is said that he
once defended a Judge in an impeachment case.  The point involved
was the power of the court to punish for contempt, and Davis
quoted in support of his position the splendid and well-known
lines of Henry the Fourth, in the famous scene where the Chief
Justice punishes the Prince of Wales for contempt of the judicial
office and authority.  For this anecdote, the writer is indebted
to Senator Lodge.  In the Senate, during the Hawaiian debate,
he quoted this passage from Juvenal:

  Sed quo cecidit sub crimine; quisnam
  Delator? quibus judiciis; quo teste probavit?
  Nil horum; verbosa et grandis epistola venit
  A Capreis.  Bene habet; nul plus interrogo.

He then proceeded:

"My friend from Massachusetts (Mr. Hoar) requests me to translate
that.  He does not need it, of course. But another Senator
(Mr. Washburn) suggests that some of the rest of us do.  I
will not attempt to give a literal translation, but I will
give an accurate paraphrase, which will show its application.
'Into what crime has he fallen? By what informer has he been
accused?  What judge has passed upon him? What witness has
testified against him? Not one or any of these.  A verbose
and turgid message has come over from Capri.  That settles
it.  I will interrogate no further.'"

The most ardent admirers of the then President, Mr. Cleveland,
could not help joining in the laugh.

Mr. Davis took great delight in his descent from the early
settlers of Plymouth, and valued exceedingly the good will
of the people of Massachusetts.  The members of the Society
who were fortunate enough to meet him will not forget their
delight in his pleasant companionship, when he visited Massachusetts
a few years ago to attend our meeting and contribute a paper
to our Proceedings.  He had hoped to repeat the visit.

I prefer, instead of undertaking to complete this imperfect
sketch by a new portraiture of my honored friend, to add what
I said in the Senate, when the loss of Mr. Davis was still
recent:--

"Mr. President:  There is no Senator who would not be glad
to lay a wreath of honor and affection on the monument of
Cushman K. Davis.  That, however, is more especially the right
of his colleague and his successor and the members of the
great Committee where he won so much of his fame.  I ought
to say but a few words.

"The Senate, as its name implies, has been from the beginning,
with few exceptions, an assembly of old men.  In the course
of nature many of its members die in office.  That has been
true of thirty-eight Senators since I came to the Capitol.
Others, a yet larger number, die soon after they leave office.
Of the men with whom I have served in this Chamber fifty-
eight more are now dead, making in all ninety-six, enough
and to spare to organize another Senate elsewhere.  To that
number has been added every Vice-President but two.  Upon
those who have died in office eulogies have been pronounced
in this Chamber and in the House.  The speakers have obeyed
the rule demanded by the decencies of funeral occasions--nil
de mortuis nisi bonum--if not the command born of a tenderer
pity for human frailty--jam parce sepulto.  But in general,
with scarcely and exception, the portraitures have been true
and faithful.  They prove that the people of the American
States, speaking through their legislative assemblies, are
not likely to select men to represent them in this august
assembly who are lacking in high qualities either of intellect
or of character.  However that may be, it is surely true of
Mr. Davis that whatever has been or will be said of him to-
day, or was said of him when the news of his death first shocked
the country, is just what would have been said when he was
alive by any man who knew him.  I have served with him here
nearly fourteen years.  I have agreed with him and I have
differed from him in regard to matters of great pith and moment
which deeply stirred the feelings of the people, as they did
mine, and doubtless did his own.  I never heard any man speak
of him but with respect and kindness.

"Of course, Mr. President, in this great century which is
just over, when our Republic--this infant Hercules--has been
growing from its cradle to its still youthful manhood, the
greatest place for a live man has been that of a soldier
in time of war and that of a statesman in time of peace.
Cushman K. Davis was both.  He did a man's full duty in both.
No man values more than I do the function of the man of letters.
No man reveres more than I do the man of genius who in a loving
and reverent way writes the history of a great people, or
the poet from whose lyre comes the inspiration which induces
heroic action in war and peace.  But I do not admit that the
title of the historian or that of the poet to the gratitude
and affection of mankind is greater than that of the soldier
who saves nations, or that of the statesman who creates or
preserves them, or who makes them great.  I have no patience
when I read that famous speech of Gladstone, he and Tennyson
being together on a journey, when he modestly puts Mr. Tennyson's
title to the gratitude of mankind far above his own.  Gladstone,
then Prime Minister, declared that Tennyson would be remembered
long after he was forgotten.  That may be true.  But whether
a man be remembered or whether he be forgotten; whether his
work be appreciated or no; whether his work be known or unknown
at the time it is accomplished, is not the test of its greatness
or its value to mankind.  The man who keeps this moral being,
or helps to keep this moral being we call a State in the paths
of justice and righteousness and happiness, the direct effect
of whose action is felt in the comfort and happiness and moral
life of millions upon millions of human lives, who opens and
constructs great highways of commerce, who makes schools and
universities not only possible but plenty, who brings to pass
great policies that allure men from misery, and poverty, and
oppression, and serfdom in one world, to free, contented,
happy, prosperous homes in another, is a great benefactor
to mankind, whether his work be accomplished with sounding
of trumpets, or stamping of feet, or clapping of hands, or
the roar and tumult of popular applause, or whether it be
done in the silence of some committee room, and no man know
it but by its results.

"I am not ready to admit that even Shakespeare worked on a
higher plane, or was a greater power on earth, than King Alfred
or George Washington, even if it be that he will survive them
both in the memory of man.  The name of every man but one
who fought with Leonidas at Thermopylae is forgotten.  But
is AEschylus greater than Leonidas, or Miltiades, or Themistocles?
The literature of Athens preserves to immortality the fame
of its great authors.  But it was Solon, and Pericles, and
Miltiades that created and saved and made great the city,
without which the poets could not have existed.  Mr. Tennyson
himself came nearer the truth than his friend, Mr. Gladstone,
when he said:

  He
  That, through the channels of the state,
  Conveys the people's wish, is great;
  His name is pure; his fame is free.

"There have been soldiers whose courage saved the day in great
decisive battles when the fate of nations hung in the scale,
yet whose most enduring monument was the column of smoke which
rose when their death shot was fired.  There have been statesmen
whose silent influence has decided the issue when the country
was at the parting of the ways, of whose service history takes
no heed.  The great Ohio Territory, now six imperial States,
was twice saved to freedom by the almost unnoticed action
of a single man.  With all respect for the man of letters,
we are not yet quite ready to admit that the trumpeter is
better than the soldier, or the painter greater than the lion.

"There is no need of many words to sum up the life and character
of Cushman Davis.  His life was in the daylight.  Minnesota
knew him.  His country knew him and loved him.  He was a good
soldier in his youth, and a great Senator in his maturer manhood.
What can be said more, or what can be said better, to sum
up the life of an American citizen? He offered his life for
his country when life was all before him.  His State and his
country rewarded him with their highest honor.  The great
orator and philosopher of Rome declared in his youth, and
repeated in his age, that death could not come prematurely
to a man who had been Consul.  This man surely might be accounted
ready to die.  He had discharged honorably life's highest
duty, and his cup of honor and of glory was full.

"We are thinking to-day of something more than a public sorrow.
We are mourning the loss of a close and delightful companionship,
a companionship which lightened public care and gave infinite
pleasure to private intercourse.  If he had never held office,
if his name had never been heard even beyond the boundaries
of a single municipality, he would have been almost anywhere
a favorite and foremost citizen.  He was, in the first place,
always a gentleman; and a true gentleman always gives tone
to any company in which he is found, whether it be among the
rulers of States or the humblest gathering of friendly neighbors.
Lord Erskine said on a great occasion:

"'It is impossible to define in terms the proper feelings
of a gentleman; but their existence has supported this country
for many ages, and she might perish if they were lost,'

"Certainly our friend had this quality.  He was everywhere
a gentleman.  He met every occasion in life with a simple
and quiet courtesy.  There was not much of deference in it.
There was no yielding or supplication or timidity in it.  I
do not think he ever asked favors, though no man was more
willing to grant them.  But there is something more than this
in the temper of which I am speaking.  The man who possesses
it gives unconsciously to himself or his associates tone to
every circle, as I just said, in which he is found.  So, wherever
he was, his manner or behavior prevailed, whatever might have
happened to the same men if they had been left alone.

"Senator Davis was a man who kept well his own counsel.  He
was a man to whom it was safe for other men to trust their
counsel.  His conversation, to which it was always a delight
to listen, had no gossip in it.  Still less had it ever anything
of ill nature or sarcasm.  He liked to share with a friend
the pleasure he took in finding some flower or gem of literature
which, for long ages till he found it in some out-of-the-
way nook, had--

  Blushed unseen,
  And wasted its sweetness on the desert air.

"He had what Jeremy Taylor calls, 'the great endearment of
prudent and temperate speech.'

"His conversation was sparkling and witty and full of variety,
but no spark from him was ever a cinder in the eye of his
friend.

"He had a learning rare among public men, and, for its variety,
rare, I think, among scholars.  He would bring out bits of
history, full of interest and instruction, from the most obscure
sources, in common conversation.  He was an excellent Latin
scholar.  He had read and mastered Tacitus, and a man who
has mastered Tacitus has had the best gymnastic training of
the intellect, both in vigor and style, which the resources
of all literature can supply.

"One secret of his great popularity with his companions here--
a popularity I think unexcelled, indeed, I incline to think
unequalled by that of any other man with whom I have served--
is that to which the late Justin Morrill owed so much.  He
never debated.  He rarely answered other men's arguments,
never with warmth or heat.  But he was exceedingly tenacious
of his own opinion.  He was, in the things he stood for, as
unyielding as flint and true as steel.  But his flint or steel
never struck out a spark by collision with any other.  He
spoke very rarely in debate in general; only when his official
place on his committee, or something which concerned his own
constituents especially, made speaking absolutely imperative.
Then he gave his opinion as a judge gives it, or as a delegate
to some great international council might be supposed to give
it; responsible for it himself, but undertaking no responsibility
for other men's opinion or conduct; never assuming that it
was his duty or within his power to convert, or change, or
instruct them, still less to chastise them.  Whether that
way be the best way for usefulness in a deliberative body,
especially in a legislative body of a great popular government,
I will not undertake now to say.  Certainly it is not the
common way here or elsewhere.  It is very rare indeed, that
any man possessing the great literary and oratorical power
of Mr. Davis, especially a man to whom nobody ever thought
of imputing timidity or undue desire to enjoy public favor,
or want of absolute confidence in his own opinions, will be
found to refrain from employing these qualities to persuade
or convince other men.

"He had a rare and exquisite gift which, if he had been a
man of letters and not a man engaged in a strenuous public
life, would have brought him great fame.  Once in a while
he said something in private, and more rarely, though once
or twice, in a public speech, which reminded you of the delicate
touch of Hawthorne.  His likening President Cleveland and
Mr. Blount, looking upon the late royalty of the Sandwich
Island with so much seriousness, to Don Quixote and Sancho
Panza taking in great earnest the spectacle of a theatrical
representation at a country fair and eager to rescue the distressed
damsel, was one of the most exquisite felicities of the literature
of the Senate.

"He had great pride in his ancestry, and was a great lover
of the history of New England and Plymouth, from which they
came, though he never gave himself airs on account of it.
He was a descendant of Robert Cushman, the preacher of the
Pilgrims, whose service was in a thousand ways of such value
to the little colony at Plymouth.  Yet it had never happened
to him to visit the scenes with which the feet of his ancestors
had been so familiar, until a few years ago he did me the
honor to be my guest in Massachusetts, and spent a few days
in visiting her historic places.  He gazed upon Boston and
Plymouth and Concord reverently as ever Moslem gazed upon
Mecca or the feet of palmer stood by the holy sepulchre.  That
week to him was crowded with a delight with which few other
hours in his life could compare.  I had hoped that it might
be my fortune and his that he might visit Massachusetts again,
that her people might gather in their cities to do him honor,
and might learn to know him better, and might listen to the
sincere eloquence of his voice.  But it was ordered otherwise.

"There are other things his country had hoped for him.  She
had hoped a longer and higher service, perhaps the highest
service of all.  But the fatal and inexorable shaft has stricken
him down in the full vigor of a yet strenuous manhood.  The
great transactions in which he had borne so large a part still
remain incomplete and their event is still uncertain.

"There is a painting which a great Italian master left unfinished.
The work was taken up and completed by a disciple.  The finished
picture bears this inscription:  'What Titian left unfinished,
Palma reverently completed, and dedicated to God.' So may
our beloved Republic find always, when one servant leaves
his work unfinished, another who will take it up and dedicate
it to the country and to God."


CHAPTER XVIII
GEORGE BANCROFT

One of the most delightful friendships of my life was with
George Bancroft, the famous historian.  I never knew him
until I went to Washington in 1877.  But we established at
once, as a matter of course, the relation of an intimate friendship.
He was born in Worcester, to which he was much attached, though
he had spent little of his life there after he had left college.
Mrs. Bancroft had known my oldest brother and sister intimately,
when she lived in Boston.  I had learned from Mr. Emerson,
who rarely gave his praise lightly, as well as from my own
study, to value Mr. Bancroft very highly as a historian,
which he soon found out.

I almost always found him waiting for me on the doorstep
of my dwelling when I came from church the first Sunday after
I reached Washington, at the beginning of a session.  I have
enjoyed many hours at his table, rendered delightful by the
conversation of the eminent guests whom he gathered there,
but by no conversation more delightful than his own.

Mr. Bancroft had two enthusiasms which made him a great historian--
an enthusiasm for truth which spared no labor and left no
stores of information unsearched, and an enthusiastic love
of country.  He believed that the great emotions and motives
which move a free people are the noble, not the mean motives.
He has written and interpreted the history of the United States
in that faith.  I believe his work will endure so long as
the love of liberty shall endure.  I gave my estimate of him
at a meeting of the American Antiquarian Society, of which
we were both chosen Vice-Presidents, in October, 1880, just
after the completion of his eightieth year and of his "History
of the United States," as follows:

"It is not usual to discuss the report of the committee to
propose a list of officers.  But one of the names reported
gives special interest to the occasion.  On the third of this
month of October, our honored associate Mr. Bancroft completed
his eightieth year.  At the same time he completed his 'History
of the United States' to the formation of the Federal Constitution.

"This Society, while it is national and continental in the
scope of its investigations, strikes down its roots into the
soil of this locality, where its founder dwelt, and where its
collections are kept.

"For both these reasons we cherish our relations to Mr. Bancroft.
He was born within a few rods of this spot.  He is descended
by the mother's side from an old Worcester County family who
were conspicuous in the administration of its public affairs
long before the Revolution.  His father was one of the six
persons who petitioned for the act of incorporation of this
Society, and one of its first members.  His brother by marriage,
Governor Davis, was your predecessor in the President' chair.

"These reasons would be enough to induce us to value our relation.
But he has filled a highly honorable and conspicuous place
in public life.  He is, I believe, the senior person living
who has been a member of the Cabinet.  He is the senior among
living persons who have filled important diplomatic stations.
He has represented the United States at Berlin and at St. James.

"His history is, and doubtless will be, the great standard
authority upon the important period which it covers.  He
is the only person living whose judgment would change the
place in public estimation held by any of the great statesmen
of the Revolutionary times.  He has had the rare good fortune
among men of letters, to have proposed to himself a great
task, requiring a lifetime for its accomplishment, the successful
achievement of which is enough to make any life illustrious,
and to have lived to complete it with powers of body and mind
undiminished.  It is his fate to know, while alive, the estimate
in which he will be held by posterity.  In his case, that
knowledge can be only a source of pleasure and satisfaction.

"In this Mr. Bancroft resembles Gibbon.  We all remember
Gibbon's delightful account of the completion of his great
work.

"In another thing, alone among great historians, Mr. Bancroft
resembles Gibbon.  As an artist he has accomplished that most
difficult task of composing a history made up of many separate
threads, which must keep on side by side, yet all be subordinate
to one main and predominant stream.  But his narrative never
loses its constant and fascinating interest.  No other historian,
I believe, except Gibbon, has attempted this without becoming
insufferably dull.

"Mr. Bancroft tells the story of thirteen States, separate,
yet blending into one National life.  It is one of the most
wonderful things in our history, that the separate States
having so much in common, have preserved so completely, even
to the present time, their original and individual characteristics.
Rhode Island, held in the hollow of the hand of Massachusetts;
Connecticut, so placed that one would think it would become
a province of New York; Delaware, whose chief city is but
twenty-five miles from Philadelphia, yet preserve their distinctive
characteristics as if they were states of the continent of
Europe, whose people speak a different language.  This shows
how perfectly state rights and state freedom are preserved
in spite of our National union, how little the power at the
centre interferes with the important things that affect the
character of a people.  Why is it that little Delaware remains
Delaware in spite of Pennsylvania, and little Rhode Island
remains Rhode Island notwithstanding her neighbor Massachusetts?

  What makes the meadow flower its bloom unfold?
  Because the lovely little flower is free
  Down to its roots, and in that freedom bold.
  And so the grandeur of the forest tree
  Comes, not from casting in a formal mould,
  But from its own divine vitality.

"But Mr. Bancroft is more fortunate than Gibbon.  Gibbon wrote
of decline, of decay, of dissolution, and death; of the days,
to use his own words, 'when giants were becoming pigmies.'
Bancroft tells the story of birth, and growth, and youth,
and life.  His name is to be inseparably associated with a
great and interesting period in the world's history; with
what in the proud imagination of his countrymen must ever
be the greatest and most interesting of all periods, when
pigmy villages were becoming giant States.  I am sure that
it is a delight to this assembly of distinguished scholars,
assembled near his birthplace, to send him, at the completion
of his great work, and of his eightieth year, their cordial
salutation."

I went to see Mr. Bancroft on the evening of the last Sunday
in December, 1890.  He was sitting in his library up stairs.
He received me in his usual emphatic manner, taking both my
hands and saying, "My dear friend, how glad I am to see you!"
He was alone.  He evidently knew me when I went in, and inquired
about Worcester, as he commonly did, and expressed his amazement
at its remarkable growth.

I stayed with him about twenty or thirty minutes.  The topics
of our conversation were, I believe, suggested by me, and
the whole conversation was one which gave evidence of full
understanding on his part of what we were talking about.  It
was not merely an old man's memory of the past, but the fresh
and vigorous thought on new topics which were suggested to
him in the course of the conversation.  I think he exhibited
a quickness and vigor of thought and intelligence and spoke
with a beauty of diction that no man I know could have surpassed.

I asked him if he could account for the interest in historical
study among the older Harvard graduates, and mentioned the
fact that the principal historians of this country, including
himself, Prescott, Sparks, Motley, Palfrey and Parkman, were
all Harvard men and were eminent at a time when there were
scarcely any other eminent historical scholars in America.
He did not directly answer this question, but said that his
own inclination toward history, he thought, was due very much
to the influence of his father.  He said his father would
have been a very eminent historian, if he had had material
at his command, and that he had a remarkably judicious mind.

He spoke of some clergymen, especially the Unitarian clergymen,
so many of whom belonged to Harvard at his time.  He said
he had little sympathy for the Unitarianism of his day, "for
its theology, no; for its spirituality, yes."

He asked me about the Election Bill pending in the Senate.
I spoke of the great storm of abuse I had had to encounter
for advocating it, but said I thought on the whole the feeling
between the different sections of the country and different
political parties was better than it ever had been before
in this country, and much better than that which now existed
between different political parties in foreign countries.
He cordially agreed to this, and made some observations which
I do not now recall, but which were interesting and bright.

After we had talked together for some time, he said:  "My
memory is very poor:  I cannot remember your first name."
I said:  "It is the same as yours, Mr. Bancroft--George."
He paused a moment with an amused and puzzled look, and said:
"What is your last name?"  He had evidently known me very
well during most of the preceding part of the interview.

I told his son about this conversation the day after Mr.
Bancroft's death.  He said that the presence of a visitor
acted in this way as a stimulant, but that he had not lately
shown much intelligence in the family, seeming lost and feeble.


CHAPTER XIX
VISITS TO ENGLAND
[1860, 1868, 1871]

I was born within a mile of the spot where the War of the
Revolution began.  My ancestors and other kindred on both
sides took an active and prominent part in the struggle with
England.  I am descended from the early Puritans of Massachusetts
in every line of descent.  So it will readily be believed
that all my feeling and sympathy have been on the side of
my country in the great controversy with England, which began
with the exile of the Pilgrims in 1620 and continued, with
little interruption, until our last great quarrel with her,
which ended with the arbitration at Geneva.  Yet I am a passionate
lover of England.  Before I ever went abroad, I longed to
visit the places famous in her history, as a child longs to
go home to his birthplace.

I have visited Europe six times.  On each occasion I devoted
the largest part of my time to Great Britain.  The desire
to see England again has increased with every visit.  Certainly
there is nothing like England, and there never has been anything
like England in the world.  Her wonderful history, her wonderful
literature, the beauty of her architecture, the historic and
poetic associations which cluster about every street and river
and mountain and valley, her vigorous life, the sweetness
and beauty of her women, the superb manhood of her men, her
navy, her gracious hospitality, her courage and her lofty
pride--although some single race of people may have excelled
here in a single particular--make up a combination never equalled
in the world.  I am, of course, not to be understood to bring
my own country into the comparison.

The first time I went abroad was in 1860.  I had for a companion
my friend from infancy, George M. Brooks, of Concord.  We
travelled like a couple of Bohemians, never riding where we
could walk; lunching or dining where he happened to find ourselves
when we were hungry; taking second or third class carriages
on the railroads, and getting into conversation with anybody
who would talk to us.  I doubt whether I shall ever have in
this world, or in another, a sensation more delicious than
that I had when the old steamer, "America," steamed up the
Channel toward the mouth of the Mersey, with the green shores
of Ireland on one side and England on the other.  I am afraid
if I were to relate the story of that journey, it would be
only to please myself by reviving its recollections, and not
for the delight of my readers, so many of whom have a similar
memory of their own.

We heard John Bright and Lord John Russell and Lord Palmerston
in a great debate in the House of Commons on the paper duties,
and saw Lord Brougham walking backward and forward on the
terrace by Brougham Castle, near Penrith.  We saw Edinburgh
and the Trosachs, and Abbotsford and Stirling.  I had been
a loving reader of Scott from my childhood, and was almost
as much at home in Scotland as if I had been born in the Canongate
or the Saltmarket.  I had had a special fancy for reading
and studying topographical books on London, and found myself,
pretty soon, so much at home there that I think I could have
made a very decent living as a guide.

We spent a month in Switzerland.  I made the journey over
the mountain passes on foot, keeping up with my companion,
who had a horse or a mule.  I could walk twenty-five or thirty
miles a day without great fatigue.

Augustus Flagg of the famous book-selling firm of Little
& Brown, with whom I had dealt a great deal, was on the
ship when I went out.  He went abroad to purchase books for
his house.  In those days the book-stalls in London were mines
of rare treasures.  They had not been much examined by collectors
or dealers, and the men who kept them did not know the value
of books that were almost priceless in the eyes of virtuosos.
Mr. Flagg and I spent together a good many days in ransacking
the old book-stalls and shops, some of them in out-of-the-
way places in the old city, even below the Tower.  I could
not afford to buy a great many books then.  But I knew something
about them, and the experience was like having in my hands
the costliest rubies or diamonds.

The journey each way, which now takes six or seven days, then
took fourteen.  The Cunard steamer, whose successor, with
its bilge keel and its vastly greater size, is as comfortable,
even in very rough weather, as the first class city hotel,
was as disagreeable in rough weather, to a man unaccustomed
to the ocean, as a fishing smack.  But the passengers got
well acquainted with one another.  There was agreeable society
on board, and the days passed pleasantly.

Among the passengers was Joseph Coolidge of Boston, father
of Thomas Jefferson Coolidge, late Minister to France.  Mr.
Coolidge had been a great traveller in his day; had had some
commercial occupations in the East, and was very pleasant
company.  His wife was a granddaughter of Mr. Jefferson.
He told me that two of Mr. Jefferson's daughters--or granddaughters,
I am not now absolutely sure which--had kept school and earned
money, which they had applied to the payment of Mr. Jefferson's
debts.  The story was highly creditable to these Virginia
ladies, who might well have thought that their illustrious
ancestor's service might excuse his family from making sacrifices
in discharge of such an obligation, if his countrymen at large
did not feel its force.

I went over pretty much the same ground in 1868 with three
ladies.  I made both these journeys as an ordinary sightseer.
I took few letters of introduction.  I did not deliver those,
except in one or two cases to American gentlemen living abroad.

One experience in this latter journey, however, it may be
worth while to tell.  I had a very pleasant friendship with
Henry T. Parker, a Boston man and a graduate of Harvard,
who had a comfortable property and had married an English
lady and had settled in London.  He found an occupation,
congenial to his own taste, in buying books, as agent of some
of the great libraries in the United States, including the
Harvard Library and the Boston City Library.  He was an intimate
friend of Mr. Cox, the accomplished Librarian of the Bodleian,
to whom he gave us letters.

Mr. Cox treated us with special courtesy and showed us many
treasures of the Library, especially some wonderful illuminated
manuscripts.  One of them, the Duc de Monpensier, who had
been at Oxford shortly before and who was an authority in
such matters, felt confident was illustrated by Raphael.  Mr.
Cox had discovered, just before I was there, in some crypt
where it had lain unknown for two hundred years, a touching
letter from Clarendon, who was Chancellor of the University,
which I think will move the heart of every man who loves the
college where he was educated.  The letter was written by
Lord Clarendon just after he had landed at Calais, a hopeless
exile, on his last flight from the country to which he was
never again to return.  The great orator, statesman, historian,
lawyer, judge,--counsellor, companion and ancestor of monarchs,--
flying for his life, in his old age, into a foreign land,
from the court of which, for a generation, he had been the
ornament and head, soon as his feet touch a place of safety,
thinks of his University.  See the noble heart through the
simple and stately rhetoric:

GOOD MR. VICE-CHANCELLOR;

Having found it necessary to transport myselfe out of England,
and not knowing when it shall please God that I shall returne
againe, it becomes me to take care that the University may
not be without the service of a person better able to be of
use to them than I am like to be, and I doe therefore hereby
surrender the office of chancellor into the hand of said University,
to the end that they may make choyce of some other person
better qualified to assist and protect them, than I am.  I
am sure he can never be more affectionate to it.  I desire
you as the last suite I am likely to make to you, to believe
that I doe not fly my country for guilt, and how passionately
soever I am pursued, that I have not done anything to make
the University ashamed of me, or to repent the good opinion
they had once of me, and though I must have no mention in
your publique devotions, (which I have always exceedingly
valued,) I hope I shall always be remembered in your private
prayers, as

  Good Mr. Vice-Chancellor,
  Your affectionate servant,
  CLARENDON.
  CALAIS, this 7-17 Dec., 1667.

In 1871 I went abroad alone.  I spent the whole time in England,
except for a brief visit to Scotland.  My purpose in going
away was to get a vacation.  I meant to do some studying in
the British Museum, especially to make a thorough study of
the conditions and economic principles affecting the strife
between capital and labor, which then threatened both this
country and England.  I got a collection of the authorities
and the references.  But I did not find that I got a great
deal of light from anything that had been written or said
so far.  I made a few very agreeable acquaintances.  I had
a letter to Thomas Hughes, and visited at his house.  I found
George W. Smalley, who had been a pupil in my office, established
in a delightful house near London.  He seemed to be on terms
of intimacy with the famous Englishmen who were the leaders
of both political parties, and with many eminent men of letters.
I spent a delightful evening with Mr. Hughes at a club which
I think was called the European Club, or something like that,
where the members smoked clay pipes and drank beer.  There
seemed to be no other provision for the refreshment of the
body or soul.  But the conversation was very pleasant.  The
members sat together about a table, and the conversation was
quite general and very bright.  The talk turned, during the
evening, on Scotsmen.  The Englishmen present seemed to have
something left of the old prejudice about Scotland with which
Dr. Johnson was possessed.  They imputed to the modern Scotsmen
the same thrifty habit and capacity for looking after himself
that prevailed a hundred years before, when Dr. Johnson and
John Wilkes, who quarrelled about everything else, became
reconciled when they united in abuse of their Northern neighbors.
Sir Frederick Pollock cited a marginal note from the report
of some old criminal case, to the following effect: "Possession
of property in Scotland evidence of stealing in England."

I was guilty of one piece of stupid folly.  Mr. Hughes kindly
proposed to take me to see Carlyle.  This was not very long
after our war, when our people were full of indignation at
Carlyle's bitter and contemptuous speech about us, especially
his "American Iliad in a Nutshell."  I was a little doubtful
about what sort of a reception I should get, and declined
the invitation.  I have bitterly regretted this ever since.
My brother visited Carlyle about 1846, bearing with him a
letter from Emerson.  Carlyle was very civil to him, and liked
him very much, as appears by a letter from him to Mr. Emerson.

During the visit I heard a great debate between Gladstone
and Disraeli.  A brief account of it will be found in the
chapter on "Some Famous Orators I have Heard."

A friend in Worcester gave me a letter to Mr. Wornum, the
Director of the National Gallery, with whom he had been a
fellow-pupil at Kensington.  Mr. Wornum received me with great
cordiality.  He asked me to come to the Gallery the next
day, when it would be closed to the public.  He said he would
be glad to show it to me then, when we would be free of interruption.
He was the author of what I understand to be an excellent
history of painting, and was regarded as the most competent
judge in Europe of the value and merit of paintings.  I suppose
Parliament would at any time, on his sole recommendation,
have given ten or twenty or perhaps fifty thousand guineas
for a masterpiece.  I shall never forget the delight of that
day.  He told me the history of the great paintings in the
National Gallery, some of which had belonged to monarchs,
popes, noblemen or famous merchants of almost all the countries
in Europe.  He said that while there were many larger galleries,
the National Gallery was the best in the world as affording
the best and most characteristic examples of every school
of painting.  I cannot remember much that was said in that
long day, interrupted only by a pleasant lunch together.  But
it was a day full of romance.  It was as if I had had in my
hand the crown jewels of every potentate in the world, and
somebody had told me the history of each gem.  For this picture
Francis the First, or Charles V., or Henry VIII. had been
bidders.  This had belonged to Lorenzo de Medici, or Pope
Leo X.  This had come from the famous collection of Charles
I., scattered through Europe on his death; and this had belonged
to some nobleman whose name was greater than that of monarchs.

Mr. Wornum spoke of his treasures with an enthusiasm which
no worshipper at the throne of any Saint or Divinity could
surpass.  That day was among the few chiefest delights of
my life.


CHAPTER XX
VISITS TO ENGLAND
1892

My next visit to England was in the spring of 1892.  The
winter before, I had a severe attack of iritis, which left my
eyes in a very demoralized condition.  I did not find much
relief in this country, not, I suppose, because of want of
skill in our ophthalmic surgeons, but because of the impossibility
of getting any rest anywhere where I could be reached by telephone
or telegraph.  To a person who can bear an ordinary voyage
there is no retreat like an ocean steamer.  Telephone, telegraph,
daily paper; call or visit of friend, client, or constituent;
daily mail--sometimes itself, to a busy public man, enough
for a hard day's work--all these are forgotten.  You spend
your ten days in an infinite quiet like that of Heaven.  You
sit in your deck-chair with the soft sea breeze on your forehead,
as the mighty ocean cradle rocks you, and see the lace of
an exquisite beauty that no Tyrian weaver ever devised, breaking
over the blue or purple waves, with their tints that no Tyrian
dye ever matched.  Ah! Marconi, Marconi, could not you let
us alone, and leave the tired brain of humanity one spot
where this "hodge-podge of business and trouble and care"
could not follow us and find us out?

On this journey I visited England, France and Switzerland.
It so happened that I had had a good deal to do with the appointment
of our Ministers to these three countries.  Colonel John D.
Washburn, a very accomplished and delightful gentleman, now
dead, had been a pupil of mine as a law student.  He lived
in Worcester and had been a very eminent member of the Massachusetts
Legislature.  I think he would have been Governor of the State
and had a very brilliant career but for a delicacy of organization
which made him break down in health when under any severe
strain of responsibility, especially such as involved antagonism
and conflict.  He was of a very friendly, gentle disposition,
and disliked to be attacked or to attack other men.  I told
Mr. Blaine, the Secretary of State when Mr. Harrison's Administration
came in, that I had but one favor to ask of it; that was,
that he should send Washburn as Minister to Switzerland.  I
had two or three very pleasant days with him at Berne.  But
he had sent his family away and was preparing to resign his
place.  So I had not much opportunity of seeing Switzerland
under his guidance.

Thomas Jefferson Coolidge, then Minister to France, had also
been appointed on my very earnest recommendation.  He was
a great-grandson of Thomas Jefferson, a very able business
man, highly esteemed throughout the country.  His guidance
was implicitly followed by many people in important business
transactions.  He had had the charge of the financial affairs
of some large manufacturing corporations, and was understood
to have extricated the Northern Pacific Railroad out of some
serious difficulties, into which it fell again after he left
its control.  He had been a Democrat.  But he had seen the
importance of the protective policy to American interests,
as would naturally be expected of a descendant of that high
protectionist, Thomas Jefferson.  He had no sympathies with
any measures that would debase or unsettle the currency, and
set his face and gave his powerful influence against all forms
of fiat or irredeemable paper money, and the kindred folly
of the free coinage of silver by this country alone, without
the concurrence of the commercial nations of the world.

Soon after Mr. Harrison's Administration began, I received
a message about nine o'clock one evening, asking me to go
to the White House at once.  I obeyed the summons.  The President
said he desired, if I had no objection, to send in the name
of Dr. Loring of Massachusetts, as Minister to Portugal.  I
told him that I had no objection whatever; that Dr.  Loring
was an able man of agreeable manners, and had performed admirably
every public duty he had undertaken.  I said that the Doctor
had felt a little disturbed, I thought, that I had refused
to call a meeting of the Massachusetts delegation to press
his name upon the President for a Cabinet office, to which
President Harrison replied, "I put my foot on that pretty
quick."  Dr. Loring had been a great friend and supporter
of Mr. Blaine, the Secretary of State.  I conjectured, although
the President did not say so, that the choice of Dr. Loring
had been made at the Secretary's instance.

The President then said that he wanted to talk with me about
the English Mission, which had troubled him a good deal.  He
mentioned the names of several prominent men in different
parts of the country, including Robert Lincoln and Mr. Jewett,
an eminent lawyer in Chicago, whose name was earnestly pressed
upon him by the Senators from Illinois.  I said that I had
known Mr. Lincoln pretty well when he was in President Garfield's
and Mr. Arthur's Cabinet, and thought very highly of him.
He was a very modest man indeed, never pressing any claim
to public consideration or office, either on his own account
or as his father's son, and never seeking responsibility.
But I had noticed that when he had anything to say or anything
to do, he always said or did the wisest and best thing to be
said or done under the circumstances.  I do not know how
much influence what I said had, but it seemed to gratify
President Harrison exceedingly, and he stated that he was
strongly inclined to appoint Mr. Lincoln.

I was told the next morning he sent for the two Illinois
Senators, and told them that he had made up his mind to nominate
Mr. Lincoln, and that one of them, Senator Farwell, was exceedingly
offended.  He was also much disturbed by President Harrison's
attitude in regard to the appointment of the postmaster at
Chicago.  The result was that when President Harrison's name
came up for another nomination, Mr. Farwell was opposed to
him, and when he was with difficulty nominated for reelection,
the State of Illinois voted for Cleveland.  Senator Cullom,
though not liking very well to have his opinion disregarded,
was more discreet.  He did not see fit to make the exercise
of the President's rightful and Constitutional prerogative
a reason for breaking off his friendly relations with the
Administration, with whose principles he was in full accord.
This is an instance of President Harrison's want of tact.
I have little doubt that if, before finally announcing his
intention, he had sent for the Illinois Senators--as Abraham
Lincoln would have done, or as President McKinley would have
done--gone over the whole ground with them, and told them
his reasons and desire, they would have cheerfully acquiesced
in the conclusion to which he had come, and their friendship
with him would have been strengthened and not weakened.

After saying what was to be said about the English Mission,
I said to President Harrison:  "We have a gentleman in Massachusetts,
whom I think it is very desirable indeed to place in some
important public service; that is Thomas Jefferson Coolidge.
He is a great-grandson of Mr. Jefferson." I said to the President
the substance of what I have just stated above, about Mr.
Coolidge.  I added that while Mr. Coolidge would be an excellent
person for the English Mission, which his uncle Mr. Stevenson
had held, yet, of course, I did not think, under the circumstances,
that it would be proper to make another important diplomatic
appointment from Massachusetts just then; but I hoped that
an opportunity might come later.  President Harrison seemed
to be much impressed with the suggestion, and said that he
would bear it in mind.

When I went back to my room, it occurred to me that I had better
speak to Mr. Blaine about it.  If he first heard of it from
the President he might think that I was trying to deal with
the President about matters in his Department over his head
and without consulting him.  So I went round to the State
Department early the next morning, and told Mr. Blaine what
I had said to the President.  I found that he knew all about
Mr. Coolidge.  I inadvertently spoke of him as grandson of
Mr. Jefferson.  Blaine immediately corrected me by saying,
"great-grandson."  He seemed to like the plan very well.

Nothing came of the matter at that time.  But later, when
the Pan-American Commission was appointed, the President,
of his own motion, appointed Mr. Coolidge as one of the American
representatives.  Later, I happened to be one day at the White
House, and President Harrison told me that Whitelaw Reid had
announced his intention of resigning the French Mission before
long.  I reminded him of our conversation about Mr. Coolidge,
and urged his name very strongly on him.  He hesitated a good
deal.  I got the approval of every New England Senator but
one to the proposal.  The President still hesitated and seemed
inclined to appoint Mr. Andrew D. White.  But he finally
yielded to the urgency for Mr. Coolidge.  I should have been
sorry if anything I had done had resulted in depriving the
country of the service of Andrew D. White.  I suppose him
to be one of the very best representatives we ever had abroad.
But an opportunity came soon after, to send him first to
Russia, and then to Germany, where he has represented what is
best in the character, ability, desire, interest and scholarship
of the American people.

So we had two first-rate representatives abroad instead of
one.  Mr. Coolidge discharged his functions to the satisfaction
of the Administration, and to the universal approval of his
countrymen.

He received me when I visited Paris with a very cordial and
delightful hospitality.  I had the pleasure of meeting at
his house at dinner M. Ribot, then Prime Minister of France
and afterward President of the French Republic, and several
others of the leading men in their public life.  But I spoke
French very imperfectly indeed, and understood it much less,
when spoken by a Parisian.  The conversation was, in general,
in French.  So I got very little knowledge of them by being
in their society.

My visit in England gave me a good deal more to remember.
Mr. Lincoln also received me with great cordiality.  He gave
a dinner at which several of the leaders of the Liberal Party
were present; among them, Sir William Vernon Harcourt.  I
had letters to Sir William Vernon Harcourt, and to Lord Rosebery,
and to Lord Coleridge, Lord Chief Justice of England.  Sir
William Vernon Harcourt and Lord Rosebery each called on me,
and spent an hour at my room.  But Parliament was dissolved
just at that time, so the Liberal leaders had at once to begin
the campaign which resulted in Mr. Gladstone's victory.  So
I had no opportunity to make an intimate acquaintance with
either of them.  I owed to Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes an introduction
to John Bellows, a Quaker, a most delightful gentleman, the
first authority in his time on the Roman antiquities of Great
Britain, a fine classical scholar and learned in old English
literature and in the languages from which came the roots
of our English tongue.  I formed with him a close friendship
which ended only with his death, in 1902.  A year before he
died he visited me in my home at Worcester, and received the
degree of Master of Arts from Harvard.  Mr. Bellows is the
author of the wonderful French Dictionary.

I spent a few days with Lord Coleridge in Devon.  His house
at Ottery St. Mary's is close to the spot where Samuel Taylor
Coleridge was born.  I met there several of the race.  I do
not know whether they were living in the neighborhood or happened
to be there on a visit.

I found in the church, close by, the tomb of John Sherman,
one of my own kindred, I have no doubt, of the race which
came from Colchester and Dedham in Essex, and Yaxley in Suffolk.

The Lord Chief Justice was much distressed lest he had done
wrong in complying with General Butler's invitation to visit
him at Lowell.  He said that many of his American friends
had treated him coldly afterward, and that his friend Richard
Dana, whom he highly esteemed, had refused to call upon him
for that reason.

I told him he did absolutely right, in my opinion.  I said
that General Butler was then Governor of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, and that an eminent person, holding a high
official character, from a foreign country, could not undertake
to question the personal character, or the title to be considered
gentlemen, of the men whom the American people put into their
high places.

Lord Coleridge said he received fifty guineas every morning
for his services in the Tichborne trial.  "But," he added,
"my general practice in my profession was so much interrupted
by it that I could not have got along that year but for my
salary as Attorney-General."

He spoke with great pride of his cross-examination of the
Claimant.  He said one of the papers had complained that
his cross-examination did no good to his case whatever.  "But
I made him admit that he sent his photograph to some person,
as the photograph of Arthur Orton."  He said the common people
in England still held to the belief that the Claimant was
the genuine Sir Roger Tichborne, and, by a curious contradiction,
this feeling was inspired largely by their sympathy with him
as a man of humble birth.  I said, "Yes, I think that is true.
I heard somebody, a little while ago, say that they heard
two people talking in the cars, and one of them said to the
other, 'They wouldn't give him the estate, because he was
the son of a poor butcher.'"  This very much amused the Lord
Chief Justice.

I asked him about the story I had heard and had verified
some time before, of the connection, in the person of Lady
Rolle, between two quite remote periods.  Lady Rolle was
alive until 1887, maintaining her health so that she gave
dinner parties in that year, shortly before she died.  She was
the widow of Mr. Rolle, afterward Lord Rolle, who made a
violent attack on Charles James Fox in 1783.  He was then
thirty-two years old.  From him the famous satire, the Rolliad,
took its name.  When he went to pay his homage to Queen Victoria
at her Coronation in Westminster Abbey, he was quite feeble,
and rolled down the steps of the throne.  The young Queen
showed her kindness of heart by jumping up and going to help
him in person.  Some of the English told the foreigners present
at the ceremonial that that was part of the ceremony, and
that the Rolles held their lands on the tenure of going through
that performance at every coronation.  Lady Rolle was married
to her husband in 1820.  He was then sixty-nine, and she a
young girl of twenty years old.  He was eighty or ninety years
old when he died, and she survived as his widow for many years.
Something came up on the subject of longevity which induced
me to refer to this story and ask Lord Coleridge if it were
true.  We were then riding out together; "Yes," said he, "there,"
pointing to a dwelling-place in full sight, "is the house
where she lived."

His Lordship asked me about an American Judge with whom he
had some acquaintance.  I told him that I thought his reputation
was rather that of a jurist than a Judge.  "Oh, yes," said
he, "a jurist is a man who knows something about the law of
every country but his own."

Lord Coleridge had a good reputation as a story-teller.  It
was pleasant to get an auditor who seemed to like to hear
the stories which have got rather too commonplace to be worth
telling over here.  He had a great admiration for President
Lincoln, and was eager to hear anything anybody had to tell
of him.  I told him the famous story of Lincoln's reply to
the man who had left with him his poem to read, when he gave
it back.  "If anybody likes that sort of thing, it's just
the sort of thing they'd like."  I overheard his Lordship,
as he circulated about the room, a little while afterward,
repeating the story to various listeners.

He thought Matthew Arnold the greatest living Englishman.
He spoke with great respect of Carlyle.  He said: "Emerson
was an imitator of Carlyle, and got his thoughts from him."
I could not stand that.  It seemed to me that he had probably
never read a page of Emerson in his life, and had got his
notion from some writer for a magazine, before either of these
great men was well known.  I took the liberty of saying, with
some emphasis, "Emerson was a far profounder and saner intellect
than Carlyle."  To which he said, "Why, what do you say?"
I repeated what I had said, and he received the statement
with great politeness, but, of course, without assent.

During this summer I paid a visit to Moyle's Court, near
Southampton, formerly owned by Lady Alice Lisle, whose daughter
married Leonard Hoar, President of Harvard College.  Leonard
Hoar was the brother of my ancestor, John Hoar of Concord,
and the son of Charles Hoar, Sheriff of Gloucester.  There
is a statement in an old account of some Puritan worthies
that I have seen, to the effect that John Hoar and Leonard
married sisters.  If that be true, John Hoar's wife, Alice,
was a daughter and namesake of Lady Alice Lisle.  Although
I should like to believe it, I am afraid that the claim cannot
be made good.  Lady Alice Lisle was a lady of large wealth
and good lineage.  Her husband was John Lord Lisle, who was
Lord Justice under Cromwell, and one of the Judges in the
trial of Charles I.  He drew the indictment and sentence of
the King, and sat next to Bradshaw at the trial, and directed
and prompted him in difficult matters.  He was murdered one
Sunday morning on his way to church when in exile at Lausanne,
Switzerland, on the Lake of Geneva, by three ruffians, said
to be sent for that purpose by Queen Henrietta.  Lady Alice
Lisle was a victim of the brutality of Jeffries.  After Monmouth's
rebellion and defeat, she gave shelter and food to two fugitives
from Monmouth's army.  The report of her trial is in Howell.
There was no proof that she knew that they were fugitives
from Monmouth's army, although she supposed one of them was
a Dissenting minister.  There had been no conviction of the
principals, which the English law required before an accessory
after the fact could be found guilty.  She suggested this
point at the trial, but it was overruled by Jeffries.  He
conducted the case with infinite brutality.  She was a kindly
old lady, of more than seventy years.  She slept during part
of the trial, probably being fatigued by the journey, in which
she had been carried on horseback from Moyle's Court to Winchester,
and the sleepless nights which would naturally have followed.
She was sentenced to be burned at the stake.  But the sentence
was commuted to beheading, at the intercession of the gentry
of the neighborhood.  She had disapproved of the execution
of the King; said she had always prayed for him, and had a
son in the King's army.  Macaulay's account of the story is
familiar to all readers of English history.

I was received at the old house with great kindness by Mrs.
Fane, wife of the present proprietor.  It is a beautiful
old house with carved oak partitions, with a dining room
rising to the roof.  Lady Lisle's chamber and the place where
the two fugitives were concealed are still shown.  Mrs. Fane
had gathered some local traditions which are not found in
print.  One old lady, who had been well known to persons now
living, had received some of them from her grandmother, who
was cotemporary with Lady Alice.

The lady was very popular with her tenants in the neighborhood.
The messenger who came from Winchester to arrest her took
her on horseback behind him, according to the custom of the
time.  The horse cast a shoe.  The messenger was for pressing
on without regard to the suffering of the animal.  She insisted
that he should stop and have the horse shod.  The man roughly
refused.  She said:  "I have made no outcry, on my own account.
But everybody here loves me.  If you do not stop, I shall
cry out.  You will never get away with me alive." The fellow
was frightened and consented to stop at a smithy.  When the
smith had finished his work, Lady Lisle said: "I will be back
this way in two or three days, and I will pay you."  To this
the messenger said:  "Yes, you will be back this way in two
or three days, but without your head."

The headless body was brought back from Winchester after the
trial.  The next day, when the household were at dinner, a
man came to the outside and thrust into the dining room window
a basket, containing her head.  This was said to be for "greater
indignity."

Lady Lisle had known Hicks, one of the persons whom she relieved,
before.  When the court was sitting for the trial of Charles
I., she went up to London to expostulate with her husband.
She arrived at his lodgings just as he was setting out in
a procession, with some state, for Westminster Hall, where
the trial was held.  As she approached to speak to him, he
did not recognize her in the soiled dress in which she had
travelled, and motioned her away rather roughly.  It was said
that she was overcome by the press in the crowd and fell to
the ground.  Hicks, who was a Dissenting minister, raised
her up and took her to his own lodging near by in the Strand.
She said to him that she could not recompense him there, but
if he would come to Hampshire, or to the Isle of Wight, where
she had property, she would be glad to repay him.

Saturday, October 22, 1892, with Mrs. Hoar and her sister,
Mrs. Rice, I went from Southampton to Ringwood, about twenty
miles, and thence drove to Ellingham Church, about two miles
and a half.  The church is a small but very beautiful structure
of stone, with a small wooden belfry.  The tomb of Lady Alice
Lisle is a heavy, flat slab of gray stone, raised about two
or three feet from the ground, bearing the following inscription:

  Here lies Dame Alicia Lisle
  and her daughter Ann Harfeld
  who dyed the 17th of Feb. 1703-4
  Alicia Lisle dyed the
  second of Sept. 1685.

It is close to the wall of the church, on the right of the
porch.  In the church is seen the old Lisle pew of carved
oak, now the pew of the Earl of Normanton.  Opposite the
pew is the pulpit, also of carved black oak, apparently ancient.
The church contains a tablet to the memory of the former owner
of Moyle's Court, who died in 1622.

Moyle's Court is about a mile and a half from Ellingham Church.
The drive is along a beautiful lane shaded by trees whose
branches meet from the two sides, through a beautiful and
fertile country, adorned by herds of fine cattle.  Moyle's
Court is a large two-story building, consisting of two square
wings connected by the main building.  The wings project from
the main building in front, but the whole forms a continuous
line in the rear.  As you approach it, you pass numerous
heavy, brick outbuildings, including several farmhouses, one
of which is quite large, and apparently of great antiquity.
We were received by Mrs. Fane with the greatest courtesy.
She said that the landed estate connected with Moyle's Court
is very large, now or recently yielding the Earl of Normanton
seven thousand pounds a year.

The present occupant of Moyle's Court, Frederick Fane, Esq.,
came there about twenty-one years before.  The house was then
much dilapidated, but he has restored it in a style in keeping
with the ancient architecture.  The principal room is a dining
hall, rising from the ground some twenty-five feet in height,
with a gallery at one end, on a level with the second story.
The walls of this room are of beautiful, carved oak, the front
of the gallery being ancient, and as it existed in the time
of Lady Alice Lisle.  The staircase, also of fine, carved
oak, is of equal antiquity.  The carved oak in the passages
and some of the other rooms has been restored by Mr. Fane
from material found in the attic.  There is also a curious
old kitchen, with a large fireplace, with a closet in the
chimney where it is said one of the persons succored by Lady
Alice Lisle was found hidden.  In the cellar is a curiously
carved head on a stone beam, which seemed as if it might formerly
have supported a mantel-piece or shelf.  It is said that this
portion of the cellar was once a chapel.

Some of the chambers have been named by Mr. Fane from persons
connected with the tragedy--Dame Alicia, Monmouth, Nelthrop,
Hicks, Tryphena--these names being inscribed on the doors.
The room is shown where Lady Lisle is said to have been seized.

The old tombstone over the grave of Leonard Hoar and his wife,
at the Quincy burial-ground, in Massachusetts, is almost an
exact copy of that over Lady Alice Lisle, at Ellerton near
Moyle's Court.  They were doubtless selected by the same taste.
Mrs. Leonard Hoar, whose maiden name was Bridget Lisle, was
connected quite intimately with three of the great tragedies
in the history of English liberty.  Her father, as has been
said, was murdered at Lausanne.  Her mother was murdered under
the form of the mock judgment of Jeffries, at Winchester.
Her niece married Lord Henry Russell, son of the Duke of Bedford,
and brother of Lord William Russell, the story of whose tragic
death is familiar to every one who reads the noble history
of the struggle between liberty and tyranny which ended with
the Revolution of 1688.

Bridget Hoar married again after the death of her husband,
President Hoar.  Her second husband was a Mr. Usher, who
seems to have been insane.  She lived with him very unhappily,
then separated from him and went back to England, staying
there until he died.  She then came back to Boston and died,
May 25, 1723.  At her own request she was buried at the side
of her first husband.  A great concourse of the clergy and
the principal citizens, including the Governor, attended her
funeral.

It was my good fortune to be instrumental, after this visit,
in correcting an evil which had caused great annoyance to
our representatives abroad for a good many years.

The Americans have never maintained their representatives
abroad with a dignity becoming a great power like the United
States.  The American Minister is compelled by our rules to
wear a dress which exposes him to be mistaken for a waiter
at any festive gathering.  Distinctions of rank are well established
in the diplomatic customs of civilized nations.  It is well
understood that whether a representative of a county shall
be an Ambassador, a Minister Plenipotentiary, a Minister Resident,
or a Charge' d'affaires, depends on the sense of its rank
among the nations of the world of the country that sends him.
For many years all argument was lost on Congress.  The United
States representative must not adopt the customs as to dress
of the effete monarchies of the old world.  To send an Ambassador
instead of a Minister was to show a most undemocratic deference
to titles, abhorrent to every good republican.  There had
been several attempts to make a change in this matter, always
unsuccessful, until I went abroad in 1892.

When I was in London in that year, I saw a great deal of
Mr. Lincoln.  He told me how vexatious he found his position.
When the Minister for Foreign Affairs received the diplomatic
representatives of other countries at the Foreign Office,
Ambassadors were treated as belonging to one rank, or class,
and the Ministers as to a lower one.  The members of each
class were received in the order of their seniority.  We change
our Ministers with every Administration.  So the Minister
of the United States is likely to be among the juniors.  He
might have to wait all day, while the representatives of insignificant
little States were received one after another.  If, before
the day ended, his turn came, some Ambassador would arrive,
who would get there, perhaps, five minutes before it was time
for Mr. Lincoln to go in, he had precedence at once.  So the
representative of the most powerful country on earth might
have to lose the whole day, only to repeat the same experience
on the next.

An arrangement was made which partly cured the trouble by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs receiving Mr. Lincoln, on
special application, informally, at his residence, on some
other day.  But that was frequently very inconvenient.  And,
besides, it was not always desirable to make a special application
for an audience, which would indicate to the English Government
that we attached great importance to the request he might
have to make, so that conditions of importance would be likely
be attached to it by them.  It was quite desirable, sometimes,
to mention a subject incidentally and by the way, rather than
to make it matter of a special appointment.

When I got to Paris, I found Mr. Coolidge complaining of the
same difficulty.  I told our two Ministers that when I got
home I would try to devise a remedy.  Accordingly I proposed
and moved as an amendment to the Consular and Diplomatic Appropriation
Bill, the following clause:

"Whenever the President shall be advised that any foreign
government is represented, or is about to be represented in
the United States, by an Ambassador, Envoy Extraordinary,
Minister Plenipotentiary, Minister Resident, Special Envoy,
or Charge' d'affairs, he is authorized, in his discretion,
to direct that the representatives of the United States to
such government shall bear the same designation.  This provision
shall in no wise affect the duties, powers, or salary of such
representative."

This had the hearty approval of Senators Allison and Hale,
the leading members of the Committee on Appropriations, and
was reported favorably by that Committee.

Senator Vest was absent when the matter came up, and it passed
without opposition.  Mr. Vest announced, the next day, that
he had intended to oppose it.  I am afraid if he had, he would
have succeeded in defeating it.

When it went to the House, the Committee on Appropriations
consented to retain the amendment, and it was favored by Mr.
Hitt of Illinois, who had, himself, represented the country
abroad and knew all about such matters.  There was a little
opposition in the House.  But it was quieted without great
difficulty.  Vice-President Morton, who had, himself, represented
the country at Paris, went personally to the House and used
his great influence in favor of the proposition.  Mr. Blount
of Georgia, a very influential Democrat, threatened to make
a strong opposition.  But the gentlemen who favored it said
to him:  "Now you are going out of the House, but your countrymen
will not long let you stay in retirement.  You will be summoned
to important public service somewhere.  It is quite likely
that your political friends will call you to one of these
important diplomatic places, where you will be in danger of
suffering the inconvenience yourself, if the present system
continue." Mr. Blount was pacified.  And the measure which
I think would have been beaten by a pugnacious opposition
in either House of Congress, got through.

Among the most impressive recollections of my life is the
funeral of Tennyson in Westminster Abbey.  I got a seat at
the request of the American Minister by the favor of Archdeacon
Farrar, who had charge of the arrangements.  It was a most
impressive scene.  I had a seat near the grave, which was
in the Poets' Corner, of which the pavement had been opened.
The wonderful music; the stately procession which followed
the coffin through the historic West entrance, in the most
venerable building in the world, to lay the poet to sleep
his last sleep with England's illustrious dead of more than
a thousand years,

  In those precincts where the mighty rest,
  With rows of statesmen and with walks of Kings,

to which

  Ne'er since their foundation came a nobler guest,

was unspeakably touching and impressive.  The solemn burial
service was conducted by the aged Dean, doomed, not long after,
to follow the beloved poet to his own final resting-place
near by.

The choir sang two anthems, both by Tennyson--"Crossing the
Bar" and "Silent Voices"--the music of the latter by Lady
Tennyson.

The grave lay next to Robert Browning's, hard by the monument
to Chaucer.  I looked into it and saw the oaken coffin with
the coronet on the lid.

The pall-bearers were the Duke of Argyle, Lord Dufferin,
Lord Selbourne, Lord Rosebery, Mr. Jowett, Mr. Lecky, Mr.
Froude, Lord Salisbury, Dr. Butler, Head of Trinity, Cambridge,
Sir James Paget, Lord Kelvin and the United States Minister.
The place of Mr. Lincoln, who had gone home on leave of absence,
was taken by Mr. Henry White.

After depositing the body, the bearers passed the seat where
I sat, one by one, pressing through between two rows of seats,
so that their garments touched mine as they went by.

The day was cloudy and mournful, blending an unusual gloom
with the dim religious light of the Abbey.  But just as the
body was let down into the earth, the sun came out for a moment
from the clouds, cheering and lightening up the nave and aisles
and transepts of the mighty building.  As the light struck
the faces of the statues and the busts, it seemed for a moment
that the countenances changed and stirred with a momentary
life, as if to give a welcome to the guest who had come to
break upon their long repose.  Of course it was but an idle
imagination, begot, perhaps, of the profound excitement which
such a scene, to the like of which I was so utterly unaccustomed,
made upon me.  But as I think of it now, I can hardly resist
the belief that it was real.

It was my good fortune during this journey to become the
purchaser of Wordsworth's Bible.  It was presented to him
by Frederick William Taber, the famous writer of hymns.  While
it is absolutely clean, it bears the mark of much use.  It
was undoubtedly the Bible of Wordsworth's old age.  On my
next visit to England I told John Morley about it.  He said,
if it had been known, I never should have been allowed to
take it out of England.  It bears the following inscription
in Taber's handwriting:

  William Wordsworth
  From Frederick Wm Taber,
  In affectionate acknowledgment of his many kindnesses,
  and of the pleasure and advantage of his friendship.
  Ambleside.  New Year's Eve.  1842.  A. D.
  Be stedfast in thy Covenant, and be _conversant_
  therein, and wax old in thy work.
  Ecclesiasticus XI. 20.


CHAPTER XXI
VISITS TO ENGLAND
1896

In 1896 I found myself again utterly broken down in health
and strength.  I had, the November before, a slight paralysis
in the face, which affected the muscles of the lower lid of
one of my eyes, causing a constant irritation in the organ
itself.  After a time this caused a distortion of the lips,
which I concealed somewhat by a moustache.  But it operated,
for a little while, as an effective disguise.  When I came
home during the winter, an old conductor on the Boston & Albany
Railroad, whom I had known quite well, when he took my ticket
looked at me with some earnestness and said, "Are you not
related to Senator Hoar?"  To which I answered, "I am a connection
of his wife, by marriage."

I found I must get rid of the work at home, if I were to
get back my capacity for work at all.  So I sailed for Southampton
before the session of Congress ended.  It was the only time
I had absented myself from my duties in Congress, except for
an urgent public reason, for twenty-seven years and more.

I saw a good many interesting English people.  It is not
worth while to give the details of dinners and lunches and
social life, unless something of peculiar and general interest
occur.  Almost every American who can afford it goes abroad
now.  Our English kinsmen are full of hospitality.  They have
got over their old coldness with which they were apt to receive
their American cousins, although they were always the most
delightfully hospitable race on earth when you had once got
within the shield of their reserve.

I remember especially, however, a very pleasant Sunday spent
on the Thames, at the delightful home of William Grenfell,
Esq., which I mention because, by a fortunate accident, the
visit had some very interesting consequences.  There I met
Sir John Lubbock, now Baron Avebury, famous for his writings
on financial questions and on Natural History, especially
for his observations of the habits of ants.  He told me, if
I am not mistaken, that he had personally watched the conduct
and behavior of more than fifteen thousand individual ants.
There was a company of agreeable English ladies and gentlemen.
They played games in the evening after dinner, as you might
expect of a company of American boys and girls of sixteen
or eighteen years old.

Mr. Grenfell was a famous sportsman.  His house was filled
with the trophies of his skill in hunting.  I was told that
he had crossed the Channel in a row-boat.

Sir John Lubbock invited me to breakfast with him a few days
afterward in St. James Square.  There I met a large number
of scientific men, among them the President of the Geographical
Society, and the Presidents or Heads of several other of the
important British Societies.  I was presented to all these
gentlemen.  But I found I could not easily understand the
names, when they were presented.  Englishmen usually, even
when they speak the language exactly as we do, have a peculiar
pronunciation of names, which makes it very hard for an American
ear to catch them.  I could not very well say, "What name
did you say?" or ask the host to repeat himself.  So I was
obliged to spend the hour in ignorance of the special dignity
of most of the illustrious persons whom I met.

Just behind my chair hung a full-length portrait of Admiral
Boscawen, a famous naval officer connected with our early
history.  For him was named the town of Boscawen in New Hampshire,
where Daniel Webster practised law.  The house where we were
had been his.  I think he was in some way akin to the host.

I sailed for home on Wednesday.  The Friday night before,
I dined with Moreton Frewen, Esq., an accomplished English
gentleman, well known on this side of the Atlantic.  Mr. Frewen
had been very kind and hospitable to me, as he had been to
many Americans.  He deserves the gratitude of both nations
for what he has done to promote good feeling between the two
countries by his courtesy to Americans of all parties and
ways of thinking.  He has helped make the leading men of both
countries know each other.  From that knowledge has commonly
followed a hearty liking for each other.

I mention this dinner, as I did the visit to Mr. Grenfell,
because of its connection with a very interesting transaction.
The guests at the dinner were Sir Julian Pauncefote, afterward
Lord Pauncefote, the British Ambassador to the United States,
who was then at home on a brief visit; Sir Seymour Blaine,
an old military officer who had won, as I was told, great
distinction in the East, and two Spanish noblemen.

The soldier told several very interesting stories of his
military life, and of what happened to him in his early days.

Of these I remember two.  He said that when he was a young
officer, scarcely more than a boy, he was invited by the Duke
of Wellington, with other officers, to a great ball at Apsley
House.  Late in the evening, after the guests had left the
supper room, and it was pretty well deserted, he felt a desire
for another glass of wine.  There was nobody in the supper
room.  He was just pouring out a glass of champagne for himself,
when he heard a voice behind him.  "Youngster, what are you
doing?"  He turned round.  It was the Duke.  He said, "I am
getting a glass of wine." To this the Duke replied, "You ought
to be up-stairs dancing.  There are but two things, Sir, for
a boy like you to be doing.  One is fighting; the other dancing
with the girls.  As for me I'm going to bed." Thereupon the
Duke passed round the table; touched a spring which opened
a secret door, in what was apparently a set of book-shelves,
and disappeared.

Sir Seymour Blaine told another story which, I dare say,
is well known.  But I have never seen it in print.  He said
that just before the Battle of Talavera when the Duke, then
Sir Arthur Wellesley, was in command in Spain, the English
and French armies had been marching for many days on parallel
lines, neither quite liking to attack the other, and neither
having got the advantage in position which they were seeking.
At last, one day, when everybody was pretty weary with the
fatigues of the march, the Duke summoned some of his leading
officers together and said to them:  "You see that clump of
trees (pointing to one a good distance away, but in sight
from where they stood)--when the head of the French column
reaches that clump of trees, attack.  As for me I'm going
to sleep under this bush."  Thereupon the great soldier lay
down, all his arrangements being made, and everything being
in readiness, and took his nap while the great battle of Talavera--
on which the fate of Spain and perhaps the fate of Europe
depended--was begun.  This adds another instance to the list
of the occasions to which Mr. Everett refers when he speaks
of Webster's sleeping soundly the night before his great reply
to Hayne.

"So the great Conde' slept on the eve of the battle of Rocroi;
so Alexander slept on the eve of the battle of Arbela; and
so they awoke to deeds of immortal fame!"

But this dinner of Mr. Frewen's had a very interesting consequence.
As I took leave of him at his door about eleven o'clock, he
asked me if there were anything more he could do for me.  I
said, "No, unless you happen to know the Lord Bishop of London.
I have a great longing to see the Bradford Manuscript before
I go home.  It is in the Bishop's Library.  I went to Fulham
the other day, but found the Bishop was gone.  I had supposed
the Library was a half-public one.  I asked the servant who
came to the door for the librarian.  He told me there was
no such officer, and that it was treated in all respects as
a private library.  But I should be very glad if I could get
an opportunity to see it." Mr. Frewen answered, "I do not
myself know the Bishop.  But Mr. Grenfell, at whose house
you spent Sunday, a little while ago, is his nephew by marriage.
He is in Scotland.  But if I can reach him, I will procure for
you a letter to his uncle."  That was Friday.  Sunday morning
there came a note from Mr. Grenfell to the Bishop.  I enclosed
it to his Lordship in one from myself, in which I said that
if it were agreeable to him, I would call at Fulham the next
Tuesday, at an hour which I fixed.  I got a courteous reply
from the Bishop, in which he said that he would be glad to
show me the "log of the Mayflower," as he called it.  I kept
the appointment, and found the Bishop with the book in his
hand.  He received me very courteously, and showed me a little
of the palace.  He said that there had been a Bishop's palace
on that spot for more than a thousand years.

I took the precious manuscript in my hands, and examined
it with an almost religious reverence.  I had delivered the
address at Plymouth, the twenty-first of December, 1895, on
the occasion of the two hundred and seventy-fifth anniversary
of the landing of the Pilgrims upon the rock.  In preparing
for that duty I read carefully, with renewed enthusiasm and
delight, the noble and touching story as told by Governor
Bradford.  I declared then that this precious history ought
to be in no other custody than that of their children.

There have been several attempts to procure the return of
the manuscript to this country.  Mr. Winthrop, in 1860, through
the venerable John Sinclair, Archdeacon, urged the Bishop
of London to give it up, and proposed that the Prince of Wales,
then just coming to this country, should take it across the
Atlantic and present it to the people of Massachusetts.  The
Attorney-General, Sir Fitzroy Kelley, approved the plan, and
said it would be an exceptional act of grace, a most interesting
action, and that he heartily wished the success of the application.
But the Bishop refused.  Again, in 1869, John Lothrop Motley,
the Minister to England, who had a great and deserved influence
there, repeated the proposition, at the suggestion of that
most accomplished scholar, Justin Winsor.  But his appeal
had the same fate.  The Bishop gave no encouragement, and said,
as had been said nine years before, that the property could
not be alienated without an Act of Parliament.  Mr. Winsor
planned to repeat the attempt on his visit to England in 1887.
When he was at Fulham the Bishop was absent, and he was obliged
to go home without seeing him in person.

In 1881, at the time of the death of President Garfield,
Benjamin Scott, Chamberlain of London, proposed again in
the newspapers that the restitution should be made.  But
nothing came of it.

When I went abroad I determined to visit the locality on
the borders of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, from which Bradford
and Brewster and Robinson, the three leaders of the Pilgrims,
came, and where their first church was formed, and the places
in Amsterdam and Leyden where the emigrants spent thirteen
years.  But I longed especially to see the manuscript of Bradford
at Fulham, which then seemed to me, as it now seems to me,
the most precious manuscript on earth, unless we could recover
one of the four gospels as it came in the beginning from the
pen of the Evangelist.

The desire to get it back grew and grew during the voyage
across the Atlantic.  I did not know how such a proposition
would be received in England.  A few days after I landed
I made a call on John Morley.  I asked him whether he thought
the thing could be done.  He inquired carefully into the story,
took down from his shelf the excellent though brief life of
Bradford in Leslie Stephen's "Biographical Dictionary," and
told me he thought the book ought to come back to us, and
that he should be glad to do anything in his power to help.
It was my fortune, a week or two after, to sit next to Mr.
Bayard at a dinner given to Mr. Collins, by the American consuls
in Great Britain.  I took occasion to tell him the story,
and he gave me the assurance, which he afterward so abundantly
and successfully fulfilled, of his powerful aid.  I was compelled,
by the health of one of the party with whom I was travelling,
to go to the Continent almost immediately, and was disappointed
in the hope of an early return to England.

After looking at the volume and reading the records on the
flyleaf, I said:  "My Lord, I am going to say something which
you may think rather audacious.  I think this book ought to
go back to Massachusetts.  Nobody knows how it got over here.
Some people think it was carried off by Governor Hutchinson,
the Tory Governor; other people think it was carried off by
British soldiers when Boston was evacuated; but in either
case the property would not have changed.  Or, if you treat
it as booty, in which last case, I suppose, by the law of
nations ordinary property does change, no civilized nation
in modern times applies that principle to the property of
libraries and institutions of learning."

The Bishop said:  "I did not know you cared anything about
it."

"Why," said I, "if there were in existence in England a history
of King Alfred's reign for thirty years, written by his own
hand, it would not be more precious in the eyes of Englishmen
than this manuscript is to us."

"Well," said he, "I think myself that it ought to go back,
and if it depended on me it would have gone back before this.
But many of the Americans who have been here have been commercial
people, and did not seem to care much about it except as a
curiosity.  I suppose I ought not to give it up on my own
authority.  It belongs to me in my official capacity, and
not as private or personal property.  I think I ought to consult
the Archbishop of Canterbury.  And, indeed," he added, "I
think I ought to speak to the Queen about it.  We should not
do such a thing behind Her Majesty's back."

I said:  "Very well, when I go home I will have a proper
application made from some of our literary societies, and
ask you to give it consideration."

I saw Mr. Bayard again and told him the story.  He was at
the train when I left London for the steamer at Southampton.
He entered with great interest into the matter, and told me
again he would do anything in his power to forward it.

When I got home I communicated with Secretary Olney about
it, who took a kindly interest in the matter, and wrote to
Mr. Bayard that the Administration desired he should do everything
in his power to promote the application.  The matter was then
brought to the attention of the Council of the American Antiquarian
Society, the Massachusetts Historical Society, the Pilgrim
Society of Plymouth and the New England Society of New York.
These bodies appointed committees to unite in the application.
Governor Wolcott was also consulted, who gave his hearty approbation
to the movement, and a letter was despatched through Mr. Bayard.

Meantime, Bishop Temple, with whom I had my conversation,
had himself become Archbishop of Canterbury, and in that capacity
Primate of all England.  His successor, Rev. Dr. Creighton,
had been the delegate of Emanuel, John Harvard's College,
to the great celebration at Harvard University in 1886, on
the two hundred and fiftieth anniversary of its foundation.
He had received the degree of Doctor of Laws from the University,
had been a guest of President Eliot, and had received President
Eliot as his guest in England.

The full story of the recovery of the manuscript, in which
the influence of Ambassador Bayard and the kindness of Bishop
Temple, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, had so large a
part, is too long to tell here.  Before the question was decided
Archbishop Temple consulted Her Majesty, Queen Victoria, who
took a deep interest in the matter, and gave the plan her
cordial approval.  I think, as I had occasion to say to the
British Ambassador afterward, that the restoration of this
priceless manuscript did more to cement the bonds of friendship
between the people of the two countries than forty Canal Treaties.
In settling Imperial questions both nations are thinking,
properly and naturally, of great interests.  But his restoration
was an act of purest kindness.  The American people, in the
midst of all their material activities, their desire for wealth
and empire, are a sentimental people, easily and deeply stirred
by anything that touches their finer feelings, especially
anything that relates to their history.

The Bishop was authorized to return the manuscript by a decree
rendered in his own Court, by his Chancellor.  The Chancellor
is regarded as the servant of the Bishop, and holds office,
I believe, at his will.  But so does the King's Chancellor
at the King's will.  I suppose the arrangement by which the
Chancellor determines suits in which his superior is affected
may be explained on the same ground as the authority of the
Lord Chancellor to determine suits in which the Crown is a
party.

I was quite curious to know on what ground, legal or equitable,
the decree for the restoration of the manuscript was made.
I wrote, after the thing was over, to the gentleman who had
acted as Mr. Bayard's counsel in the case, asking him to enlighten
me on this subject.  I got a very courteous letter from him
in reply, in which he said he was then absent from home, but
would answer my inquiry on his return.  After he got back,
however, I got a formal and ceremonious letter, in which he
said that, having been employed by Mr. Bayard as a public
officer, he did not think he was at liberty to answer questions
asked by private persons.  As the petition and decree had
gone on the express ground that the application for the return
of the manuscript was made by Mr. Bayard, not in his official,
but only in his private capacity, as he had employed counsel
at my request, and I had been responsible for their fees,
I was, at first, inclined to be a little vexed at the answer.
On a little reflection, however, I saw that it was not best
to be too curious on the subject; that where there was a will
there was a way, and probably there was no thought, in getting
the decree, on the part of anybody concerned, to be too strict
as to legalities.  I was reminded, however, of Silas Wegg's
answer to Mr. Boffin, when he read aloud to him and his wife
evening after evening "The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,"
which Silas had spoken of at first, as "The Decline and Fall
of the Russian Empire."  Mr. Boffin noticed the inconsistency,
and asked Mr. Wegg why it was that he had called it "The Decline
and Fall of the Russian Empire" in the beginning.  To which
Mr. Wegg replied that Mrs. Boffin was present, and that it
would not be proper to answer that question in the presence
of a lady.

The manuscript was brought to Massachusetts by Mr. Bayard,
on his return to the United States at the end of his official
term.  It was received by the Legislature in the presence
of a large concourse of citizens, to whom I told the story
of the recovery.  Mr. Bayard delivered the book to the Governor
and the Legislature with an admirable speech, and Governor
Wolcott expressed the thanks of the State in an eloquent reply.
He said that "the story of the departure of this precious
work from our shores may never in every detail be revealed;
but the story of its return will be read of all men, and will
become a part of the history of the Commonwealth.  There are
places and objects so intimately associated with the world's
greatest men or with mighty deeds that the soul of him who
gazes upon them is lost in a sense of reverent awe, as it
listens to the voice that speaks from the past, in words like
those which came from the burning bush, 'Put off thy shoes
from off they feet, for the place whereon thou standest is
holy ground.'

"The story here told is one of triumphant achievement, and
not of defeat.  As the official representative of the Commonwealth,
I receive it, sir, at your hands.  I pledge the faith of the
Commonwealth that for all time it shall be guarded in accordance
with the terms of the decree under which it is delivered into
her possession as one of her chiefest treasures.  I express
the thanks of the Commonwealth for the priceless gift, and
I venture the prophecy that for countless years to come and
to untold thousands these mute pages shall eloquently speak
of high resolve, great suffering and heroic endurance made
possible by an absolute faith in the over-ruling providence
of Almighty God."

The Bishop gave the Governor of Massachusetts the right to
deposit the manuscript either in his office at the State
House or with the Massachusetts Historical Society, of which
Archbishop Temple and Bishop Creighton, who succeeded Bishop
Temple in the See of London, were both Honorary members.  The
Governor, under my advice, deposited the manuscript in the
State House.  It seemed to him and to me that the Commonwealth,
which is made up of the Colony which Bradford founded, and
of which he was Governor, blended with that founded by the
Puritans under Winthrop, was the fitting custodian of the
life in Leyden of the founders of Plymouth, of the voyage
across the sea, and of the first thirty years of the Colony
here.  It is kept in the State Library, open at the spot which
contains the Compact made on board the Mayflower--the first
written Constitution in history.  Many visitors gaze upon
it every year.  Few of them look upon it without a trembling
of the lip and a gathering of mist in the eye.  I am told
that it is not uncommon that strong men weep when they behold
it.


CHAPTER XXII
SILVER AND BIMETALLISM

I was compelled, by the state of my health, to be absent
from the country in the campaign which preceded the Presidential
election of 1896, except for the last week or two.  But, of
course, I took a very deep interest indeed in the campaign.
Mr. Bryan's theories, and those of his followers in many parts
of the country, had thoroughly alarmed the business men of
the Northern and Eastern States.  But in the new States of
the Northwest, especially in those that contained silver mines,
a large majority of the people, without distinction of party,
had become converts to the doctrine that the United States
should coin silver at a ratio compared to gold of sixteen
to one, and make the silver so coined legal tender in the
payment of all debts, public and private.  The price of silver
as compared with that of gold had been constantly falling
for several years past.  This was attributed to the effect
of the legislation which demonetized silver except to a limited
amount.  Several eminent Republicans, both in the Senate and
in the House, as well as many others in private station, left
the Republican Party on that issue.  Several States that had
been constantly and reliably Republican became Democratic
or Populist, under the same influence.

The Democratic Platform of 1896 demanded the immediate restoration
of the free coinage of gold and silver at the present ratio
of 16 to 1, without waiting for the consent of any other nation.
That doctrine was reaffirmed and endorsed in the Democratic
National Platform for 1900.

There were two theories among the persons who desired to maintain
the gold standard.  One was entertained by the persons known
as Gold Monometallists.  They insisted that no value could
be given to any commodity by legislation.  They said that
nothing could restore silver to its old value as compared
with gold; that its fall was owing to natural causes, chiefly
to the increased production.  They insisted that every attempt
to restore silver to its old place would be futile, and that
the promise to make the attempt, under any circumstances,
was juggling with the people, from which nothing but disaster
and shame would follow.  They justly maintained that, if we
undertook the unlimited coinage of silver, and to make it
legal tender, under the inevitable law long ago announced
by Gresham, the cheaper metal, silver, would flow into the
country where it would have a larger value for the purpose
of paying debts, and that gold, the more precious metal, would
desert the country where there would be no use found for it
as long as the cheaper metal would perform its function according
to law.  From this, it was claimed, would follow the making
of silver the exclusive basis of all commercial transactions;
the disturbance of our commercial relations with other countries,
and the establishment of a standard of value which would fluctuate
and shrink as the value of silver fluctuated and shrunk.  So
that no man who contracted a debt on time could tell what
would be the value of the coin he would be compelled to pay
when his debt became due, and all business on earth would
become gambling.  They, therefore, demanded that the Republican
Party should plant itself squarely on the gold standard; should
announce its purpose to make gold the exclusive legal tender
for the country, and appeal to the people for support in the
Presidential election, standing on that ground.

To them their antagonists answered, that the true law was
stated by Alexander Hamilton in his famous Report, accepted
by all his contemporaries, and by all our statesmen of all
parties down to 1873 or thereabouts, and recognised in the
Constitution of the United States.  That doctrine was, that
the standard of value must necessarily be fixed by the agreement
of all commercial nations.  No nation could, without infinite
suffering and mischief, undertake to set itself against the
rule adopted by the rest of mankind.  It was best, if the
nations would consent to it, to have two metals instead of
one made legal tender, at a ratio to be agreed upon by all
mankind, establishing what was called Bimetallism.  If this
were done, the Gresham law could not operate, because there
would be no occasion for the cheaper metal to flow into any
one country by reason of its having a preference there in
the payment of debts; and nothing which would cause the more
precious metal to depart from any country by reason of its
being at a disadvantage.  If such a rule were adopted, and
a proper ratio once established, it would be pretty likely
to continue, unless there were a very large increase in the
production of one metal or the other.  If the supply of gold
in proportion to silver were diminished a little, the corresponding
demand for silver by all mankind would bring up its price
and cure the inequality.  So, if the supply of gold were to
increase in proportion to silver, a like effect would take
place.

If, however, the nations of the world were to agree on one
metal alone, it was best that the most precious metal should
be taken for that purpose.

The above, in substance, was the doctrine of Alexander Hamilton,
the ablest practical financier and economist that ever lived,
certainly without a rival in this country.

The duties specially assigned to me in the Senate and in
the House related to other matters.  But I made as thorough
and faithful a study as I could of this great question, and
accepted Hamilton's conclusions.  I believed they were right
in themselves, and thought the reasons by which they were
supported, although the subject is complex and difficult,
likely to find favor with the American people.  Silver has
always been a favorite metal with mankind from the beginning.
While gold may be the standard of value, it is too precious
to be a convenient medium of payment for small sums, such
as enter into the daily transactions of ordinary life.  It
is said that you can no more have a double standard, or two
measures of value, than you can have a double standard, or
two measures of distance.  But the compensating effect may
be well illustrated by what is done by the makers of clocks
for the most delicate measurements of time, such as are used
for astronomical calculations.  The accuracy of the clock
depends upon the length of the pendulum and the weight which
the pendulum supports.  If the disk at the end of the pendulum
be humg by a wire of a single metal, that metal expands and
shrinks in length under changing atmospheric influences, and
affects the clock's record of time.  So the makers of these
clocks resort to two or three wires of different metals, differently
affected by the atmosphere.  One of these compensates for
and supplements the other, so that the atmospheric changes
have much less effect than upon a single metal.

Beside the fact that I thoroughly believed in the soundness
of bimetallism, as I now believe in it, I thought we ought
not to give our antagonists who were pressing us so hard,
and appealing so zealously to every debtor and every man in
pecuniary difficulties, the advantage, in debate before the
people, of arraying on their side all our great authorities
of the past.  We had enough on our hands to encounter Mr.
Bryan and the solid South and the powerful Democratic Party
of New York and the other great cities, and every man in the
country who was uneasy and discontented, without giving them
the right to claim as their allies Alexander Hamilton, and
George Washington, and Oliver Ellsworth, and John C. Calhoun,
and Daniel Webster, and Henry Clay, and Thomas H. Benton.
I was, therefore, eager that the Republican Party should state
frankly in its platform what I, myself, deemed the sound doctrine.
It should denounce and condemn the attempt to establish the
free coinage of silver by the power of the United States
alone, and declare that to be practical repudiation and national
ruin.  But I thought we ought also to declare our willingness,
if the great commercial nations of the earth would agree,
to establish a bimetallic system on a ratio to be agreed upon.

Some of the enemies of the Republican Party, who could not
adopt the Democratic plan for the free coinage of silver,
without contradicting all their utterances in the past, denounced
this proposal as a subterfuge, a straddle, an attempt to deceive
the people and get votes by pledges not meant to be carried
out.

I believed then, and I believe now, that we were right in
demanding that the Republican Party should go into the campaign
with the declaration I have stated.

It is true that you cannot give value to any commodity by
law.  It is as idle to attempt to make an ounce of silver
worth as much as an ounce of gold by legislation, as it is to
try to make one pound weigh two pounds, or one yard measure
two yards.  You cannot increase the price of a hat, or a coat,
or a farm, by act of Congress.  The value of every article,
whether gold or silver, whether used as money or as merchandise,
must depend upon the inexorable law of demand and supply.
But you can, by legislation, compel the use of an article,
which use will create a demand for it, and the demand will
then increase its price.  If Congress shall require that every
soldier in the United States Army shall wear a hat or coat
of a particular material or pattern, or shall enact that every
man who votes shall come to the polls dressed in broadcloth,
if there be a limited supply of these commodities, the price
of the hat or the coat or the broadcloth will go up.  So,
when the nations of the world joined in depriving silver of
one of its chief uses--that of serving the function of a tender
for the payment of debts, the value of silver diminished because
one large use which it had served before was gone.  Whether
this doctrine be sound or no, it was the result of as careful
study as I ever gave in my life, to any subject, public or
private.  It was not only the doctrine of the Fathers, but
of recent generations.  It was the doctrine on which the Republicans
of Massachusetts, a community noted for its conservatism and
business sagacity, had planted the Commonwealth, and it was
the doctrine on which the American people planted itself and
which triumphed in the election of 1896.

I have been accused, sometimes, of want of sincerity, and,
by one leading New England paper, with having an imperfect
and confused understanding of the subject.  Perhaps I may
be pardoned, therefore, for quoting two testimonials to the
value of my personal contribution to this debate.  One came
from Senator Clay of Georgia, one of the ablest of the Democratic
leaders.  After I had stated my doctrine in a brief speech
in the Senate one day, he crossed the chamber and said to
me that, while he did not accept it, he thought I had made
the ablest and most powerful statement of it he had ever heard
or read.  The other came from Charles Emory Smith, afterward
a member of President McKinley's Cabinet and editor of the
_Press,_ a leading paper in Philadelphia.  I have his letter
in which he says that he think an edition of at least a million
copies of my speech on gold and silver should be published
and circulated through the country.  He also said, in an article
in the _Saturday Evening Post,_ June 14, 1902:

"In the great contest over the repeal of the Silver Purchase
Act he made the most luminous exposition, both of what had
been done, and the reasons for it; and what ought to be done,
and the grounds for it, that was heard in the Senate."

It occurred to me that I could render a very great service
to my country, during my absence, if I could be instrumental
in getting a declaration from England and France that those
countries would join with the United States in an attempt
to reestablish silver as a legal tender.

It was well known that Mr. Balfour, Leader of the Administration
in the House of Commons, was an earnest bimetallist.  He had
so declared himself in public, both in the House and elsewhere,
more than once.

There had been a resolution, not long before, signed by more
than two thirds of the French Chamber of Deputies, declaring
that France was ready to take a similar action whenever England
would move.  I, accordingly, with the intervention of Mr.
Frewen, the English friend I have just mentioned, arranged
an interview with Mr. Balfour in Downing Street.  We had a
very pleasant conversation indeed.  I told him that if he
were willing, in case the United States, with France and Germany
and some of the smaller nations, would establish a common
standard for gold and silver, to declare that the step would
have the approval of England, and that, although she would
maintain the gold standard alone for domestic purposes, she
would make a substantial and most important contribution to
the success of the joint undertaking, that it would insure
the defeat of the project for silver monometallism, from which
England, who was so largely our creditor, would suffer, in
the beginning almost as much as we would, and perhaps much
more, and would avert the panic and confusion in the business
of the world, which would be brought about by the success
of the project.

I did not state to Mr. Balfour exactly what I thought the
contribution of England to this result ought to be.  He, on
the other hand, did not tell me what he thought she would
do.  I did not, of course, expect that England would establish
the free coinage of silver for her own domestic purposes.
But I thought it quite likely that she would declare her cordial
approval of the proposed arrangement between the other countries,
and would reopen her India mints to the free coinage of the
rupee, and maintain the silver standard for the Queen's three
hundred million subjects in Asia.  This contribution, I thought,
if Great Britain went no farther, would give great support
to silver, and would ensure the success of the concerted attempt
of the other commercial nations to restore silver to its old
place.

Mr. Balfour expressed his assent to my proposal, and entered
heartily into the scheme.  He said he would be very happy
indeed to make such a declaration.  I suggested to him that
I had been authorized to say, by one or two gentlemen with
whom I had talked, that, if he were willing, a deputation
of the friends of Bimetallism would wait upon him, to whom
he could express his opinion and purpose.  He said he thought
it would be better that he should write a letter to me, and
that if I would write to him stating what I had said orally,
he would answer it with such a statement as I desired.  I
told him I was going to Paris in a few days, and that I would
write to him from Paris when I got there.  The matter was
left in that way.  The next day, or the next day but one,
a luncheon was given me at White's, the club famous for its
memories of Pitt and Canning and the old statesmen of that
time, and still the resort of many of the Conservative leaders
of to-day.  There were present some fifteen or twenty gentlemen,
including several members of the Government.  A gentleman
who had known of my interview with Mr. Balfour, and sat at
the table some distance from me, made some allusion to it
which was heard by most of the guests.  I said that I did
not like to repeat what Mr. Balfour had said; that gentlemen
in his position preferred, if their opinions were to be made
public, to do it for themselves, rather than to have anybody
else do it for them.  To this, one member of the Government--
I think it was Sir Michael Hicks-Beach, but I will not undertake
to be sure--said: "It is no secret that Mr. Balfour's opinions
are those of a majority of Her Majesty's Government."

I went to Paris, and wrote at once the letter that had been
agreed upon, of which I have in my possession a copy.  I
at once secured an introduction to M. Fougirot, the Member
of the French Assembly who had drawn and procured the signatures
to the resolution to which I just referred.  That is, I am
told, a not uncommon way in France of declaring the sense
of the House in anticipation of a more formal vote.  He entered
heartily into the plan.  He thought Germany would at once
agree, at any rate, he was sure that Belgium, Spain, Italy
and all the European commercial powers would come into the
arrangement, and that the whole thing would be absolutely
sure if Great Britain were to agree.  I waited a week or two
for the letter from Mr. Balfour.  In the meantime I got a
letter from Mr. Frewen, who told me that Mr. Balfour had
shown him the letter he had written to me; that it was admirable,
and eminently satisfactory.  But no letter came.  I waited
another week or two, and then got another letter from Mr.
Frewen, in which he said that he had taken no copy of Mr.
Balfour's letter, and had returned the original, and asked
me, if I had no objection, if I would give him a copy of it.
I answered that I had heard nothing, whereupon Mr. Frewen
wrote a note to Mr. Balfour, telling him that I had not heard.
Mr. Balfour said that he had, after writing the letter, submitted
it to a meeting of his colleagues; that one of them had expressed
his most emphatic disapproval of the plan, and that he did
not feel warranted in taking such a step against the objection
of one of his colleagues.  I gathered, from what I heard afterward,
that Mr. Balfour wished he had sent he letter without communicating
its contents.  But of this I have no right to be sure.  Mr.
Balfour sent Mr. Frewen the following letter, which is now
in my possession.  It was, I suppose with his approval, sent
to me.

10 DOWNING STREET, WHITEHALL, S. W.
  August 6, 1896.

DEAR MORETON FREWEN.

I think Senator Hoar has just reason to complain of my long
silence.  But, the truth is that I was unwilling to tell
him that my hopes of sending him a letter for publication
had come to an end, until I was really certain that this was
the case.  I am afraid however that even if I am able now
to overcome the objections of my colleagues, the letter itself
would be too late to do much good.  Please let me know what
you think on this subject.

  Yours sincerely,
  ARTHUR JAMES BALFOUR.

I never blamed him.  He was in the midst of a good deal of
difficulty with his Education Bill.  Certainly there can
be no obligation on the Leader of the English House of Commons
to do anything that he is not sure is for the interests of
his own country, or his own party, for the sake of benefitting
a foreign country, still less for the sake of affecting its
politics.  Indeed, I suppose Mr. Balfour would have utterly
and very rightfully disclaimed any idea of writing such a
letter, unless he thought what was proposed would benefit
England.  When I went back to London, an offer was made me
later to arrange another interview with Mr. Balfour, and
see if something else could not be devised.  This I declined.
I thought I had gone as far as I properly could, with a due
sense of my own dignity.  The exigency at home had pretty
much passed by.

A day or two after I got to Paris, after I had seen M. Fougirot,
I cabled my colleague, Mr. Lodge, at St. Louis, where the
delegates to the convention to nominate a President were then
gathering, stating my hope that our convention would insert
in its platform a declaration of the purpose of the Republican
Party to obtain, in concert with other nations, the restoration
of silver as a legal tender in company with gold, and that
I had reason to feel sure that such a plan could be accomplished.
This cable reached St. Louis on the morning the convention
assembled.  I do not know how much influence it had, or whether
it had any, in causing the insertion of that plank in the
platform.  Such a plank was inserted.  In my opinion it saved
the Presidential election, and, in my opinion, in saving the
Presidential election, it saved the country from the incalculable
evil of the free coinage of silver.

After I came home, at the next winter's session, I told the
story of what I had done, to a caucus of the Republican Senators.
A Committee was thereupon appointed by John Sherman, President
of the Caucus, to devise proper means for keeping the pledge
of the National platform and establishing international bimetallism
in concurrence with other nations.  The Committee consisted
of Messrs. Wolcott, Hoar, Chandler, Carter and Gear.  They
reported the Act of March 3, 1897, authorizing a commission
to visit Europe for that purpose, of which Senator Wolcott
was chairman.

A Commission was sent abroad by President McKinley, in pursuance
of the pledge of the Republican National platform, to endeavor
to effect an arrangement with the leading European nations
for an international bimetallic standard.  Senator Wolcott
of Colorado, who was the head of this Commission, told me
he was emboldened to undertake it by the account I had given.
The Commission met with little success.  I conjecture that
the English Administration, although a majority of the Government,
and probably a majority of the Conservative Party, were Bimetallists
and favored an international arrangement on principle, did
not like to disturb existing conditions at the risk of offending
the banking interests at London, especially those which had
charge of the enormous foreign investments, the value of
which would be constantly increasing so long as their debts
were payable, principal and interest, in gold, the value of
which, also, was steadily appreciating.

It has been the fashion of some quite zealous--I will not
say presumptuous, still less ignorant or shallow writers on
this subject--to charge bimetallists with catering to a mischievous,
popular delusion, for political purposes, or with shallowness
in thinking or investigating.  I have had my share of such
criticism.  All I have to say in reply to it is that I have
done my best to get at the truth, without, so far as I am
concerned, any desire except to get at and utter the truth.
In addition to the authority of our own early statesmen,
and to that of the eminent Englishmen to whom I have referred,
I wish to cite that of my pupil and dear friend, General Francis
A. Walker, who is declared by abundant European, as well as
American authority, to be the foremost writer on money of
modern times.  He was a thorough believer in the doctrine
I have stated.

He pointed out the danger, indeed the ruin, of undertaking
to reestablish silver without the consent of foreign nations.
But he declared that the happiness and, perhaps, the safety
of the country rested on Bimetallism.  He said:

"Indeed, every monometallist ought also to be a monoculist.
Polyphemus, the old Cyclops, would be his ideal.  Unfortunately
our philosophers were not in the Garden of Eden at the time
when the Creator made the mistake of endowing men with eyes
in pairs.  Perhaps it would not be too much to say that there
are probably few men whose eyes do not differ from each other
as to every element affecting vision by more than the degree
from which gold and silver varied from the French standard
of fifteen and a half to one for whole decades."

The German Imperial Parliament passed a resolution, in June,
1895, in favor of Bimetallism, and the Prussian Parliament
passed a resolution favoring an international bimetallic convention,
provided England joined it, May 22, 1895.

The great increase in the gold product of the world, and
the constant diminution in the value of silver, have put an
end to the danger of the movement for the free coinage of
silver, and made the question purely academic or theoretic,
at any rate for a good while to come.  The same causes have
diminished the desire for a bimetallic standard, and make
the difficulty of establishing a parity between silver and
gold, for the present, almost insuperable.  So the question
which excited so much public feeling throughout the world
for nearly a quarter of a century, and endangered not only
the ascendancy of the Republican Party, but the financial
strength of the United States, has become almost wholly one
of theory and ancient history.

After leaving Paris I spent a few delightful weeks at Innsbruck
in Austria, and Reichenhall in Germany, both near the frontier
between those two countries.  The wonderful scenery and the
curious architecture and antiquity of those towns transport
one back to the Middle Ages.  But I suppose they are too well
known now, to our many travellers, to make it worth while
to describe them.  I went to those places for the health of
a lady nearly allied to my household.  She was under the care
of Baron Liebig, one of the most famous physicians in Germany,
the son of the great chemist.  I got quite well acquainted
with him.  He was a very interesting man.  He had a peculiar
method of dealing with the diseases of the throat and lungs
like those under which my sister-in-law suffered.  He had
several large oval apartments, air-tight, with an inner wall
made of porcelain, like that used for an ordinary vase or
pitcher.  From these he excluded all the air of the atmosphere,
and supplied its place with an artificial air made for the
purpose.  The patients were put in there, remaining an hour
and three quarters or two hours each day--I do not know but
some of them for a longer time.  Then they were directed to
take long walks, increasing them in length day by day, a considerable
part of the walk being up a steep hill or mountain.  I believe
his method was of very great value to the patient who was
in my company.  The Baron thought he could effect a complete
cure if she could stay with him several months.  But that
was impossible.


CHAPTER XXIII
VISITS TO ENGLAND
1899

I visited England again in 1899.  I did not go to the Continent
or Scotland.  My wife consulted a very eminent London physician
for an infirmity of the heart.  He told her to go to the Isle
of Wight; remain there a few weeks; then to go to Boscombe;
stay a few weeks there; then to Malvern Hills, and thence
to a high place in Yorkshire, which, I believe, is nearly,
if not quite, the highest inhabited spot in England.  This
treatment was eminently advantageous.  But to comply with the
doctor's direction took all the time we had at our command
before going home.

We had a charming and delightful time in the Isle of Wight.
We stayed at a queer little Inn, known as the "Crab and Lobster,"
kept by Miss Cass, with the aid of her sister and niece.  We
made excursions about the island.  I saw two graves side by
side which had a good deal of romance about them.  One was
the grave of a woman.  The stone said that she had died at
the age of one hundred and seven.  By its side was the grave
of her husband, to whom she had been married at the age of
eighteen, and who had died just after the marriage.  So she
had been a widow eighty-nine years, and then the couple, separated
in their early youth, had come together again in the grave.

We found a singular instance of what Americans think so astonishing
in England, the want of knowledge by the people of the locality
with which they were familiar in life, of persons whose names
have a world-wide reputation.  In a churchyard at Bonchurch,
about a mile from our Inn at Ventnor, is the grave of John
Stirling--the friend of Emerson--of whom Carlyle wrote a memoir.
Sterling is the author of some beautiful hymns and other poems,
including what I think is the most splendid and spirited ballad
in English literature, "Alfred the Harper." Yet the sexton
who exhibited the church and the churchyard did not seem to
know anything about him, and the booksellers near by never
had heard of him.  The sexton showed, with great pride, the
grave of Isaac Williams, author of the "Shadow of the Cross"
and some other rather tame religious poetry.  He was a devout
and good man, and seemed to be a feeble imitator of Keble.
I dare say, the sexton first heard of Sterling and saw his
grave when we showed it to him.

The scenery about Boscombe and the matchless views of the
Channel are a perpetual delight, especially the sight, on
a clear day, of the Needles.

We did not find it necessary to obey the doctor's advice to
go to Yorkshire.  After leaving Boscombe, I spent the rest
of my vacation at Malvern Hills, some eight or nine miles
north of Worcester, and some twenty miles from Gloucester.

The chief delight of that summer--a delight that dwells freshly
in my memory to-day, and which will never be forgotten while
my memory endures--was a journey through the Forest of Dean,
in a carriage, in company with my friend--alas, that I must
say my late friend!--John Bellows, of Gloucester.  He was,
I suppose, of all men alive, best qualified to be a companion
and teacher of such a journey.  He has written and published
for the American Antiquarian Society an account of our journey--
a most delightful essay, which I insert in the appendix.
He tells the story much better than I could tell it.  My readers
will do well to read it, even if they skip some chapters of
this book for the purpose.  I am proud and happy in this way
to associate my name with that of this most admirable gentleman.

I visited Gloucester.  I found the houses still standing
where my ancestors dwelt, and the old tomb in the Church
of St. Mary de Crypt, with the word Hoare cut in the pavement
in the chancel.

My ancestors were Puritans.  They took an active part in the
resistance to Charles I., and many traces are preserved of
their activity in the civic annals of Gloucester.  Two of
my name were Sheriffs in those days.  There were two other
Sheriffs whose wives were sisters of my direct ancestors.
Charles Hoar, my direct ancestor, married one of the Clifford
family, the descendant of the brother of Fair Rosamond, and
their arms are found on a tomb, and also on a window in the
old church at Frampton-on-Severn, eight miles from Gloucester,
where the Cliffords are buried.  The spot where fair Rosamond
was born, still, I believe, belongs to the Clifford family.

I got such material as I could for studying the history of
the military operations which preceded the siege and capture
of Worcester and the escape of Charles II.  Several of the
old houses where he was concealed are shown, as also one in
Worcester from which he made his escape out of the window
when Worcester was stormed, just as Cromwell's soldiers were
entering at the door.

Shakespeare used to pass through Gloucester on his way to
London.  Some of his celebrated scenes are in Gloucestershire.
The tradition is that Shakespeare's company acted in the yard
of the New Inn, at Gloucester, an ancient hostelry still standing,
a few rods only from the Raven Tavern, which belonged to my
ancestors, and is mentioned in one of their wills still extant.
I have no doubt my kindred of that time saw Shakespeare, and
saw him act, unless they had already learned the Puritanism
which came to them, if not before, in a later generation.

I purchased, some years ago, some twenty ancient Gloucestershire
deeds, of various dates, but all between 1100 and 1400.  One
of them was witnessed by John le Hore.  It was of lands at
Wotton-under-Edge in Gloucestershire.  I have in my possession
a will of Thomas Hore of Bristol, dated 1466, in which he
mentions his wife Joanna, and his daughters Joanna and Margery,
and his sons Thomas and John.  These names--Thomas, John,
Joanna and Margery--are the names of members of the family
who dwelt in the city of Gloucester in later generations.
So I have little doubt that Thomas was of the same race, although
there is a link in the pedigree, between his death and 1560
or 1570 which I cannot supply.  This Thomas bequeaths land
at Wotton-under-Edge, so I conjecture that John also was of
the same race.  A large old black oak chest bound with iron,
bequeathed by Thomas to Bristol in 1466, is still in the
possession of the city.

I was very much gratified that the people of the old City
of Gloucester were glad to recognize the tie of kindred which
I, myself, feel so strongly.  I received a handsome box,
containing a beautifully bound copy of an account of the City
from the Traders' Association of the City of Gloucester.
This account of the matter appears in the _Echo,_ a local
paper of July 4, 1899.

GLOUCESTER CITY.  GLOUCESTER TRADERS' ASSOCIATION.
INTERESTING PRESENTATION

On Monday evening a largely attended public meeting was held
in the Guildhall under the auspices of the Gloucester Traders'
Association for the purpose of hearing addresses on "The municipal
electricity supply."  Mr. D.  Jones (president) occupied the
chair, and there were also present on the platform the Mayor
(Mr. H. R. J. Braine), City High Sheriff (Mr. A. V. Hatton),
Councillors Holborook, Poole and several members of the association.

The Chairman said that in his position as president of the
association it was his pleasurable duty to present a copy of
their guide to Mr. G. F. Hoar, the distinguished member of
the United States Government, who had always taken a great
interest in their historic City.--The presentation consisted
of a handsomely carved box made by Messrs.  Matthews and Co.
from pieces of historic English oak supplied by Mr. H. Y.
J. Taylor.  On the outside of the cover are engraved the City
arms, and a brass plate explaining the presentation.  A beautifully
printed copy of the well-known guide, bound in red morocco,
has been placed within, and on the inside of the cover there
is the following illuminated address:

"To the Hon. G. F. Hoar, of Worcester, Mass., Senator of the
United States of America.  Sir,--The members of the Traders'
Association, Gloucester, England, ask your acceptance of a
bound copy of their guide to this ancient and historic City,
together with this box made from part of a rafter taken from
the room in which Bishop Hooper was lodged the night before
his burning, and from oak formerly in old All Saints' Church,
as souvenirs of the regard which the association entertains
for you and its recognition of your ardent affection for the
City of Gloucester, the honored place of the nativity of the
progenitor of your family, Charles Hoar, who was elder Sheriff
in 1634; and may these sincere expressions also be typical
of the sterling friendship existing between Great Britain
and America."

"Senator Hoar had been unable to attend the meeting, and
the presentation was entrusted to the American Vice-Consul,
Mr. E. H. Palin, to forward to him.  Remarking on the presentation,
the Mayor expressed his regret that Mr. Hoar had been unable
to accept the high and important position of American Ambassador
which had been offered to him.  Addresses on the installation
of the electric light were then given by Mr. Hammond, M.I.C.E.,
and Mr. Spencer Hawes."

I was invited by the Corporation of the City to visit them
in the fall and receive the freedom of the City, which was
to be bestowed at the same time on Sir Michael Hicks-Beach.
But I had arranged to return to the United States before the
time fixed for the ceremonial.  So I was deprived of that
great pleasure and honor.

I had a great longing to hear the nightingale.  I find in
an old memorandum that I heard the nightingale in Warwickshire
in 1860, somewhere about the twentieth of May.  But the occurrence,
and the song of the bird, have wholly faded from my memory.
When I was abroad in 1892 and '96 I hoped to hear the song.
But I was too late.  Mrs. Warre, wife of the Rector of Bemerton,
George Herbert's Parsonage, told me that the nightingales
were abundant in her own garden close to the Avon, but that
they did not sing after the beginning of the nesting session
which, according to a note to White's "History of Selborne,"
lasts from the beginning of May to the early part of June.
Waller says:

  Thus the wise nightingale that leaves her home,
  Pursuing constantly the cheerful spring,
  To foreign groves does her old music bring.

There are some counties in England where the bird is not
found.  It is abundant in Warwickshire, Gloucester and the
Isle of Wight.  It is not found in Scotland, Derbyshire or
Yorkshire or Devon or Cornwall.  Attempts to introduce it
in those places have failed.  The reason is said to be that
its insect food does not exist there.

I utterly failed to hear the nightingale, although I was
very close upon his track.  On the night of the fifth of
June at Freshwater, close to Tennyson's home, we were taken
by a driver, between eleven and twelve at night, to two copses
in one of which he said he had heard the nightingale the night
before; and at the other they had been heard by somebody,
from whom he got the information, within a very few days.
But the silence was unbroken, notwithstanding our patience
and the standing reward I had offered to anybody who would
find one that I could hear.  Two different nights shortly
afterward, I was driven out several miles past groves where
the bird was said to be heard frequently.  Nothing came of
it.  May 29, at Gloucester, I rode with my friend, H. Y.
J. Taylor, Esq., an accomplished antiquary, out into the country.
We passed a hillside where he said he had heard the nightingale
about eleven o'clock in the daytime the week before.  Shakespeare
says:

  The nightingale, if she should sing by day,
  When every goose is cackling, would be
  No better a musician than the wren.

But the nightingale does sometimes sing by day.  Mr. Taylor
says that on the morning he spoke of the whole field seemed
to be full of singing birds.  There were larks and finches
and linnets and thrushes, and I think other birds whose name
I do not remember.  But when the nightingale set up his song
every other bird stopped.  They seemed as much spellbound
by the singing as he was, and Philomel had the field to himself
till the song was over.  It was as if Jenny Lind had come
into a country church when the rustic choir of boys and girls
were performing.

The nightingale will sometimes sing out of season if his
mate be killed, or if the nest with the eggs therein be destroyed.

He is not a shy bird.  He comes out into the highway and will
fly in and out of the hedges, sometimes following a traveller.
And the note of one bird will, in the singing season, provoke
the others, so that a dozen or twenty will sometimes be heard
rivalling one another at night, making it impossible for the
occupants of the farmhouses to sleep.

The superstition is well known that if a new-married man
hear the cuckoo before he hear the nightingale in the spring,
his married peace will be invaded by some stranger within
the year.  But if the nightingale be heard first he will be
happy in his love.  It is said that the young married swains
in the country take great pains to hear the nightingale first.
We all remember Milton's sonnet:

  O nightingale, that on yon bloomy Spray
  Warbl'est at eve, when all the woods are still,
  Thou with fresh hope the Lover's heart dost fill,
  While the jolly hours lead on propitious May,
  They liquid notes that close the eye of Day,
  First heard before the shallow Cuckoo's bill
  Portend success in love; O, if Jove's will
  Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay,
  Now timely sing, ere the rude bird of hate
  Foretell my hopeless doom in some Grove nigh;
  As thou from year to year hast sung too late
  For my relief; yet hadst no reason why,
  Whether the Muse, or Love, call thee his mate,
  Both them I serve, and of their train am I.

I had a funny bit of evidence that this superstition is not
entirely forgotten.  A very beautiful young lady called upon
us in London just as we were departing for the Isle of Wight.
I told her of my great longing to hear the nightingale, and
that I hoped to get a chance.  She said that she had just
come from one of her husband's country estates; that she had
not seen a nightingale or heard one this year, although they
were very abundant there.  She said she had seen a cuckoo,
which came about the same time.  I suppose she observed a
look of amusement on my countenance, for she added quick as
lightning, "But he didn't speak."

I made this year a delightful visit to Cambridge University.
I was the guest of Dr. Butler, the Master of Trinity, and
his accomplished wife, who had, before her marriage, beaten
the young men of Cambridge in all of the examinations.  Dr.
Butler spoke very kindly of William Everett, with whom he
had been contemporary at Cambridge.  He told me that Edward
Everett, when he received his degree at Oxford, was treated
with great incivility by the throng of undergraduates, not
because he was an American, but because he was a Unitarian.
I told this story afterwards to Mr. Charles Francis Adams.
He confirmed it, and said that his father had refused the
degree because he did not wish to expose himself to a like
incivility.

I dined in the old hall of Trinity, and met many very eminent
scholars.  I saw across the room Mr. Myers, the author of
the delightful essays, but did not have an opportunity to speak
to him.  I was introduced, among other gentlemen, to Aldus
Wright, Vice or Deputy Master, eminent for his varied scholarship,
and to Mr. Frazer, who had just published his admirable edition
of Pausanias.

A great many years ago I heard a story from Richard H. Dana,
illustrating the cautious and conservative fashions of Englishmen.
He told me that when the Judges went to Cambridge for the
Assizes they always lodged in the House of the Master of Trinity,
which was a royal foundation, the claim being, that as they
represented the King, they lodged there as of right.  On the
other hand the College claims that they are there as the guests
of the College, and indebted to its hospitality solely for
their lodging.  When the Judges approach Cambridge, the Master
of Trinity goes out to meet them, and expresses the hope that
they will make their home at the College during their stay;
to which the Judges reply that "They are coming." The Head
of the College conducts them to the door.  When it is reached,
each party bows and invites the other to go in.  They go in,
and the Judges stay until the Assize is over.  This ceremony
has gone on for four hundred years, and it never yet has been
settled whether the Judges have a right in the Master's house,
or only are there as guests and by courtesy.  I suppose that
in the United States both sides would fight that question
until it was settled somehow.  Each would say: "I am very
willing to have the other there.  But I want to know whether
he has any right there."  I asked about the truth of this
story.  Dr. Butler said it was true and seemed, if I understood
him aright, to think the Judges' claim was a good one.  Mr.
Wright, the Deputy Master, to whom I also put the question,
spoke of it with rather less respect.


CHAPTER XXIV
A REPUBLICAN PLATFORM

I have had occasion several times to prepare the Republican
platform for the State Convention.  The last time I undertook
the duty was in 1894.  I was quite busy.  I shrunk from the
task and put it off until the time approached for the Convention,
and it would not do to wait any longer.  So I got up one morning
and resolved that I would shut myself up in my library and
not leave it until the platform was written.  Accordingly
I sat down after breakfast, with the door shut, and taking
a pencil made a list of topics about which I thought there
should be a declaration in the platform.

I wrote each at the top of a separate page on a scratch-
block, intending to fill them out in the usual somewhat grandiloquent
fashion which seems to belong to that kind of literature.
I supposed I had a day's work before me.

It suddenly occurred to me:  Why not take these headings
just as they are, and make a platform of them, leaving the
Convention and the public to amplify as they may think fit
afterward.  Accordingly I tore out the leaves from the scratch-
block, and handed them to a secretary to be put into type.
The whole proceeding did not take fifteen minutes.

The sense of infinite relief that the Convention had when,
after listening a moment of two, they found I was getting
over what they expected as a rather tedious job, with great
rapidity, was delightful to behold.  I do not believe there
was ever a political platform received in this country with
such approval, certainly by men who listened to it, as that:

PLATFORM

"The principles of the Republicans of Massachusetts are as
well known as the Commonwealth itself; well known as the Republic;
well known as Liberty; well known as Justice.

Chief among them are:

An equal share in Government for every citizen.

Best possible wages for every workman.

The American market for American labor.

Every dollar paid by the Government, both the gold and the
silver dollars of the Constitution, and their paper representatives,
honest and unchanging in value and equal to every other.

Better immigration laws.

Better naturalization laws.

No tramp, Anarchist, criminal or pauper to be let in, so
that citizenship shall not be stained or polluted.

Sympathy with Liberty and Republican government at home and
abroad.

Americanism everywhere.

The flag never lowered or dishonored.

No surrender in Samoa.

No barbarous Queen beheading men in Hawaii.

No lynching.

No punishment without trial.

Faith kept with the pensioner.

No deserving old soldier in the poorhouse.

The suppression of dram drinking and dram selling.

A school at the public charge open to all the children, and
free from partisan or sectarian control.

No distinction of birth or religious creed in the rights of
American citizenship.

Devotion paramount and supreme to the country and to the flag.

Clean politics.

Pure administration.

No lobby.

Reform of old abuses.

Leadership along loftier paths.

Minds ever open to the sunlight and the morning, ever open
to new truth and new duty as the new years bring their lessons."

I ought to explain one phrase in this platform, which I have
since much regretted.  That is the phrase, "No barbarous Queen
beheading men in Hawaii."  It was currently reported in the
press that the Queen of Hawaii, Liliuokalani, was a semi-
barbarous person, and that when Mr. Blount, Mr. Cleveland's
Commissioner, proposed to restore her government and said
that amnesty should be extended to all persons who had taken
part in the revolution, she had said with great indignation,
"What, is no one to be beheaded?" and that upon that answer
Mr. Blount and Mr. Cleveland had abandoned any further purpose
of using the power of the United States to bring the monarchy
back again.  That, so far as I knew, had never been contradicted
and had obtained general belief.

I ought not to have accepted the story without investigation.
I learned afterward, from undoubted authority, that the Queen
is an excellent Christian woman; that she has done her best
to reconcile her subjects of her own race to the new order
of things; that she thinks it is better for them to be under
the power of the United States than under that of any other
country, and that they could not have escaped being subjected
to some other country if we had not taken them; and that she
expended her scanty income in educating and caring for the
children of the persons who were about her court who had lost
their own resources by the revolution.  I have taken occasion,
more than once, to express, in the Senate, my respect for
her, and my regret for this mistake.


CHAPTER XXV
OFFICIAL SALARIES

When I was in the House the salaries of the Judges of the
Supreme Court of the United States were raised to ten thousand
dollars a year, and a provision for a retiring pension, to
be continued for life to such of them as became seventy years
old, and had served ten years on the Bench, was enacted.

But it is always very difficult indeed to get salaries raised,
especially the salaries of Judges.  That it was accomplished
them was due largely to the sagacity and skill of Mr. Armstrong
of Pennsylvania.  He was a very sensible and excellent Representative.
His service, like that of many of the best men from Pennsylvania,
was too short for the public good.  I had very little to do
with it myself, except that I talked the matter over a good
deal with Mr. Armstrong, who was a friend of mine, and heartily
supported it.

After I entered the Senate, however, I undertook to get through
a bill for raising the salaries of the Judges of the United
States District Courts.  The District Judges were expected
to be learned lawyers of high reputation and character, and
large experience.  Very important matters indeed are within
the jurisdiction of the District Courts.  They would have
to deal with prize cases, if a war were to break out.  In
that case the reputation of the tribunals of the United States
throughout the world would depend largely on them.  They have
also had to do a large part of the work of the Circuit Courts,
especially since the establishment of the Circuit Courts of
Appeals, as much of the time of the Circuit Judges is required
in attendance there.

I had great difficulty in getting the measure through.  But
at last I was successful in getting the salaries, which had
ranged from $1,500 to $4,000 in different districts of the
country, made uniform and raised to $5,000 a year.

Later I made an attempt to have the salaries of the Judges
of the Supreme Court of the United States increased.  My
desire was to have the salary of the Associate Judges fixed
at $15,000, being an increase of fifty per cent., that of the
Chief Justice to be $500 more.  I met with great difficulty,
but at last, in the winter of 1903, I succeeded in getting
through a measure, which I had previously reported, which
increased the salary of the Associate Judges to $12,500, and
that of the Chief Justice to $13,000.  The same measure increased
the salaries of the District Judges from $5,000 to $6,000,
and that of the Circuit Judges from $6,000 to $7,000 a year.

The salary of Senators and Representatives is shamefully
small.  This is a great injustice, not only to members of
the two Houses, but it is a great public injury, because the
country cannot command the service of able men in the prime
of life, unless they have already acquired large fortunes.
It cannot be expected that a lawyer making from $25,000 to
$50,000 a year, or a man engaged in business, whose annual
income perhaps far exceeds that amount, will leave it for
$5,000 a year.  In that way he is compelled not only to live
frugally himself, but what is more disagreeable still, to
subject his household to the live in the humblest style in
a costly and fashionable city, into which wealthy persons
are coming from all parts of the country.

The members of Congress have a great many demands upon them,
which they cannot resist.  So a Senator or Representative
with $5,000 a year, living in Washington a part of the year
and at home the other part, cannot maintain his family as
well as an ordinary mechanic or salaried man who gets $2,500
or $3,000 a year, and spends all his time in one place.

The English aristocracy understand this pretty well.  They
give no salary at all to the members of their House of Commons.
The result is that the poor people, the working people and
people in ordinary life, cannot get persons to represent them,
from their own class.  That will soon be true in this country,
if we do not make a change.  I suppose nearly every member
of either House of Congress will tell you in private that
he thinks the salary ought to be raised.  But the poor men
will not vote for it, because they think the example will
be unpopular, and the rich men do not care about it.


CHAPTER XXVI
PROPRIETY IN DEBATE

The race of demagogues we have always with us.  They have
existed in every government from Cleon and the Sausage-maker.
They command votes and seem to delight popular and legislative
assemblies.  But they rarely get very far in public favor.
The men to whom the American people gives its respect, and
whom it is willing to trust in the great places of power,
are intelligent men of property, dignity and sobriety.

We often witness and perhaps are tempted to envy the applause
which many public speakers get by buffoonery, by rough wit,
by coarse personality, by appeal to the vulgar passions.  We
are apt to think that grave and serious reasonings are lost
on the audiences that receive them, half asleep, as if listening
to a tedious sermon, and who come to life again when the stump
speaker takes the platform.  But it will be a great mistake
to think that the American people do not estimate such things
at their true value.  When they come to take serious action,
they prefer to get their inspiration from the church or the
college and not from the circus.  Uncle Sam likes to be amused.
But Uncle Sam is a gentleman.  In the spring of 1869, when
I first took my seat in Congress, General Butler was in the
House.  He was perhaps as widely known to the country as any
man in it except President Grant.  He used to get up some
scene of quarrel or buffoonery nearly every morning session.
His name was found every day in the head-lines of the newspapers.
I said to General Banks one day after the adjournment: "Don't
you think it is quite likely that he will be the next President
of the United States?"  "Never," said General Banks, in his
somewhat grandiloquent fashion.  "Why," said I, "don't you
see that the papers all over the country all full of him every
morning?  People seem to be reading about nobody else.  Wherever
he goes, the crowds throng after him.  Nobody else gets such
applause, not even Grant himself."

"Mr. Hoar," replied General Banks, "when I came down to the
House this morning, there was a fight between two monkeys
on Pennsylvania Avenue.  There was an enormous crowd, shouting
and laughing and cheering.  They would have paid very little
attention to you or me.  But when they come to elect a President
of the United States, they won't take either monkey."

The men who possess the capacity for coarse wit and rough
repartee, and who indulge it, seldom get very far in public
favor.  No President of the United States has had it.  No
Judge of the Supreme Court has had it, no Speaker of the
House of Representatives, and, with scarcely an exception,
no eminent Senator.


CHAPTER XXVII
THE FISH-BALL LETTER

In August, 1890, the Pittsburg _Post,_ a Democratic paper,
made a savage attack on me.  He attributed to me some very
foolish remark and declared that I lived on terrapin and champagne;
that I had been an inveterate office-seeker all my life; and
that I had never done a stroke of useful work.  Commonly it
is wise to let such attacks go without notice.  To notice
them seriously generally does more harm than good to the party
attacked.  But I was a good deal annoyed by the attack, and
thought I would make a good-natured and sportive reply to
it, instead of taking it seriously.  So I sent the editor
the following letter, which was copied quite extensively throughout
the country, North and South; and I believe put an end, for
the rest of my life, to the particular charges he had made:

UNITED STATES SENATE,
  WASHINGTON, D. C., Aug. 10, 1890.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE PITTSBURG POST;

_My Dear Man:_  Somebody has sent me a copy of your paper
containing an article of which you do me the honor to make
me the subject.  What can have put such an extravagant yarn
into the head of so amiable and good-natured a fellow? I never
said the thing which you attribute to me in any interview,
caucus or anywhere else.  I never inherited any wealth or
had any.  My father was a lawyer in very large practice for
his day, but he was a very generous and liberal man and never
put much value upon money.  My share of his estate was about
$10,500.  All the income-producing property I have in the
world, or ever had, yields a little less than $1,800 a year;
$800 of that is from a life estate and the other thousand
comes from stock in a corporation which has only paid dividends
for the last two or three years, and which I am very much
afraid will pay no dividend, or much smaller ones, after two
or three years to come.  With that exception the house where
I live, with its contents, with about four acres of land,
constitute my whole worldly possessions, except two or three
vacant lots, which would not bring me $5,000 all told.  I
could not sell them now for enough to pay my debts.  I have
been in my day an extravagant collector of books, and have
a library which you would like to see and which I would like
to show you.  Now, as to office-holding and working.  I think
there are few men on this continent who have put so much hard
work into life as I have.  I went one winter to the Massachusetts
House of Representatives, when I was twenty-five years old,
and one winter to the Massachusetts Senate, when I was thirty
years old.  The pay was two dollars a day at that time.  I
was nominated on both occasions, much to my surprise, and
on both occasion declined a renomination.  I afterward twice
refused a nomination for Mayor of my city, have twice refused
a seat on the Supreme Bench of Massachusetts, and refused
for years to go to Congress when the opportunity was in my
power.  I was at last broken down with overwork, and went
to Europe for my health.  During my absence the arrangements
were made for my nomination to Congress, from which, when
I got home, I could not well escape.  The result is I have
been here twenty years as Representative and Senator, the
whole time getting a little poorer year by year.  If you
think I have not made a good one, you have my full authority
for saying anywhere that I entirely agree with you.  During
all this time I have never been able to hire a house in Washington.
My wife and I have experienced the varying fortune of Washington
boarding houses, sometimes very comfortable, and a good deal
of the time living in a fashion to which no mechanic earning
two dollars a day would subject his household.  Your "terrapin"
is all in my eye, very little in my mouth.  The chief carnal
luxury of my life is in breakfasting every Sunday morning
with an orthodox friend, a lady who has a rare gift for making
fish-balls and coffee.  You unfortunate and benighted Pennsylvanians
can never know the exquisite flavor of the codfish, salted,
made into balls and eaten on a Sunday morning by a person
whose theology is sound, and who believes in all the five
points of Calvinism.  I am myself but an unworthy heretic,
but I am of Puritan stock, of the seventh generation, and
there is vouchsafed to me, also, some share of that ecstasy
and a dim glimpse of that beatific vision.  Be assured, my
benighted Pennsylvania friend, that in that hour when the
week begins, all the terrapin of Philadelphia or Baltimore
and all the soft-shelled crabs of the Atlantic shore might
pull at my trousers legs and thrust themselves on my notice
in vain.

  I am faithfully,
  GEO. F. HOAR


CHAPTER XXVIII
THE BIRD PETITION

Before the year 1897 I had become very much alarmed at the
prospect of the total extinction of our song-birds.  The
Bobolink seemed to be disappearing from the field in Massachusetts,
the beautiful Summer Red Bird had become extinct, and the
Oriole and the Scarlet Tanager had almost disappeared.  Many
varieties of songbirds which were familiar to my own boyhood
were unknown to my children.  The same thing seems to be going
on in other countries.  The famous Italian novelist, Ouida,
contributed an article in the _North American Review_ a few
years ago in which she described the extermination of the
Nightingale in Italy.  The Director of the Central Park, in
one of his Reports, stated that within fifteen or twenty years
the song-birds of the State of New York had diminished forty-
five per cent.

One afternoon in the spring of 1897, Governor Claflin called
on me at my Committee Room in the Capitol and told me a lady
had just visited his daughter at her rooms who had on her
head eleven egrets.  These egrets are said to come from the
female White Heron, a beautiful bird abounding in Florida.
They are a sort of bridal ornament, growing out on the head
of the female at pairing time and perishing and dropping off
after the brood is reared.  So the ornament on the horrible
woman's head had cost the lives of eleven of these beautiful
birds and very likely in every case the lives of a brood of
young ones.

When I went home I sat down after dinner and wrote with a
pencil the following petition.

_"To the Great and General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts:

"We, the song-birds of Massachusetts and their playfellows,
make this our humble petition:_

"We know more about you than you think we do.  We know how
good you are.  We have hopped about the roofs and looked in
at the windows of the homes you have built for poor and sick
and hungry people and little lame and deaf and blind children.
We have built our nests in the tress and sung many a song
as we flew about the gardens and parks you have made so beautiful
for your own children, especially your poor children, to play
in.

"Every year we fly a great way over the country, keeping
all the time where the sun is bright and warm; and we know
that whenever you do anything, other people all over the
great land between the seas and the great lakes find it out,
and pretty soon will try to do the same thing.  We know;
we know.  We are Americans just as you are.  Some of us,
like some of you, came from across the great sea, but most
of the birds like us have lived here a long while; and birds
like us welcomed your fathers when they came here many years
ago.  Our fathers and mothers have always done their best
to please your fathers and mothers.

"Now we have a sad story to tell you.  Thoughtless or bad
people are trying to destroy us.  They kill us because our
feathers are beautiful.  Even pretty and sweet girls, who
we should think would be our best friends, kill our brothers
and children so that they may wear plumage on their hats.
Sometimes people kill us from mere wantonness.  Cruel boys
destroy our nests and steal our eggs and our young ones.  People
with guns and snares lie in wait to kill us, as if the place
for a bird were not in the sky, alive, but in a shop window
or under a glass case.  If this goes on much longer, all your
song-birds will be gone.  Already, we are told, in some other
countries that used to be full of birds, they are almost gone.
Even the nightingales are being all killed in Italy.

"Now we humbly pray that you will stop all this, and will
save us from this sad fate.  You have already made a law
that no one shall kill a harmless song-bird or destroy our
nests or our eggs.  Will you please to make another that no
one shall wear our feathers, so that no one will kill us to get
them?  We want them all ourselves.  Your pretty girls are
pretty enough without them.  We are told that it is as easy
for you to do it as for Blackbird to whistle.

"If you will, we know how to pay you a hundred times over.
We will teach your children to keep themselves clean and neat.
We will show them how to live together in peace and love and
to agree as we do in our nests.  We will build pretty houses
which you will like to see.  We will play about your gardens
and flower-beds,--ourselves like flowers on wings,--without
any cost to you.  We will destroy the wicked insects and worms
that spoil your cherries and currants and plums and apples
and roses.  We will give you our best songs and make the spring
more beautiful and the summer sweeter to you.  Every June
morning when you go out to the field, Oriole and Blackbird
and Bobolink will fly after you and make the day more delightful
to you; and when you go home tired at sundown, Vesper Sparrow
will tell you how grateful we are.  When you sit on your porch
after dark, Fife Bird and Hermit Thrush and Wood Thrush will
sing to you; and even Whip-poor-will will cheer up a little.
We know where we are safe.  In a little while all the birds
will come to live in Massachusetts again, and everybody who
loves music will like to make a summer home with you."

I thought it might, perhaps, strike the Legislature of Massachusetts
and the public more impressively than a sober argument.  The
whole thing took only fifteen or twenty minutes.  The petition
was signed by all the song-birds of Massachusetts, and illustrated
by Miss Ellen Day Hale with the portraits of the signers.
It was presented to the Massachusetts Senate by the Honorable
A. S. Roe, Senator from the Worcester District.  The Legislature
acted upon it and passed the following Statute:

"Whoever has in his possession the body of feathers of any
bird whose taking or killing is prohibited by section four
of chapter two hundred and seventy-six of the acts of the
year eighteen hundred and eighty-six, or wears such feathers
for the purpose of dress or ornament, shall be punished as
provided in said section:  _provided_ that his act shall not
be construed to prohibit persons having the certificate provided
for in said sections from taking or killing such birds; and
_provided, further,_ that this act shall not apply to Natural
History Associations, or to the proprietors of museums, or
other collections for scientific purposes.

_"Approved June 11, 1897."_

The Statute was copied in several other States.  I think
the petition helped a good deal the healthy reaction which,
owing largely to the efforts of humane societies and Natural
History Associations and especially of some very accomplished
ladies, has arrested the destruction of these beautiful ornaments
of our woods and fields and gardens, "our fellow pilgrims
on the journey of life," who have so much of humanity in them
and who, like us, have their appointed tasks set to them by
the great Creator.


CHAPTER XXIX
THE A. P. A. CONTROVERSY

One very unreasonable, yet very natural excitement has stirred
deeply the American people on several occasions in our history.
It came to us by lawful inheritance from our English and Puritan
ancestors.  That is the bitter and almost superstitious dread
of the Catholics, which has resulted more than once in riots
and crimes, and more than once in the attempt to exclude them
from political power in the country.  This has sometimes taken
the form of a crusade against all foreigners.  But religious
prejudice against the Catholics has been its chief inspiration.

I just said that this feeling, though absolutely unjustifiable,
was yet quite natural, and that it came to us by lawful inheritance.
I have always resisted it and denounced it to the utmost of
my power.  My father was a Unitarian.  I was bred in that
most liberal of all liberal faiths.  But I have believed that
the way to encounter bigotry is by liberality.  If any man
try to deprive you of your absolute right, begin to defend
yourself by giving him his own.  Human nature, certainly American
human nature, will never, in my opinion, long hold out against
that method of dealing.

Our people, so far as they are of English descent, learned
from their fathers the stories of Catholic persecution and
of the fires of Smithfield.  Fox's "Book of Martyrs," one
of the few books in the Puritan libraries, was, even down to
the time of my youth, reverently preserved and read in the
New England farmhouses.

So it was believed that it was only the want of power that
prevented the Catholics from renewing the fires of Smithfield
and the terrors of the Inquisition.  It was believed that
the infallibility and supremacy of the Pope bound the Catholic
citizen to yield unquestioning obedience to the Catholic clergy
in matters civil and political, as well as spiritual.  There
was a natural and very strong dread of the Confessional.

This feeling was intensified by the fact of which it was
partly the cause, that when the Irish-Catholics first came
over they voted in solid body, led often by their clergy, for
the Democratic Party, which was in the minority in the New
England States, especially in Massachusetts.  England down
to a very recent time disqualified the Catholics from civil
office.

Our people forgot that the religious persecution, of which
they cherished the bitter memory, was the result of the spirit
of the age, and not of one form of religious faith.  They
forgot that the English Protestants not only retaliated on
the Catholics when they got into power, but that the Bishops
from whose fury, as John Milton said, our own Pilgrim Fathers
fled, were Protestant Bishops and not Catholic.  They forgot
the eight hundred years during which Ireland had been under
the heel of England, and the terrible history so well told
by that most English of Englishmen, and Protestant of Protestants,
Lord Macaulay.

"The Irish Roman Catholics were permitted to live, to be fruitful,
to replenish the earth; but they were doomed to be what the
Helots were in Sparta, what the Greeks were under the Ottoman,
what the blacks now are at New York.  Every man of the subject
caste was strictly excluded from any public trust.  Take what
path he might in life, he was crossed at every step by some
vexatious restriction.  It was only by being obscure and inactive,
that he could, on his native soil, be safe.  If he aspired
to be powerful and honoured, he might gain a cross or perhaps
a Marshal's staff in the armies of France or Austria.  If
his vocation was to politics, he might distinguish himself
in the diplomacy of Italy or Spain.  But at home he was a
mere Gibeonite, a hewer of wood and a drawer of water.  The
statute book of Ireland was filled with enactments which furnish
to the Roman Catholics but too good a ground for recriminating
on us when we talk of the barbarities of Bonner and Gardiner;
and the harshness of those odious laws was aggravated by a
more odious administration.  For, bad as the legislators were,
the magistrates were worse still.  In those evil times originated
that most unhappy hostility between landlord and tenant, which
is one of the peculiar curses of Ireland.  Oppression and
turbulence reciprocally generated each other.  The combination
of rustic tyrants was resisted by gangs of rustic banditii.
Courts of law and juries existed only for the benefit of the
dominant sect.  Those priests who were revered by millions
as their natural advisers and guardians, as the only authorised
dispensers of the Christian sacraments, were treated by the
squires and squireens of the ruling faction as no good-natured
man would treat the vilest beggar."

When I came into political life shortly after 1848, I found
this anti-Catholic feeling most intense.  The Catholics in
Massachusetts were, in general, in a very humble class.  The
immigration, which had well begun before the great Irish Famine,
was increased very much by that terrible calamity.  The Irishmen
were glad to build our railroads at sixty cents a day, dwelling
in wretched shanties, and living on very coarse fare.  They
had brought with them the habit of drinking whiskey, comparatively
harmless in their native climate--though bad enough there--
but destructive in New England.  So they contributed very
largely to the statistics of crime and disorder.

Even then they gave an example--from which all mankind might
take a lesson--of many admirable qualities.  They had a most
pathetic and touching affection for the Old Country.  They
exhibited an incomparable generosity toward the kindred they
had left behind.  From their scanty earnings, Edward Everett,
a high authority, estimates that there were sent twenty millions
of dollars in four years to their parents and kindred.

There was some jealousy on the part of our working people,
especially the men and women employed in large manufacturing
establishments, lest the Irish, by working at cheaper wages,
would drive them out of employment.  But the Irishman soon
learned to demand all the wages he could get.  The accession
of the Irish laborer increased largely the productive forces
of the State.  So there was more wealth created, of which
the better educated and shrewder Yankee got the larger share.
By the bringing in of a lower class of labor he was elevated
to a higher place, but never driven out of work.  The prejudice
of which I have spoken showed itself in some terrible Protestant
riots in New Orleans and in Baltimore, and in the burning
of the Catholic Convent at Charlestown.

There was also a strong feeling that the compact body of
Catholics, always voting for one political party was a danger
to the public security.  Of course this feeling manifested
itself in the Whig Party, for whose adversary the solid Irish-
Catholic vote was cast.  As early as 1844, after the defeat
of Mr. Clay, Mr. Webster made a suggestion--I do know where
it is recorded now, but I was informed of it on good authority
at about the time he made it--that there must be some public
combination with a view to resist the influence of our foreign
element in our politics.

But there was no political movement on any considerable scale
until 1854.  In that year there was a very dangerous crusade
which came very near National success, and which got control
of several States.

In the fall of 1857 the Republican Party elected its first
Governor.  The slavery question was still very prominent,
and the people were deeply stirred by the attempt to repeal
the Missouri Compromise.  So in that year, under the leadership
of Nathaniel P. Banks, Gardner, the Know-Nothing Governor,
was defeated, and from that time the strength of Know-Nothingism
was at an end.  I was elected to the Senate in the fall of
1856 as the Republican candidate from the county of Worcester
over the Know-Nothing and Democratic candidates.

It is a remarkable fact that of the men known to join the
Know-Nothing Party, no man, unless he were exceedingly young
and obscure when he did it, ever maintained or regained the
public confidence afterward, with the exception of Henry Wilson,
Anson Burlingame and Nathaniel P. Banks.  These men all left
it after the first year.  Wilson and Burlingame denounced
it with all the vigor at their command, and Banks led the
forces of the Republican Party to its overthrow.

I ought to say, however, of this movement and of the A. P.
A. movement, as it is called, of which I am now to speak,
that I do not think the leaders in general shared the bitter
and proscriptive feeling to which they appealed.  The secret
organization, founded on religious prejudice, or on race prejudice,
is a good instrument to advance the political fortunes of
men who could not gain advancement in an established political
organization.  So a great many men are active and busy in
such organizations, who would be equally active and busy in
movements founded on precisely the opposite doctrines, if
they could as well find their advancement in them.  Yet, as
I have said, the prejudice which lay at the bottom of this
movement was very powerful, very sincere, and not unnatural.

Secret societies were formed all over the country.  It seemed
not unlikely that the surprise of 1854 would be repeated,
and that the great Republican party, which had done so much
for civil liberty, would either be broken to pieces or would
be brought to take an attitude totally inconsistent with religious
liberty.

The organization, calling itself the American Protective
Association, but known popularly as the A. P. A., had its
branches all over the North.  Its members met in secret,
selected their candidates in secret--generally excluding all
men who were not known to sympathize with them--and then attended
the Republican caucuses to support candidates in whose selection
members of that political party who were not in their secret
councils had no share.  Ambitious candidates for office did
not like to encounter such a powerful enmity.  They in many
cases temporized or coquetted with the A. P. A. if they
did not profess to approve its doctrine.  So far as I know,
no prominent Republican in any part of the country put himself
publicly on record as attacking this vicious brotherhood.
Many men who did not agree with it were, doubtless, so strong
in the public esteem that they were not attacked.

That was the condition of things when, in the early summer
of 1895, I delivered an address at the opening of the Summer
School of Clark University in which I spoke briefly, but in
very strong terms, in condemnation of the secrecy and of the
proscriptive principles of this political organization.  I
declared:  "I have no patience or tolerance with the spirit
which would excite religious strife.  It is as much out of
place as the witchcraft delusion or the fires of Smithfield."
I added:  "This Nation is a composite.  It is made up of many
streams, of the twisting and winding of many bands.  The quality,
hope and destiny of our land is expressed in the phrase of
our Fathers, 'E Pluribus Unum'--of many, one--of many States,
one Nation--of many races, one people--of many creeds, one
faith--of many bended knees, one family of God." A little
later I went with the Massachusetts Club, of which I was a
member, to an outing at Newport.  There, briefly but still
more emphatically, I called upon the people not to revive
the bitter memories of ancient, social and religious strife.

These two speeches excited the indignation of the leaders
of this organization.  A gentleman named Evans, I believe
born in England, took up the cudgels.  He was supported by
many worthy clergymen and a good many newspapers which had
been established to support the doctrine of the A. P. A.
organization.  Mr. Evans, if I am right in my memory, claimed
that he was not a member of the organization.  But he stood
up for it stanchly in two letters to me, in which he very
severely denounced what I had said, and pointed out the wicked
behavior of some Catholic priests to whom he referred.  He
said he had looked up to me as he formerly did to Charles
Sumner and William H. Seward; that my course would tend as
absolutely to the breaking up of the Republican Party as Daniel
Webster's speech did to the breaking up of the old Whig Party,
and that I had rung my own death knell; that the one mistake
Wesley made when he called slavery "the sum of all villainies"
was that he did not except the Roman Catholic Church.  He
added that there were at least three million members of these
patriotic orders, constituting at least three fifths of the
Republican Party, and that their membership was being added to
daily.  Mr. Evans also said, what was absolutely without
foundation, that I had said, "We need a Father Confessor."

That gave me my opportunity.  I answered with the following
letter in which I stated my own doctrine as vigorously and
clearly as I knew how.

WORCESTER, Aug. 5, 1895.
  T. C. EVANS, ESQ.:

_My Dear Sir_--One of the great evils, though by no means
the greatest evil of secret political societies, is that foolish
and extravagant statements about men who don't agree with
them get circulated without opportunity for contradiction
or explanation.  You seem to be a well-meaning and intelligent
man; yet I am amazed that any well-meaning and intelligent
man should believe such stuff as you repeat in your letter
of August 3.  I never said, thought or dreamed what you impute
to me.  I don't believe there ever was any report in the Worcester
_Telegram_ to that effect.  Certainly there is none in the
report of what I said in the summer school at Clark University
the morning after, and there is no such statement in any of
the other Worcester newspapers.  I never anywhere expressed
the idea that there should be a confessional or that there
was any need of a Father Confessor, or that I wanted to see
something in our Protestant churches like the Father Confessor
in the Catholic.  The whole thing is a miserable lie and invention
made out of whole cloth.  The language, which you quote, about
an attempt to recall on one side, "the cruelties of the Catholic
Church and frighten our women and children with horrid hobgoblins,"
is not my language.  That does appear in the _Telegram_.  But
it is the reporter's statement of what he understood my idea
to be in his own language.  What I said was: "We are confronted
with a public danger which comes from an attempt to rouse
the old feelings of the dark ages, and which ought to have
ended with them, between men who have different forms of faith.
It is an attempt to recall on one side the cruelties of the
Catholic Church and to frighten old women of both sexes, and,
on the other side, to band the men of the Catholic Church
together for political action.  Both these attempts will fail."

There is no more zealous believer in the principles of the
New England Puritans, and no more zealous advocate of them,
than I am.  There is not a man in Massachusetts who has more
at heart the welfare and perpetuity of our system of free
common schools than I have.  I was the first person, so far
as I know, who called public attention to the fact that they
were in danger, in any formal way.  I drew and had put in
the platform of the Republican State Convention the following
resolution:  "The Republican Party ever has maintained and
ever will maintain and defend, the common schools of Massachusetts
as the very citadel of happiness.  They shall be kept open
to all the children and free from all partisan and sectarian
control."

This doctrine I stand by.  And I stand by the further doctrine,
as I stated at length in my address at Clark University, that
the whole resources of the Commonwealth are pledged to their
support, and that that is the bottom mortgage on every dollar
of our property, and that no person can escape or be allowed
to escape that responsibility.  The difference between you
and me is a difference of method.  I want to get the 700,000
Catholics in Massachusetts on our side.  I want them to send
their children to the public schools, to pay their share of
the cost, and when their young men and women are suitable,
are intelligent, liberal persons, attached to the school system,
I want some of them to be employed as teachers.  I don't wish
to exclude them from my political support when they are Republicans
and agree with me in other matters, because of their religious
faith.  Nor do I wish to exclude them from being public school
teachers, if they will keep their particular religious tenets
out of their instruction, because of their religious faith, any
more than I would have excluded Phil Sheridan from his office
in the army, or would have refused to support him for any
public office, if he had been nominated for it.  Further,
I want to state and advocate my opinions in the face of day,
and you may be sure that I shall do this without flinching
before anybody's threats or anybody's displeasure or indignation.
You, on the other hand, I understand, want to go into a cellar
to declare your principles.  You want to join an association
whose members are ashamed to confess they belong to it; many
of whom, without apparently forfeiting the respect of their
fellows, lie about their membership in it when they are asked
about it.  You want to mass together the whole Catholic population
of Massachusetts to the support of their extreme and wrong-
headed priests, if any such can be found.

The difference between us is a difference of methods in accomplishing
the same result.  I think your method would overthrow the
common school system, would overthrow the Republican Party,
and would end by massing together all the Catholic voters,
as proscription always does mass men together, to increase
and strengthen that political power which you profess so much
to dread.

When O'Neill, the young Catholic soldier of Worcester, lay
dying, he said:  "Write to my dear mother and tell her I die
for my country.  I wish I had two lives to give.  Let the
Union flag be wrapped around me and a fold of it laid under
my head."  I feel proud that God gave me such a man to be
my countryman and townsman.  I have very little respect for
the Americanism that is not moved and stirred by such a story.
If O'Neill had left a daughter who had her father's spirit,
I would be willing to trust my child or grandchild to her
instruction in secular education in the public school, even
if the father had kissed with his last breath the cross on
which the Saviour died, or even if the parting soul had received
comfort from the lips of Thomas Conaty or John Power or John
Ireland or Archbishop Williams.

When John Boyle O'Reilly, the Catholic poet, sang the praises
of the Pilgrims at Plymouth, in that noblest of odes, when
he quoted in his preface from William Bradford and John Robinson
and Robert Cushman, I was glad to hear what he said, especially
when he quoted from the lips of the clergyman Robinson: "I
charge you before God that you follow me no further than you
have seen me follow the Lord Jesus Christ.  If God reveal
anything to you by any other instrument of His, be as ready
to receive it as ever you were to receive any truth by my
ministry, for I am verily persuaded, I am very confident,
the Lord hath more truths yet to break forth out of His Holy
Word."  I liked what he said.  If I understand your former
letter correctly, you didn't.  That is where we differ.  When
John Boyle O'Reilly said, declaring the very spirit of New
England Puritanism, and speaking of religious faith, "the
one sacred revolution is change of mind," when he spoke these
noble lines:

  So held they firm, the Fathers aye to be,
  From Home to Holland, Holland to the sea--
  Pilgrims for manhood, in their little ship,
  Hope in each heart, and prayer on every lip.
  Apart from all--unique, unworldly, true,
  Selected grain to sow the earth anew;
  A winnowed part--a saving remnant they;
  Dreamers who work; adventurers who pray!
  We know them by the exile that was theirs;
  Their justice, faith and fortitude attest.

When he further said:

  On the wintry main
  God flings their lives as farmers scatter grain,
  His breath propels the winged seed afloat;
  His tempests swerve to spare the fragile boat;
  Here on this rock and on this sterile soil,
  Began the kingdom, not of kings, but men;
  Began the making of the world again,
  Their primal code of liberty, their rules
  Of civil right; their churches, courts and schools;
  Their freedom's very secret here laid down--
  The spring of government is the little town!
  On their strong lines, we base our social health--
  The man--the home--the town--the Commonwealth;
  Their saintly Robinson was left behind
  To teach by gentle memory; to shame
  The bigot spirit and the word of flame;
  To write dear mercy in the Pilgrim's law;
  To lead to that wide faith his soul foresaw--

I liked what he said.  If I understand your former letter,
you didn't.  You don't want a man who differs from you saying
or thinking such things.  I want the whole 700,000 Catholics
of Massachusetts to believe what John Boyle O'Reilly believed,
and to love and reverence the Puritan founders of Massachusetts
as he did, and I think my way is the way to make them do it.
You don't, if I understand you.  You think the way to make
good citizens and good men of them and to attract them to
Protestantism, is to exclude them, their sons and daughters,
from all public employment and to go yourself into a dark
cellar and curse at them through the gratings of the windows.

I stated my religious faith and my ideas of the relation
of our religious denominations to each other, in an address
I delivered at Saratoga last year, of which I send you a
copy, and which I hope, as you have kindly volunteered to
send me so much of your opinion, you may perhaps be willing
to read.  It doesn't become me to say anything about it myself.
I am deeply sensible of its imperfections.  It fails to do
justice to what is in my own heart.  But perhaps I may be
permitted to say that within a few weeks after it was delivered,
an eminent Catholic clergyman sent me a message expressing
his delight in it.  The most famous Episcopalian Bishop in
the country said to a friend of mine that he had read it with
great pleasure and that it sounded to him like the old times.
A Baptist minister, bearing one of the most distinguished
names in the country, wrote me a letter, in which he said,
as he read it, "At every sentence, I said to myself, Amen,
Amen."  An eminent Orthodox minister, Doctor of Divinity,
read it aloud to his parish, in full, instead of his Sunday's
sermon.  And a very excellent and able Methodist minister
wrote to me and said, "If that is Unitarianism, I am afraid
I am a Unitarian."  I think the time has come to throw down
the walls between Christians and not to build new ones.  I
think the time has come to inculcate harmony and good will
between all American citizens, especially between all citizens
of the old Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

You quote some expressions which you attribute to Catholic
clergymen.  If you don't get any nearer right in quoting
them than you do in quoting me, I don't believe that they
ever said any such thing.  If they have, they never will
persuade any considerable number of Catholic laity in this
country, in this nineteenth century, to follow them.  You may
perhaps induce the Catholic young men and women of Massachusetts
to believe there is something in what those clergymen say.
They never will succeed in doing it themselves.

I don't think you will succeed in getting any considerable
number of the people of this country, who are able to read
and write, or to count ten on their fingers, to believe that, as
I am entering my seventieth year, I am actuated by any personal
ambition, in the counsel which I give my fellow citizens.
I don't think you will get them to believe that, if I were
so actuated, I should begin by saying anything which would
estrange a considerable number of the Protestant Republican
citizens of Massachusetts.  I don't think you will convince
them that I am indifferent to the good will of so large a
portion of the American people as are said to be enlisted
in the ranks of the secret society to which you refer.  If
you know as little of your Catholic fellow citizens as you
know of me, you have a good deal as yet to learn of the subject
of which you are speaking.

On the other hand, you may be quite sure I should be unwilling
to do injustice to any of my fellow citizens.  They will hardly
need be assured that I would not lightly or unnecessarily
incur their disapprobation.  But you may perhaps think it
pardonable that I should not be thoroughly informed as to
the principles, motives or conduct of a secret society.  As
you have undertaken the duty of giving me information, will
you kindly answer for me the following questions:

1st.  Is the organization to which you refer a secret organization?
Are its discussions in the face of day?  Do the persons whose
political errors they especially oppose have an opportunity
to know their purposes and to be convinced by their arguments?
If the organization be in any respect secret, why is it deemed
necessary to maintain such secrecy in the United States of
America and at the close of the nineteenth century?

2d.  Is it the custom of many persons who belong to it to
deny, when inquired of, that they are members of such an
association?  And if this be true, does such a falsehood cost
them the respect and friendship of their associates or diminish
their influence in the order?

3d.  Do members of the association, after joining it, retain
their membership in other political parties?  Do they agree
together upon candidates for office or delegates to conventions
to nominate officers and then go into their party caucuses
to support such delegates agreed upon in secret, without consultation
with their political brethren? If that be true, does it seem
to you that that course is honest?

4th.  Do you understand that any considerable number of Catholic
laymen, in this country, accept the interpretation which you
put upon the fifteen articles which you quote as principles
of the Roman Catholic Church?  Is it not true that the interpretation
is absolutely rejected by the Catholic laity in general, and
that they affirm for themselves as absolute independence of
the Pope or of the clergy in all secular matters as you or
I claim for ourselves in regard to Protestant clergymen?

5th.  Are not Italy and France, two Catholic countries, to-
day as absolutely free from any temporal power or influence
of the Pope or the Catholic clergy as is Massachusetts?

6th.  I have had sent me a little leaflet, purporting to be
the principles of the American Protective Association, which
you doubtless have seen.  When you say, in your third article,
that the American Protective Association is "opposed to the
holding of offices in the National, State or municipal Government,
by any subject or supporter of such ecclesiastical power,"
and in your fifth article, that you "protest against the employment
of the subjects of any un-American ecclesiastical power as
officers or teachers of our public schools," do you mean,
or no, that no Catholic shall hold such National or State
or municipal office, and that no Catholic shall be a teacher
in a public school?  You don't answer this question by quoting
the language of church officials in by-gone days or the intemperate
language of some priests in recent times.  It is a practical
question.  Do you or don't you mean to exclude from such office
and from such employment as teachers the bulk of the Catholic
population of Massachusetts?

7th.  Is it you opinion that General Philip H. Sheridan,
were he living, would be unfit to hold civil or military office
in this country?  Or that his daughter, if she entertained
the religious belief of her father, should be disqualified from
being a teacher in a public school?

I have no pride of opinion.  I shall be very glad to revise
any opinion of mine and, as you state it, I shall be very
glad to "know better in the future," if you will kindly enlighten
me.

You and I, as I have said, have the same object at heart.
We desire, above all things, the maintenance of the principles
of civil and religious liberty; and above all other instrumentalities
to that end, the maintenance of our common school system,
at the public charge, open to all the children and free from
partisan or sectarian control.  If you and I differ, it is
only as to what is the best means of accomplishing these
ends.  If you think that they are best accomplished by secret
societies, by hiding from the face of day, by men who will
not acknowledge what they are doing, and by refusing public
employment to men and women who think on these subjects exactly
as we do, but whose religious faith differs from ours, then
I don't agree with you.  I think your method will result
in driving and compacting together, in solid mass, persons
who will soon number nearly or quite fifty per cent. of the
voting population of Massachusetts.  Nothing strengthens
men, nothing makes them so hard to hear reason, nothing so
drives them to extremity in opinion or in action as persecution
or proscription.

On the other hand, my method is the method of absolute freedom
and of pure reason.  The Catholic boy, who has grown up in
our common schools, who had formed his youthful friendships
with his Protestant classmates, whose daughter or sister,
as he grows older, is employed as a teacher, will very soon
be attached to our common school system as we are ourselves.
He will be required, as he gets property, to pay his share
of his support.  He cannot ask to be exempt from a tax to
which all Protestants cheerfully submit, whether their own
children be in the schools or not, and he will not easily
be made to give his consent to paying twice.  The American
Spirit, the Spirit of the age, the Spirit of Liberty, the
Spirit of Equality, especially what Roger Williams called
"Soul Liberty" is able to maintain herself in a fair field
and in a free contest against all comers.  Do not compel her
to fight in a cellar.  Do not compel her to breathe the damp,
malarial atmosphere of dark places.  Especially let no member
of the Republican Party, the last child of freedom, lend his
aid to such an effort.  The atmosphere of the Republic is
the air of the mountain top and the sunlight and the open
field.  Her emblem is the eagle and not the bat.

  I am faithfully yours,
  GEORGE F. HOAR.

After the publication of the foregoing letter, I received
one from Theodore Roosevelt, who was holding a high office
in New York City, then at the beginning of his illustrious
political career.  He expressed his hearty sympathy and approval,
and offered to lay aside everything else and come to my aid,
if I so desired.  I need not say I took special pleasure in
this letter, which disclosed so unmistakably the honest and
brave heart of the man, who was then in his difficult office
fighting wild beasts at Ephesus.  But I did not need to accept
his offer.

I was angrily denounced.  But the leading Republican papers
soon came to my support.  The Republican political leaders
generally, though quietly, approved what I had said and done.
The generous and just heart of the American people was stirred,
and the result was that the movement, inspired by bigotry
and intolerance, lost its force, languished for a year or
two, and was little heard of afterward.

I dare say that the same causes which excited it may provoke
a similar movement more than once hereafter.  But I believe
it will fail as that failed.

I know how prone men are, especially old men, in telling
the story of their lives, to over-estimate the value and the
consequence of the things in which they have taken a part.
But I think I am not extravagant in claiming that the overthrow
of this dangerous delusion was of great value not only to
the Republican Party, but to the cause of religious liberty
in this country, and that the success of the A. P. A. would
have been the destruction of both.


CHAPTER XXX
THE ENGLISH MISSION

I may as well put on record here a matter which I suppose
has never been made public.  When in President Hayes's time
Mr. Welsh resigned the English Mission, Mr. Lowell, then in
Spain, was strongly recommended for the place.  Mr. Evarts,
Secretary of State, was quite unwilling to have Mr. Lowell
appointed.  I fancied that Mr. Evarts might have been influenced
somewhat by his reluctance to appoint a Harvard man.  He was
an exceedingly pleasant-natured man, with no bitterness in
him.  But he entered with a good deal of zeal into the not
unhealthy rivalry between the two famous Universities, Harvard
and Yale.  Of course I did not like that notion.  President
Hayes had an exceedingly friendly feeling for Harvard.  He
had studied at the Harvard Law School, and later had the degree
of Doctor of Laws there.  Mr. Lowell hesitated about accepting
the duty.  I said to the President:  "In the matter of the
English Mission, if Mr. Lowell declines, I have a suggestion
to make which Mr. Evarts, I am afraid, won't like very well.
But I wish to ask you to consider it, Evarts or no Evarts."
My relations with both of them made this familiar and half-
boyish style of dealing with so important a matter not unbecoming.
"I think President Eliot would be an excellent person for
such a service.  It is understood that he is somewhat out
of health.  I think if he should go to England for a year
or two, and take a vacation from his duties at the College,
it would reflect great credit on your Administration and on
the country, and he would return to his duties at Harvard
with renewed health and added reputation and capacity for
usefulness."  Mr. Hayes did not quite commit himself.  But
he expressed his very emphatic approval of the idea, and said
he guessed it might be brought to pass.  But I had, at his
request, sent a cable to Mr. Lowell who was then in Spain,
urging him to take the place.  He was then hesitating, but
finally, as is well known, consented.

I was on the friendliest terms with President Hayes.  As I
have already said he was good enough to offer me the office
of Attorney-General, when the appointment of Devens to the
Circuit Court was under consideration.

I had already, before that time, received from Mr. Evarts,
Secretary of State, the offer of the English Mission, as I
have said in another place, when Mr. Welsh resigned.

I may as well state here, although it belongs to a later
time, that the offer was made to me again, by President McKinley.
I give the correspondence with President McKinley when he
made me that offer:

EXECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C.
  September 13, 1898.
  HON. GEORGE F. HOAR (Confidential),
  WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS.

It would give me much satisfaction to appoint you Ambassador
to London.  Will it be agreeable to you?

  WILLIAM MCKINLEY.

September 14, 1898.
  TO THE PRESIDENT, WASHINGTON, D. C.

I am highly honored by your confidence, for which I am grateful.
But I believe I can better serve my country, and better support
your Administration by continuing to discharge the legislative
duties to which I have been accustomed for thirty years, than
by undertaking new responsibilities at my age, now past seventy-
two.  If it were otherwise, I cannot afford to maintain the
scale of living which the social customs of London make almost
indispensable to an Ambassador, and I have no right to impose
upon my wife, in her present state of health, the burden which
would fall upon her.  Be assured of my warm personal regard
and of my desire to stand by you in the difficult and trying
period which is before you.

  GEO. F. HOAR


CHAPTER XXXI
PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AND THE SYRIAN CHILDREN

A very touching incident, characteristic of the kind heart
of President Roosevelt, ought to be put on record in connection
with his visit to Worcester.

During the Christmas holidays of 1901 a very well known Syrian,
a man of high standing and character, came into my son's office
and told him this story:

A neighbor and countryman of his had a few years before emigrated
to the United States and established himself in Worcester.
Soon afterward, he formally declared his intention of becoming
an American citizen.  After a while, he amassed a little money
and sent to his wife, whom he had left in Syria, the necessary
funds to convey her and their little girl and boy to Worcester.
She sold her furniture and whatever other belongings she had,
and went across Europe to France, where they sailed from one
of the northern ports on a German steamer for New York.

Upon their arrival at New York, it appeared that the children
had contracted a disease of the eyelids, which the doctors
of the Immigration Bureau declared to be trachoma, which is
contagious, and in adults incurable.  It was ordered that
the mother might land, but that the children must be sent
back in the ship upon which they arrived, on the following
Thursday.  This would have resulted in sending them back as
paupers, as the steamship company, compelled to take them
as passengers free of charge, would have given them only such
food as was left by the sailors, and would have dumped them
out in France to starve, or get back as beggars to Syria.

The suggestion that the mother might land was only a cruel
mockery.  Joseph J. George, a worthy citizen of Worcester,
brought the facts of the case to the attention of my son,
who in turn brought them to my attention.  My son had meantime
advised that a bond be offered to the Immigration authorities
to save them harmless from any trouble on account of the children.

I certified these facts to the authorities and received a
statement in reply that the law was peremptory, and that it
required that the children be sent home; that trouble had
come from making like exceptions theretofore; that the Government
hospitals were full of similar cases, and the authorities
must enforce the law strictly in the future.  Thereupon I
addressed a telegram to the Immigration Bureau at Washington,
but received an answer that nothing could be done for the
children.

Then I telegraphed the facts to Senator Lodge, who went in
person to the Treasury Department, but could get no more
favorable reply.  Senator Lodge's telegram announcing their
refusal was received in Worcester Tuesday evening, and repeated
to me in Boston just as I was about to deliver an address
before the Catholic College there.  It was too late to do
anything that night.  Early Wednesday morning, the day before
the children were to sail, when they were already on the ship,
I sent the following dispatch to President Roosevelt:

TO THE PRESIDENT, WHITE HOUSE, WASHINGTON, D. C.

I appeal to your clear understanding and kind and brave heart
to interpose your authority to prevent an outrage which will
dishonor the country and create a foul blot on the American
flag.  A neighbor of mine in Worcester, Mass., a Syrian by
birth, made some time ago his public declaration for citizenship.
He is an honest, hard-working and in every way respectable
man.  His wife with two small children have reached New York.

He sent out the money to pay their passage.  The children
contracted a disorder of the eyes on the ship.  The Treasury
authorities say that the mother may land but the children
cannot, and they are to be sent back Thursday.  Ample bond
has been offered and will be furnished to save the Government
and everybody from injury or loss.  I do not think such a
thing ought to happen under your Administration, unless you
personally decide that the case is without remedy.  I am told
the authorities say they have been too easy heretofore, and
must draw the line now.  That shows they admit the power to
make exceptions in proper cases.  Surely, an exception should
be made in the case of little children of a man lawfully here,
and who has duly and in good faith declared his intention
to become a citizen.  The immigration law was never intended
to repeal any part of the naturalization laws which provide
that the minor children get all the rights of the father as
to citizenship.  My son knows the friends of this man personally
and that they are highly respectable and well off.  If our
laws require this cruelty, it is time for a revolution, and
you are just the man to head it.

  GEORGE F. HOAR.

Half an hour from the receipt of that dispatch at the White
House Wednesday forenoon, Theodore Roosevelt, President of
the United States, sent a peremptory order to New York to
let the children come in.  They have entirely recovered from
the disorder of the eyes, which turned out not to be contagious,
but only caused by the glare of the water, or the hardships
of the voyage.  The children are fair-haired, with blue eyes,
and of great personal beauty, and would be exhibited with
pride by any American mother.

When the President came to Worcester he expressed a desire
to see the children.  They came to meet him at my house, dressed
up in their best and glorious to behold.  The President was
very much interested in them, and said when what he had done
was repeated in his presence, that he was just beginning to
get angry.

The result of this incident was that I had a good many similar
applications for relief in behalf of immigrants coming in
with contagious diseases.  Some of them were meritorious,
and others untrustworthy.  In the December session of 1902
I procured the following amendment to be inserted in the immigration
law.

"Whenever an alien shall have taken up his permanent residence
in this country and shall have filed his preliminary declaration
to become a citizen and thereafter shall send for his wife
or minor children to join him, if said wife or either of said
children shall be found to be affected with any contagious
disorder, and it seems that said disorder was contracted on
board the ship in which they came, such wife or children shall
be held under such regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury
shall prescribe until it shall be determined whether the disorder
will be easily curable or whether they can be permitted to
land without danger to other persons; and they shall not be
deported until such facts have been ascertained."


CHAPTER XXXII
NATIONAL BANKRUPTCY

I have, since I have been in the Senate, taken great interest
in the passage of a bill for a system of National Bankruptcy.
The Constitution gives Congress power to establish a uniform
system of Bankruptcy.  The people of Massachusetts, a commercial
and manufacturing State from the beginning, have always desired
a Bankrupt law.  They were large dealers with other States
and with other countries.  Insolvent debtors in Massachusetts
could not get discharge from their debts contracted in such
dealings.  The Massachusetts creditors having debts against
insolvents in other States found that their debtors under
the laws of those States either got preferences or made fraudulent
assignments which they could not detect or prevent.

On the other hand, the bankruptcy laws have always been unpopular
in many parts of the country.  The Democrat who strictly construed
the Constitution did not like to see this power of Congress
vigorously exercised.  The National Courts, who must administer
such laws, were always the object of jealousy and suspicion
in the South and West.  The people did not like to be summoned
to attend the settlement of an estate in bankruptcy, hundreds
and hundreds of miles, to the place where the United States
Court was sitting, in States like Texas or Missouri.  The
sympathy of many communities is apt to be with the debtor,
and not with the creditors, who were represented as harpies
or vultures preying on the flesh of their unfortunate victims.
A good example of this prejudice will be found in an extract
from the speech of Senator Ingalls, of Kansas.  He said in
defending what was known as the equity scheme:

"The opposition arose first, from the great wholesale merchants
in the chief distributing centres of the country.  They have
their agents and attorneys in the vicinity of every debtor,
obtaining early information of approaching disaster, and ready
to avail themselves of the local machinery of State courts
by attachment or by preferences, through which they can secure
full payment of their claims, to the exclusion of less powerful
or less vigilant but equally meritorious creditors.  Naturally
they want no Bankrupt law of any description.

"Second.  From the disabled veterans of the old army registers;
from the professional assignees and wreckers of estates, who,
by exorbitant fees and collusive sales of assets to convenient
favorites, plundered debtor and creditor alike and made the
system an engine of larceny and confiscation.

"Third.  From those who desire, instead of a system for the
discharge of honest but unfortunate debtors upon the surrender
of their estates, a criminal code and a thumb-screw machine
for the collection of doubtful and desperate debts.  They
covet a return to the primitive practices which prevailed
in Rome, when the debtor was sold into slavery or had his
body cut into pieces and distributed pro rata among his creditors.

"Fourth.  From those timid and cautious conservatives who
believe that nothing is valuable that is not venerable.

"Like the statesman described by Macaulay, they prefer to
perish by precedent rather than be saved by innovation.  They
adhere to ancient failures rather than incur the risk of success
through venture and experiment.

"Fifth.  From Boards of Trade, Chambers of Commerce and other
ornamental organizations who, being entirely uninformed on
the subject, permit themselves to become the conduits through
which the misrepresentation and animosity of avaricious creditors
and rapacious attorneys are discharged upon Congress and the
country."

I had moved in the Senate, in 1882, a bill favored by the
merchants and manufacturers of Massachusetts, which was largely
the work of Judge John Lowell, of the United States Circuit
Court, one of the most accomplished lawyers of his day, as
an amendment to a bill which Mr. Edmunds, Mr. Davis and Mr.
Ingalls had reported as a Subcommittee to the Senate Judiciary
Committee, and which had been reported from that Committee
to the Senate.

The Lowell Bill was on my motion substituted for the report
of the Judiciary Committee, by a majority of three.  This
bill was extensively discussed in June and December.  But
I was unable to secure its passage.  It passed the Senate,
but it did not get through the House.

I have had the Parliamentary charge of all Bankruptcy measures
in the Senate from that time.  After the failure of the Lowell
Bill, the Boards of Trade and Chambers of Commerce, and other
like associations throughout the country, took up the matter
very zealously by employing an able lawyer, the Hon. Jay
L. Torrey of Missouri, to present the matter in the two Houses
of Congress.  He was thoroughly acquainted with the principles
and history of Bankruptcy laws in this country and England.
But he had no compromise in him.  He insisted on the Bill
which he drew, which was a modification of the Lowell Bill,
without being willing to make any concession to objection
or difference of opinion in Congress, or out of it.  He said
he would have a perfect law, or none at all.  The measure
as he drew it was apparently very austere and harsh to the
debtor.  It enumerated a large number of offences for which
the debtor was to be punished by fine and imprisonment, and
by a denial of his discharge.  Mr. Torrey's provisions were
not very unreasonable.  But they made it seem as if the Bill
were a penal code for the punishment of fraudulent debtors.
A simple provision that any debtor who wilfully should make
false answer to any question lawfully put to him by the Court,
or who wilfully concealed or attempted to conceal any property
from his assignee should lose his discharge and be punished
with a proper and moderate punishment, would have answered
the whole purpose.  I take some blame to myself for not insisting
more strenuously upon modifying Mr. Torrey's measure.  But
he constantly visited different Senators and Representatives
and came back to me with glowing accounts of the prospects
of the Bill, and of their promises to support the Bill.  He
was also the agent of the business organizations of the country
who had passed resolutions in favor of the measure as he had
drawn it.  It seemed to me therefore that if I should get
the Bill amended and then it got lost, I should incur the
great reproach of having obstinately set up my judgment against
that of this large number of the ablest men in the country,
who were so deeply interested in the matter.  So the Bill,
though brought up and pressed Congress after Congress, failed
until Mr. Torrey enlisted in the Spanish War.

I then introduced a Bill in a softened and modified form.
It was attacked in that form by Senator Nelson of Minnesota,
a very excellent lawyer and gentleman of great influence,
in the Senate.  He succeeded in having the Bill modified
and softened still more.  The Bill then passed and went to
the House which, under the leadership of the Judiciary Committee,
substituted the original Bill.

Mr. Nelson and I, with Mr. Lindsay of Kentucky, were put on
the Conference Committee in the Senate, with Mr. Henderson,
afterward Speaker, Mr. Ray of New York, now Judge of the
U. S. District Court, and Mr. Terry of Missouri, on the part
of the House.  We struggled nearly the whole winter.  Mr.
Nelson and Mr. Ray took the burden of the contest upon their
shoulders.  Their attempts at compromise reminded their brethren
of the old scientific problem--"What will happen when an irresistible
force encounters an immovable obstacle." But both gentlemen,
each exceedingly firm in his own opinion when he thought he
was in the right, were wise and reasonable and conscientious
men.  So at last they agreed upon the present Bankruptcy
Bill, which became a law July 1, 1898.  It was on the whole
satisfactory to the country, except for one clause in it, which
was interpreted by the United States Supreme Court in a manner
contrary to the understanding and expectation of the framers
of the Bill.

A law was passed February 7, 1903, correcting this and some
minor defects.  It is hoped, though we cannot be sure in
such a matter, that a permanent system of Bankruptcy, so
essential to all commercial, indeed to all civilized nations, is
now established, and will be maintained in the United States.


CHAPTER XXXIII
THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS

It has been my singular ill fortune that I have been compelled
to differ from the Republican Party, and from a good many
of my political associates, upon many important matters.

It has been my singular good fortune that, so far, they have
all come to my way of thinking, as have the majority of the
American people, in regard to every one, with perhaps one
exception.  That is the dealing of the American people with
the people of the Philippine Islands, by the Treaty with Spain.
The war that followed it crushed the Republic that the Philippine
people had set up for themselves, deprived them of their independence,
and established there, by American power, a Government in
which the people have no part, against their will.  No man,
I think, will seriously question that that action was contrary
to the Declaration of Independence, the fundamental principles
declared in many State constitutions, the principles avowed
by the founders of the Republic and by our statesmen of all
parties down to a time long after the death of Lincoln.

If the question were, whether I am myself right, or whether
my friends and companions in the Republican Party be right,
I should submit to their better judgment.  But I feel quite
confident, though of that no man can be certain, that if the
judgment of the American people, even in this generation,
could be taken on that question alone, I should find myself
in the majority.  If it be not so, the issue is between the
opinion of the American people for more than a century, and
the opinion that the American people has expressed for one
or two Presidential terms.

Surely I do not need to argue the question; at any rate, I
will not here undertake to argue the question, that our dealing
with the Philippine people is a violation of the principles
to which our people adhered from 1776 to 1893.  If the maintenance
of slavery were inconsistent with them, it was admitted that
in that particular we were violating them, or were unable
from circumstances to carry them into effect.  Mr. Jefferson
thought so himself.

But the accomplishment by this Republic of its purpose to
subjugate the Philippine people to its will, under the claim
that it, and not they, had the right to judge of their fitness
for self-government, is a rejection of the old American doctrine
as applicable to any race we may judge to be our inferior.

This doctrine will be applied hereafter, unless it be abandoned,
to the Negro at home.  Senator Tillman of South Carolina well
said, and no gentleman in the Senate contradicted him: "Republican
leaders do not longer dare to call into question the justice
or the necessity of limiting Negro suffrage in the South."
The same gentleman said at another time: "I want to call your
attention to the remarkable change that has come over the
spirit of the dream of the Republicans.  Your slogans of the
past--brotherhood of man and fatherhood of God--have gone
glimmering down through the ages.  The brotherhood of man
exists no longer." These statements of Mr. Tillman have never
been challenged, and never can be.

I do not mean here to renew the almost interminable debate.
I will only make a very brief statement of my position:

The discussion began with the acquisition of Hawaii.  Ever
since I came to the Senate I had carefully studied the matter
of the acquisition of Hawaii.  I had become thoroughly satisfied
that it would be a great advantage to the people of the United
States, as well as for the people of Hawaii.

Hawaii is 2,100 miles from our Pacific coast.  Yet if a line
be drawn from the point of our territory nearest Asia to the
Southern boundary of California, that line being the chord
of which our Pacific coast is the bow, Hawaii will fall this
side of it.  Held by a great Nation with whom we were at war,
it would be a most formidable and valuable base of supplies.
We had sustained a peculiar relation to it.  American missionaries
had redeemed the people from barbarism and Paganism.  Many
of them, and their descendants, had remained in the Islands.
The native Hawaiians were a perishing race.  They had gone
down from 300,000 to 30,000 within one hundred years.

The Japanese wanted it.  The Portugese wanted it.  Other nations
wanted it.  But the Hawaiians seemed neither to know nor care
whether they wanted it or no.  They were a perishing people.
Their only hope and desire and expectation was that in the
Providence of God they might lead a quiet, undisturbed life,
fishing, bathing, supplied with tropical fruits, and be let
alone.

We had always insisted that our relation to them was peculiar;
that they could not be permitted to fall under the dominion
of another power, even by their own consent.  That had been
declared by our Department of State under Administrations
of all parties, including Mr. Webster, Mr. Seward, and Mr.
Bayard.  They were utterly helpless.  As their Queen has lately
declared:  "The best thing for them that could have happened
was to belong to the United States."

By the Constitution of Hawaii, the Government had been authorized
to make a treaty of annexation with this country.  It was
said that that Constitution was the result of usurpation which
would not have come to pass but for American aid, and the
presence of one of our men-of-war.  But that Government had
been maintained for six or seven years.  Four of them were
while Mr. Cleveland was President, who it was well known would
be in full sympathy with an attempt to restore the old Government.
So if the people had been against it, the Government under
that Constitution could not have lasted an hour.

President Harrison had negotiated a treaty of annexation,
against which no considerable remonstrance or opposition
was uttered.  My approval of it was then, I suppose, well
known.  Certainly no friend of mine, and nobody in Massachusetts,
so far as I know, in the least objected or remonstrated against
it.  The treaty was withdrawn from the consideration of the
Senate by President Cleveland.

Another was negotiated soon after President McKinley came
in.  Meantime, however, the controversy with Spain had assumed
formidable proportions, and the craze for an extension of
our Empire had begun its course.  Many Republican leaders
were advocating the acquisition of the Hawaiian Islands, not
for the reasons I have just stated, but on the avowed ground
that it was necessary we should own them as a point of vantage
for acquiring dominion in the East.  It was said that China
was about to be divided among the great Western powers, and
that we must have our share.  I saw when the time approached
for action of the McKinley Treaty that the question could
not be separated, at least in debate, from the question of
entering upon a career of conquest of Empire in the Far East.

Under these circumstances the question of duty came to me:
Will you adhere to the purpose long formed, and vote for the
acquisition of Hawaii solely on its own merit?  Or, will you
vote against it, for fear that the bad and mischievous reasons
that are given for it is so many quarters, will have a pernicious
tendency only to be counteracted by the defeat of the treaty
itself?

I hesitated long.  President McKinley sent for me to come
to the White House, as was his not infrequent habit.  He said
he wanted to consult me upon the question whether it would
be wise for him to have a personal interview with Senator
Morrill of Vermont.  He had been told that Mr. Morrill was
opposed to the Treaty.  The President said: "I do not quite
like to try to influence the action of an old gentleman like
Mr. Morrill, so excellent, and of such great experience.  It
seems to me that it might be thought presumptuous, if I were
to do so.  But it is very important to us to have his vote,
if we can."  The President added something implying that he
understood that I was in favor of the Treaty.

I said, "I ought to say, Mr. President, in all candor, that
I feel very doubtful whether I can support it myself." President
McKinley said:  "Well, I don't know what I shall do.  We cannot
let those Islands go to Japan.  Japan has her eye on them.
Her people are crowding in there.  I am satisfied they do
not go there voluntarily, as ordinary immigrants, but that
Japan is pressing them in there, in order to get possession
before anybody can interfere.  If something be not done, there
will be before long another Revolution, and Japan will get
control.  Some little time ago the Hawaiian Government observed
that when the immigrants from a large steamer went ashore
they marched with a military step, indicating that they were
a body of trained soldiers.  Thereupon Hawaii prohibited the
further coming in of Japanese.  Japan claimed that was in
violation of their treaty, and sent a ship of war to Hawaii.
I was obliged to notify Japan that no compulsory measures
upon Hawaii, in behalf of the Japan Government, would be tolerated
by this country.  So she desisted.  But the matters are still
in a very dangerous position, and Japan is doubtless awaiting
her opportunity."

I told President McKinley that I favored then, as I always
had, the acquisition of Hawaii.  But I did not like the spirit
with which it was being advocated both in the Senate and
out of it.  I instanced several very distinguished gentlemen
indeed, one a man of very high authority in the Senate in
matters relating to foreign affairs, who were urging publicly
and privately the Hawaiian Treaty on the ground that we must
have Hawaii in order to help us get our share of China.  President
McKinley disclaimed any such purpose.  He expressed his earnest
and emphatic dissent from the opinions imputed to several
leading Republicans, whom he named.

I never, at any time during the discussion of the Philippine
question, expressed a more emphatic disapproval of the acquisition
of dependencies or Oriental Empire by military strength, than
he expressed on that occasion.  I am justified in putting
this on record, not only because I am confirmed by several
gentlemen in public life, who had interviews with him, but
because he made in substance the same declaration in public.

He declared, speaking of this very matter of acquiring sovereignty
over Spanish territory by conquest:

"Forcible annexation, according to our American code of morals,
would be criminal aggression."

He said at another time:

"Human rights and constitutional privileges must not be forgotten
in the race for wealth and commercial supremacy.  The Government
of the people must be by the people and not by a few of the
people.  It must rest upon the free consent of the governed
and all of the governed.  Power, it must be remembered, which
is secured by oppression or usurpation or by any form of injustice
is soon dethroned.  We have no right in law or morals to usurp
that which belongs to another, whether it is property or power."

I suppose he was then speaking of our duty as to any people
whom we might liberate from Spain, as the results of the Spanish
War.  He unquestionably meant that we had no right, in law
or morals, to usurp the right of self-government which belonged
to the Cubans, or to the Philippine people.

Yet I have no doubt whatever that in the attitude that he
took later he was actuated by a serious and lofty purpose
to do right.  I think he was led on from one step to another
by what he deemed the necessity of the present occasion.  I
dare say that he was influenced, as any other man who was
not more than human would have been influenced, by the apparently
earnest desire of the American people, as he understood it,
as it was conveyed to him on his Western journey.  But I believe
every step he took he thought necessary at the time.  I further
believe, although I may not be able to convince other men,
and no man will know until the secret history of that time
shall be made known, that if he had lived, before his Administration
was over, he would have placed the Republic again on the principles
from which it seems to me we departed--the great doctrine
of Jefferson, the great doctrine of the Declaration of Independence,
that there can be no just Government by one people over another
without its consent, and that the International law declared
by the Republic is that all Governments must depend for their
just powers upon the consent of the governed.  This was insisted
on by our Fathers as the doctrine of International law, to
be acted upon by the infant Republic for itself.  In this
I am confirmed by the testimony of Mr. Secretary Long, who
was in President McKinley's most intimate counsels.

The Treaty negotiated by President McKinley with Hawaii was
not acted upon.  It was concluded to substitute a joint resolution,
for which there was a precedent in the case of the acquisition
of Texas.  I voted for the joint resolution, as did Senator
Hale of Maine, and several Democratic Senators, who were earnestly
opposed to what is known as the policy of Imperialism.

I left the President, after the conversation above related,
without giving him any assurance as to my action.  But I
determined on full reflection, to support the acquisition of
Hawaii, in accordance with my long-settled purpose, and at
the same time to make a clear and emphatic statement of my
unalterable opposition to acquiring dependencies in the East,
if we did not expect, when the proper time came, to admit
them to the Union as States.  This I did to the best of my
power.  I was invited to give an address before a college
in Pennsylvania, where I took occasion to make an emphatic
declaration of the doctrine on which I meant to act.

Afterward, July 5, 1898, I made a speech in the Senate, on
the joint resolution for the acquisition of Hawaii, in which
I said that I had entertained grave doubts in regard to that
measure; that I had approached the subject with greater hesitation
and anxiety than I had ever felt in regard to any other matter
during the whole of my public life.

I went on to say:

"The trouble I have found with the Hawaiian business is this:
Not in the character of the population of the Sandwich Island,
not in their distance from our shores, not in the doubt that
we have an honest right to deal with the existing government
there in such a matter.  I have found my trouble in the nature
and character of the argument by which, in the beginning and
ever since, a great many friends of annexation have sought
to support it . . . .

"If this be the first step in the acquisition of dominion
over barbarous archipelagoes in distant seas; if we are to
enter into competition with the great powers of Europe in
the plundering of China, in the division of Africa; if we
are to quit our own to stand on foreign lands; if our commerce
is hereafter to be forced upon unwilling peoples at the cannon's
mouth; if we are ourselves to be governed in part by peoples
to whom the Declaration of Independence is a stranger; or,
worse still, if we are to govern subjects and vassal States,
trampling as we do it on our own great Charter which recognizes
alike the liberty and the dignity of individual manhood, then
let us resist this thing in the beginning, and let us resist
it to the death.

"I do not agree with those gentlemen who think we would wrest
the Philippine Islands from Spain and take charge of them
ourselves.  I do not think we should acquire Cuba, as the
result of the existing war, to be annexed to the United States."

I reinforced this protest as well I could.  But I went on
to state the reasons which had actuated me in favoring the
measure, and that my unconquerable repugnance to the acquisition
of territory to be held in dependency did not apply to that
case.

I cited the Teller resolution, and declared that it bound
the American people in honor, and that its principle applied
to all Spanish territory.  I maintained that there was nothing
in the acquisition of Hawaii inconsistent with this doctrine.
I think so still.

I was bitterly reproached by some worthy persons, who I suppose
will always find matter for bitter reproach in everything
said or done on public matters.  They charged me with speaking
one way and voting another.  But I am content to leave the
case on its merits, and on the record.

The war went on.  The feeling of the country was deeply excited.
President McKinley made his famous Western journey.  He was
greeted by enthusiastic throngs.  The feeling in that part
of the country in favor of a permanent dominion over the Philippine
Islands was uttered by excited crowds, whom he addressed from
the platform and the railroad cars as he passed thorough the
country.  But the sober, conservative feeling, which seldom
finds utterance in such assemblies, did not make itself heard.

The President returned to Washington, undoubtedly in the honest
belief that the country demanded that he acquire the Philippine
Islands, and that Congress should govern them.

I have never attributed publicly, or in my own heart, to
President McKinley any but the most conscientious desire
to do his duty in what, as the case seems to me, was an entire
change of purpose.  Many military and naval officers, from
whose reports he had to get his facts almost wholly, insisted
that the Philippine people were unfit for self-government.
After the unhappy conflict of arms the solution of the problem
seemed to be to compel the Philippine people to unconditional
submission.  It would not be just or fair that I should undertake
to state the reasons which controlled the President in adopting
the conclusions to which I did not myself agree.  I am merely
telling my own part in the transaction.

When I got back to Washington, at the beginning of the session
in December, 1898, I had occasion to see the President almost
immediately.  His purpose was to make a Treaty by which, without
the assent of their inhabitants, we should acquire the Philippine
Islands.  We were to hold and govern in subjection the people
of the Philippine Islands.  That was pretty well understood.

The national power of Spain was destroyed.  It was clear
that she must submit to whatever terms we should impose.
The President had chosen, as Commissioners to negotiate the
Treaty, five gentlemen, three of whom, Senators Cushman K.
Davis, and William P. Frye and Whitelaw Reid, the accomplished
editor of the New York _Tribune,_ former Minister to France,
were well known to be zealous for acquiring territory in the
East.  Mr. Frye was said to have declared in a speech not
long before he went abroad that he was in favor of keeping
everything we could lay our hands on.  I suppose that was,
however, intended as a bit of jocose extravagance, which that
most excellent gentleman did not mean to have taken too seriously.

Mr. Day, the Secretary of State, and Senator Gray of Delaware,
were understood to be utterly opposed to the policy of expansion
or Imperialism.

I do not know about Mr. Day.  But it appeared, when three
years afterward the correspondence between the Commissioners
and the Department of State became public, that Mr. Day expressed
no objection to the acquisition of Luzon, but objected to
a peremptory demand for the whole Philippine Island group,
thereby--to use his language--"leaving us open to the imputation
of following agreement to negotiate with demand for whole
subject matter of discussion ourselves."

The public impression as to Senator Gray is confirmed by the
following remonstrance, which appears in the same correspondence:

PEACE COMMISSIONERS TO MR. HAY
[Telegram]

PARIS, October 25, 1898.

The undersigned cannot agree that it is wise to take Philippine
Islands in whole or in part.  To do so would be to reverse
accepted continental policy of the country, declared and acted
upon throughout our history.  Propinquity governs the case
of Cuba and Porto Rico.  Policy proposed introduces us into
European politics and the entangling alliances against which
Washington and all American statemen have protested.  It will
make necessary a navy equal to largest of powers; a greatly
increased military establishment; immense sums for fortifications
and harbors; multiply occasions for dangerous complications
with foreign nations, and increase burdens of taxation.  Will
receive in compensation no outlet for American labor in labor
market already overcrowded and cheap; no area for homes for
American citizens; climate and social conditions demoralizing
to character of American youth; new and disturbing questions
introduced into our politics; church question menacing.   On
whole, instead of indemnity--injury.

The undersigned cannot agree that any obligation incurred
to insurgents is paramount to our own manifest interests.
Attacked Manila as part of legitimate war against Spain.
If we had captured Cadiz and Carlists had helped us, would
not owe duty to stay by them at the conclusion of war.  On
the contrary, interests and duty would require us to abandon
both Manila and Cadiz.  No place for colonial administration
or government of subject people in American system.  So much
from standpoint of interest; but even conceding all benefits
claimed for annexation, we thereby abandon the infinitely
greater benefit to accrue from acting the part of a great,
powerful, and Christian nation; we exchange the moral grandeur
and strength to be gained by keeping our word to nations of
the world and by exhibiting a magnanimity and moderation in
the hour of victory that becomes the advanced civilization
we claim, for doubtful material advantages and shameful stepping
down from high moral position boastfully assumed.  We should
set example in these respects, not follow in the selfish and
vulgar greed for territory which Europe has inherited from
mediaeval times.  Our declaration of war upon Spain was accompanied
by a solemn and deliberate definition of our purpose.  Now
that we have achieved all and more than our object, let us
simply keep our word.  Third article of the protocol leaves
everything concerning the control of the Philippine Islands
to negotiation between the parties.

It is absurd now to say that we will not negotiate but will
appropriate the whole subject-matter of negotiation.  At
the very least let us adhere to the President' instructions
and if conditions require the keeping of Luzon forego the
material advantages claimed in annexing other islands.  Above
all let us not make a mockery of the injunction contained
in those instructions, where, after stating that we took
up arms only in obedience to the dictates of humanity and
in the fulfillment of high public and moral obligations, and
that we had no design of aggrandizement and no ambition of
conquest, the President among other things eloquently says:

"It is my earnest wish that the United States in making peace
should follow the same high rule of conduct which guided it
in facing war.  It should be as scrupulous and magnanimous
in the concluding settlement as it was just and humane in
its original action."

This and more, of which I earnestly ask a reperusal, binds
my conscience and governs my action.

GEORGE GRAY.
  WEDNESDAY, 12.30, night.

Senator Gray afterward signed the Treaty, defended it in
debate, and voted for its ratification.  He vigorously defended
his vote on the floor of the Senate, chiefly by the argument
that when he learned that it was the purpose of the United
States to expel Spain from the Philippine Islands, he concluded
it was our duty to remain there for the protection of the
people against foreign rapacity and against domestic anarchy.
He claimed that he had been influenced in coming to this conclusion
very considerably by the fact that I was reported to have
said that under no circumstances would we give back the Philippine
people to Spain.  That was true.  I believed then, and believe
now, that it was our duty to deliver them from Spain, to protect
them against her, or against the cupidity of any other nation
until her people could have tried fully the experiment of self-
government, in which I have little doubt they would have
succeeded.

When I saw President McKinley early in December, 1898, he
was, I suppose, committed to the policy to which he adhered.
He greeted me with the delightful and affectionate cordiality
which I always found in him.  He took me by the hand, and
said:  "How are you feeling this winter, Mr. Senator?" I
was determined there should be no misunderstanding.  I replied
at once:  "Pretty pugnacious, I confess, Mr. President."
The tears came into his eyes, and he said, grasping my hand
again:  "I shall always love you, whatever you do."

I found we differed widely on this great subject.  I denounced
with all the vigor of which I was capable the Treaty, and
the conduct of the war in the Philippine Islands, in the Senate,
on the platform, in many public letters, and in articles in
magazines and newspapers.  But President McKinley never abated
one jot of his cordiality toward me.  I did not, of course,
undertake to press upon him my advice in matters affecting
the Philippine Islands, about which we differed so much.  But
he continued to seek it, and to take it in all other matters
as constantly as ever before.

In order that it may not be supposed that I deceived myself
in regard to President McKinley's kindly regard, I may perhaps
be pardoned for saying that his close friend, Senator Hanna,
has more than once assured me that McKinley's love for me
was never abated, and for citing a sentence from an article
by Charles Emory Smith, his trusted counsellor and able and
accomplished Postmaster-General, in this Cabinet.  Mr. Smith
says:

"Senator Hoar was the earnest foe and critic of President
McKinley's policy.  But President McKinley had the warmest
regard and consideration for him.  Nothing, indeed, in public
life was sweeter than the sentiment of these different and
differing men toward each other.  President McKinley was anxious
to commission Senator Hoar as Minister to England, and proffered
him the place.  It was without any desire to remove him from
the arena of contention--apprehension of such a reflection
restrained the proffer for a time--though the contention had
not then been fully developed."

After President McKinley's death I expressed the public sorrow
and my own in an address to a vast audience of the people
of my own city of Worcester, in Mechanics' Hall; and again,
at the request of the Republican State Committee, at the Republican
State Convention shortly afterward.

I have reason to know that both the addresses gave pleasure
to many of the lamented President's closest and warmest friends
throughout the country.  I was afterward invited by the City
Government of Worcester to deliver a historical eulogy on
President McKinley before them.  That office, it seemed to
me, I ought to decline.  It was not because I was behind any
other man in admiration or personal affection for that lofty
and beautiful character.  But I thought that address, which
was not only to utter the voice of public sorrow, but to give
a careful and discriminating sketch of the public life of
its subject, ought to be delivered by some person who agreed
with him in regard to the most important action of his life.
I could not well pass over the Philippine question.  I could
not well speak of it without stating my own opinion.  I could
not undertake to state President McKinley's opinion, conduct
or policy, without expressing my disapproval of it, and if
I did not do that, I could not state it without being thought
by those who heartily approved it, not to have stated it justly
and fairly.

I had repeatedly declared, during the preceding two years,
both before and since his death, my highest admiration for
the intellectual and moral qualities of my beloved friend,
and my belief that he would have a very high place in history
among the best and ablest men of the country.

But I thought the story of the important part of his life
should be told from his point of view, and not from mine;
that the reasons which governed him should be stated by a
person sure to appreciate them fully.  If a great Catholic
Prelate were to die, his eulogy should not be pronounced
by a Protestant.  When Dr. Channing died, we did not select
a Calvinist minister to pronounce his funeral sermon.  When
Charles Sumner died Mr. Schurz and Mr. Curtis, not some old
Whig, and not some earnest supporter of General Grant, pronounced
the eulogy.  I suppose nobody would have dreamed of asking
a Free Trader to pronounce the eulogy on President McKinley
if he had died soon after the beginning of his first term.
So I declined the office.  The City did not ask anybody else
to fill my place, or perform the task.

I will not now renew the debate about our treatment of the
people of the Philippine Islands.  My opinion has not at all
changed.  I think that under the lead of Mabini and Aguinaldo
and their associates, but for our interference, a Republic
would have been established in Luzon, which would have compared
well with the best of the Republican Governments between the
United States and Cape Horn.  For years and for generations,
and perhaps for centuries, there would have been turbulence,
disorder and revolution.  But in her own way Destiny would
have evolved for them a force of civic rule best adapted to
their need.  If we had treated them as we did Cuba, we should
have been saved the public shame of violating not only our
own pledges, but the rule of conduct which we had declared
to be self-evident truth in the beginning of our history.
We should have been saved the humiliation of witnessing the
subjection by Great Britain of the Boers in South Africa,
without a murmur of disapproval, and without an expression
of one word of sympathy for the heroic victims.

My term as Senator expired on the fourth of March, 1901.
The election of Senator for the following term came in January
of that year.  I differed sharply from my colleague, Mr. Lodge,
in this whole matter.  But the people of Massachusetts, with
the generous and liberal temper which ever distinguished that
noble Commonwealth, desired that their Senators should act
upon their own judgment, without any constraint.

A resolution was introduced at the session of the Legislature
of 1899 by Mr. Mellen, Democratic member from Worcester, thanking
me for my speech in opposition to the Spanish Treaty, endorsing
the doctrine of that speech, and condemning the subjugation
of the Philippine people by force of arms.

Charles G. Washburn, Republican member from Worcester, introduced
a resolution commending my speech, and declaring it to be
"A speech of the loftiest patriotism and eloquent interpretation
of the high conception of human freedom which the fathers
sought to preserve for all time in the Declaration of Independence
and in the Constitution of the United States."

These resolution, if adopted, would, by implication, condemn
the well-known opinion and action of my colleague.  They were
encountered by several others, none of which referred to either
Senator, but expressed approval of the Spanish Treaty.  One
of them, however, presented in the House by Mr. Mills of
Newburyport, declared that the Treaty ought to be ratified,
and then the United States should fulfil to Porto Rico and
the Philippine Islands the pledge of self-government and independence
made to Cuba.  Very wisely all these resolutions were referred
to the Committee on Federal Relations, who reported this as
a compromise:

RESOLUTION REPORTED BY THE COMMITTEE ON FEDERAL
  RELATIONS, OF THE LEGISLATURE, MARCH 29, 1899

_Resolved,_ by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in General Court assembled,
that Massachusetts, ever loyal in sympathy and support of
the General Government, continues her unabated confidence
in her Senators, and with a just pride in the eloquent and
memorable words they have uttered, leaves them untrammeled
in the exercise of an independent and patriotic judgment upon
the momentous questions presented for their consideration.

The whole matter was then dropped.  But the Legislature,
and the generous people of Massachusetts whom they represented,
acted upon the spirit of the Committee's Resolution.  I was
reelected without opposition.  I had every Republican vote,
and many Democratic votes, of the Legislature.  My affectionate
and cordial relations with my brilliant and accomplished colleague
have never suffered an instant's interruption.

I think I am entitled to record, however, that this result
was not accomplished by any abatement of my opposition to
the policy of the Administration as to the Philippine Islands.
I made a great many speeches within a few weeks of the Presidential
election in 1900.  The members of the Senate and House, of
the Massachusetts Legislature, who were to choose a Senator,
were to be chosen at the same time.  I expressed my unchanged
and earnest opposition of disapproval to the whole business
at length.

In speaking of the habit of appealing to the love of the
flag in behalf of this policy of conquest, I said that there
was but one symbol more sacred than the American flag.  That
was the bread and wine which represented the body and blood
of the Saviour of mankind; adding, that a man who would use
an appeal to the flag in aid of the subjugation of an unwilling
people, would be capable of using the sacramental wine for
a debauch.

The week before the election of Senator came on a bill for
the reorganization of the Army was before the Senate.  That
contained a provision for increasing the Army to a hundred
thousand men, allowing the President, however, to reduce it
to seventy thousand, and to raise it again if necessary,
so it would in his discretion be elastic, within those limitations.

Mr. Bacon, of Georgia, who seemed to be the leader of the
Democrats on that measure, inquired of the Republicans who
were managing the bill, how many men they needed and what
time would be required to put down the insurrection in the
Philippine Islands.  Senator Bacon said that they would give
them the hundred thousand men, or any force they might demand
for one or two or three or five years, or for any required
time.  But they were unwilling to give the President the power
of expanding and contracting the army in time of peace.  This
was in full Senate.

I followed with a statement that I had no objection to giving
the President this discretion, and did not disapprove the
bill on that account.  I thought the size of the Army in
time of peace should be left largely to the opinion of the
experts, especially General Miles, the famous soldier at the
head of our Army, who thought the regular Army should consist
of one hundred for every thousand of our population.  That
would be about eighty thousand then, and before long would
require a hundred thousand men.  But I said I was opposed
to raising soldiers to carry on the war in the Philippine
Islands.  The only way to stop it that I knew was to refuse
to vote for the Army Bill.  I voted against it solely on that
account.

I meant that if the Legislature of Massachusetts were to
reelect me, no man should ever have it to say that I had
bought my reelection by silence on this question, or concealed
my opinion, however extreme it might be, until after election.

After my election I delivered an address before the two Houses
of the Legislature, at their request, and was received with
a most cordial enthusiasm.

Yet I think that if any leading Republican who had differed
from me on this question, especially Governor Long, of whose
brilliant administration of the Navy the people of the Commonwealth
were so proud, had pressed his candidacy for the office in
opposition to me, as has been the custom in like cases in
other States, it is not unlikely that he would have been elected.

I have no doubt I should have found Governor Roger Wolcott
a formidable competitor, if he had lived and been willing.
Governor Wolcott had made a statement in public, quietly and
briefly, as was his wont, expressing his sympathy with me
when the question of the Treaty was under debate.  Somewhat
later he made a statement in the same way, expressing his
opinion that the Administration should be supported.  Both
these declarations were in general terms.  They were not inconsistent
with each other.  But death arrested the honorable and useful
career of Roger Wolcott when he was still in the prime of
life, in the strength of his noble manhood, a strength which
seemed rapidly enlarging and growing as if in early youth.

I have not doubt that the subjugation of the Philippine Islands,
the acquisition of a dependency to be held in subjection by
the United States, the overthrow of the great doctrine that
Governments rest on the consent of the governed; that all
the painful consequences which have attended the war for the
subjugation of that distant people, would have been avoided
if the Democratic opposition had been hearty and sincere.
The same spirit that defeated the Election bill in spite of
the majority in its favor, would have easily accomplished
that result.  The Democratic Party, as a party, never meant
business in this matter.  I do not deny that many Democrats--
I dare say a majority of the Democrats--were as earnestly
and seriously opposed to the acquisition of the Philippine
Islands as I was myself.  But they never wielded their party
strength in opposition to it.  I said to one eminent Democratic
leader early in the year 1900: "There is one way in which
you can put an end to this whole business.  If you can elect
a Democratic House it will have power under the Constitution
to determine the use to which the Army shall be put.  In that
way you compelled President Hayes to refrain from further
support by military force of the Republican State Governments
in the South." He answered: "Mr. Hoar, we shall never do
anything as radical as that."

When Senator Bacon made the offer to the majority of the Senate
to agree to give them all the military power they desired
for the suppression of the resistance in the Philippines
for as long a time as they should think it necessary, the
entire Democratic Party in the Senate was in their seats,
and there was no expression of dissent.

I think the Democratic Party feared the fate of the Federalists
who opposed the War of 1812, and of the Democrats who opposed
the War for the Union in 1861.  This of course in the nature
of things is but conjecture.

Seventeen of the followers of Mr. Bryan voted for the Treaty.
The Treaty would have been defeated, not only lacking the
needful two thirds, but by a majority of the Senate but for
the votes of Democrats and Populists.

Senators Morgan and Pettus of Alabama, Senator McLaurin of
South Carolina, Senator McEnery of Louisiana, were avowed
supporters of the Treaty from the beginning.

Mr. Bryan in the height of the contest came to Washington
for the express purpose of urging upon his followers that
it was best to support the Treaty, end the War, and let the
question of what should be done with our conquest be settled
in the coming campaign.  He urged upon them, as I was told
by several Democrats at the time who did not take his advice,
that the Democratic Party could not hope to win a victory
on the financial questions at stake after they had been beaten
on them in a time of adversity; and that they must have this
issue for the coming campaign.  He was besought by his wiser
political associates to go away and leave the Senate to settle
the matter.  But he remained.

After that it became impossible, not only to defeat the Treaty,
but to defeat the policy which had inspired it.  The Treaty
pledged that the Philippine Islands should be governed by
Congress.  It undertook obligations which require for their
fulfillment, at least ten years' control of the Islands.
It put the people of the Philippine Islands in the attitude
of abandoning the Republic they had formed, and of acknowledging
not only our supremacy but that they were neither entitled
or fit to govern themselves or to carry on the war which had
unfortunately broken out.  I do not mean to imply that, as
I have said, a large number of the Democratic Party both in
public life and out of it, were not sincere and zealous in
their opposition to this wretched business.  But next to a
very few men who controlled the policy of the Republican Party
in this matter, Mr. Bryan and his followers who voted in the
Senate for the Treaty are responsible for the results.

I have been blamed, as I have said already, because, with
my opinions, I did not join the Democratic Party and help
to elect Mr. Bryan.  I disagreed with him and his party as
to every other issue then pending before the American people.
So differing from him, I found nothing in his attitude or
that of his party, to induce me to support him, or even to
inspire my confidence in their settlement of the question of
Imperialism or expansion.

In my opinion, if he had been elected, he would have accepted
the result, have put the blame for it on his predecessor
in office, and matters would have gone on very much as they
have under Republican control.

I have been told by many Senators who voted for the Treaty,
that they regretted that vote more than any other act of their
lives.  Enough Senators have said this to me in person, not
only to have defeated the Treaty, but if they had so voted,
to have defeated it by a majority.  A very eminent Republican
Senator told me that more than twenty Senators, who voted
for the Treaty, had given the same assurance to him.  But
they are very unwilling to make the declaration public.  Several
gentlemen, however, have publicly expressed their regret for
their vote, as is well known, enough to have changed the result.

When I think of my party, whose glory and whose service to
Liberty are the pride of my life, crushing out this people
in their effort to establish a Republic, and hear people
talk about _giving_ them good Government, and that they are
better off than they ever were under Spain, I feel very much
as if I had learned that my father, or some other honored
ancestor, had been a slave-trader in his time, and had boasted
that he had introduced a new and easier kind of hand-cuffs
or fetters to be worn by the slaves during the horrors of
the middle passage.

I do not believe that there is a respectable or intelligent
Filipino to-day, unless possibly some Macabebe scout, who
would not get rid of the Government of the United States
at once, if he could.  Buencamino is said to be one of the
ablest of their public men.  He has been quoted as friendly
to us, and is so.  There is no doubt that he has so expressed
himself.  He has been appointed a member of the Taft Government,
and has had committed to him the responsible and important
duty of deciding the appointments to the offices which are
to be filled by the native Filipinos, under the existing establishment.
It is said by both sides that he is crafty and selfish and
ambitious, and that he likes to be on the side that is the
strongest.  How that may be, I do not know.  But he will not
even pretend to accept the rule of the United States willingly.
He appeared as a witness before a Committee of the House of
Representatives, when in this country in 1902.  He was asked
whether his people approved the policy of the Democratic Party.
He answered emphatically: "No.  They do not wish to have the
United States abandon them to the ambition or cupidity of
foreign Governments." But he added: "Every Filipino is in
favor of the policy advocated by Senator Hoar." "What!" said
his inquirer, with great surprise, "Do you mean to say that
every Filipino agrees with Senator Hoar in his views?" "Yes,"
replied the man, with great emphasis; "every Filipino agrees
with Senator Hoar."

I mentioned this one day in conversation with President Roosevelt.
He told me that Buencamino had said exactly the same thing
to him.

General Miles told me on his return from his journey round
the world that he saw many leaders of the Philippine people;
that they spoke of me with great regard and attachment.

June 17, 1902, an eminent Hindoo scholar, published a long
article in the _Japan Times,_ in which he said:

"The speech of Mr. Hoar, though an address to his own countrymen,
is a message of hope to the whole world which sank with despondency
at the sight of Republican America behaving like a cruel,
tyrannical and rapacious Empire in the Philippines and particularly
to the broken-hearted people of Asia who are beginning to
lose all confidence in the humanity of the white races.  Or
is it that they have lost it already?  Hence all papers in
Asia should reprint his speech, translate it, and distribute
it broadcast.  Let it be brought home to the Asiatic people
so that they may work and worship their champion and his forefathers.
Thanks to the awakening in America, thanks to the forces that
are at work to chase out the degenerating, demoralizing passion
for territorial aggrandizement from the noble American mind
and save it for itself and the world at large from the cancer
of Imperialism."

I am afraid I am committing an offence against good taste
in repeating such laudations.  But it must be remembered
that a public man who has to encounter so much bitter reviling
and objurgation, is fairly entitled to have a little extravagance
on the other side that the balance may be even.  I would rather
have the gratitude of the poor people of the Philippine Islands,
amid their sorrow, and have it true that what I may say or
do has brought a ray of hope into the gloomy caverns in which
the oppressed peoples of Asia dwell, than to receive a Ducal
Coronet from every Monarch in Europe, or command the applause
of listening Senators and read my history in a Nation's eyes.

At first there can seem nothing more absurd than the suggestion
of my Asiatic friend that the people of Asia should worship
their champion and his ancestors.  But on second thought,
it is fair to say that while no human being can be entitled
to be worshipped by any other, yet that we got our love of
Liberty from our ancestors, or at any rate that is where I
got mine, and that they are entitled to all the credit.


CHAPTER XXXIV
APPOINTMENTS TO OFFICE

Among the great satisfactions in the life of public men is
that of sometimes being instrumental in the advancement to
places of public honor of worthy men, and of being able to
have a great and salutary influence upon their lives.  I have
always held to the doctrine of what is called Civil Service
Reform, and have maintained to the best of my ability the
doctrine of the absolute independence of the Executive in
such matters, as his right to disregard the wishes and opinions
of members of either House of Congress, and to make his appointments,
executive and judicial, without advice, or on such advice
as he shall think best.  But, at the same time, there can
be no doubt that the Executive must depend on some advice
other than his own, to learn the quality of men in different
parts of this vast Republic, and to learn what will be agreeable
to public opinion and to the party which is administering
the Government and is responsible for its administration.
He will, ordinarily, find no better source of such information
than in the men whom the people have shown their own confidence
by entrusting them with the important function of Senator
or Representative.  He will soon learn to know his men, and
how far he can safely take such advice.  He must be careful
to see to it that he is not induced to build up a faction
in his party, or to fill up the public offices with the partisans
of ambitious but unscrupulous politicians.  When I entered
the House of Representatives, before the Civil Service Reform
had made any progress, I addressed and had put on file with
the Secretary of the Treasury a letter in which I said that
I desired him to understand when I made a recommendation to
him of any person for public office, it was to be taken merely
as my opinion of the merit of the candidate, and not as an
expression of a personal request; and that if he found any
other person who would in his judgment be better for the public
service, I hoped he would make the selection without regard
to my recommendation.

I have never undertaken to use public office as personal
patronage, or to claim the right to dictate to the President
of the United States, or that the executive was not entirely
free, upon such advice as he saw fit, or without advice, if he
thought fit, in making his selection for public office.

It has been my good fortune to have influenced, or I think
I may fairly say, procured the appointment to public office
of many gentlemen who would not have been appointed without
my active efforts.  I have no reason to be ashamed of one
of the list.  I believe that the following gentlemen, beside
others less distinguished, who have been very satisfactory,
able and faithful public servants, owe their appointment to
my original suggestion, or would not have been appointed without
my earnest efforts.

Charles Devens, Attorney-General; Alanson W. Beard, Collector
of the Port of Boston; Horace Gray, first to the office of
Reporter of the Supreme Court of Massachusetts, and later
to that of Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States; J. Evarts Greene, Postmaster of Worcester; Thomas
L. Nelson, Judge of the District Court of Massachusetts; Francis
C. Lowell, Judge of the District Court of Massachusetts; Howell
E. Jackson, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the
United States; John D. Washburn, Minister to Switzerland.

I think I may also fairly claim that the election of William
B. Washburn as Governor of Massachusetts was due not only
to the fact that I originally proposed him as a candidate,
but to my active efforts in the campaign which preceded the
Convention which nominated him.

There is no man in this list of greater ability or of higher
quality of manhood than Evarts Greene.  Mr. Greene was compelled
by the illness of his wife to remain fast-bound in one spot,
instead of going to some large city where his great talent
would have commanded a very high place indeed in his profession
as editor.  When he edited the Worcester _Spy,_ it was one
of the most influential Republican newspapers in the country.
The _Spy_ got into pecuniary difficulties.  Mr. Greene, with
some reluctance, accepted the office of Postmaster, an office
which, according to usage in such cases, was in my gift.

Just before Postmaster-General Wanamaker, whose executive
ability no man will question, went out of office, he requested
Mr. Greene to send to the Department an account of the improvements
he had made and proposed in the post-office service.  This
was sent in a circular all over the country to other like
post-offices.

Just before Mr. Greene died, President Roosevelt visited
Worcester.  In passing the post-office, where the persons
employed in the service were collected, he stopped and said
he was glad to see "what we have been accustomed to consider
the record post-office."  This, as may well be believed,
gave Mr. Greene great satisfaction.


CHAPTER XXXV
ORATORY AND SOME ORATORS I HAVE HEARD

The longer I live, the more highly I have come to value the
gift of eloquence.  Indeed, I am not sure that it is not
the single gift most to be coveted by man.  It is hard, perhaps
impossible, to define, as poetry is impossible to define.
To be a perfect and consummate orator is to possess the highest
faculty given to man.  He must be a great artist, and more.
He must be a great actor, and more.  He must be a master of
the great things that interest mankind.  What he says ought
to have as permanent a place in literature as the highest
poetry.  He must be able to play at will on the mighty organ,
his audience, of which human souls are the keys.  He must
have knowledge, wit, wisdom, fancy, imagination, courage,
nobleness, sincerity, grace, a heart of fire.  He must himself
respond to every emotion as an AEolian harp to the breeze.
He must have

  An eye that tears can on a sudden fill
  And lips that smile before the tears are gone.

He must have a noble personal presence.  He must have, in
perfection, the eye and the voice which are the only and
natural avenues by which one human soul can enter into and
subdue another.  His speech must be filled with music, and
possess its miraculous charm and spell,

  Which the posting winds recall,
  And suspend the river's fall.

He must have the quality which Burke manifested when Warren
Hastings said, "I felt, as I listened to him, as if I were
the most culpable being on earth"; and which made Philip say
of Demosthenes, "Had I been there he would have persuaded
me to take up arms against myself."

He has a present, practical purpose to accomplish.  If he
fail in that he fails utterly and altogether.  His object is to
convince the understanding, to persuade the will, to set
aflame the heart of his audience or those who read what he
says.  He speaks for a present occasion.  Eloquence is the
feather that tips his arrow.  If he miss the mark he is a
failure, although his sentences may survive everything else
in the permanent literature of the language in which he speaks.
What he says must not only accomplish the purpose of the hour,
but should be fit to be preserved for all time, or he can
have no place in literature, and a small and ephemeral place
in human memory.

The orator must know how so to utter his thought that it
will stay.  The poet and the orator have this in common.
Each must so express and clothe his thought that it shall
penetrate and take possession of the soul, and, having penetrated,
must abide and stay.  How this is done, who can tell?  Carlyle
defines poetry as a "sort of lilt."  Cicero finds the secret
of eloquence in a

  Lepos quidem celeritasque et brevitas.

One writer lately dead, who has a masterly gift of noble
and stirring eloquence, finds it in "a certain collocation of
consonants."  Why it is that a change of a single word, or
even of a single syllable, for any other which is an absolute
synonym in sense, would ruin the best line in Lycidas, or
injure terribly the noblest sentence of Webster, nobody knows.
Curtis asks how Wendell Phillips did it, and answers his own
question by asking you how Mozart did it.

When I say that I am not sure that this is not the single
gift most to be coveted by man, I may seem to have left out
the moral quality in my conception of what is excellent.  But
such is the nature of man that the loftiest moral emotions
are still the overmastering emotions.  The orator that does
not persuade men that righteousness is on his side will seldom
persuade them to think or act as he desires; and if he fail
in that he fails in his object; and the orator who has not
in fact righteousness on his side will in general fail so to
persuade them.  And even if in rare cases he do persuade
his audience, he does not gain a permanent place in literature.
Bolingbroke's speeches, though so enthusiastically praised
by the best judges, have perished by their own worthlessness.

Although the danger of the Republic, and his own, still occupied
his thoughts, Cicero found time in his old age to record,
at the request of his brother Quintus, his opinion, _de omni
ratione dicendi._  It is not likely that the treatise "de
Oratore" or that "de Claris Oratoribus" will ever be matched
by any other writer on this fascinating subject, except the
brief and masterly fragment of Tacitus.

He begins by inquiring why it is that, when so many persons
strive to attain the gift of eloquence, and its rewards of
fame and wealth and power are so great, the number of those
who succeed as orators is so small in comparison with the
number of those who become great generals, or statesmen,
or poets.  I suppose this fact, which excited the wonder
of Cicero, exists in our country and our time.  There is a
foreign country which is to us as a posterity.  If we reckon
those Americans only as great orators who are accepted in
England as such, or who, belonging to past generations are
so accepted now by their own countrymen, the number is very
small.  A few sentences of Patrick Henry are preserved, as
a few sentences of Lord Chatham are preserved.  The great
thoughts of Webster justify, in the estimation of the reader,
the fame he enjoyed with his own generation.  The readers
of Fisher Ames--alas, too few--can well comprehend the spell
which persuaded an angry and reluctant majority to save the
treaty to which the nation had pledged its faith, and, perhaps,
the life of the nation itself.  With these exceptions, the
number of American orators who will live in history as orators
can be counted on the fingers of one hand.

I have never supposed myself to possess this gift.  The instruction
which I had in my youth, especially that at Harvard, either
in composition or elocution, was, I think, not only of no
advantage, but a positive injury.  Besides the absence of
good training, I had an awkward manner, and a harsh voice.
Until quite late in life I never learned to manage so that
I could get through a long speech without serious irritation
of the throat.  But I have had good opportunity to hear the
best public speaking of my time.  I have heard in England,
on a great field day in the House of Commons, Palmerston,
Lord John Russell, and John Bright, and, later, Disraeli,
Gladstone and Bernal Osborne.  I have heard Spurgeon, and
Bishop Wilberforce, and Dr. Guthrie in the pulpit.

At home I have heard a good many times Daniel Webster, Edward
Everett, Rufus Choate, Robert C. Winthrop, John P. Hale,
Wendell Phillips, Charles Sumner, Richard H. Dana, Ralph
Waldo Emerson, James G. Blaine, Lucius Q. C. Lamar, James
A. Garfield, William McKinley, William M. Evarts, Benjamin
F. Thomas, Pliny Merrick, Charles Devens, Nathaniel P. Banks,
and, above all, Kossuth; and in the pulpit, James Walker,
Edwards A. Park, Mark Hopkins, Edward Everett Hale, George
Putnam, Starr King, and Henry W. Bellows.  So, perhaps, my
experience and observation, too late for my own advantage,
may be worth something to my younger readers.

I am not familiar with the books which have been lately published
which give directions for public speaking.  So I dare say
that what I have to advise is already well known to young
men, and that all I can say has been said much better.  But
I will give the result of my own experience and observation.

In managing the voice, the speaker when he is engaged in earnest
conversation, commonly and naturally falls into the best tone
and manner for public speaking.  Suppose you are sitting about
a table with a dozen friends, and some subject is started
in which you are deeply interested.  You engage in an earnest
and serious dialogue with one of them at the other end of
the table.  You are perfectly at ease, not caring in the least
for your manner or tone of voice, but only for your thought.
The tone you adopt then will ordinarily be the best tone for
you in public speaking.  You can, however, learn from teachers
or friendly critics to avoid any harsh or disagreeable fashion
of speech that you may have fallen into, and that may be habitual
to you in private conversation.

Next.  Never strain your vocal organs by attempting to fill
spaces which are too large for you.  Speak as loudly and
distinctly as you can do easily, and let the most distant
portions of your audience go.  You will find in that way very
soon that your voice will increase in compass and power, and
you will do better than by a habit of straining the voice
beyond its natural capacity.  Be careful to avoid falsetto.
Shun imitating the tricks of speech of other orators, even
of famous and successful orators.  These may do for them,
but not for you.  You will do no better in attempting to
imitate the tricks of speech of other men in public speaking than
in private speaking.

Never make a gesture for the sake of making one.  I believe
that most of the successful speakers whom I know would find
it hard to tell you whether they themselves make gestures
or not, they are so absolutely unconscious in the matter.
But with gestures as with the voice, get teachers or friendly
critics to point out to you any bad habit you may fall into.
I think it would be well if our young public speakers, especially
preachers, would have competent instructors and critics among
their auditors, after they enter their profession, to give
them the benefit of such observations and counsel as may be
suggested in that way.  If a Harvard professor of elocution
would retain his responsibility for his pupils five or ten
years after they got into active life he would do a great
deal more good than by his instructions to undergraduates.

So far we have been talking about mere manner.  The matter
and substance of the orator's speech must depend upon the
intellectual quality of the man.

The great orator must be a man of absolute sincerity.  Never
advocate a cause in which you do not believe, or affect an
emotion you do not feel.  No skill or acting will cover up
the want of earnestness.  It is like the ointment of the
hand which bewrayeth itself.

I shall be asked how I can reconcile this doctrine with the
practice of the law.  It will be said the advocate must often
defend men whom he believes to be guilty, or argue to the
court propositions he believes to be unsound.  This objection
will disappear if we consider what exactly is the function
of the advocate in our system of administering justice.

I suppose it is needless to argue to persons of American
or English birth that our system of administering justice is
safer for the innocent and, on the whole, secures the punishment
of guilt and secures private right better than any other
that now exists or that ever existed among men.  The chief
distinction of the system we have inherited from England consists
in two things:  first, the function of the advocate, and
second, that cases are decided not upon belief, but upon
proof.  It has been found that court or jury are more likely
to get at truth if they have the aid of trained officers whose
duty it shall be to collect and present all the arguments on
each side which ought to be considered before the court or
jury reach the decision.  The man who seems clearly guilty
should not be condemned or punished unless every consideration
which may tend to establish innocence or throw doubt upon
guilt has been fully weighed.  The unassisted tribunal will
be quite likely to overlook these considerations.  Public
sentiment approves the judgment and the punishment in the
case of John W. Webster.  But certainly he should never have
been convicted without giving the fullest weight to his previous
character and to the slightness of the temptation to the commission
of such a crime, to the fact that the evidence was largely
circumstantial, to the doubt of the identity of the body of
the victim, and to the fact that the means or instrument of
the crime which ordinarily must be alleged and proved in cases
of murder could not be made certain, and could not be set
forth in the indictment.  The question in the American or
English court is not whether the accused be guilty.  It is
whether he be shown to be guilty, by legal proof, of an offence
legally set forth.  It is the duty of the advocate to perform
his office in the mode best calculated to cause all such considerations
to make their due impression.  It is not his duty or his right
to express or convey his individual opinion.  On him the responsibility
of the decision does not rest.  He not only has no right to
accompany the statement of his argument with any assertion
as to his individual belief, but I think the most experienced
observers will agree that such expressions, if habitual, tend
to diminish and not to increase the just influence of the
lawyer.  There was never a weightier advocate before New England
juries than Daniel Webster.  Yet it is on record that he always
carefully abstained from any positiveness of assertion.  He
introduced his weightiest arguments with such phrases as,
"It will be for the jury to consider," "The Court will judge,"
"It may, perhaps, be worth thinking of, gentlemen," or some
equivalent phrase by which he kept scrupulously off the ground
which belonged to the tribunal he was addressing.  The tricks
of advocacy are not only no part of the advocate's duties,
but they are more likely to repel than to attract the hearers.
The function of the advocate in the court of justice, as thus
defined and limited, is tainted by no insincerity or hypocrisy.
It is as respectable, as lofty, and as indispensably necessary
as that of the judge himself.

In my opinion, the two most important things that a young
man can do to make himself a good public speaker are:

First.  Constant and careful written translations from Latin
or Greek into English.

Second.  Practice in a good debating society.

It has been said that all the greatest Parliamentary orators
of England are either men whom Lord North saw, or men who
saw Lord North--that is, men who were conspicuous as public
speakers in Lord North's youth, his contemporaries, and the
men who saw him as an old man when they were young themselves.
This would include Bolingbroke and would come down only to
the year of Lord John Russell's birth.  So we should have
to add a few names, especially Gladstone, Disraeli, John Bright,
and Palmerston.  There is no great Parliamentary orator in
England since Gladstone died.  I once, a good many years ago,
studied the biographies of the men who belonged to that period
who were famous as great orators in Parliament or in Court,
to find, if I could, the secret of their power.  With the
exception of Lord Erskine and of John Bright, I believe every
one of them trained himself by careful and constant translation
from Latin or Greek, and frequented a good debating society
in his youth.

Brougham trained himself for extemporaneous speaking in the
Speculative Society, the great theatre of debate for the University
of Edinburgh.  He also improved his English style by translations
from the Greek, among which is his well-known version of the
"Oration on the Crown."

Canning's attention, while at Eton, was strongly turned to
extemporaneous speaking.  They had a debating society, in
which the Marquis of Wellesley and Charles Earl Grey had been
trained before him, in which they had all the forms of the
House of Commons--Speaker, Treasury benches, and an Opposition.
Canning also was disciplined by the habit of translation.

Curran practised declamation daily before a glass, reciting
passages from Shakespeare and the best English orators.  He
frequented the debating societies which then abounded in London.
He failed at first, and was ridiculed as "Orator Mum." But
at last he surmounted every difficulty.  It was said of him
by a contemporary:  "He turned his shrill and stumbling brogue
into a flexible, sustained, and finely modulated voice; his
action become free and forcible; he acquired perfect readiness
in thinking on his legs; he put down every opponent by the
mingled force of his argument and wit; and was at last crowned
with the universal applause of the society and invited by
the president to an entertainment in their behalf." I am not
sure that I have seen, on any good authority, that he was
in the habit of writing translations from Latin or Greek,
but he studied them with great ardor and undoubtedly adopted,
among the methods of perfecting his English style, the custom
of students of his day of translation from these languages.

Jeffrey joined the Speculative Society, in Edinburgh, in
his youth.  His biographer says that it did more for him
than any other event in the whole course of his education.

Chatham, the greatest of English orators, if we may judge
by the reports of his contemporaries, trained himself for
public speaking by constant translations from Latin and Greek.
The education of his son, the younger Pitt, is well known.
His father compelled him to read Thucydides into English at
sight, and to go over it again and again, until he had got
the best possible rendering of the Greek into English.

Macaulay belonged to the Cambridge Union, where, as in the
society of the same name at Oxford, the great topics of the
day were discussed by men, many of whom afterward became famous
statesmen and debaters in the Commons.

Young Murray, afterward Lord Mansfield, translated Sallust
and Horace with ease; learned great part of them by heart;
could converse fluently in Latin; wrote Latin prose correctly
and idiomatically, and was specially distinguished at Westminster
for his declamations.  He translated every oration of Cicero
into English and back again into Latin.

Fox can hardly have been supposed to have practised much in
debating societies, as he entered the House of Commons when
he was nineteen years old.  But it is quite probably that
he was drilled by translations from Latin and Greek into English;
and in the House of Commons he had in early youth the advantage
of the best debating society in the world.  It is said that
he read Latin and Greek as easily as he read English.  He
himself said that he gained his skill at the expense of the
House, for he had sometimes tasked himself during the entire
session to speak on every question that came up, whether he
was interested in it or not, as a means of exercising and
training his faculties.  This is what made him, according
to Burke, "rise by slow degrees to be the most brilliant and
accomplished debater the world ever saw."

Sir Henry Bulwer's "Life of Palmerston" does not tell us whether
he was trained by the habit of writing translations or in
debating societies.  But he was a very eager reader of the
classics.  There is little doubt, however, considering the
habit of his contemporaries at Cambridge, and that he was
ambitious for public life, and represented the University
of Cambridge in Parliament just after he became twenty-one,
that he belonged to a debating society and that he was drilled
in English composition by translation from the classics.

Gladstone was a famous debater in the Oxford Union, as is
well known, and was undoubtedly in the habit of writing translations
from Greek and Latin, of which he was always so passionately
fond.  He says in his paper on Arthur Hallam that the Eton
debating club known as the Society supplied the British Empire
with four Prime Ministers in fourscore years.

The value of the practice of translation from Latin or Greek
into English, in getting command of good English style, in
my judgment, can hardly be stated too strongly.  The explanation
is not hard to find.  You have in these two languages and
especially in Latin, the best instrument for the most precise
and most perfect expression of thought.  The Latin prose of
Tacitus and Cicero, the verse of Virgil and Horace, are like
a Greek statue, or an Italian cameo--you have not only exquisite
beauty, but also exquisite precision.  You get the thought
into your mind with the accuracy and precision of the words
that express numbers in the multiplication table.  Ten times
one are ten--not ten and one one-millionth.  Having got the
idea into your mind with the precision, accuracy, and beauty
of the Latin expression, you are to get its equivalent in
English.  Suppose you have knowledge of no language but your
own.  The thought comes to you in the mysterious way in which
thoughts are born, and struggles for expression in apt words.
If the phrase that occurs to you does not exactly fit the
thought, you are almost certain, especially in speaking or
rapid composition, to modify the thought to fit the phrase.
Your sentence commands you, not you the sentence.  The extemporary
speaker never gets, or easily loses, the power of precise
and accurate thinking or statement, and rarely attains a literary
excellence which gives him immortality.  But the conscientious
translator has no such refuge.  He is confronted by the inexorable
original.  He cannot evade or shirk.  He must try and try
and try again until he has got the exact thought expressed
in its English equivalent.  This is not enough.  He must get
an English expression if the resources of the language will
furnish it, which will equal as near as may be the dignity
and beauty of the original.  He must not give you pewter for
silver, or pinchbeck for gold, or mica for diamond.  This
practice will soon give him ready command of the great riches
of his own noble English tongue.  It will give a habitual
nobility and beauty to his own style.  The best word and phrase
will come to him spontaneously when he speaks and thinks.
The processes of thought itself will grow easier.  The orator
will get the affluence and abundance which characterize the
great Italian artists of the Middle Ages, who astonish us
as much by the amount and variety of their work as by its
excellence.

The value of translation is very different from that of original
written composition.  Cicero says:

"Stilus optimus et praestantissimus dicendi effector ac magister."

Of this I am by no means sure.  If you write rapidly you
get the habit of careless composition.  If you write slowly
you get the habit of slow composition.  Each of these is an
injury to the style of the speaker.  He cannot stop to correct
or scratch out.  Cicero himself in a later passage states
his preference for translation.  He says that at first he used
to take a Latin author, Ennius or Gracchus, and get the meaning
into his head, and then write it again.  But he soon found
that in that way if he used again the very words of his author
he got no advantage, and if he used other language of his
own, the author had already occupied the ground with the best
expression, and he was left with the second best.  So he gave
up the practice and adopted instead that of translating from
the Greek.

But to go back to what makes an orator.  As I have said,
his object is to excite the emotions which, being excited, will
be most likely to impel his audience to think or act as he
desires.  He must never disgust them, he must never excite
their contempt.  He can use to great advantage the most varied
learning, the profoundest philosophy, the most compelling
logic.  He must master the subject with which he has to deal,
and he must have knowledge adequate to illustrate and adorn
it.  When every other faculty of the orator is acquired, it
sometimes almost seems as if the voice were nine-tenths, and
everything else but one-tenth, of the consummate orator.  It
is impossible to overrate the importance to his purpose of
that matchless instrument, the human voice.

The most fastidious critic is by no means the best judge,
seldom even a fairly good judge, of the public speaker.  He
is likely to be a stranger to the emotion which the orator
inspires and excites.  He is likely to fall into mistakes like
that which Goldwin Smith makes about Patrick Henry.  Mr.
Smith ridicules Henry's speech and action and voice.  The
emotion which the great Virginian stirred in the breasts of
his backwoodsmen seems very absurd to this cultured Englishman.
The bowing and changes of countenance and gesticulating of
the orator seem to him like the cheapest acting.  Yet to us
who understand it, it does not seem that Patrick Henry in
the old church at Richmond need yield the palm to Chatham
in St. Stephen's Chapel, either for the grandeur of his theme
or of his stage, or the sublimity of his eloquence.

Matthew Arnold had the best pair of intellectual eyes of
our time.  But he sometimes made a like mistake as a critic
of poetry.  He speaks slightingly of Emerson's Fourth of
July Ode--

  Oh tenderly the haughty day
  Fills his blue urn with fire;
  One morn is in the mighty heaven,
  And one in our desire.

What did the Englishman know of the Fourth of July emotion
which stirred all Americans in the days when the country
had just escaped destruction, and was entering upon its new
career of freedom and of glory?  What could he understand
of that feeling, full of the morning and of the springtime,
which heard the cannon boom and the bells ring, with stirring
and quickened pulse, in those exultant days?  Surely there
never was a loftier stroke than that with which the New England
poet interpreted to his countrymen the feeling of that joyous
time--the feeling which is to waken again when the Fourth
of July comes round on many anniversaries:

  Oh tenderly the haughty day
  Fills his blue urn with fire;
  One morn is in the mighty heaven,
  And one in our desire.

It is often said that if a speech read well it is not a good
speech.  There may be some truth in it.  The reader cannot,
of course, get the impression which the speaker conveys by
look and tone and gesture.  He lacks that marvellous influence
by which in a great assembly the emotion of every individual
soul is multiplied by the emotion of every other.  The reader
can pause and dwell upon the thought.  If there be a fallacy,
he is not hurried away to something else before he can detect
it.  So, also, more careful and deliberate criticism will
discover offences of style and taste which pass unheeded in
a speech when uttered.  But still the great oratoric triumphs
of literature and history stand the test of reading in the
closet, as well as of hearing in the assembly.  Would not
Mark Anthony's speech over the dead body of Caesar, had it
been uttered, have moved the Roman populace as it moves the
spectator when the play is acted, or the solitary reader in
his closet?  Does not Lord Chatham's "I rejoice that America
has resisted" read well?  Do not Sheridan's great perorations,
and Burke's, in the Impeachment of Warren Hastings, read well?
Does not "Liberty and Union, Now and Forever!" read well?
Does not "Give me Liberty or Give me Death!" read well?  Does
not Fisher Ames's speech for the treaty read well?  Do not
Everett's finest passages read well?

There are examples of men of great original genius who have
risen to lofty oratory on some great occasion who had not
the advantage of familiarity with any great author.  But they
are not only few in number, but the occasions are few when
they have risen to a great height.  In general the orator,
whether at the Bar, or in the pulpit, or in public life, who
is to meet adequately the many demands upon his resources,
must get familiarity with the images and illustrations he
wants, and the resources of a fitting diction, by soaking
his mind in some great authors which will alike satisfy and
stimulate his imagination, and supply him with a lofty expression.
Of these I suppose the best are, by common consent, the Bible,
Shakespeare, and Milton.  It is a maxim that the pupil who
wishes to acquire a pure and simple style should give his
days and nights to Addison.  But there is a lack of strength
and vigor in Addison, which perhaps prevents his being the
best model for the advocate in the court-house or the champion
in a political debate.  I should rather, for myself, recommend
Robert South to the student.  If the speaker, whose thought
have weight and vigor in it, can say it as South would have
said it, he may be quite sure that his weighty meaning will
be expressed alike to the mind of the people and the apprehension
of his antagonist.

There is one great difference between the condition of the
American orator and that of the orator of antiquity.  The
speaker, in the old time, addressed an audience about to act
instantly upon the emotions or convictions he had himself
caused.  Or he spoke to a Judge who was to give no reason
for his opinion.  The sense of public responsibility scarcely
existed in either.  The speech itself perished with the occasion,
unless, as in some few instances, the orator preserved it
in manuscript for a curious posterity.  Even then the best
of them had discovered that not eloquence, but wisdom, is
the power by which states grow and flourish.

"Omnia plena consiliorum, inania verborum.

"Quid est tam furiosum quam verborum vel optimorum atque ornatissimorum
sonitus inanis nulla subjecta sententia nec scientia?"

Cicero's oratory is to excite his hearers, whether Judge
or popular assembly, for the occasion.  Not so in general
with our orator.  The auditor is ashamed of excitement.  He
takes the argument home with him:  He sleeps on it.  He reads
it again in the newspaper report.  He hears and reads the
other side.  He discusses with friends and antagonists.  He
feels the responsibility of his vote.  He expects to have
to justify it himself.  Even the juryman hears the sober
statement of the Judge, and talks the case over with his
associates of the panel in the quiet seclusion of the jury-room.
The Judge himself must state the reasons for his opinions,
which are to be read by a learned and critical profession and
by posterity.  The speaker's argument must be sounded, and
rung, and tested, and tried again and again, before the auditor
acts upon it.  Our people hear some great orators as they
witness a play.  The delight of taste, even intellectual
gratification, caused by what is well said, is one thing.
Conviction is quite another.  The printing-press and the reporter,
the consultation in the jury-room, the reflection in the Judge's
chamber, the delay of the election to a day long after the
speech, are protections against the mischief of mere oratory,
which the ancients did not enjoy.

I heard a debate in the House of Commons in 1860, on the
paper duties, in which Lord John Russell, Palmerston, Gladstone,
and John Bright took part.  Gladstone's part was not very
prominent.  I now remember little that he said.  His image,
as it then appeared, is effaced by his later appearance on
a much greater occasion.  Bright spoke admirably, both in
manner and matter.  He was an Independent, through giving
general support to the measures of the Government, in which
Palmerston and Lord Russell were the leaders.  He complained
bitterly of their acquiescence in what he thought the unconstitutional
attitude of the House of Lords, in refusing to consent to
the abolition of the paper duties, for which the House of
Commons had voted.  But the Government, though they had tried
to abolish the duty, were very glad to hold on to the revenue.
Bright had none of the English hesitation, and frequent punctuation
of sentences with--"er"--"er"--which has led some one, speaking
of English orators, to say that "to err" is human.  He reminded
me in general, in look, voice, and manner, of the late Richard
H. Dana, although he sometimes threw more passion and zeal
into his speech than Dana ever indulged.  Periods followed
each other in easy and rapid flow.  He had a fine voice and
delivery, easily filling the hall from his place below the
gangway.

Palmerston, in his jaunty and off-hand way, rebuked Bright
for desiring to make the House of Commons adopt a resolution
which would only show its own helplessness.  On the whole,
he seemed to me to get the better of the debate.  Bright could
not persuade the House, or the people of England, to make
a great constitutional question out of the paper duties, especially
after the powerful speech of Lord Lyndhurst, who, then more
than ninety years old, argued for the side of the Lords with
a power that no other speaker on the subject rivalled.

I heard Gladstone again in 1871, when there was a great struggle
between him and Disraeli over the Parliamentary and Municipal
Elections Bill.  I visited the House with Thomas Hughes, to
whom I was indebted for much courtesy while in London, and
had a seat on the floor just below the gallery, where a few
strangers are, or were then, admitted by special card from
the Speaker.

Bernal Osborne, Sir Michael Hicks-Beach, Sir Stafford Northcote,
Gladstone, and Disraeli took part in the debate.  The bill
was introduced by Mr. Gladstone's Government.  The question
that night was on a motion to strike out the provision for
the secret ballot; so the opponents of the Government had
to close in support of the motion.  The report of Hansard
purports to be in the first person.  But I can testify from
memory that it is by no means verbally accurate.  I have no
doubt the speeches were taken down in short-hand.  The phonetic
system was then used.  But the report seems to be about like
those which our good short-hand reporters used to make before
that invention.  The speeches are well worth studying by a
person who wishes to get an idea of the intellectual and literary
quality of these champions.  There is no great passage in
any one of them.  But the capacity and quality of power appear
distinctly.  Osborne was full of a shrewd and delightful wit,
without the vitriolic flavor which often appears in the sarcasm
of Disraeli.  Gladstone showed his power of elevating the
discussion to a lofty plane, which his opponent never reached,
although Disraeli launched at him many a keen shaft from
below.  Mr. Hughes sat by me most of the night, and occasionally
brought and introduced to me some eminent person whom he thought
I would like to know.

The members of our National House of Representatives, however
turbulent or disorderly, never would submit to the fashion
of treating a speaker whom they do not want to hear which
prevails in the House of Commons.  When Mr. Gladstone got
through, the night was far spent, and the House evidently
wanted to hear Disraeli, then vote and go home.  Mr. Plunket,
a member for the University of Dublin, who seemed an intelligent
and sensible man, rose, wishing to correct a statement of
Mr. Gladstone's, which he thought had done him an injustice.
Disraeli rose about the same time, but bowed and gave way.
The House did not like it.  Poor Plunket's voice was drowned
in the storm of shouts--"Sit down.  Sit down.  Dizzy, Dizzy,"
in which my friend, Mr. Hughes, although of Gladstone's party,
joined at the top of his lungs.  I think the Bedlam lasted
five minutes.  But Plunket stood his ground and made his correction.

Although Bernal Osborne was a man of great wit and sense,
and Sir Stafford Northcote and Sir Michael Hicks-Beach were
then, as the latter is now, very eminent characters, yet the
only speakers who belonged to the rank of the great orators
were Gladstone and Disraeli.  I will not undertake to add
another description of Gladstone to the many with which every
reader of mine is thoroughly familiar.  The late Dr. Bellows
resembled him very nearly, both in his way of reasoning and
his manner of speech.  Persons who have heard Dr. Bellows
at his best will not deem this comparison unworthy.

Gladstone was terribly in earnest.  He began his speech by
a compliment to Northcote, his opponent, for whom he had shown
his esteem by sending him to the United States as one of the
Joint High Commission to make the Alabama Treaty.  But when
Mr. Gladstone was well under way, Sir Stafford interposed
a dissent from something he said by calling out "No, no"--
a very frequent practice in the House.  Gladstone turned
upon him savagely, with a tone of anger which I might almost
call furious:  "Can the gentleman tolerate no opinion but
his own, that he interjects his audible contradiction into
the middle of my sentence?"  The House evidently did not like
it.  Hughes, who agreed with Gladstone, said to me: "What
a pity it is that he cannot control his temper; that is his
great fault."

There are no passages in this speech of Gladstone that can
be cited as among the best examples of the great style of
the orator.  But there are several that give a good idea of
his manner, and show something of the argument in two or
three sentences:  "I am not at all ashamed of having said,
and I will say it again, that this is a choice of evils.  I do not
say that the proposal for a secret ballot is open to no objections
whatever.  I admit that open voting has its evils as well
as its merits.  One of these merits is that it enables a
man to discharge a noble duty in the noblest possible manner.
But what are its demerits?  That by marking his vote you expose
the voter to be tempted through his cupidity and through his
fears.  We propose, by secret voting, to greatly diminish
the first of these, and we hope to take away the second.  We
do not believe that the disposition to bribe can operate with
anything like its present force when the means of tracing
the action of the man bribed are taken away, because men will
not pay for that they do not know they will ever receive."

"I think it is too late for the honorable gentleman to say,
'We are passing through an experiment; wait for more experiment.'"
"We have already been debating this subject for forty years;
we have plenty of time on our hands; it is a Godsend to have
anything to fill up our vacant hours; and therefore let us
postpone the subject in order that it may be dealt with in
future years."

The great quality of Gladstone, as of Sumner, is his profound
seriousness.  He makes the impression on his hearers, an impression
made, but not so strongly, upon his readers, that the matter
he is discussing is that upon which the foundations of heaven
and earth rest.

It would be a great mistake to hold Disraeli cheap.  He turned
the tables upon Osborne, who had gone into several, what Disraeli
called, archaeological details, with respect to the antiquity
of the ballot, and had cited a proclamation of Charles I.
prohibiting the ballot in all corporations, either in the
city of London or elsewhere, which Disraeli said "was done
with the admirable view of identifying the opinions of those
who sit on this side of the House with the political sentiments
of that monarch.  But there was another assertion of the principle
that the ballot should be open that the gentleman has not
cited.  That occurred in the most memorable Parliament that
ever sat in England--the Long Parliament . . . . They wished
it therefore to be exercised, not to satisfy the self-complacency
of the individual, but with due respect for common-sense and
the public opinion of the country, and influenced by all those
doctrines and all that discipline of party which they believed
to be one of the best securities for public liberty."

Gladstone showed in his speech the profounder reflection
on the general subject, the more philosophy, and the intenser
earnestness; Disraeli showed quickness of wit, a ready command
of his resources, ability for subtle distinctions, and glimpses
of his almost Satanic capacity for mocking and jeering.  He
describes Mr. Gladstone most felicitously as "inspired by
a mixture of genius and vexation."  He speaks of his majority
as a "mechanical majority, a majority the result of heedlessness
of thought on the part of members who were so full of other
questions that they gave pledges in favor of the ballot without
due consideration."

He said:  "There is a celebrated river, which has been the
subject of political interest of late, and with which we
are all acquainted.  It rolls its magnificent volume, clear and
pellucid, in its course; but it never reaches the ocean; it
sinks into mud and morass.  And such will be the fate of
this mechanical majority.  The conscience of the country is
against it.  It is an old-fashioned political expedient;
it is not adapted to the circumstances which we have to encounter
in the present, and because it has no real foundation of truth
or policy, it will meet with defeat and discomfiture."

Gladstone had, what is quite rare, and what no famous American
orator that I now think of, except Choate and Evarts, have
had--a tendency to diffuse and somewhat involved speech, and
at the same time a gift of compact epigrammatic utterance
on occasions.  When Mr. Evarts, who was my near relative,
and a man with whom I could take a liberty, came into the
Senate, I said to him that we should have to amend the rules
so that a motion to adjourn would be in order in the middle
of a sentence; to which he replied that he knew of nobody
in this country, who objected to long sentences, except the
criminal classes.

Gladstone was the last of a school of oratory, and the last
of our time--I hope not for all time--of a school of statesmen.
When he entered upon a discussion in Parliament, or on the
hustings, he elevated it to the highest possible plane.  The
discussion became alike one of the highest moral principles
and the profoundest political philosophy.  He seemed to be
speaking as our statesmen of the Revolutionary time, and the
time of framing our Constitution.  He used to speak to all
generations alike.  What he had to say would have been true
and apt and fit to be uttered in the earlier days of Athens
and Rome, and true and apt and fit to be uttered for thousands
of years to come.  He had, in a large measure, a failing which
all Englishmen have, and always had; the notion that what
is good for England is good for humanity at large.  Still
it was a lofty morality and a lofty ideal statesmanship.  It
was sincere.  What he said, that he believed.  It came straight
from his heart, and he kindled in the bosoms of his listeners
the ardor of his own heart.  He was not afraid of his ideals.

I heard Dr. Guthrie in Edinburgh in 1860.  It was a hot day.
My companion was just getting well from a dangerous attack
of bleeding at the lungs.  We made our way with difficulty
into the crowded church.  The people were, almost all of them,
standing.  We were obliged, by my friend's condition, to get
out again before the sermon.  I remember, however, the old
man's attitude, and his prayer in the racy, broad Scotch,
the most tender, pathetic and expressive language on earth
for the deeper emotions as well as for humor.  I wonder if
my readers have ever seen the version of the Psalms--

"Frae Hebrew Intil Scottis," by P. Hately Waddell, LL.D.,
Minister, Edinburgh, 1891.

If not, and they will get it, a new delight is in store for
them, and they will know something of the diction of Dr.
Guthrie.

He once began a prayer, "O Lord, it is a braw thing to loe
ye.  But it is a better (bitter) thing to hate ye."

The beauty of this dialect is that while it is capable alike
of such tenderness, and such lofty eloquence, and such exquisite
and delicate humor, it is, like our Saxon, incapable of falsetto,
or of little pomposities.

I heard Lyman Beecher, then a very old man, before a meeting
of the members of the Massachusetts Legislature in 1852, when
the measure known as the Maine Liquor Law was pending.  He
bore unmistakable marks of advanced age.  But there were one
or two passages that showed the power of the orator, one especially
in which he described the beauty and delight of our homes,
and intemperance threatening them with its waves like a great
sea of fire.

I saw Henry Ward Beecher several times in private, and had
pleasant talks with him.  But I am sorry to say I never heard
him speak, so far as I can now remember, on any occasion when
he put forth his power.  But if half that is told of his speeches,
during the Civil War, some of them to hostile and angry audiences,
be true, he was a consummate master.  One story is told of
him which I suppose is true, and, if it be true, ranks him
as one of the greatest masters of his art that ever lived.
It is said that he was speaking to a great crowd in Birmingham,
or perhaps Liverpool, which constantly goaded him with hostile
interruptions, so that he had great difficulty in getting
on.  At last one fellow provoked the cheers and applause of
the audience by crying out--"Why didn't you put down the Rebellion
in sixty days as you said you would?" Beecher paused a moment
until they became still, in their eagerness to hear his reply,
and then hurled back--"We should if they had been Englishmen."
The fierce, untamed animal hesitated a moment between anger
and admiration, and then the English love of fair play and
pluck prevailed, and the crowd cheered him and let him go
on.

But any man who reads Beecher's delightful "Letters from the
White Mountains," or some of his sermons, and imagines his
great frame, and far-sounding voice, will get a conception
of his power to play on the feelings or men, of his humor,
and pathos, and intense conviction, and rapidity in passing
from one emotion to another, and will understand him.

I heard Rufus Choate a great many times.  I heard nearly
all the speeches given in Brown's Life; and I heard him a
great many times at the Bar, both before juries and the full
Court.  He is the only advocate I ever heard who had the
imperial power which would subdue an unwilling and hostile
jury.  His power over them seemed like the fascination of
a bird by a snake.  Of course, he couldn't do this with able
Judges, although all Judges who listened to him would, I think,
agree that he was as persuasive a reasoner as ever lived.
But with inferior magistrates and juries, however intelligent,
however determined they were in a made-up opinion, however
on their guard against the charmer, he was almost irresistible.
There are very few important cases recorded that Choate lost.
Non supplex, sed magister aut dominus videretur esse judicum.

Choate's method was pure persuasion.  He never appealed to
base motives, nor tried to awake coarse prejudices or stormy
passions.  He indulged in no invective.  His wit and sarcasm
and ridicule amused the victim almost as much as it amused
the bystander.  He had the suaviloquentia which Cicero attributes
to Cornelius.  There was never a harsh note in his speech.

  Latrantur enim jam quidam oratores, non loquuntur.

When he was confronted with some general rule, or some plain
fact, he had a marvellous art of subtle distinction.  He
showed that his client, or witness, or proposition, belonged
to a class of itself.  He invested it with a distinct and
intense personality.  He held up his fact or his principle
before the mind of the Court and the jury.  He described
and pictured it.  He brought out in clear relief what distinguished
it from any other fact or proposition whatever.  If necessary,
he would almost have made a jury, before he was through, think
the Siamese twins did not look alike, and possibly that they
never could have been born of the same parents.

He had a voice without any gruff or any shrill tones.  It
was like a sweet, yet powerful flute.  He never strained it
or seemed to exert it to its fullest capacity.  I do not know
any other public speaker whose style resembled his in the
least.  Perhaps Jeremy Taylor was his model, if he had any
model.  The phraseology with which he clothed some commonplace
or mean thought or fact, when he was compelled to use commonplace
arguments, or to tell some common story, kept his auditors
ever alert and expectant.  An Irishman, who had killed his
wife, threw away the axe with which Choate claimed the deed
was done, when he heard somebody coming.  This, in Choate's
language, was "the sudden and frantic ejaculation of the axe."
Indeed his speech was a perpetual surprise.  Whether you liked
him or disliked him, you gave him your ears, erect and intent.
He used manuscript a great deal, even in speaking to juries.
When a trial was on, lasting days or weeks, he kept pen, ink,
and paper at hand in his bedroom, and would often get up in
the middle of the night to write down thoughts that came to
him as he lay in bed.  He was always careful to keep warm.
It was said he prepared for a great jury argument by taking
off eight great coats and drinking eight cups of green tea.

When I was a young lawyer in Worcester I had something to
do before the Court sitting in the fourth story of the old
stone court house in Boston.  I finished my business and
had just time to catch the train for home.  As I came down
the stairs I passed the door of the court-room where the
United States Court was sitting.  The thick wooden door was
open, and the opening was closed by a door of thin leather
stretched on a wooden frame.  I pulled it open enough to look
in, and there, within three feet of me, was Choate, addressing
a jury in a case of marine insurance, where the defence was
the unseaworthiness of the vessel.  I had just time to hear
this sentence, and shut the door and hurry to my train: "She
went down the harbor, painted and perfidious--a coffin, but
no ship."

I hear now, as if still in the eager throng, his speech in
Faneuil Hall during the Mexican War.  He demanded that we
should bring back our soldiers to the line we claimed as
our rightful boundary, and let Mexico go.  He said we had
done enough for glory, and that we had humiliated her enough.

"The Mexican maiden, as she sits with her lover among the
orange-groves, will sing to her guitar the story of these
times--'Ah, woe is me, Alhama,' for a thousand years to come."

Choate, like other good orators, and like some great poets,
notably Wordsworth, created the taste which he satisfied.
His dramatic action, his marvellous and strange vocabulary,
his oriental imagination, his dressing the common and mean
things of life with a poetic charm and romance, did not at
once strike favorably the taste of his Yankee audiences.
Webster and Everett seem to have appreciated him from the
first.  But he was, till he vindicated his title to be a great
lawyer, rather a thorn in the flesh of Chief Justice Shaw, of
whose consternation and amazement, caused by the strange
figure that appeared in his court-room, many queer stories
used to be told.  But the young men and the people liked
him.

"Non probantur haec senibus--saepe videbam cum invidentem
tum etiam irascentem stomachantem Philippum--sed mirantur
adulescentes multitudo movetur."

It was a curious sight to see on a jury twelve hard-headed
and intelligent countrymen--farmers, town officers, trustees,
men chosen by their neighbors to transact their important
affairs--after an argument by some clear-headed lawyer for
the defence, about some apparently not very doubtful transaction,
who had brought them all to his way of thinking, and had warned
them against the wiles of the charmer, when Choate rose to
reply for the plaintiff--to see their look of confidence and
disdain--"You needn't try your wiles upon me." The shoulder
turned a little against the speaker--the averted eye--and
then the change; first, the changed posture of the body; the
slight opening of the mouth; then the look, first, of curiosity,
and then of doubt, then of respect; the surrender of the eye
to the eye of the great advocate; then the spell, the charm,
the great enchantment--till at last, jury and audience were
all swept away, and followed the conqueror captive in his
triumphal march.

He gesticulated with his whole body.  Wendell Phillips most
irreverently as well as most unjustly compared him to a monkey
in convulsions.  His bowings down and straightening himself
again were spoken of by another critic, not unfriendly, as
opening and shutting like a jack-knife.  His curly black hairs
seemed each to have a separate life of its own.  His eyes
shone like coals of fire.  There is a passage of Everett's
which well describes Choate, and is also one of the very best
examples of Everett, who, with all his fertility of original
genius, borrowed so much, and so enriched and improved everything
that he borrowed.  Cicero said of Antonius:

"Omnia veniebant Antonio in mentem; eaque suo quaeque loco,
ubi pluimum proficere et valere possent, ut ab imperatore
equites pedites levis armatura, sic ab illo in maxume opportunis
orationis partibus conlocabantur."

Now see what Everett does with this thought in his eulogy,
spoken in Faneuil Hall, the week after Choate's death:

"He is sometimes satisfied, in concise epigrammatic clauses,
to skirmish with his light troops, and drive in the enemy's
outposts.  It is only on fitting occasions, when great principles
are to be vindicated, and solemn truths told, when some moral
or political Waterloo or Solferino is to be fought, that he
puts on the entire panoply of his gorgeous rhetoric.  It is
then that his majestic sentences swell to the dimensions
of his majestic thought; then it is that we hear afar off the
awful roar of his rifled ordnance; and when he has stormed
the heights, and broken the centre, and trampled the squares,
and turned the staggering wings of the adversary, that he
sounds his imperial clarion along the whole line of battle,
and moves forward with all his hosts, in one overwhelming
charge."

One of the most remarkable advocates of my day was Sidney
Bartlett.  He seldom addressed juries, and almost never public
assemblies.  He was a partner of Chief Justice Shaw before
1830.  He argued cases before the Supreme Court of the United
States and before the Supreme Court of Massachusetts after
he was ninety.  He cared for no other audience.  He had a
marvellous compactness of speech, and a marvellous sagacity
in seeing the turning-point of a great question.  He found
the place where the roads diverged, got the Court's face set
in the right direction, and then stopped.  He would argue
in ten or fifteen minutes a point where some powerful antagonist
like Curtis or Choate would take hours to reply.  I once told
him that his method of argument was to that of ordinary lawyers
like logarithms to ordinary mathematics.  He seemed pleased
with the compliment, and said, "Yes, I know I argue over their
heads.  The Chief Justice told me he wished I would talk a
little longer." I do not know that Bartlett ought to be reckoned
among orators.  But he had a great power of convincing, and
giving his intellectual delight to minds capable of appreciating
his profound and inexorable logic.

Edward Everett seems to me, on the whole, our best example
of the orator, pure and simple.  Webster was a great statesman,
a great lawyer, a great advocate, a great public teacher.
To all these his matchless oratory was but an instrument and
incident.

Choate was a great winner of cases, and as relaxation he
gave, in the brief vacations of an overworked professional
life (he once defined a lawyer's vacation as the time after he
has put a question to a witness while he is waiting for an
answer), a few wonderful literary and historical addresses.
He gave a brief period of brilliant but most unwilling service
in each House of Congress.  He made some powerful political
speeches to popular audiences.  But his heart was always in
the court-house.  No gambler ever hankered for the feverish
delight of the gaming table as Choate did for that absorbing
game, half chance, half skill, where twelve human dice must
all turn up together one way, or there be no victory.

But Everett is always the orator.  He was a clergyman a little
while.  He was a Greek professor a little while.  He was a
College President a little while.  He was a Minister to England
a little while.  He was Representative in Congress and Senator.
He was Governor of the Commonwealth.  In these places he did
good service enough to make a high reputation for any other
man.  Little of these things is remembered now.  He was above
all things--I am tempted to say, above all men--the foremost
American orator in one class.

There is one function of the orator peculiar to our country,
and almost unknown elsewhere.  That is the giving utterance
to the emotion of the people, whether of joy or sorrow, on
the occasions when its soul is deeply stirred--when some great
man dies, or there is a great victory or defeat, or some notable
anniversary is celebrated.  This office was filled by other
men, on some few occasions by Daniel Webster himself, but
by no man better than by Everett.  A Town, or City, or State
is very human.  In sorrow it must utter its cry of pain; in
victory, its note of triumph.  As events pass, it must pronounce
its judgement.  Its constant purpose must be fixed and made
more steadfast by expression.  It must give voice to its love
and its approbation and its condemnation.  It must register
the high and low water mark of its tide, its rising and its
sinking in heat and cold.  This office Edward Everett, for
nearly fifty years, performed for Massachusetts and for the
whole country.  In his orations is preserved and recorded
everything of the emotion of the great hours of our people's
history.  The camera of his delicate photography has preserved
for future generations what passed in the soul of his own
in the times that tried the souls of men.

I do not know where he got his exquisite elocution.  He went
abroad in his youth, and there were good trainers abroad,
then.  He must have studied thoroughly the speeches of Cicero
and the Greek orators.  Many casual phrases in his works,
besides many quotations, show his familiarity with Cicero's
writing on oratory.

If you would get some faint, far-off conception of him, first
look at the best bust or picture of Everett you can find.
Imagine the figure with its every movement gentle and graceful.
The head and face are suggestive of Greek sculpture.  This
person sits on the platform with every expression discharged
from the face, looking like a plaster image when the artist
has just begun his model, before any character or intelligence
has been put into it.  You think him the only person in the
audience who takes no interest whatever in what is going on,
and certainly that he expects to have nothing to do with it
himself.  He is introduced.  He comes forward quietly and
gracefully.  There is a slight smile of recognition of the
welcoming applause.  The opening sentences are spoken in a
soft--I had almost said, a caressing voice, though still a
little cold.  I suppose it would be called a tenor voice.
There was nothing in the least unmanly about Edward Everett.
Yet if some woman had spoken in the same tones, you would
have not thought them unwomanly.

  Illa tamquam cycnea fuit divini hominis vox et oratio.

He has found somewhere in the vast storehouse of his knowledge
a transaction exactly like the present, or exactly in contrast
with it, or some sentiment of poet or orator which just fits
the present occasion.  If it be new to his audience, he adds
to it a newer delight still by his matchless skill as a narrator--
a skill almost the rarest of all talents among public speakers.
If it be commonplace and hackneyed he makes it fresh and pleasant
by giving in detail the circumstances when it was first uttered,
or describes some occasion when some orator has applied it
before; or calls attention to its very triteness as giving
it added authority.  If he wish to express his agreement with
the last speaker and "say ditto to Mr. Burke," he tells you
when that was said, what was the occasion, and gives you the
name of Mr. Kruger, who stood for the representation of Bristol
with Burke.

Mr. Everett's stores were inexhaustible.  If any speaker
have to get ready in a hurry for a great occasion, let him
look through the index of the four volumes of Everett's speeches,
and he will find matter enough, not only to stimulate his
own thought and set its currents running, but to illustrate
and adorn what he will say.

But pretty soon the orator rises into a higher plane.  Some
lofty sentiment, some stirring incident, some patriotic emotion,
some play of fancy or wit comes from the brain or heart of
the speaker.  The audience is hushed to silence.  Perhaps
a little mist begins to gather in their eyes.  There is now
an accent of emotion in the voice, though still soft and
gentle.  The Greek statue begins to move.  There is life in
the limbs.  There has been a lamp kindled somewhere behind
the clear and transparent blue eyes.  The flexible muscles
of the face have come to life now.  Still there is no jar or
disorder.  The touch upon the nerves of the audience is like
that of a gentle nurse.  The atmosphere is that of a May
morning.  There is no perfume but that of roses and lilies.
But still, gently at first, the warmer feelings are kindled in
the hearts of the speaker and hearers.  The frame of the
speaker is transfigured.  The trembling hands are lifted
high in the air.  The rich, sweet voice fills the vast audience
chamber with its resonant tones.  At last, the bugle, the
trumpet, the imperial clarion rings out full and clear, and
the vast audience is transported as to another world--I had
almost said to a seventh heaven.  Read the welcome to Lafayette
or the close of the matchless eulogy on that illustrious object
of the people's love.  Read the close of the oration on Washington.
Read the contrast of Washington and Marlborough.  Read the
beautiful passage where, just before the ocean cable was laid,
the rich fancy of the speaker describes--

"The thoughts that we think up here on the earth's surface
in the cheerful light of day--clothing ourselves with elemental
sparks, and shooting with fiery speed in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, from hemisphere to hemisphere, far down
among the uncouth monsters that wallow in the nether seas,
along the wreck-paved floor, thorough the oozy dungeons of
the rayless deep; the last intelligence of the crops, whose
dancing tassels will in a few months be coquetting with the
west wind on those boundless prairies, flashing along the
slimy decks of old sunken galleons, which have been rotting
for ages; messages of friendship and love, from warm, living
bosoms, burn over the cold green bones of men and women, whose
hearts, once as fond as ours, burst as the eternal gulfs
closed and roared over them, centuries ago."

Read the passage in the eulogy on Choate where he describes
him arming himself in the entire panoply of his gorgeous
rhetoric--and you will get some far-away conception of the
power of this magician.

One thing especially distinguishes our modern orator from
the writer in the closet, where he writes solely for his readers,
or where he has prepared his speeches beforehand--that is,
the influence of the audience upon him.  There is nothing
like it as a stimulant to every faculty, not only imagination,
and fancy, and reason, but especially, as every experienced
speaker knows, memory also.  Everything needed seems to come
out from the secret storehouses of the mind, even the things
that have lain there forgotten, rusting and unused.  Mr. Everett
describes this in a masterly passage in his Life of Webster.
Gladstone states it in a few fine sentences:

"The work of the orator, from its very inception," he says,
"is inextricably mixed up with practice.  It is cast in the
mould offered to him by the mind of his hearers.  It is an
influence principally received from his audience (so to speak)
in vapor, which he pours back upon them in a flood.  The sympathy
and concurrence of his time is, with his own mind, joint parent
of his work.  He cannot follow nor frame ideals; his choice
is to be what his age would have him, what it requires in
order to be moved by him, or else not to be at all."

I heard six of Kossuth's very best speeches.  He was a marvellous
orator.  He seemed to have mastered the whole vocabulary of
English speech, and to have a rare gift of choosing words
that accurately expressed his meaning, and he used so to fashion
his sentences that they were melodious and delightful to the
ear.  That is one great gift or oratory, as it is of poetry,
or indeed of a good prose style.  Why it is that two words
or phrases which mean precisely the same thing to the intellect,
have so different an effect on the emotions, no man can tell.
To understand it, is to know the secret not only of reaching
the heart, but frequently of convincing the understanding
of man.

Kossuth made a great many speeches, sometimes five or six
in a day.  He could have had no preparation but the few minutes
which he could snatch while waiting for dinner at some house
where he was a guest, or late at night, after a hard day's
work.  But his speeches were gems.  They were beautiful in
substance and in manner.  He was ready for every occasion.
When the speaker who welcomed him at Roxbury told him that
Roxbury contained no historic spot that would interest a stranger,
Kossuth at once answered, "You forget that it is the birthplace
of Warren."  When old Josiah Quincy, then past eighty, said
at a Legislative banquet that he had come to the time--"when
the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men
shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they
are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened,
and they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears
shall be in the way," Kossuth interrupted him, "Ah! but that
was of ordinary men."

I was a member of the Legislature when Kossuth visited Boston.
I heard his address to the House and to the Senate, his reply
to the Governor's welcome.  I heard him again at the Legislative
banquet in Faneuil Hall, and twice in Worcester--on the Common
in the afternoon, and at the City Hall in the evening.  I
shook hands with him and perhaps exchanged a word or two,
but of that I have no memory.  Afterward I visited him with
my wife at Turin in 1892, when he was a few months past ninety.
He received me with great cordiality.  I spent two hours with
him and his sister, Madam Ruttkay.  They both expressed great
pleasure with the visit, and Madam Ruttkay kissed Mrs. Hoar
affectionately when we took leave.  Kossuth's beautiful English
periods were as beautiful as they were forty years before,
at the time of his famous pilgrimage through the United States.
His whole conversation related to the destiny of his beloved
Hungary.  He spoke with great dignity of his own share in
the public events which affected his country.  There was nothing
of arrogance or vanity in his claim for himself, yet in speaking
of Francis Joseph, he assumed unconsciously the tone of a
superior.  He maintained that constitutional liberty could
never be permanent where two countries with separate legislatures
were under one sovereign.  He said the sovereign would always
be able to use the military and civil power of one to accomplish
his designs against the liberty of the other.  The opinion
of Kossuth on such a question is entitled to the greatest
deference.  But I incline to the belief that, while undoubtedly
there may be great truth in the opinion, the spirit of liberty
will overcome that danger.  Hungary and Hungary's chief city
seem rapidly to be asserting control in their own affairs
and an influence in the Austro-Hungary Empire which no monarch
will be able to withstand, and which it is quite likely the
royal family will not desire to withstand.  In these days
monarchs are learning the love of liberty, and I believe
in most cases to-day the reigning sovereigns of Europe are
eager to promote constitutional government, and prefer the
title of Liberator to that of Despot.

I have heard Wendell Phillips speak a great many times.  I
do not include him in this notice, because, if I did, I ought
to defend my estimate of him at considerable length, and to
justify it by ample quotation.  I think him entitled to the
very highest rank as an orator.  I do not estimate his moral
character highly.  I think he exerted very little influence on
his generation, and that the influence he did exert was in the
main pernicious.  I have had copied everything he said, from
the time he made his first speech, so far as it is found in
the newspapers, and have the volumes in which his speeches
are collected.  I never had occasion to complain of him on
my own account.  So far as I know and believe, he had the
kindliest feeling for me until his death, and esteemed my
public service much more highly than it deserved.  But he
bitterly and unjustly attacked men whom I loved and honored
under circumstances which make it impossible for me to believe
that his conduct was consistent with common honesty.  He seemed
never to care for the soundness of his opinion before he uttered
it, or for the truth of the fact before he said it, if only
he could produce a rhetorical effect.  He seemed to like to
defame men whom the people loved and honored.  Toward the
latter part of his life, he seemed to get desperate.  If he
failed to make an impression by argument, he took to invective.
If vinegar would not answer he resorted to cayenne pepper.
If that failed, he tried to throw vitriol in the eyes of the
men whom he hated.  His remedy for slavery was to destroy
the country, and to leave the slave to the unchecked will
of the South.  During Lincoln's great trial, he attacked and
vilified him.  At the time when nearly every household in
the North was mourning for its dead, he tried to persuade
the people that Lincoln did not mean to put down the Rebellion.
He never gave the people wise counsel, and rarely told them
the honest truth.  He rarely gave his homage to anybody.  When
he did, it was to bad men, and not to good men.

There can be no worse influence upon the youth of the Republic
than that which shall induce them to approve sentiments, not
because they are true, but only because they are eloquently
said.


CHAPTER XXXVI
TRUSTS

I have given the best study I could to the grave evil of the
accumulation in the country of vast fortunes in single hands,
or of vast properties in the hands of great corporations--
popularly spoken of as trusts--whose powers are wielded by
one, or a few persons.  This is the most important question
before the American people demanding solution in the immediate
future.  A great many remedies have been proposed, some with
sincerity and some, I am afraid, merely for partisan ends.
The difficulty is increased by the fact that many of the evils
caused by trusts, or apprehended from them, can only be cured
by the action of the States, but cannot be reached by Congress,
which can only deal with international or interstate commerce.
As long ago as 1890 the people were becoming alarmed about
this matter.  But the evil has increased rapidly during the
last twelve years.  It is said that one man in this country
has acquired a fortune of more than a thousand million dollars
by getting an advantage over other producers or dealers in
a great necessary of life in the rates at which the railroads
transport his goods to market.

In 1890 a bill was passed which was called the Sherman Act,
for no other reason I can think of except that Mr. Sherman
had nothing to do with framing it whatever.  He introduced
a bill and reported it from the Finance Committee providing
that whenever a trust, as it was called, dealt with an article
protected by the tariff, the article should be put on the
free list.  This was a crude, imperfect, and unjust provision.
It let in goods made abroad by a foreign trust to compete
with the honest domestic manufacturer.  If there happened
to be an industry employing thousands or hundreds of thousands
of workmen, in which thousands of millions of American capital
was invested, and a few persons got up a trust--perhaps importers,
for the very purpose of breaking down the American manufacturer--
and made the article to a very small extent, all honest manufacturers
would be deprived of their protection.

Mr. Sherman's bill found little favor with the Senate.  It
was referred to the Judiciary Committee of which I was then
a member.  I drew as an amendment the present bill which I
presented to the Committee.  There was a good deal of opposition
to it in the Committee.  Nearly every member had a plan of
his own.  But at last the Committee came to my view and reported
the law of 1890.  The House disagreed to our bill and the
matter went to a Conference Committee, of which Mr. Edmunds,
the Chairman of the Committee, and I, as the member of the
Committee who was the author of the bill, were members.  The
House finally came to our view.

It was expected that the Court, in administering that law,
would confine its operation to cases which are contrary to the
policy of the law, treating the words "agreements in restraint
of trade," as having a technical meaning, such as they are
supposed to have in England.  The Supreme Court of the United
States went in this particular farther than was expected.
In one case it held that "the bill comprehended every scheme
that might be devised to restrain trade or commerce among
the several States or with foreign nations." From this opinion
several of the Court, including Mr. Justice Gray, dissented.
It has not been carried to its full extent since, and I think
will never be held to prohibit the lawful and harmless combinations
which have been permitted in this country and in England without
complaint, like contracts of partnership which are usually
considered harmless.  We thought it was best to use this general
phrase which, as we thought, had an accepted and well-known
meaning in the English law, and then after it had been construed
by the Court, and a body of decisions had grown up under
the law, Congress would be able to make such further amendments
as might be found by experience necessary.

The statute has worked very well indeed, although the Court
by one majority and against the very earnest and emphatic
dissent of some of its greatest lawyers, declined to give
a technical meaning to the phrase, "in restraint of trade."
But the operation of the statute has been healthy.  The Attorney-
General has recently given an account of suits in equity by
which he had destroyed a good many vast combinations, including
a combination of the six largest meat-packing concerns in
the country; a combination of railroads which had been restrained
from making any rebate or granting any preference whatever
to any shipper; and a pooling arrangement between the Southern
railroads which denied the right of the shippers interested
in the cotton product in the South to prescribe the route
over which their goods should pass.  He has also brought a
suit in equity to prevent the operation of a proposed merger
of sundry transcontinental railroads, thereby breaking up
a monopoly which affected the whole freight and passenger
traffic of the Northwest.

The public uneasiness, however, still continued.  The matter
was very much discussed in the campaign for electing members
of the House of Representatives in the autumn of 1902.

I made two or three careful speeches on the subject in Massachusetts,
in which I pointed out that the existing law, in general,
was likely to be sufficient.  I claimed, however, further,
that Congress had, in my opinion, the power of controlling
the whole matter, by reason of its right to prescribe terms
on which any corporation, created by State authority or its
own, should engage in interstate or international commerce.
It might provide as a condition for such traffic by a corporation,
that its officers or members should put on file an obligation
to be personally liable for the debts of the concern in case
the conditions prescribed by Congress were not complied with.

The House of Representatives passed a very stringent bill
known as the Littlefield Bill, which was amended by the Judiciary
Committee, of which I was the Chairman, by adding the provisions
of a bill which I had, myself, previously introduced, based
on the suggestions above stated.

But there was a general feeling that the amendments to the
existing law proposed by the Administration were all that
should be made at present.  These consisted in providing
severe penalties for granting rebates by railroads to favored
shippers; for having suits under the existing law brought
forward for prompt decision, and for giving the new Department
of Commerce large powers for the examination of the conduct
of the business of such corporations, and to compel them to
make such returns as should be thought desirable.

I should have preferred to have the bill I reported brought
forward and discussed in the Senate, although there was obviously
no time, with the pressure of other business, to get it through.
But it was thought best by a majority of the Republicans not
to take it up.  Some of them thought it was likely, if passed,
to have a very serious and perhaps disastrous effect on the
country.  So far as I know, nobody in either House of Congress
or in the press has pointed out why such a result would be
likely to follow.

On the whole I was very well satisfied.  The interests concerned
are vast.  A rash or unskilful remedy might bring infinite
trouble or ruin to lawful business.  The work of restraining
the trusts is going on very well under the law of 1890.  It
is a matter which must be discussed and considered by the
American people for a great many years to come, and the evils
from the trusts at present are rather in anticipation than
in reality.  So I am very well content, for the present, with
what has been accomplished.


CHAPTER XXXVII
RECOLLECTIONS OF THE WORCESTER BAR

The Worcester Bar, when I came to it, was much like a class
of boys in college.  There was rivalry and sharp practice
in some cases, and roughness of speech toward each other and
toward witnesses and parties.  But in the main, the lawyers
stood by one another and were ready to help each other in
trouble, and the lawyer's best and most trustworthy friends
were his associates.  The Judge and the jurymen, and the lawyers
from out of town used to come into Worcester and stay at the
old Sykes or Thomas Tavern, opposite the court-house, and
at another one known as the United States Hotel, further south.
The former was kept for a good many years by an old fellow
named Sykes.  He was a singular-looking person--a large head,
stout body, rather protuberant belly, and short curved legs
and very long arms.  He had large heavy eyebrows, a wide mouth
and a curved nose and sallow complexion looking a good deal
like the caricatures of the Jewish countenance in the comic
newspapers.  He had two sons who looked very much like him
and seemed about as old as their father.  One day the three
were standing in front of his tavern when a countryman came
along who undertook to stop with his load at the front door
of the tavern.  Sykes was standing there with his two sons,
one on each side of him.  He did not like to have the countryman
stop his load in that spot and called out to him rather roughly,
"Move along."  The fellow surveyed the group for a moment
with an amused look and complied with the order, but shouted
out to the old man:  "Wal, this is the fust time I ever saw
three Jacks of Spades in one pack."

The Court sat till six o'clock and often far into the evening,
and began at half-past eight or nine.  So there was no chance
for the country lawyers to go home at night.  There was great
fun at these old taverns in the evening and at meal times.
They insisted generally, like Mrs. Battles in whist, on the
rigor of the game, and the lawyer had to look sharp after
his pleadings or he found himself tripped up.  The parties
could not be witnesses, nor could any person interested in
the result of the trial.  So many a good case, and many a
good defence failed for want of the legal evidence to make
it out.  But the whole Bar and the public seemed to take an
interest in important trials.  People came in from the country
round with their covered wagons, simply for the pleasure of
attending Court and seeing the champions contend with each
other.  The lawyers who were not engaged in the case were
always ready to help those who were with advice and suggestion.
It used to be expected that members of the Bar would be in
the court-house hearing the trials even if they were not engaged
in them.  That was always an excuse for being absent from
the office, and their clients sought them at the court-house
for consultation.  I cannot but think that the listening to
the trial and argument of causes by skilful advocates was
a better law school than any we have now, and that our young
men, especially in the large cities, fail to become good advocates
and to learn the art of putting in a case, and of examining
and cross-examining witnesses, for want of a constant and
faithful attendance on the courts.

In those old times, our old lawyers, if Charles Lamb had
known them and should paint them, would make a set of portraits
as interesting as his old Benchers of the Inner Temple.  Old
Calvin Willard, many years sheriff of Worcester, would have
delighted Elia.  He did not keep the wig or the queue or the
small-clothes of our great-grandfathers, but he had their
formal and ceremonial manners in perfection.  It was like
a great State ceremonial to meet him and shake hands with
him.  He paused for a moment, surveyed you carefully to be
sure of the person, took a little time for reflection to be
sure there was nothing in the act to compromise his dignity,
and then slowly held out his hand.  But the grasp was a warm
one, and the ceremony and the hand-shake conveyed his cordial
respect and warmth of regard.  He always reminded me of the
Englishman in Crabbe's "Tales" who, I think, may have been
his kinsman.

  The wish that Roman necks in one were found
  That he who formed the wish might deal the wound,
  This man had never heard.  But of the kind
  Is the desire which rises in his mind.
  He'd have all English hands, for further he
  Cannot conceive extends our charity,
  All but his own, in one right hand to grow;
  And then what hearty shake would he bestow.

Mr. Willard was once counsel before a magistrate in a case
in which he took much interest.  A rough, coarse country
lawyer was on the other side.  When Willard stated some legal
proposition, his adversary said:  "I will bet you five dollars
that ain't law."  "Sir," said Mr. Willard, drawing himself
up to his full height, with the great solemnity of tone of
which he was master:  "Sir, I do not permit myself to make
the laws of my country the subject of a bet."

Another of the old characters who came down to my time from
the older generation was Samuel M. Burnside.  He was a man
of considerable wealth and lived in a generous fashion, dispensing
an ample hospitality at his handsome mansion, still standing
in Worcester.  He was a good black-letter lawyer, though without
much gift of influencing juries or arguing questions of law
to the Court.  He was a good Latin scholar, very fond of Horace
and Virgil, and used to be on the committees to examine the
students at Harvard, rather disturbing the boys with his somewhat
pedantic questioning.  He was very nearsighted, and, it is
said, once seized the tail of a cow which passed near him
in the street and hurried forward, supposing some woman had
gone by and said, "Madam, you are dropping your tippet."

One of the most interesting characters among the elders of
the Worcester Bar was old Rejoice Newton.  He was a man of
excellent judgment, wisdom, integrity and law learning enough
to make him a safe guide to his clients in their important
transactions.  He was a most prosaic person, without sentiment,
without much knowledge of literature, and absolutely without
humor.  He was born in Northfield near the banks of the Connecticut
River and preserved to the time of his death his love of rural
scenes and of farming.  He had an excellent farm a mile or
two out of town, where he spent all the time he could get
from his professional duties.  He was associated with Chief
Justice Shaw in some important cases, and always thought that
it was due to his recommendation that Governor Lincoln appointed
the Chief Justice--a suggestion which Governor Lincoln used
to repel with great indignation.  The Governor was also a
good farmer, especially proud of his cattle.  Each of them
liked to brag of their crops and especially of the produce
of their respective dairies.  Governor Lincoln was once discoursing
to Devens and me, in our office, of a wonderful cow of his
which, beside raising an enormous calf, had produced the cream
for a great quantity of butter.  Mr. Devens said: "Why, that
beats Major Newton's cow, that gave for months at a time some
fifteen or eighteen quarts at a milking." "If Brother Newton
hears of my cow," said Governor Lincoln, "he will at once
double the number of quarts."  The old Major was quite fond
of telling stories, of which the strong points were not apt
to suffer in his narration.  One Fourth of July, when he had
got to be an old man, he came down street and met a brother
member of the Bar, who took him up into the room of the Worcester
Light Infantry, a Company of which the Major's deceased son
had long ago been the Captain.  The members of the Company
were spending the Fourth with a bowl of punch and other refreshments.
The Major was introduced and was received with great cordiality,
and my friend left him there.  The next day my friend was
going down street and met the Captain of the Light Infantry,
who said:  "That was a very remarkable old gentleman you brought
into our room yesterday.  He stayed there all the forenoon,
drinking punch and telling stories.  He distinctly remembered
General Washington.  He went home to dinner, came back after
dinner, drank some more punch, and remembered Christopher
Columbus."

The old Major was once addressing the Supreme Court and maintained
a doctrine which did not commend itself to Chief Justice Shaw.
The Chief Justice interposed: "Brother Newton, what is the
use of arguing that?  We have held otherwise in such a case
(citing it) and again and again since." The Major paused,
drew his spectacles slowly off his nose, and said to the Court
with great seriousness: "May it please your Honors, I have
a great respect for the opinions of this Court, except in
some very gross cases."

A man by the name of Lysander Spooner, whose misfortune it
was to be a good deal in advance of his age, the author of
a very clever pamphlet maintaining the unconstitutionality
of slavery, also published some papers attacking the authenticity
of Christian miracles.  In these days of Bob Ingersoll such
views would be met with entire toleration, but they shocked
Major Newton exceedingly, as they did most persons of his
time.  Spooner studied for the Bar and applied to be admitted.
He was able to pass an examination.  But the Major, as _amicus
curiae,_ addressed the Court and insisted that Spooner was
not a man of proper character, and affirmed in support of
his assertion that he was the author of some blasphemous attacks
on Christianity.  The result was that Spooner's application
was denied.  The Court adjourned for dinner.  It was the day
of the calling of the docket, and just before the Judge came
in in the afternoon, the whole Bar of Worcester County were
assembled, filling the room.  The Major sat in a seat near
one of the doors.  He had dined pretty heavily, the day was
hot and the Major was sleepy.  He tipped back a little in
his chair, his head fell back between his shoulders and his
mouth opened, with his nose pointed toward the zenith.  Just
then Spooner came in.  As he passed by the Major, the temptation
was irresistible.  He seized the venerable nose of the old
patriarch between his thumb and finger, and gave it a vigorous
twist.  The Major was awakened and sprang to his feet, and
in a moment realized what had happened.  He was, as may be
well supposed, intensely indignant.  No Major in the militia
could submit to such an insult.  He seized his chair and hurled
it at the head of the offender, but missed, and the bystanders
interposed before he was able to inflict the deserved punishment.


The Major lived to a good old age.  His mental faculties
became somewhat impaired before he died.  He had great respect
for his excellent son-in-law, Colonel Wetherell, who was on
Governor Andrew's staff during the War, and thought that anything
which ought to be accomplished could be accomplished by the
influence of the Colonel.  Somebody told him during the hardest
part of the war that we ought to bend all our energies to
the capture of Richmond.  If Richmond were to fall the rebellion
would be easily put down.  "You are quite right, sir," said
the Major.  "It ought to be done, and I will speak to Colonel
Wetherell about it." But everybody who knew the worthy Major,
unless it were some offender against justice, or some person
against whose wrong-doing he had been the shield and protector
to a client, liked the kindly, honest and sturdy old man.
He was District Attorney for the district which included Worcester
County--an office then and ever since held by admirable lawyers.
He prided himself on the fact that he never drew an indictment
which was not sustained by the Court, if it were questioned.
He liked to recite his old triumphs.  He especially plumed
himself on his sagacity in dealing with one case which came
before him.  A complaint was made of a book well known at
that time, the memoirs of a dissolute woman, which was full
of indecency, but in which there could not be found a single,
separate indecent sentence or word.  The Major was at a loss
for some time what to do in indicting it.  If he set forth
the whole book, it would give it an immortality on the records
of the court which perhaps would be worse for the public morals
than the original publication.  Finally he averred in the
indictment that the defendant had published a book so indecent
that it was unfit to be spread on the records of the court.
The question went up to the Supreme Court and the indictment
was held good.  It was difficult for the Court or the jury
to find that such a book was fit to be spread on the records
of the Court, and the Major secured his victory and convicted
his criminal.

One of the bright young lawyers who came to the Bar a few
years after I did, was Appleton Dadmun.  He died of consumption
after a brief but very successful career.   He was the very
type and embodiment of the Yankee countryman in his excellencies
and his defects and in his fashion of speech and behavior.
He was a graduate of Amherst College.  The only evidence I
ever discovered of his classical education was his habit of
using the Greek double negative in ordinary English speech.
He used to employ me almost always as senior when he had a
case to argue to a jury, or an important law argument in Court.
He would put off the engagement until just as the case was
coming on.  He used to intend to try his cases himself.  But
his heart, at the last moment, would fail him.  He was as
anxious about his clients' cases as if they were his own.
He was exceedingly negligent about his pleadings and negligent
in the matter of being prepared with the necessary formal
proofs of facts which were really not doubtful but which
were put in issue by the pleadings.  When I was retained
my first duty was to prepare an amendment of the declaration
or the answer or plea, or, perhaps, to see whether he had
got the attesting witness to prove some signature.  But when
we had got past all that I used to find that he had prepared
his evidence with reference to what was the pinch of the
case of what was likely to be finally the doubtful point in
the mind of court or jury with infinite sagacity and skill.
I have rarely known a better judge of the effect of evidence
on the mind of ordinary juries.  He took his clients into his
affection as if they had been his own brethren or children,
and seemed always to hate to be compelled to make any charge
for his services, however successful.

He had a pleasant wit.  On one occasion a member of the bar
named Holbrook, who was not a bad fellow, but had, like the
rest of the world, some peccadilloes to repent of, came into
the Court-house one morning just as the Court was coming in
where the lawyers were gathered.  Much excited, he said he
was riding into Worcester in a chaise from the neighboring
town where he spent his nights in the summer.  His horse had
run away and tore at a terrible rate down Main Street, swinging
the chaise from one side to the other as he ran, and breaking
some part of the harness and perhaps one of the shafts.  But
at last he had contrived to crawl out through the window behind
in the chaise top and hold on to the cross-bar.  Letting himself
down just as the chaise had got to the extremity of its sway
from one side to another, he let go and escaped without injury.
But, he said, it was a terrible five minutes.  Every action
of his life seemed to rush through his memory with the swiftness
of a torrent.  "You ought to have very heavy damages, sir,"
said Mr. Dadmun.

Another of the brightest of the young lawyers when I came
to the Bar was H.  He had, however, had rather an unfortunate
introduction to life.  His father, who was a very wealthy
and prosperous manufacturer, sent him to Yale College and
supplied him liberally with money, not only for his support,
but for the indulgence of every extravagant taste.  Beside
spending what his father allowed him, he incurred a good many
debts, expecting to find no difficulty in their payment.  His
father failed in business with a great crash about the end
of his junior year and died suddenly.  He kept on, however,
on credit, until he graduated and then came out with a heavy
load of debt, and no resources for studying his profession.
He got thorough, however, by dint of plausible manners.  He
was a very honest fellow in other respects, but he got the
habit of incurring debts which he could not pay.  Then he
took to drinking hard, and finally went to New York, and died
after a career of dissipation.  But everybody liked him.  Drunk
or sober, he was the best company in the world, full of anecdote
flavored with a shrewd and not ill-natured wit.  There was a
manufacturer in a village near Worcester who had failed in
business owing large debts all about.  He was a man of enormous
bulk, the fattest man in the whole region round-about, weighing
considerably over three hundred.  He left the State to avoid
his creditors, and dwelt in New York, keeping himself out
of their reach.  At last it was discovered by a creditor that
he used to come to Worcester in the train which arrived from
New York on the Western Railroad shortly before midnight Saturday,
go over to his old home, which was not far off, stay there
Sunday, when he was exempt from arrest, and take the cars
Sunday night at about the same hour for New York.  Accordingly
old Jonathan Day, a veteran deputy-sheriff, armed with an
execution, lay in wait for him one dark and stormy Saturday
night at the little old wooden depot of the Western Railroad,
some hundred or two feet from Grafton Street.  The train
came in, and the debtor got out.  The old General laid his
hands on him, and told him he was his prisoner.  He protested
and demurred and begged, making all manner of promises to
pay the debt if the officer would not take him to jail.  But
Day was inexorable.  Meantime the train had gone on, and the
keeper of the depot had put out the lights and gone off.  There
was nobody left in the darkness but the officer and the debtor.
"Well," said the fellow, "if you are going to take me to jail
you must carry me.  I won't walk." So he sat himself down
on the platform.  Day tried to persuade him to walk, and then
tugged and tugged at his collar, but without the slightest
effect.  He might as well have tried to move a mountain.  He
waited in a good deal of perplexity, and at last he heard
the rattle of wheels on Grafton Street, and gave a loud yell
for assistance.  The owner of the wagon came to the scene.
General Day demanded his help as one of the posse comitatus.
But it was as hard to the two to move the obstruction as it
had been for the old General alone.  So the General put the
debtor in charge of his new recruit, and went off up street
to see what counsel he could get in the matter.  All the lights
in the lawyers' offices and places of business were out except
a solitary gleam which came from the office of my friend
H.  He was sitting up alone, soaking himself with the contents
of a bottle of brandy.  General Day found him sitting there
and stated his case.  My friend heard it through, took it
into consideration, and took down and consulted the Revised
Statutes and the Digest.  At last he shook his head with an
air of drunken gravity and said:  "I don't find any express
provision anywhere for such a case.  So I think we must be
governed by the rule of law for the case nearest like it we
can find.  That seems to be the case of the attachment of
personal property, such as lumber, which is too bulky to be
removed.  My advice to you is to put a placard on him saying
he is attached, and go off and leave him till Monday morning."

When I was a young man, one summer a few years after my admission
to the Bar, I took a journey on foot with Horace Gray through
Berkshire County.  We started from Greenfield and walked over
the Hoosac Mountain to Adams and Williamstown, then over the
old road to Pittsfield, then to Stockbridge, Great Barrington,
and the summit of Mt. Washington, now better known as Mt.
Everett or Taghsomi; thence to Bashpish Falls in New York,
and to the Salisbury Lakes in Connecticut.  We visited many
interesting places and enjoyed what has always seemed to me
the most beautiful scenery on earth.

There were one or two quite ludicrous adventures.  I went
alone to the top of Bald Mountain in Lenox one day.  Gray
had been there and preferred to visit a neighboring hilltop.
As I approached the summit, which was a bare pasture, I came
upon a powerful bull with a herd of cattle near him.  He began
to bellow and paw the ground and move toward me in angry fashion.
There was no chance for any place of refuge which I could
hope to gain.  I looked around for some rock or instrument
of defence.  It was, I think, the most imminent danger to
which I have ever been exposed.  I was calculating my capacity
for dodging the creature when suddenly a sound like a small
clap of thunder was heard.  The rest of the herd, which seemed
quite wild, seeing the approach of a stranger, had taken alarm
and started off down the hillside on a full run, their rushing
and trampling causing the earth to reverberate beneath their
tread and produce the sound of which I have just spoken.
The old bull hearing the sound and seeing his companions
departing concluded he would follow their example.  He turned
tail too, and retreated down the mountain side, much to my
relief.

On our walk through Lanesboro we stopped at a plain country
tavern to get lunch.  There were several codgers such as in
those days used to haunt country bar-rooms about eleven o'clock
in the morning and four o'clock in the afternoon.  Sitting
in an old wooden chair tilted back against the wall of the
room was one of them curled up with his knees sticking up
higher than his head.  He looked at Gray's stately proportions
and called out:  "How tall are you?" Gray, who was always
rather careful of his dignity, made some brief answer not
intended to encourage familiarity.  But the fellow persisted:
"I would like to measure with you." Gray concluded it was
best to enter into the humor of the occasion.  So he stood
up against the wall.  The other man proceeded to draw himself
up out of the chair, and unroll, and unroll, and unroll until
at last his gigantic stature reached up almost as high as
Gray's.  But he fell short a little.  I learned, later, that
it was a man named Shaw who afterward became famous as a writer
and humorist under the pseudonym of Josh Billings.  He was
the son of Henry Shaw, formerly of Lanesboro; at that time
a millionaire dwelling in New York, and known to fame as
one of the two Massachusetts Representatives who voted for
the Missouri Compromise in 1820.  Henry Shaw was, I believe,
a native of Lanesboro, and had represented the Berkshire district
in Congress.

The person whom the Worcester lawyers of this time like best
to remember was Peter C. Bacon.  He was the Dominie Sampson
of the Worcester Bar.  I suppose he was the most learned man
we ever had in Worcester, and probably, in Massachusetts.
He was simple and guileless as a child; of a most inflexible
honesty, devoted to the interest of his clients, and an enthusiastic
lover of the science of the law.  When, in rare cases, he
thoroughly believed in the righteousness of his case, he was
irresistible.  But in general he was full of doubts and hesitation.
He was, until he was compelled to make his arguments more
compact by the rules of court limiting the time of arguments,
rather tedious.  He liked to go out into side-paths and to
discourse of matters not material to the issue but suggested
to him as he went along.  He had a curious fashion of using
the ancient nomenclature of the Common law where it had passed
out of the knowledge even of most lawyers and the comprehension
of common men.  He would begin his appeal to the jury in some
case where a fraud had been attempted on his client, by saying,
"Gentlemen, the law abhorreth covin." He was a lawyer everywhere.
His world was the Court-house and his office.  I met him in
the street, of a Sunday noon, one summer and said to him,
"Why, Brother Bacon, you must have had a long sermon to-day."

"Oh," Mr. Bacon said, "I stayed to the Sunday-school.  I have
a class of young girls.  It's very interesting.  I've got
'em as far as the Roman Civil Law."

Mr. Bacon could seldom be made angry by any incivility to
himself.  But he resented any attempt to deprive a client,
however much of a n'er-do-well he might be, of all the rights
and forms of a legal trial.  He was also much disturbed if
any lawyer opposed to him misstated a principle of law, who
ought, in his judgment, to know better.  I was once trying
a case against him and his partner, Judge Aldrich, where General
Devens was my associate.  Devens was summing up the case,
and complaining of the conduct of some parties interested
in the estate of a deceased person.  One of them was a son
of a deceased niece.  There being no children, under our law,
the nephews and nieces inherit, but not the children of deceased
nephews or nieces, when there are living nephews or nieces.
General Devens, not having in his mind the legal provision
at the moment, said to the jury: "The sound of the earth on
the coffin of the old lady had scarcely ceased when one of
these heirs hurried to the probate office to get administration."
Mr. Bacon rose and interrupted him with great emotion.  "He
is not an heir."

"I said," Mr. Devens repeated, "one of these heirs, Mr.
A. F."

Bacon burst into tears and said again, with a broken voice:
"He is not an heir, I say, he is not an heir."

I saw the point and whispered to Devens:  "An assumed heir."

"Very well," Devens said, "an assumed heir, if my friend likes
it better."  Bacon replied with a "Humph" of contentment and
satisfaction, and the matter subsided.  As I was walking home
from the court-house with Mr. Bacon afterward I expressed
my regret at the occurrence and told him that General Devens
had the greatest respect for him.  Mr. Bacon replied: "He
had no business to say it.  Aldrich told me to tell him he
had not read the 'Revised Statutes.' But I would not say such
a thing as that, sir, about any man."

But Brother Bacon had the kindliest of hearts.  It was impossible
for him to bear malice or retain resentment against anybody.
When I was a youngster I was once in a case where Bacon was
on the other side.  Charles Allen was my associate.  It was
a case which excited great public feeling.  There were throngs
of witnesses.  It was tried in the middle of the terrific
heats of one of the hottest summers ever known in Worcester.
Allen, who had a power of stinging sarcasm which he much delighted
to use, kept Bacon nervous and angry through the whole trial.
At last, one afternoon, Bacon lost his patience.  When the
Court adjourned, he stood up on a little flight of steps on
the outside of the Court-house and addressed the crowd, who
were going out.  He said: "Charles Allen has abused me all
through this trial.  He is always abusing me.  He has abused
me ever since I came to this Bar.  I have said it before and
I will say it again--_he is a curious kind of a man."_ This
utterance relieved Brother Bacon's wounded feelings and he
never probably thought of the matter again.

One of the great events in Bacon's life was his receiving
the degree of Doctor of Laws from Brown University, where
he was graduated.  This gave infinite satisfaction to his
brethren of the Bar, who were all very fond of him.  It was
at once proposed, after the old Yankee fashion in the country
when a man got a new hat or a new suit of clothes, that we
should all go down to T.'s to "wet" it.  T. was the proprietor
of a house a few miles from Worcester, famous for cooking
game and trout in the season, and not famous for a strict
observance of the laws against the sale of liquor.  There
was a good deal of feeling about that among the temperance
people of the town, although it was a most excellent, properly
kept house in all other respects.  But the prejudice against
it of the strict teetotalers had occasioned some entirely
unfounded scandal about its management in other matters.  Mr.
Bacon, when invited by the Bar to go as a guest, accepted
the invitation, but stipulated that he should have provided
for him a pint bottle of English ale.  He said he was opposed,
on principle, to drinking intoxicating liquors, but his doctors
had ordered that he should drink a pint of ale every day with
his dinner.  That was provided.  The Bar sat down to dinner
at an early hour and the fun and frolic were kept up far into
the small hours of the night.  Brother Bacon was the subject
of every speech and of every toast.  He seemed to think it
was necessary for him to reply to every speaker and toast.
So he was kept on his legs a great part of the night.  As
he sipped his modest tumbler of ale, Brother Dewey, who sat
next to him, would replenish it, when Mr. Bacon was not looking,
from a bottle of champagne.  So at least two quart bottles
of champagne were passed into the unsuspecting Brother Bacon
through that single pint of beer.  When we broke up, the host
came to ask us how we had enjoyed ourselves, and Mr. Bacon
told him he would like to know where he got his English ale,
which he thought was the best he had ever tasted in his life.
It is the only instance that I know of in modern times of
the repetition of the miracle of the widow's cruse.

Judge Thomas, then holding the Supreme Court at Worcester,
wanted very much indeed to go down with the Bar, but he thought
it would not quite do.  The next morning, Mr. Bacon had to
try a libel for adultery between two parties living in the
town where the Bar had had their supper.  He had had no chance
to see his witnesses, who got into town just as the Court
opened.  So he had to put them on and examine them at a venture.
The first one he called was a grave-looking citizen.  Mr.
Bacon asked him a good many questions, but could get no answer
which tended to help his case, and at last he said, with some
impatience:  "Mr. Witness, can you tell me any single fact
which tends to show that his man has committed adultery?"

"Well, all I know about it, Squire Bacon," replied the witness,
"is that he's been seen at Charlie T.'s"--the inn where Bacon
had had his supper the night before.  There was an immense
roar of laughter from the Bar, led by Judge Thomas, the ring
of whose laugh could have been heard half way across the square.

Brother Bacon, though a modest and most kindly man, used to
think he had a monopoly of the abstruser knowledge in regard
to real property and real actions.  It used sometimes to provoke
him when he found a competent antagonist in cases involving
such questions.  There was a suit in which Bacon was for the
demandant where a creditor had undertaken to levy an execution
of property standing in a wife's name but claimed to have
been conveyed to her in trust for the husband on consideration
paid by him.  In such cases, under the Massachusetts law,
the land may be levied upon as the property of the debtor,
notwithstanding the ostensible title is in another.  The wife
contested the facts.  But after the bringing of the suit,
the wife died, and the husband by her death became tenant
by the courtesy.  Of course his title as tenant by the courtesy
was unaffected by the previous levy, and his wife's right
to contest the demand devolved upon him.  The husband and
wife had both been made parties defendant to the suit under
the Massachusetts practice.  It would not do to let the creditor
get judgment.  Under the advice of Mr. Nelson, afterward
Judge, one of the most learned and careful lawyers, the defendant
pleaded a special non-tenure, and the case was reported to
the full bench of the Supreme Court, where Mr. Bacon was
employed for the plaintiff.  The report inaccurately said
that the defendant filed a disclaimer.  Mr. Bacon made a
very learned argument to show that upon the facts the disclaimer
could not be supported, and was going on swimmingly, under
full sail.  Mr. Bacon said in his argument:  "If he had pleaded
non-tenure, I admit, your Honors, he would have been pretty
well off."  Whereupon Judge Hoar sent for the original papers,
and looking at them read the plea, and said: "Isn't that a
plea of non-tenure?"  Mr. Bacon was obliged to admit that
it was.  The Chief Justice said:  "Well, then, the tenant
is in the condition which you describe as being pretty well
off, isn't he, Brother Bacon?"  Bacon answered with an angry
and impatient "Humph."  The Chief Justice said: "Are there
any other objections to the plea, Brother Bacon?" "More than
forty, your Honor," replied Bacon indignantly, "which I should
state to you at a proper time." The Chief Justice said that
that seemed to be the proper time.  But Mr. Bacon sat down
in high dudgeon, without further remark.

He was the kindliest of men, both to man and beast.  I once
was at a country tavern where Bacon and I were to dine.  It
was about the time of the session of the Supreme Court.  I
was sitting on the veranda of the hotel waiting for dinner
to be ready, in the summer afternoon.  Mr. Bacon took a little
walk, and as he came along and was passing the porch, a puppy
ran after him, came up behind, and seized his pantaloons in
his teeth, making quite a rent in them.  Bacon looked round
and saw the mischief, and shook his finger at the poor dog.
I am sure he had no idea that anybody of the human species
was within hearing.  The animal crouched down in great terror,
expecting a beating.  Mr. Bacon paused a moment with his
uplifted finger, and addressed the cur.  "Why do you try to
bite me?  Why do you tear my pantaloons? Do you think I can
go through the Supreme Court without pantaloons?" With that
he left the poor dog to the reproaches of his own conscience
and took no further notice of the transaction.

I ought perhaps, as I have told this story at Brother Bacon's
expense, to tell one at my own where he came out decidedly
ahead.  We were opposed in a real estate case where the other
evidence of the title was pretty strong Bacon's way, but the
ancient bounds seemed to agree with my client's theory.  I
addressed the jury with all the earnestness in my power in
favor of the importance of maintaining the ancient landmarks,
quoting the curse of the Scripture on him that removed them,
and endeavored to make them see how much of the safety and
security of property depended on sticking to them in spite
of any amount of fallible human testimony.  I thought I had
made a good impression.  When Brother Bacon came to reply,
he told the jury about the Roman god Terminus who watched
over boundaries, and after quite an eloquent description,
he told the jury: "Brother Hoar always seems to me when he
makes this argument, which I have heard a good many times
before, to think he is the god Terminus, and that the protection
of all our modern landmarks is in his exclusive province."
The jury were very much amused.  I have forgotten how the
case was decided.  But I should doubtless remember if it had
been decided in my favor.

Quite late in life some of Mr. Bacon's clients, seeing that
he was out of health, and grateful for his long, faithful and
poorly paid service, made an arrangement to send him on a
journey to Europe.  He was gone a little more than a year,
visiting England, France, Italy and Spain, and returning
with new vigor for another ten years of hard work.  His interest
in Europe had come chiefly from the literature which he had
read in his younger days.  He was not very familiar with much
English prose or poetry later than the time of Addison.  In
one of his first letters in London he announced with great
satisfaction, "I have a room not far from the celebrated Westminster
Abbey mentioned in the _Spectator."_

But Brother Bacon ought not to be remembered alone, or chiefly,
for his eccentricities.  He was a profound, accurate and able
jurist.  The great interests of clients were safe with him.
To him the profession of the lawyer was a sacred office.  I
never think of him without recalling Cicero's beautiful description
in the "De Oratore" of the old age of the great lawyer:

Quit est enim praeclarius quam honoribus et republicae muneribus
perfunctum senem posee suo jure dicere id quot apud Enium
dicit ille Pythias Apollo, se esse eum, unde sibi, si no populi
et reges, at onmnes sui cives consilium expetant;

  suarum rerum incerti quos ego ope mea ex
  incertis certos compotesque consili dimitto
  ut ne res temere tractent turbidas.

Est enim sine dubio domus jurisconsulti totius oraculum civitatis.

Mr. Bacon lived to celebrate his golden wedding, and ended
a stainless and honored life in a ripe old age, mourned by
the whole community, of which he had been a pillar and an
ornament.  His portrait hangs in the Court House where he
would have loved best to be remembered.

In my early days at the Worcester Bar there were a good many
bright men, young and old, who had their offices in the country
towns, but who tried a good many cases before juries.  All
the courts for the county in those days were held in Worcester.
Among these country lawyers was old Nat Wood of Fitchburg,
now a fine city; then a thriving country town.  Mr. Wood
had a great gift of story-telling, and he understood very
well the character and ways of country farmers.  He used to
come down from Fitchburg at the beginning of the week, stop
at the old Sykes Tavern where the jurymen and witnesses put
up, spend the evening in the bar-room getting acquainted with
the jurymen and telling them stories.  So when he had a case
to try, he was apt to have a very friendly tribunal.  His
enemies used to say that he always contrived to sleep with
one juryman himself, and have his client sleep with another,
when he had a case coming on.  He was quite irritable and
hasty, and would sometimes break out with great indignation
at some fancied impropriety of the other side, without fully
understanding what was going on.  I was once examining a witness
who had led rather a roving and vagabond life.  I asked him
where he had lived and he named seven different towns in
each of which he had dwelt within a very short time.  I observed:
"Seven mighty cities claimed great Homer dead." Wood instantly
sprang to his feet with great indignation.  "Brother Hoar,
I wish you would not put words into the witness's mouth."

Wood was a native of Stirling, a thinly settled country town
near the foot of Mount Wachusett.  The people of that town
were nearly equally divided between the Unitarian and Universalist
congregations.  Each had its meeting house fronting on the
public common or Green, as it was called.  In the summer the
farmers would come to meeting from distant parts of the town,
bringing luncheon with them; have a short intermission after
the morning service, and then have a second service in the
afternoon.  During the recess, in pleasant summer weather,
the men of the two congregations would gather together on
the Green, discussing the news of the town, and very often
getting into theological controversies.  In the winter, they
gathered in the tavern or post-office in the same way.  There
was one Universalist champion who told the gathering that he
would make any man admit the truth of Universalism in five
minutes.  He was a well known and doughty champion, and the
Unitarians were rather loth to tackle him.  But, one Sunday,
Lawyer Wood came home to spend the day at his birthplace,
and the Unitarians thought it was a good chance to encounter
the Universalist champion.  So they accepted his challenge
and put Wood forward to meet him.

The Universalist theologian began:  "You'll admit there is
a God?"

"No, I'll be damned if I do," replied Wood.

The fellow was completely non-plussed.  He had got to take
up his five minutes in compelling Wood to admit the existence
of a Creator.  So he was obliged to retire from the field
discomfited.

Another of our leaders at the Bar was Henry Chapin.  He had
made his way from a rather humble place in life to be one
of the leaders of a very able Bar, Mayor of Worcester, and
to hold a place of large influence in the various business,
social, charitable and religious activities of the community.
He was not specially learned, specially profound or specially
eloquent.  But he had a rare gift of seizing upon the thought
which was uppermost in the minds of excellent and sensible
men, country farmers, skilled workmen in the shops, business
men, expressing it in a clear and vigorous way, always agreeing
with the best sentiment of the people.  This, with an unfailing
courtesy and pleasant humor and integrity of character and
life gave him great popularity.  He was exceedingly happy
in short speeches at dinners or at political meetings.  He
had a fund of entertaining anecdote which never seemed to
fail.  He was very careful not to seem dogmatic, or to assert
himself too strongly.  He would put forward his opinion with
saying, "It strikes my mind," or "It has occurred to me,"
or "I thought perhaps it was possible," or "It is my impression."
I remember once protesting before old Judge Byington against
some objection which the counsel on the other side had made
to a witness testifying to his impressions.  I told the Judge
that Brother Chapin never in his life stated anything more
strongly.  If you asked him if he were married, he would
say it was his impression he was.  The Judge said:  "Well,
we have a lawyer in Berkshire County who has the same habit.
Only if you ask him if he is married it is his impression
he isn't."

It is said that when he went to see the Siamese Twins, he
observed to the exhibitor, "Brothers, I suppose."  But I
believe that story had been told before of one of the Royal
Dukes.

Mr. Chapin was nominated by the Republicans for Congress and
accepted and would have had a useful and distinguished public
life.  But he became alarmed by the opposition of the Know-
Nothings and withdrew from the canvass much to the dissatisfaction
of his political friends.  That ended his political aspirations.
But he was soon after appointed to the more congenial office
of Judge of Probate, which he discharged to great public satisfaction
until his lamented death.


CHAPTER XXXVIII
SOME JUDGES I HAVE KNOWN

Unquestionably the most important character in the legal
history of Massachusetts is Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw.  He
was a great lawyer before he came to the Bench.  He had written
one or two very able articles for the _North American Review,_
one of them a vigorous statement of the opinion of Massachusetts
upon slavery.  He was the author of a petition signed by many
of the leading men of Massachusetts in opposition to the high
tariff of 1828.  No more powerful statement of the argument
against high protection can be found.  I have been surprised
that the modern free-traders have not long ago discovered
it, and brought it to light.  He was one of the managers of
the impeachment of Judge Prescott, securing a conviction against
a powerful array of counsel for the defendant, which included
Daniel Webster.  He was consulted in difficult and important
matters by eminent counsel in other counties than Suffolk.

But all these titles to distinction have been forgotten in
his great service as Chief Justice of Massachusetts for thirty
years.  No other judicial fame in the country can rival his,
with the single exception of Marshall.  He was induced to
undertake the office of Chief Justice very reluctantly, by
the strong personal urgency of Mr. Webster.  Mr. Webster
used to give a humorous account of the difficulty he had in
overcoming the morbid scruples of the great simple-hearted
intellectual giant.  He found Mr. Shaw in his office in a
cloud of tobacco-smoke.  Mr. Webster did not himself smoke,
and was at some disadvantage during the interview for that
reason.

Mr. Shaw was rather short in stature and, in the latter part
of his life, somewhat corpulent.  He had a massive head, a
low forehead, and strong and rather coarse features.  He reminded
you of the statues of Gog and Magog in the Guildhall in London.
His hair came down over his forehead, and when he had been
away from home for a week or two, so that his head got no combing
but his own, it was in a sadly tangled mass.  His eye was
dull, except when it kindled in discussion, or when he was
stirred to some utterance of grave displeasure.

There is an anecdote of Mr. Choate which occasionally goes
the rounds of the papers, and which is often repeated quite
inaccurately.  The true version is this.  I heard it within
a few hours after it happened, and have heard it at first
hand more than once since.

Mr. Choate was sitting next to Judge Hoar in the bar when
the Chief Justice was presiding, and the Suffolk docket was
being called.  The Chief Justice said something which led
Mr. Choate to make a half-humorous and half-displeased remark
about Shaw's roughness of look and manner, to which Judge
Hoar replied:  "After all, I feel a reverence for the old
Chief Justice."

"A reverence for him, my dear fellow?" said Choate.  "So do
I.  I bow down to him as the wild Indian does before his wooden
idol.  I know he's ugly; but I bow to a superior intelligence."

Judge Shaw's mind moved very slowly.  When a case was argued,
it took him a good while to get the statement of facts into
his mind.  It was hard for him to deal readily with unimportant
matters, or with things which, to other people, were matters
of course.  If the simplest motion were made, he had to unlimber
the heavy artillery of his mind, go down to the roots of the
question, consider the matter in all possible relations, and
deal with it as if he were besieging a fortress.  When he
was intent upon a subject, he was exceedingly impatient of
anything that interrupted the current of his thought.  So
he was a hard person for young advocates, or for any other
unless he were strong, self-possessed, and had the respect
of the Judge.  My old friend and partner, Judge Washburn,
once told me that he dreaded the Law term of the Court as
it approached, and sometimes felt that he would rather lay
his head down on the rail, and let a train of cars pass over
it, than argue a case before Shaw.  The old man was probably
unconscious of this failing.  He had the kindest heart in
the world, was extremely fond of little children and beautiful
young women, and especially desirous to care for the rights
of persons who were feeble and defenceless.

I was myself counsel before him in a case where the question
was whether a heifer calf, worth six or seven dollars, the
offspring of the one cow which our law reserves to a poor
debtor against attachment, was also exempt.  My opponent undertook
to make some merriment about the question, and there was some
laughter at the Bar.  The old Chief Justice interposed with
great emotion:  "Gentlemen, remember that this is a matter
of great interest to a great many poor families." There was
no laughter after that, and that heifer calf did duty in many
a trial afterward, when the young advocates at the Worcester
Bar had some poor client to defend.

The Chief Justice had not the slightest sense of humor.  When
old Judge Wilde, the great real property Judge, died after
an illustrious judicial service of thirty-five years, somebody
showed Chief Justice Shaw a register published in Boston which
recorded his death, "Died in Boston, the Honorable Samuel
S. Wilde, aged eighty, many years Justice of the Peace." It
was passed up to the Bench.  The old Chief Justice looked
at it, read it over again, and said "What publication is this?"

In the old days, when the lawyers and Judges spent the evenings
of Court week at the taverns on the Circuit, the Chief Justice
liked to get a company of lawyers about him and discourse
to them.  He was very well informed, indeed, on a great variety
of matters, and his talk was very interesting and full of
instruction.  But there was no fun in it.  One evening he
was discoursing in his ponderous way about the vitality of
seed.  He said:  "I understand that they found some seed of
wheat in one of the pyramids of Egypt, wrapped up in a mummy-
case, where it had been probably some four thousand years
at least, carried it over to England last year and planted
it, and it came up and they had a very good crop."

"Of mummies, sir?" inquired old Josiah Adams, a waggish member
of the Bar.

"No, Mr. Adams," replied the Chief Justice, with a tone of
reproof, and with great seriousness.  "No, Mr. Adams, not
mummies--wheat."

Adams retired from the circle in great discomfiture.  He
inquired of one of the other lawyers, afterward, if he supposed
that the Chief Justice really believed that he thought the
seed had produced mummies, and was told by his friend that
he did not think there was the slightest doubt of it.

Chief Justice Shaw, though very rough in his manner was exceedingly
considerate of the rights of poor and friendless persons.
Sometimes persons unacquainted with the ways of the world
would desire to make their own arguments, or would in some
way interrupt the business of the court.  The Chief Justice
commonly treated them with great consideration.  One amusing
incident happened quite late in his life.  A rather dissipated
lawyer who had a case approaching on the docket, one day told
his office-boy to "Go over to the Supreme Court and see what
in hell they are doing." The Court were hearing a very important
case in which Mr. Choate was on one side and Mr. Curtis
on the other.  The Bar and the Court-Room were crowded with
listeners.  As Mr. Curtis was in the midst of his argument,
the eye of the Chief Justice caught sight of a young urchin,
ten or eleven years old, with yellow trousers stuffed into
his boots, and with his cap on one side of his head, gazing
intently up at him.  He said, "Stop a moment, Mr. Curtis."
Mr. Curtis stopped, and there was a profound silence as the
audience saw the audacious little fellow standing entirely
unconcerned.  "What do you want, my boy?" said the Chief Justice.
"Mr. P. told me to come over here and see what in hell you
was up to," was the reply.  There was a dive at the unhappy
youth by three or four of the deputies in attendance, and
a roar of laughter from the audience.  The boy was ejected.
But the gravity of the old Chief Justice was not disturbed.

He had a curiously awkward motion, especially in moving about
a parlor in social gatherings, or walking in the street.
I once pointed out to a friend a ludicrous resemblance between
his countenance and expression and that of one of the tortoises
in the illustrations of one of Agassiz's works on natural
history.  To which my friend replied:  "It is the tortoise
on which the elephant stands that bears up the foundations
of the world," alluding to the Hindoo mythology.

Chief Justice Shaw's opinions, as we have them in the reports,
are exceedingly diffuse.  That practice would not answer for
a generation which has to consult the reports of forty-five
States and of the Supreme Court and nine judicial circuits
of the United States, besides the reports of the decisions
of some of the District Judges, and in most cases the English
decisions.  But it would be a great public loss if any of
Chief Justice Shaw's utterances were omitted.  His impulse,
when a question was argued before him, was to write a treatise
on the subject.  So his decisions in cases where the questions
raised are narrow and unimportant are often most valuable
contributions to jurisprudence.  He seldom passed over any
point or suggestion without remark.  He went to the bottom
of the case with great patience and incredible industry.  The
counsel who lost his case felt not only that he had had the
opinion of a great and just magistrate, but that every consideration
he could urge for his client was respectfully treated and
either yielded to or answered.  Some of his ablest and most
far-reaching decisions were written after he was eighty years
old.

He possessed, beyond any other American Judge, save Marshall,
what may be termed the statesmanship of jurisprudence.  He
never undertook to make law upon the Bench, but he perceived
with a far-sighted vision what rule of law was likely to operate
beneficially or hurtfully to the Republic.  He was watchful
to lay down no doctrine which would not stand this test.  His
great judgments stand among our great securities, like the
provisions of the Bill of Rights.

The Chief Justice was a tower of strength to the Massachusetts
judiciary.  But for him it is not unlikely that the State
would have adopted an elective judiciary or a tenure limited
to a term of years.  But the whole people felt that his great
integrity and wisdom gave an added security to every man's
life, liberty, and property.  So the proposition to limit
the judicial tenure, although espoused by the two parties
who together made up a large majority of the people of the
State, was defeated when it was submitted to a popular vote.
It is, however, a little remarkable that in the neighboring
State of Vermont, for many years the Judges of the Supreme
Court were annually elected by the Legislature, a system which,
I believe, has worked on the whole to their satisfaction.
They have had an able judiciary.  It is said that old Chief
Justice Shaw was one evening discoursing at a meeting of the
Boston Law Club to an eminent Vermont Judge, who was a guest.
He said, "With your brief judicial tenure, sir--"  The Vermonter
interrupted him and said, "Why, our tenure of office is longer
than yours."  "What do you mean?" said the Chief Justice.
"I do not understand you."  "Why," was the reply, "our Judges
are elected for a year, and you are appointed as long as you
behave yourselves."

Chief Justice Shaw is said to have been a very dull child.
The earliest indication of his gift of the masterly and unerring
judgment which discerned the truth and reason of things was,
however, noticed when he was a very small boy.  His mother
one day had a company at tea.  Some hot buttered toast was
on the table.  When it was passed to little Lemuel he pulled
out the bottom slice, which was kept hot by the hot plate
beneath and the pile of toast above.  His mother reproached
him quite sharply.  "You must not do that, Lemuel.  Suppose
everybody were to do that?"  "Then everybody would get a bottom
slice," answered the wise urchin.

Judge Shaw had the sturdy spirit and temper of the old seafaring
people of Cape Cod, among whom he was born and bred.  He was
fond of stories of the sea and of ships.  He liked to hear
of bold and adventurous voyages.  Judge Gray used to tell
the story of the old Chief's standing with his back to the
fire, with his coat-tails under his arm, in the Judges' room
at the Suffolk Court-House, one cold winter morning, when
the news of the fate of Sir John Franklin's expedition or
the story of some other Arctic tragedy had just reached Boston
and was in the morning papers.

"I hope, sir," said Judge Bigelow, "that there will be no
more of these voyages to discover the North Pole."

"I want 'em to find that open Polar sea, sir," said Shaw.

"But don't you think," said Judge Bigelow, "that it is too
bad to risk so many human lives, and to compel the sailors
to encounter the terrible suffering and danger of these Arctic
voyages?"

"I think they'll find it yet, sir," was all the reply Bigelow
could get.

Judge Shaw, in his latter days, was reverenced by the people
of Massachusetts as if he were a demi-god.  But in his native
county of Barnstaple he was reverenced as a God.  One winter,
when the Supreme Court held a special session at Barnstaple
for the trial of a capital case, Judge Merrick, who was one
of the Judges, came out of the Court-house just at nightfall,
when the whole surface of the earth was covered with ice and
slush, slipped and fell heavily, breaking three of his ribs.
He was taken up and carried to his room at the hotel, and
lay on the sofa waiting for the doctor to come.  While the
Judge lay, groaning and in agony, the old janitor of the court-
house, who had helped pick him up, wiped off the wet from
his clothes and said to him, "Judge Merrick, how thankful
you must be it was not the Chief Justice!" Poor Merrick could
not help laughing, though his broken ribs were lacerating
his flesh.

Next to Chief Justice Shaw in public esteem, when I came
to the Bar in December, 1849, was Mr. Justice Wilde.  He
was nearly eighty years old, and began to show some signs
of failing powers.  But those signs do not appear in his
recorded opinions.  He was a type of the old common-lawyer
in appearance and manner and character.  He would have been
a fit associate for Lord Coke, and would never have given
way to him.  I suppose he was never excelled as a real-property
lawyer in this country.  He had the antiquated pronunciation
of the last century, a venerable gray head and wrinkled countenance,
with heavy gray eyebrows.  He seemed to the general public
to be nothing but a walking abridgment.  Still, he was a very
well-informed man, and had represented a district of what
is now the State of Maine in Congress with great distinction.
A friend of mine went rather late to church at King's Chapel
one Sunday when the congregation had got some way in the service,
and was shown into the pew immediately in front of old Judge
Wilde.  The Judge was just uttering in a distinct, clear tone,
"Lord, teach me Thy statoots." It was the only petition he
needed to have granted to make him a complete Judge.  Of
the Lord's common law he was a thorough master.

He was no respecter of persons.  He delivered his judgments
with an unmoved air, as if he had footed up a column of figures
and were announcing the result.  When I was in the Law School,
Mr. Webster was retained to argue an important real estate
case before Judge Wilde in Suffolk County.  Mr. Webster was
making what would have been a powerful argument on a question
of land-title but for a statute passed since the days of his
constant practice, which had not come to his knowledge.  There
was a great audience, and when Mr. Webster had got his point
fairly stated, he was interrupted by Wilde.  "Pooh, pooh,
Mr. Webster." The Judge pointed out that Webster had overlooked
one link in the chain of his antagonist's title.

"But," said Mr. Webster in reply, "the descent tolls the
entry."

"That rule is abolished by the statoot, sir."

"Why didn't you tell me that?" said Webster angrily to his
junior.

Another of our great old Judges was Judge Fletcher.  He had
had a great practice as an advocate in Boston, especially
as a commercial lawyer.  He had a great power of clear statement.
He brought out his utterances in a queer, jerking fashion,
protruding his lips a little as he hesitated at the beginning
of his sentences.  But he knew how to convey his meaning to
the apprehension of Courts and juries.  He left the Bench
less than two years after I came to the Bar.  I never had
but one important case before him.  He was a bachelor.  He
was very interesting in conversation, liked the company of
young men, who never left him without carrying away some delightful
anecdote or shrewd and pithy observation.

A lawyer from the country told me one day that he had just
been in Fletcher's office to get his opinion.  While he was
in the office, old Ebenezer Francis, a man said to be worth
$8,000,000, then the richest man in New England, came to consult
him about a small claim against some neighbor.  Fletcher interrupted
his consultation with my friend and listened to Mr. Francis's
story.  In those days, parties could not be witnesses in their
own cases.  Fletcher advised his client that although he had
an excellent case, the evidence at his command was not sufficient
to prove it, and advised against bringing an action.  Francis,
who was quite avaricious, left the office with a heavy heart.
When he had gone, Fletcher turned to my friend and said: "Isn't
it pitiful, sir, to see an old critter, wandering about our
streets, destitute of proof?"

But the most interesting and racy character among our old
Judges was Theron Metcalf.  He used to say of himself--a saying
that did him great injustice--that he was taken to fill a
gap in the Court as people take an old hat to stop a broken
window.  He undervalued his own capacity.  He was not a good
Judge to preside at jury trials.  He had queer and eccentric
notions of what the case was all about, and while he would
state a principle of law with extraordinary precision and
accuracy he had not the gift of making practical application
of the law to existing facts.  So a great many of his rulings
were set aside, and it did not seem, when he had held a long
term of Court, that a great deal had been accomplished.  But
he was a very learned common-lawyer.  His memory was a complete
digest of the decisions down to his time.  He comprehended
with marvellous clearness the precise extent to which any
adjudged case went, and would state its doctrine with mathematical
precision.

He hated statutes.  He was specially indignant at the abolition
of special pleading.  He sent word to me, when I was Chairman
of the Judiciary Committee in the Massachusetts Senate, asking
to have a provision enacted for simplifying the process of
bringing before the full Bench for revision the proceedings
in habeas corpus, or mandamus, or certiorari, or some other
special writ, I forget now what.  I called upon him at once,
and pointed out to him that exactly what he wanted was accomplished
by the Practice Act of 1852.  This was the statute under which
all our legal proceedings in cases affecting personal property
were had.  Metcalf said, with great disgust: "I have said,
sir, that if they did not repeal that thing I would not read
it."

He used to enliven his judgments with remarks showing a good
deal of shrewd wisdom.  In one case a man was indicted for
advertising a show without a license.  The defendant insisted
that the indictment was insufficient because it set out merely
what the show purported to be, and not what it really was.
On which the Judge remarked:  "The indictment sets out all
that is necessary, and, indeed, all that is safe.  The show
often falls short of the promise in the show-bill."

There was once a case before him for a field-driver who had
impounded cattle under the old Massachusetts law.  The case
took a good many days to try, and innumerable subtle questions
were raised.  The Judge began his charge to the jury: "Gentlemen
of the jury, a man who takes up a cow straying in a highway
is a fool."

Another time there was a contest as to the value of some
personal property which had been sold at auction.  One side
claimed that the auction-sale was a fair test of the value.
The other claimed that property that was sold at auction was
generally sold at a sacrifice.  Metcalf said to the jury:
"According to my observation, things generally bring at auction
all they are worth, except carpets."

I once tried a case before him against the Norwich Railroad
for setting fire to the house of a farmer by a spark from
a locomotive.  It was a warm summer afternoon when the house
was burnt up.  There was no fire in the house except a few
coals among the ashes in a cooking stove where the dinner
had been cooked some hours before.  The railroad was very
near the house.  There was a steep up-grade, so that the engineers
were tempted to open the bonnet of their smokestacks for a
better draught.  We called as a witness a sturdy, round-faced,
fat old woman, who testified that she was sitting at her window,
knitting, in a house some little distance away, when the train
went by.  She put in a mark to see, as she expressed it, "how
many times round" she could knit before supper.  A few minutes
after, she heard a cry of fire, and looked out and saw a blaze
on the roof of her neighbor's house, just kindling, close
to the eaves on the side where the engine had passed.  She
threw down the stocking and went to help.  The stocking was
found after the fire with the mark just as she left it.  So
we claimed that we could tell pretty well how long the time
had been between the passing of the train and the breaking
out of the fire.  Judge Metcalf, who was always fussy and
interfering, said:  "How can we tell anything by that, unless
we know how large the stocking was?"  The old lady, with
a most bland smile, turned to the Judge as if she were soothing
an infant, lifted up the hem of her petticoats, and exhibited
a very sturdy ankle and calf, and said, "Just the size I wear,
your Honor."  There was a roar of laughter in the court-house.
The incident was published in the morning paper the next day,
much to the Judge's indignation.  He addressed the audience
when he came into Court in the morning, and said: "I see the
Worcester _Spy_ has been trying to put a fool's cap on my
head."

Judge Metcalf told me this story about Chief Justice Parsons.
The Chief Justice's manner to the Bar, as is well-known, was
exceedingly rough.  He was no respecter of persons, and treated
the old and eminent lawyers quite as harshly as the youngsters.
The Bar used to call him Ursa Major.  The Chief Justice used
to look over the pleadings carefully before the trials began.
It was in the time when special pleading often brought the
issue to be decided into a narrow compass.  Soon after the
case was begun, the Judge would take the case out of the hands
of the counsel and examine the witnesses himself, and give
an opinion which was likely to be implicitly followed by the
jury.  Jabez Upham, of Brookfield, in Worcester County, Mr.
Justice Gray's grandfather, once sent his office-boy to Court
with a green bag containing his papers, thinking there was
no use in going himself.  At last the leading members of the
Bar in Boston got very angry, and four or five of them agreed
together to teach the old Chief a lesson.  So they sat down
to a trial in the Supreme Court where Parsons was presiding.
Pretty soon he interfered with the lawyer who was putting
in the case for the plaintiff, in his rough way.  The lawyer
rose and said:  "I cannot take care of my client's rights
where my own are not respected," or something to that effect.
"I will ask Brother Sullivan to take my place." Sullivan,
who was possessed of the case, took the place.  The trial
went on a little while, when something happened which offended
Sullivan.  He rose and said he could not go on with the case
after his Honor's remark, and would ask Brother So-and-So,
perhaps Otis, to take his place.  This happened three or four
times in succession.  The Chief Justice saw the point and
adjourned the Court very early for the noon recess, and went
to the house of his colleague, Judge Sewall, who lived out
somewhere on the Neck, called him out and said: "You must
go down and hold that Court.  There is a con_spire_acy sir."
Parsons never held a _nisi-prius_ term in Suffolk again.

Chief Justice Shaw used to tell with great indignation the
story of his first appearance before Parsons, when a young
man.  There was a very interesting question of the law of
real property, and Samuel Dexter, then the head of the Bar,
was on the other side.  Parsons was interested in the question
as soon as it was stated, and entered into a discussion with
Dexter in which they both got earnestly engaged.  The Chief
Justice intimated his opinion very strongly and was just deciding
it in Dexter's favor, when the existence of the young man
on the other side occurred to him.  He looked over the bar
at Shaw and said:  "Well, young man, do you think you can
aid the Court any in this matter?"   "I think I can, sir,"
said Shaw with spirit.  Parsons listened to him, but, I believe,
remained of his first opinion.

Judge Metcalf in the time when he was upon the Bench had the
credit, I do not know how well deserved it was, of not being
much given to hospitality.  He was never covetous, and he
was very fond of society and conversation.  But I fancy he
had some fashions of his own in housekeeping which he thought
were not quite up to the ways of modern life.  At any rate,
he was, so far as I know, never known to invite any of his
brethren upon the Bench or of the Bar to visit him at his
house, with one exception.  One of the Judges told me that
after a hard day's work in court the Judges sat in consultation
till between nine and ten o'clock in the evening, and he walked
away from the Court-House with Judge Metcalf.  The Judge went
along with him past the Tremont House, where my informant
was staying.  As they walked up School Street, he said: "Why,
Judge Metcalf, I didn't know you went this way.  I thought
you lived out on the Neck somewhere." "No, sir," said Judge
Metcalf, "I live at number so-and-so Charles Street, and I will
say to you what I heard a man say the first night I moved
into my present house.  I heard a great noise in the street after
midnight, and got up and put my head out of the window.  There
was a man lying down on the sidewalk struggling, and another
man, who seemed to be a policeman, was on top of him holding
him down.  The fellow with his back to the ground said: 'Let
me get up, --- d--- you,'  The policeman answered: 'I sha'n't
let you get up till you tell me what your name is and where
you live.'  The fellow answered, 'My name is Jerry Mahoney,
--- d--- you, and I live at No.  54 Cambridge Street, --- d---
you, where I'd be happy to see you, --- d--- you, if you dare
to call."  That was the only instance known to his judicial
brothers of Judge Metcalf's inviting a friend to visit him.

Judge Metcalf's legal opinions will read, I think, in the
future, as well as those of any Judge of his time.  They are
brief, compact, written in excellent English, and precisely
fit the case before him without any extraneous or superfluous
matter.  He would have been a very great Judge, indeed, if
his capacity for the conduct of jury trials and dealing with
_nisi-prius_ business in general had equalled his ability
to write opinions on abstract questions.

John Davis was never a Judge.  But a few words about him may
well find a place here.  He had long since withdrawn from
the practice of law when I came to Worcester.  He remained
in the Senate of the United States until March 4, 1853.  But
the traditions of his great power with juries remained.  I
was once or twice a guest in his house, and once or twice
heard him make political speeches.

My father, who had encountered all the great advocates of his
time in New England--Webster, Choate, Jeremiah Mason, Dexter--
used to say that John Davis was the toughest antagonist he
ever encountered.  Mr. Davis had no graces of oratory or person.
He was not without a certain awkward dignity.  His head was
covered with thick and rather coarse white hair.  He reminded
you a little, in look and movement, of a great white bear.
But he had a gift of driving his point home to the apprehension
of juries and of the people which was rarely equalled.  He
was a man of few words and infrequent speech, without wit
or imagination.  He thoroughly mastered the subjects with
which he dealt.  When he had inserted his wedge, he drove
it home with a few sledge-hammer blows.  It was commonly
impossible for anybody to extract it.  It was only the great
weight of his authority, and the importance of the matters
with which he dealt, which kept him from seeming exceedingly
tedious.  I remember thinking when I heard him make a speech
in behalf of General Scott in the City Hall, in the autumn
of 1852, that if any man but John Davis were talking the audience
could not be kept awake.  He spoke very slowly, with the tone
and manner of an ordinary conversation.  "The Whigs, fellow-
citizens, have presented for your suffrages this year, for
the office of President of the United States, the name of
Major-General Winfield Scott.  I know General Scott.  I have
had good opportunity to acquaint myself with his character
and public service.  I think you may give him your confidence,
gentlemen."  That was pretty much the whole speech.  At any
rate, there was nothing more exciting in it.  But it was John
Davis that said it, and it had great effect upon his audience.

Mr. Davis supported General Taylor for President in 1848,
thereby, on the one hand, offending Mr. Webster, with whom
his relations had for some time been exceedingly strained,
and the anti-slavery men in Massachusetts on the other.  It
was understood also that he had displeased Governor Lincoln
at the time of his election to the Senate, Governor Lincoln
thinking that Mr. Davis had taken an undue advantage of his
official influence as Governor to promote his own selection.
But the two united in the support of General Taylor, which
led Charles Allen to quote a verse which has been more than
once applied in the same way since, "And in that day Pilate
and Herod were made friends together."

Mr. Davis was a careful and prudent manager of money matters,
and left what was, for his time, a considerable estate, considering
the fact that so much of his life had been passed in the public
service.  His success in public life was, doubtless, in large
measure, increased by his accomplished and admirable wife,
the sister of George Bancroft.  She was a lady of simple dignity,
great intelligence, great benevolence and kindness of heart.
Her conversation was always most delightful, especially in
her old age, when her mind was full of the treasures of her
long experience and companionship with famous persons.  Mr.
Davis left five sons, all of them men of ability.  The eldest
has been Minister to Berlin, Assistant Secretary of State,
Secretary of Legation in London, Judge of the Court of Claims,
and Reporter of the decisions of the Supreme Court of the
United States.  Another son, Horace, has been a member of
Congress, eminent in the public life of California, and, I
believe, president of the University of California.

John Davis won great distinction by a very powerful speech
on the tariff question in reply to James Buchanan.  Buchanan
was one of the most powerful Democratic leaders in the Senate,
but Davis was thought by the Whigs to have got much the better
of him in the debate.  It was generally expected that he would
be the Whig candidate for the Vice-Presidency in 1840.  But
another arrangement was made, for reasons which may be as
well told here.  The Whig Convention to nominate a President
was held at Harrisburg, Pa., in December 4, 1839, nearly a
year before the election.  The delegates from the different
States were asked to consult together and agree upon their
first choice.  Then they were asked to say whom they thought
next to the person they selected would be the strongest candidate.
When the result was ascertained, it was discovered that William
Henry Harrison was thought by a very large majority of the
Convention to be the strongest candidate they could find.
He was accordingly selected as the Whig standard-bearer.
A committee of one person from each State was then chosen to
propose to the Convention a candidate for Vice-President.
Benjamin Watkins Leigh, of Virginia, was a strong supporter
of Henry Clay, a man of great personal worth, highly esteemed
throughout the country.  The Convention adjourned, and came
in after the adjournment to hear the report of the committee.
Mr. Leigh accosted the Chairman of the committee and stood
with him in a conspicuous place as the delegates filed in.
He inquired of the Chairman what conclusion they had come
to as to a candidate for Vice-President.  To which the Chairman
replied:  "You will be informed in due time." When the Convention
was called to order, one of the delegates from Massachusetts
made a speech in which he set forth the high qualities that
were desired in a candidate for this important office, and,
after giving a sketch of exalted character and great capacity
for the public service, he ended by declaring that such a
man was Mr. Leigh, of Virginia, and proposing his name as
the unanimous recommendation of the committee.  Mr. Leigh
was taken aback.  He had been a zealous supporter of Mr.
Clay.  He addressed the chair, saying he was much gratified
by what had been said by his friend from Massachusetts, and
he hoped he might live in some humble measure to deserve the
tribute which had been paid to him.  But he thought that having
been a zealous supporter of Mr. Clay, and having had, in some
sense, the charge of his candidacy, he could not himself accept
a nomination in connection with another person without exposing
himself to the suspicion that he had in some way benefitted
by the defeat of his own candidate and leader.  It was said
that his embarrassment was increased by the fact that he had
been seen conversing with the Chairman of the committee by
the members of the Convention.  How that is I do not know.
The result was the nomination of Mr. Tyler, his election,
his succession to the Presidency after the death of Harrison,
which resulted in such disastrous consequences to the Whigs.

John Davis was a Federalist and a Whig.  His sons were Whigs
and Republicans always on the conservative side of public
questions.  His nephew, Colonel Isaac Davis, was in that respect
a contrast to his uncle.

It has been charged that John Davis, by taking up the time
at the close of the session of Congress by an indiscreet
speech, was the means of defeating the Wilmot Proviso, which
had come from the House inserted in a bill for the incorporation
of Oregon as a Territory.  This statement has received general
circulation.  It is made in Pierce's "Life of Sumner," and
in Von Holst's "Constitutional History." There is no truth
in it.  I investigated the matter very carefully, and have
left on record a conclusive refutation of the whole story
in a paper published by the American Antiquarian Society.

Mr. Davis's popularity, however, enabled him to render an
important service to his party at home.  The Democrats in
1839 had elected their governor, Marcus Morton, by a majority
of one vote by reason of the unpopularity of the law to prevent
liquor-selling, known as the Fifteen-Gallon Law, which had
been passed in January, 1838.  They were anxious to redeem
the State, and summoned John Davis, their strongest and most
popular man, to lead their forces.  He accordingly resigned
his seat in the Senate, was chosen Governor by a large majority,
and was reelected to the Senate again the next year.

Sketches like these, made by a man who was young when the
men he is talking about were old, are apt to give prominence
to trifles, to little follies and eccentricities.  Let nobody
think that there was anything trifling or ludicrous about
John Davis.  He was a great, strong, wise man, a champion
and tower of strength.  He not only respected, but embodied
the great traditions and opinions of Massachusetts in the
great days, after the generation of the Revolution had left
the state when she earned for herself the name of the "Model
Commonwealth," and her people were building the structure
of the Commonwealth on the sure foundations which the master-
workmen of the Colonial and Revolutionary days had laid.  The
majestic presence of Webster, the classic eloquence of Everett,
the lofty zeal of Sumner have made them more conspicuous figures
in the public eye, and it is likely will preserve their memeory
longer in the public heart.  But the figure of John Davis
deserves to stand by the side of these great men in imperishable
memory as one of the foremost men of the State he loved so
well and served so faithfully and wisely.

The Bar of Worcester County in 1850 and the years following
was a very able one, indeed.  It had many men of high reputation
in the Commonwealth and some of wide national fame.  The principal
citizen of Worcester and the most distinguished member of
the Bar was Governor Levi Lincoln.  Although he had long since
left practice, he used always to come into the court once
at each term of the Supreme Court, bow respectfully to the
Bench, and invite the Judges to dinner at his house, and withdraw.
He filled a very large place in the history of Massachusetts
from the time of his graduation at Harvard in 1802 until the
close of the War in 1865.  There is, so far as I know, no
memoir of him in existence, except one or two brief sketches
which appear in the proceedings of some local societies of
which he was a member.

His father, Levi Lincoln the elder, was an intimate friend
and correspondent of Mr. Jefferson, and Attorney-General
in his Cabinet.  He was nominated Judge of the Supreme Court
of the United States by Mr. Madison and confirmed by the Senate
and actually appointed, but was unable to take the office
because of failing sight.  He did more, probably, than any
other man to organize and bring to success the political revolution
in New England which followed Jefferson's accession to the
Presidency in 1801.  Many letters to him are found in Mr.
Jefferson's published works, and there are many letters from
him to Mr. Jefferson in the Jefferson papers in the archives
at Washington.  Some of the correspondence on both sides is
enough to make the hair of the civil service reformer stand
on end.  The son adopted his father's political opinions and
was an enthusiastic supporter of Jefferson in his youth.  Jefferson
wrote a letter, which I think is now in existence, praising
very highly some of young Mr. Lincoln's early performances.
He delivered an address at Worcester, March 4, 1803, a few
months after he left college, in which he proposed that the
Fourth of March, the day of Mr. Jefferson's accession to
the Presidency, should be celebrated thereafter instead of
the Fourth of July.  He says: "Republicans no longer can hail
the day as exclusively theirs.  Federalism has profaned it.
She has formed to herself an idol in the union of Church and
State, and this is the time chosen to offer its sacrifice."
He sets forth "the long train of monstrous aggressions of
the Federalists" under Washington and Adams; declares that
they "propose a hereditary executive and a Senatorial nobility
for life," and says that the "hand would tremble in recording,
and the tongue falter in reciting, the long tale of monstrous
aggression.  But on the Fourth of March was announced from
the Capitol the triumph of principle.  Swifter than Jove on
his imperial eagle did the glad tiding of its victory pervade
the Union.  As vanish the mists of the morning before the
rays of a sunbeam, so error withdrew from the inquiries of
the understanding.  The reign of terror had passed," etc.,
etc.  But there never was a better example of Emerson's maxim
that "a Conservative is a Democrat grown old and gone to seed."
As the young man grew in reputation and influence he became
more moderate in his opinions.  He was appointed Judge of
the Supreme Court; then was elected Governor by a union of
all parties in what was called "the era of good feeling";
held the office nine years; then represented the Worcester
district in Congress, and withdrew to a dignified and honorable
retirement from which he emerged to hold the office of Mayor
of Worcester the first year of the life of the city.  He was,
as I remember him, the very embodiment of dignity and aristocracy.
He had a diffuse and rather inflated style, both in public
speaking and in private conversation.  His dignity had a bare
suspicion of pomposity in it.  He looked with great disdain
upon the simplicity of behavior of some of his successors,
and their familiarity with all classes of the people.  He
came into my office one morning full of an intense disgust
with something Governor Briggs had been doing.  He said: "In
my time, sir, the office of Governor of the Commonwealth was
an office of dignity.  The arrival of the Chief Magistrate
in any town was an event of some importance.  He travelled
in his carriage, with suitable attendants.  He appeared in
public only on great occasions.  But now you see hand-bills
about the street giving notice that there is to be a Temperance
tea-party to-morrow afternoon, in some vestry or small hall.
Music by the Peak family.  His Excellency George N. Briggs
will address the meeting.  Admission, ten cents."

He accepted his position at the head of the social life of
Worcester as a matter of course.  I remember one night, when
a party was breaking up, I said to the person next to me, in
some jesting fashion:  "I am sorry to see the decay of the
old aristocracy."  The Governor, who was getting his coat
at the other end of the room, overheard the remark, and called
out:  "Who is lamenting our decay?"

The Governor looked with great disgust upon the formation
of the Free Soil Party and the Anti-Slavery movement.  But
when the war came he remained thoroughly loyal.  He encouraged
enlistment in every way, and measures for the support of the
Government had all the weight of his influence.  He was a
Presidential elector, and voted for Abraham Lincoln at the
time of his second election.

When Webster was first chosen Senator he refused to be a candidate
for the office until it was ascertained whether Governor Lincoln
would accept it.  The Governor then declined, for the reason
I have stated in another place.  He was also offered an appointment
to the Senate by Governor Washburn when Mr. Everett resigned
in 1853.  But it is said that he was quite desirous of being
elected Senator when Mr. Davis was first chosen.

The Governor was, as just said, an example of Emerson's famous
saying that a Conservative is a Democrat grown old and gone
to seed.  He was looked upon as the embodiment of reverend
dignity.  His household was at the head of the social life
of Worcester during his later years.  Every family in the
County was proud who could trace a connection with his.  There
were a few traditions in the old Federalist families like
the Thomases and the Allens of a time when the Lincolns were
accounted too democratic to be respectable.  But they gained
little credence with people in general.  One day, however,
I had to try a real estate case which arose in the adjoining
town and involved an ancient land-title.  An old man named
Bradyill Livermore was summoned as a witness for my client.
He was, I think, in his ninety-fifth year.  He lived in a
sparsely settled district and had not been into Worcester
for twenty or twenty-five years.  I sat down with him in the
consultation-room.  After he had told me what he knew about
the case, I had a chat with him about old times and the changes
in Worcester since his youth, and he asked me about some of
the members of the Bar then on the stage.  Governor Lincoln,
who had long retired, happened to be mentioned.  The old fellow
brought the point of his staff down with great emphasis upon
the floor, and then held it loosely with the fingers of his
trembling and shaking hand, and said, very earnestly, but
with a shrill and strident voice like that of one of Homer's
ghosts: "They say, sir, that that Mr. Lincoln has got to
be a very respectable man.  But I can remember, sir, when
he was a terrible Jacobite."

I have given elsewhere a portraiture of Charles Allen, and
a sketch of his great career.  He was a man of slender physical
frame and feeble voice.  But he was a leader of leaders.
When in 1848 he left the Whig Convention in Philadelphia,
an assembly flushed with the anticipation of National triumph,
declaring, amid the jeers and hisses of its members, that
the Whig Party was dead--a prediction verified within four
years--down to the election of Lincoln, in 1860, he was in
Massachusetts a powerful influence.  He was a great advocate,
a great judge, a great counsellor.  He was in my judgment
a greater intellectual force than any other man in his time,
Daniel Webster not excepted.  It was a force before which
Webster himself more than once recoiled.  I knew him intimately
and was, I believe, admitted to no inconsiderable share of
his confidence.  But there is no space here to do justice
to my reverence for his noble character.

On the whole, the most successful of the Worcester Bar, in
my time, in the practice of his profession, was Emory Washburn.
He was a man of less intellectual power undoubtedly than either
of his great contemporaries and antagonists, Allen, Merrick,
or Thomas.  Yet he probably won more cases, year in and year
out, than either of them.  He was a man of immense industry.
He went to his office early in the morning, took a very short
time, indeed, for his meals, and often kept at work until
one or two o'clock in the morning of the next day.  He suffered
severely at one time from dyspepsia brought on by constant
work and neglect of exercise; but generally he kept his vigorous
health until his death at the age of eighty.  He was indefatigable
in his service to his clients.  His mind was like a steel
spring pressing on every part of the other side's case.  It
was ludicrous to see his sympathy and devotion to his clients,
and his belief in the cause of any man whom he undertook to
champion.  It seemed as if a client no sooner put his head
on the handle of Washburn's office-door than his heart warmed
to him like that of a mother toward her first-born.  No strength
of evidence to the contrary, no current of decisions settling
the law would prevent Washburn from believing that his man
was the victim of prejudice or persecution or injustice.  But
his sincerity, his courtesy of manner and kindness of heart
made him very influential with juries, and it was rare that
a jury sat in Worcester county that had not half a dozen
of Washburn's clients among their number.

I was once in a very complicated real estate case as Washburn's
associate.  Charles Allen and Mr. Bacon were on the other
side.  Mr. Bacon and I, who were juniors, chatted about the
case just before the trial.  Mr. Bacon said: "Why, Hoar, Emory
Washburn doesn't understand that case the least in the world."
I said, "No, Mr. Bacon, he doesn't understand the case the
least in the world.  But you may depend upon it he will make
that jury misunderstand it just as he does." And he did.

Charles Allen, who never spared any antagonist, used to be
merciless in dealing with Washburn.  He once had a case with
him which attracted a great deal of public attention.  There
had been a good many trials and the cost had mounted up to
a large sum.  It was a suit by a farmer who had lost a flock
of sheep by dogs, and who tried to hold another farmer responsible
as the owner of the dog which had killed them.  One of the
witnesses had been out walking at night and heard the bark
of the dog in the field where the sheep were.  He was asked
to testify if he could tell what dog it was from the manner
of his bark.  The evidence was objected to, and Allen undertook
to support his right to put the question.  He said we were
able to distinguish men from each other by describing their
manner and behavior, when the person describing might not
know the man by name.  "For instance, may it please your Honor,
suppose a stranger who came into this court-house during this
trial were called to testify to what took place, and he should
say that he did not know anybody in the room by sight, but
there was a lawyer there who was constantly interrupting the
other side, talking a great deal of the time, but after all
didn't seem to have much to say.  Who would doubt that he
meant my Brother Washburn?"

This gibe is only worth recording as showing the court-house
manners of those times.  It is no true picture of the honest,
faithful and beloved Emory Washburn.  He was public-spirited,
wise, kind-hearted, always ready to give his service without
hope of reward or return to any good cause, a pillar of the
town, a pillar of the church.  He had sometimes a certain
confusion of statement and of thought, but it was only apparent
in his oral discourse.  He wrote two admirable law-books,
one on easements, and one on real property.  Little & Brown
said his book on easements had the largest sale of any law-
book ever published in this country up to its time.  He was
a popular and useful Professor in the Harvard Law School.
He gave a great deal of study to the history of Massachusetts,
and was the author of some valuable essays on historical questions,
and some excellent discourses on historical occasions.  He
left no duty undone.  Edward Hale used to say: "If you want
anything done well, go to the busiest man in Worcester to
do it--Emory Washburn, for example." He was grievously disappointed
that he was not appointed Judge of the Supreme Court when
Judge Thomas became a member of the Bench.  A little while
afterward there was another vacancy, and Governor Clifford
took Merrick, another of Washburn's contemporaries and rivals
at the bar, although Merrick was a Democrat, and the Governor,
like Washburn himself, was a Whig.  This was almost too much
for him to bear.  It took place early in the year 1853.  Mr.
Washburn sailed for Europe a few weeks after, and felt almost
like shaking off the dust of his feet against Massachusetts
and the Whig Party.  But he was very agreeably compensated
for his disappointment.  During his absence he was nominated
by the Whigs for the office of Governor, to which office he
was elected in the following January, there being then, under
our law, which required a clear majority of all the votes,
no choice by the people.  He made an admirable and popular
Governor.  But the Nebraska Bill was introduced in that year.
This created strong excitement among the people of Massachusetts,
and the Know-Nothing movement came that fall, inspired more
by the desire of the people to get rid of the old parties,
and form a new anti-slavery party, than by any real opposition
to foreigners, which was its avowed principle.  This party
swept Massachusetts, electing all the State officers and every
member of the State Legislature except two from the town of
Northampton.  They had rather a sorry Legislature.  It was
the duty of the outgoing Governor to administer the oath to
the Representatives- and Senators-elect.  Governor Washburn
performed that duty, and added: "Now, gentlemen, so far as
the oath of office is concerned, you are qualified to enter
upon your duties."

Governor Washburn was a thorough gentleman, through and through,
courteous, well-bred, and with an entirely sufficient sense
of his own dignity.  But he had little respect for any false
notions of gentility, and had a habit of going straight at
any difficulty himself.  To this habit he owed much of his
success in life.  A very amusing story was told by Mrs. Washburn
long after her husband's death.  She was one of the brightest
and sprightliest and wittiest of women.  Her husband owed
to her much of his success in life, as well as much of his
comfort and domestic enjoyment.  She used to give sometimes
half a dozen entertainments in the same week.  She was never
disconcerted by any want of preparation or suddenness of demand
upon her hospitality.  One day some quite distinguished guests
arrived in Worcester unexpectedly, whom it was proper that
she should keep to dinner.  The simple arrangements which
had been made for herself and her husband would not do.  She
accordingly went at once to the principal hotel of the town, in
the neighborhood, and bargained with the landlord to send
over the necessary courses for her table, which were just
hot and cooked and ready for his own.  She got off very comfortably
without being detected.

Her story was that one time when Judge Washburn was Governor
the members of his Staff came to Worcester on some public
occasion and were all invited to his house to spend the night.
When he got up in the morning he found, to his consternation,
that the man who was in the habit of doing such services at
his house was sick, or for some other reason had failed to
put in an appearance, and none of the boots of the young gentlemen
were blacked.  The Governor was master of the situation.  He
descended to his cellar, took off his coat, blacked all the
boots of the youngsters himself, and met them at breakfast
with his usual pleasant courtesy, as if nothing had happened.

I do not undertake to give a full sketch of Benjamin F. Thomas.
He was one of the very greatest of American lawyers.  But
such desultory recollections as these are apt to dwell only
on the eccentricities or peculiarities or foibles of men.
They are not the place for elaborate and noble portraiture.

Judge Thomas was the principal figure in the Worcester court-
house after Judge Allen's election to Congress in 1848.  Judge
Thomas did not get large professional business very rapidly.
He was supposed, in his youth, to be a person of rather eccentric
manners, studious, fond of poetry and general literature and
of historical and antiquarian research.  He was impulsive,
somewhat passionate, but still with an affectionate, sunny,
generous nature, and a large heart, to which malice, hatred,
or uncharitableness were impossible.  It is said that in his
younger days he used to walk the streets, wrapped in his own
thoughts, unconscious of the passers-by, and muttering poetry
to himself.  But when I came into his office as a student,
in August, 1849, all this trait had disappeared.  He was a
consummate advocate, a favorite alike with Judges and jurors,
winning his causes wherever success was possible, and largely
employed.  He had a clear voice, of great compass, pitched
on rather a high key, but sweet and musical like the sound
of a bugle.  The young men used to fill the court-house to
hear his arguments to juries.  He became a very profound lawyer,
always mastering the learning of the case, but never leaning
too much upon authorities.  Charles Emerson's beautiful phrase
in his epitaph upon Professor Ashmun, "Books were his helpers,
never his masters," was most aptly applied to Thomas.  If
he had any foible which affected at all his usefulness or
success in life it was an impatience of authority, whether
it were the authority of a great reputation, or of party,
or of public sentiment, or of the established and settled
opinions of mankind.  He went on the Supreme Bench in 1853.
Dissenting opinions were rare in the Massachusetts Supreme
Court in those days.  In this I think the early Judges were
extremely wise.  Nothing shakes the authority of a court more
than the frequent habit of individual dissent.  But Judge
Thomas dissented from the judgments of his court on several
very important occasions.  His dissenting opinions were exceedingly
alike.  I think it would have been better if they had not
been delivered.  I think he would have been much more likely
to have come to the other conclusion if the somewhat imperious
intellect of Shaw had not been put into the prevailing scale.
When all Massachusetts bowed down to Webster, Judge Thomas,
though he respected and honored the great public idol, supported
Taylor as a candidate for the Presidency.  At the dinner
given to the Electoral College after the election, where Mr.
Webster was present, Judge Thomas shocked the meeting by saying:
"Some persons have spoken of our candidate as their second
choice.  I am proud to say that General Taylor was not only
my last, but my first choice."  So, when Judge Thomas was
in Congress, while he was as thoroughly loyal, patriotic,
and brave a man as ever lived, he opposed the policies of
the Republican Party for carrying on the war and putting down
the Rebellion.  He was thought to be inspired by a great dislike
of submitting to party authority or even to that of President
Lincoln.  He was very fond of young men.  When he was Judge
they always found that they had all the consideration that
they deserved, and had no fear of being put at a disadvantage
by any antagonist, however able or experienced.  The Judge
seemed always to be stirred by the suggestion of an intellectual
difficulty.  When I was seeking some remedy at his hands,
especially in equity, I used to say that I thought I had a
just case, but I was afraid his Honor might think the legal
difficulties were insuperable and I did not know whether I
could get his Honor's approbation of what I asked.  He would
instantly rouse himself and seem to take the suggestion as
a challenge, and if it were possible for human ingenuity to
find a way to accomplish what I wanted he would do it.  He
preserved the sweetness and joyous spirit of boyhood to the
day of his death.  It was delightful to catch him when he
was at leisure, to report to him any pleasant story that was
going about, and to hear his merry laugh and pleasant voice.
He was a model of the judicial character.  It was a delight
to practise before him at _nisi prius._ I have known a great
many admirable lawyers and a good many very great Judges.
I have known some who had more learning, and some, I suppose,
though very few, who had greater vigor of intellect.  But
no better Judge ever sat in a Massachusetts court-house.  Dwight
Foster felicitously applied to him the sentence which was first
uttered of Charles James Fox, that "his intellect was all
feeling, and his feeling all intellect."

Dwight Foster came to the Bar just a week after I did.  But
I ought not to omit him in any account of the Massachusetts
lawyers or Judges of my time.  He rose rapidly to a place
in the first rank of Massachusetts lawyers, which he held
until his untimely death.  He was graduated the first scholar
in his class at Yale in 1848.  Before he was graduated he
became engaged to a very admirable and accomplished lady,
daughter of Roger S. Baldwin, Governor of Connecticut and
United States Senator, then head of the Connecticut Bar.  This
lady had some tendency to a disorder of the lungs and throat
which had proved fatal to two of her brothers.  Dwight Foster
was very anxious to get her away from New Haven, where he
thought the climate and her habit of mingling in gay society
very unfavorable to her health.  So he set himself to work
to get admitted to the Bar and get established in business
that he might have a place for her in Worcester.  He was examined
by Mr. Justice Metcalf, after studying a little more than
a year, and found possessed of attainments uncommon even for
persons who had studied the full three years and had been
a good while at the Bar.  Judge Metcalf admitted him, and
on some other Judge criticising what he had done, the Judge
said, with great indignation, "If he thinks Foster is not
qualified, let him examine him himself."

Mr. Foster's first employment had very awkward consequences.
The people in Worcester had the old Puritanic dislike to theatrical
entertainments, and had always refused to license such exhibitions.
But a company of actors desired to obtain a theatre for the
season and give performances in Worcester.  There was a great
opposition, and the city government ordered a public hearing
of the petition in the old City Hall.  Foster was employed
by the petitioners.  The hall was crowded with citizens interested
in the matter, and the Mayor and Aldermen sat in state on
the platform.  When the hearing was opened, the audience were
struck with astonishment by the coming forward of Dwight Foster's
father, the Hon. Alfred D. Foster, a highly honored citizen
of great influence and ability.  He had been in the State
Senate and had held some few political offices, but had disliked
such service and had never practised law, having a considerable
property which he had inherited from his father, the former
United States Senator.  He made a most eloquent and powerful
appeal to the aldermen to refuse the petition, in the name
of morality and good order.  He stated the deplorable effect
of attending such exhibitions on the character of the youth
of our city of both sexes, cited the opinion and practice
of our ancestors in such matters, and made a profound impression.
He then warned his hearers against the young man who was to
follow him, whom, he said, he loved as his life, but he was
there employed as a lawyer with his fee in his hand, without
the responsibility which rested upon them of protecting the
morals and good order of the city.  It was very seldom that
so powerful a speech was heard in that hall, although it was
the cradle of the Anti-slavery movement, and had been the
scene of some of the most famous efforts of famous orators.
Everybody supposed that the youth was crushed and would not
venture to perform his duty in the face of such an attack.
But he was fully equal to the occasion.  He met his father
with a clear, simple, modest, but extremely able statement
of the other side; pointed out the harmlessness of such exhibitions
when well conducted, and that the strictness which confounded
innocence and purity with guilt and vice was itself the parent
and cause of vice.  He did not allude to his father by name
or description, but in replying to his arguments said: "It
is said in some quarters," or "An opposition comes from some
quarters" founded on such-and-such reasons.  He got the sympathy
of his audience and carried his point.  And from that time
nobody hesitated to trust Dwight Foster with any cause, however
important, from any doubt of his capacity to take care of
his clients.

He had been brought up as a Whig.   But when the Nebraska
Bill was passed, he became a zealous and earnest Republican.
He was candidate for Mayor, but defeated on a very close vote
by George W. Richardson.  He held the office of Judge of Probate
for a short time, by appointment of Governor Banks; was elected
Attorney-General in 1860 when Governor Andrew was chosen Governor,
and soon after was appointed Judge of the Supreme Court, an
office which he filled with great distinction, then left the
Bench to resume his practice, and died of a disease of the
heart which he inherited from his ancestors.  He was Governor
Andrew's Attorney-General during the War, who said of him
that "he was full of the fire and hard-working zeal of Massachusetts."
He was the organ of the patriotism and energy of Worcester
at the seat of government during the war, looking out for
the interests of her soldiers, and always urging the brave
and vigorous counsel.  I lost a stanch friend by his death.
I can sum up his qualities in no better way than by the word
"manliness."  He never uttered an ignoble word, thought an
ignoble thought, or did an ignoble act.  His method of speech
was clear, simple, spirited, without much pathos or emotion,
but still calculated to stir and move his hearers.

I had more intimate relations with Judge Thomas L. Nelson
than with any other member of the Worcester Bar except those
with whom I formed a partnership.  We were never in partnership.
But after I went to Congress in 1869, he moved into my office
until his appointment to the Bench.  So when I was at home
we were in the same room.  He had been accustomed for a long
time before to employ me to assist him in important trials
before the jury and in arguments before the Supreme Court.
I suppose I am responsible for his appointment to the District
Court, although the original suggestion was not mine.  After
the death of Judge Shepley, there was a general expectation
that Judge John Lowell, of the District Court, would be made
Circuit Judge.  One morning one of the Boston papers suggested
several names for the succession, among them that of Mr.
Knowlton, of Springfield, and Mr. Nelson.  I said nothing
to him.  But he observed:  "I see in a paper that I am spoken
of as District Judge."  I replied:  "Yes, I saw the article."
Neither of us said anything further on the subject.  When
I got to Washington I met Mr. Devens, then Attorney-General,
who said, "We shall have to appoint a District Judge, I suppose.
I think your friend Nelson is the best man for it.  But I
suppose he would not accept it."  I said:  "No, I don't believe
he would accept it.  But, if you think he is the best man
for it, the question whether he will accept it ought to be
determined by him, and not by his friends for him." I had
no thought that Mr. Nelson would leave his practice for the
Bench.  But I thought it would be a very agreeable thing to
him to have the offer.  I wrote to him a day or two afterward
that I thought it likely he would be offered the place.  He
answered by asking me, if it were to be offered to him, how
much time would be given to him to consider the matter.  Soon
after I was informed by Attorney-General Devens that the President
had offered him the place on the Circuit Bench, and that he
very much desired to accept it.  But he thought that, although
the President had put the place at his disposal, he was very
unwilling to have any change in the Cabinet, and doubted whether
he ought to accept the offer unless he were very sure the
President was willing to spare him.  One day soon after, President
Hayes sent for me to come to see him.  I called at the Attorney-
General's office, told him the President had sent for me,
and that he probably wished to speak about the Circuit Judgeship,
and I wanted to know what he would like to have me say.  Devens
said that he should prefer that way of spending the rest of
his life to any other.  But the President had done him a great
honor in inviting him to his Cabinet, and he did not wish
to leave him unless he were sure that the President was willing.
I went to the White House.  When President Hayes opened the
subject, I told him what was the Attorney-General's opinion.
The President said that if he could be sure that were true,
it would relieve his mind of a great burden.  I told him he
could depend on it.  The President said he did not know anybody
else whom he should be as willing to have in his Cabinet as
Devens, unless I myself would consent to accept the place.
He gave a little friendly urging in that direction.  I told
him that I had lately been elected to the Senate after a considerable
controversy, and that I did not think I could in justice to
the people of the State make a vacancy in the office which
would occasion a new strife.  I called on Devens on my way
back, and reported to him what the President had said.  He
immediately went to the White House, and they had a full understanding,
which resulted in Devens keeping his place in the Cabinet
through the Administration.

It was then suggested that while Judge Lowell was a most
admirable District Judge, and in every way an admirable lawyer,
yet that it would be better if it were possible to get one
of the leaders of the Bar, who would supply what Judge Lowell
lacked--the capacity for charging juries on facts, and presiding
at jury trials, and to leave him in the District Court, where
his services were so valuable.  The office of Circuit Judge
was accordingly offered to Mr. William G. Russell.  I wrote
to Nelson, asking him to consider my first letter on the subject
as not having been written.  Mr. Russell replied, declining
the place, and saying, with great emphasis that he was sorry
the President should hesitate a moment about offering the
place to Judge Lowell, whom he praised very highly.  But the
President and the Attorney-General thought that it should
be offered to Mr. George O. Shattuck, a very eminent lawyer
and advocate.  On inquiry, however, it turned out that Mr.
Shattuck, who was in poor health, was absent on a journey,
and it was so unlikely that he would accept the offer that
it was thought best not to diminish the value and honor to
Judge Lowell of the place by offering it further to another
person.  Accordingly the place was offered to Judge Lowell
and accepted by him.

General Devens than said to me:  "I have been thinking over
the matter of the District Judge, and I think if a man entirely
suitable can be found in the Suffolk Bar, that the appointment
rather belongs to that Bar, and I should like, if you have
no objection, to propose to the President to offer it to Mr.
Charles Allen."  Mr. Allen was later Judge of the Supreme
Court of Massachusetts.  I assented, but said:  "If Mr. Allen
refuses it, I hope it will then be offered to Mr. Nelson,
in accordance with your original opinion."  The Attorney-
General agreed.  The offer was made to Mr. Allen, and by him
declined.  When the letter of refusal came, the Attorney-
General and I went together to the White House and showed
the President the letter.  In the meantime a very strong recommendation
of Mr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., now of the Supreme Court,
had been received by the President.  He felt a good deal of
interest in Holmes.  I think they had both been wounded in
the same battle.  But, at any rate, they were comrades.  The
President then said: "I rather think Holmes is the man." I
then gave him my opinion of Mr. Nelson, and the President
said to Devens: "Do you agree, Mr. Attorney-General?" Devens
said:  "I do." And the President said: "Then Nelson be it."
Mr. Nelson, to my surprise, accepted the appointment.

Judge Nelson was a master of equity and bankruptcy.  No doctrine
was too subtle or abstruse for him.  The matter of marshalling
assets, or the tacking of mortgages, and such things which
require a good deal of the genius of the mathematician, were
clear in his apprehension.  He was one of the two or three
men in the State who ever understood the complications of
the old loan-fund associations.  He was especially a master
of legal remedies.  He held on like a bull-dog to a case in
the justice of which he believed.  When you had got a verdict
and judgment in the Supreme Court against one of Nelson's
clients, he was just ready to begin work.  Then look out for
him.  He had with this trait also a great modesty and diffidence.
If anybody put to him confidently a proposition against his
belief, Nelson was apt to be silent, but, as Mr. Emerson
said of Samuel Hoar, "with an unaltered belief." He would
come out with his reply days after.  When he came to state
the strong point in arguing his case, he would sink his voice
so it could hardly be heard, and look away like a bashful
maiden giving her consent.  Judge Bigelow told me, very early
in Nelson's career, that he wished I would ask my friend to
make his arguments a little longer, and to raise his voice
so the court could hear him better.  They always found his
arguments full of instruction, and disliked to lose anything
so good a lawyer had to say.  His value as a Judge was largely
in consultation and in his sound opinions.  I suppose that,
like his predecessor, Judge Lowell, he was not the very best
of Judges to preside at jury trials, or to guide juries in
their deliberations.  Indeed, Nelson had many of the intellectual
traits--the same merits and the same defects that Lowell
had.  Lowell was a man of great wit, and a favorite with
the Boston Bar when he was appointed.  So they made the best
of him.  They were not inclined to receive Nelson's appointment
very graciously.  It was some years before he established
a high place in their confidence and esteem.  But it was established
before his death.  Gray and Putnam and Webb, all in their
way lawyers of the first class, found Nelson a most valuable
and acceptable associate, and have all spoken of him in most
enthusiastic terms.  He was a good naturalist.  He knew the
song-birds, their habits, and dwelling-places.  He knew all
the stars.  He liked to discuss difficult and profound questions
of public policy, constitutional law, philosophy, and metaphysics.
Sometimes, when I came home from Washington after a period
of hard work, if I happened to find Nelson in the cars when
I went to Boston, it was almost painful to spend an hour with
him, although his conversation was very profound and interesting.
But it was like attempting to take up and solve a difficult
problem in geometry.  I was tired, and wanted to be humming
a negro melody to myself.  He was a man of absolute integrity,
not caring whether he pleased or displeased anybody.  He had
a good deal of literary knowledge, was specially fond of Emerson,
and knew him very thoroughly, both prose and verse.  He had
a good deal of wit, one of the brightest examples of which
I will not undertake to quote here.  He was a civil engineer
in his youth, and was always valuable in complicated questions
of boundary, or cases like our sewer and water cases, which
require the application of practical mathematics.  He was
a friendly and placable person so far as he was concerned
himself, but resented, with great indignation, any unkindness
toward any of his friends or household.  His friend and associate,
Judge Webb, after his death spoke with great beauty and pathos
of Nelson's love of nature and of his old county home:

"When, in later years, he revisited the scenes of his childhood,
he made no effort to conceal his affection for them; as he
wandered among the mountains and along the valleys, so dearly
remembered, his eye would grow bright, his face beam with
pleasure, and his voice sound with the tone of deep sensibility.
He grew eloquent as he described the beauty spread out before
him, and lovingly dwelt on the majesty and grandeur of the
mountain at the foot of which his infancy was cradled.  It
was high companionship to be with him at such times.  His
ear was open to catch the note of every bird, which came to
him like voices of well-beloved friends; he knew the brooks
from their sources to their mouths, and the rivers murmured
to him the songs they sang in the Auld Lang Syne.  But deep
as was the joy of these visits, they did not allure him from
the more rugged paths of labor and duty."

The wisdom of Nelson's selection, if it need vindication,
is abundantly established by the memorial of him reported
by a committee, of which Lewis S. Dabney was chairman, and
adopted by the Suffolk Bar.  The Bar, speaking of the doubt
expressed in the beginning by those who feared an inland lawyer
on the Admiralty Bench, goes on to say:

"Those who knew him well, however, knew that he had been a
successful master and referee in many complicated cases of
great importance; that his mathematical and scientific knowledge
acquired in his early profession as an engineer was large
and accurate, and would be useful in his new position; that
he who had successfully drawn important public acts would
be a successful interpreter of such acts; that always a student
approaching every subject, not as an advocate but as a judicial
observer, he would give that attention to whatever was new
among the problems of his judicial office that would make
him their best master and interpreter, and that what in others
might be considered weakness or indolence was but evidence
of a painful shrinking from displaying in public a naturally
firm, strong, earnest and persistent character, a character
which would break out through the limitations of nature whenever
the occasion required it.

"Those who, as his associates upon the Bench, or as practitioners
before him at the Bar, have had occasion to watch his long
and honorable career, now feel that the judgment of his friends
was the best and that his appointment has been justified;
and those who have known him as an Associate Justice of the
Circuit Court of Appeals have felt this even more strongly."

Another striking figure of my time was Horace Gray.  He was
in the class before me at Harvard, though considerably younger.
I knew him by sight only in those days.  He was very tall,
with an exceedingly youthful countenance, and a head that
looked then rather small of so large-limbed a youth--rather
awkward in his gait and bearing.  But after he reached manhood
he grew into one of the finest-looking men of his time.  I
believe he was the tallest man in Boston.  He expanded in
every way to a figure which corresponded to his stately height.
He was the grandson of the famous William Gray, the great
merchant and ship-owner of New England, who was an important
figure in the days just preceding and just following the War
of 1812.  Many anecdotes are still current of his wise and
racy sayings.  His sons inherited large fortunes and were
all of them men of mark and influence in Boston.  Francis
C. Grey, the Judge's uncle, was a man of letters, a historical
investigator.  He discovered the priceless Body of Liberties
of 1641, which had remained unprinted from that time, although
the source from which our Bill of Rights and constitutional
provisions had been so largely drawn.

Judge Gray's father was largely employed in manufacturing
and owned some large iron works.  The son had been brought
up, I suppose, to expect that his life would be one of comfort
and ease, free from all anxieties about money, and the extent
of the labor of life would be, perhaps, to visit the counting-
room a few hours in the day to look over the books and see
generally that his affairs were properly conducted by his
agents and subordinates.  He had visited Europe more than
once, and was abroad shortly after his graduation when the
news reached him that the companies in which his father's
fortune was invested had failed.  He at once hurried home
and set himself resolutely to work to take care of himself.
He was an accomplished naturalist for his age and time, and
had a considerable library of works on natural history.  He
exchanged them for law-books and entered the Law School.  I
was splitting wood to make my own fire one autumn morning
when my door, which was ajar, was pushed open, and I saw a
face somewhere up in the neighborhood of the transom.  It
was Gray, who had come to inquire what it was all about.  He
had little knowledge of the rules or fashions of the Law School.
I told him about the scheme of instruction and the hours of
lectures, and so forth.  We became fast friends, a friendship
maintained to his death.  He at once manifested a very vigorous
intellect and a memory, not only for legal principles, but for
the names of cases, which I suppose had been cultivated by
his studies in natural history and learning the scientific
names of birds and plants.  At any rate, he became one of
the best pupils in the Law School.  He afterward studied
law with Edward D. Sohier, and immediately after his admission
became known as one of the most promising young men at the
Bar.  Luther S. Cushing was then Reporter of the decisions
of the Supreme Court.  He was in poor health and employed
Gray to represent him as Reporter on the Circuit.  Gray always
had a marvellous gift of remembering just where a decision
of principle of law could be found, and his thumb and forefinger
would travel instantly to the right book on the obscurest
shelf in a Law Library.  So nothing seemed to escape his thorough
and indefatigable research.  When he was on the Circuit, learned
counsel would often be arguing some question of law for which
they had most industriously prepared, when the young Reporter
would hand them a law-book with a case in it which had escaped
their research.  So the best lawyers all over the State got
acquainted at an early day with his learning and industry, and
when Cushing soon after was obliged to resign the office of
Reporter, Gray was appointed by the general consent of the
best men of the profession, although he had as a competition
Judge Perkins, a very well known lawyer and Judge, who had
edited some important law-books and was a man of mature age.
This was in 1854, only three years after his admission to
the Bar.  The office of Reporter was then one of the great
offices of the State, almost equal in dignity to that of the
Judge of the Supreme Court itself.  Four of our Massachusetts
Reporters have been raised to that Bench.  He was quite largely
retained and employed during that period, especially in important
questions of commercial law.  He resigned his office of Reporter
about the time of the breaking out of the war.  Governor Andrew
depended upon his advice and guidance in some very important
and novel questions of military law, and in 1864 he was appointed
Associate Justice of the Court.  In 1873 he became its Chief
Justice, and in 1882 was made Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States.  The extent of his learning and
the rapidity and thoroughness of his research were marvellous.
But it is not upon this alone, or chiefly, that his fame as
one of the great Judges of the world will rest.  He was a
man of a native, original intellectual power, unsurpassed
by any man who has been on the Bench in his time, either in
this country or in England.  His decisions have been as sound
and as acceptable to the profession upon questions where no
authority could be found upon which to rest, and upon questions
outside of the beaten paths of jurisprudence as upon those
where he found aid in his great legal learning.  He was a
remarkably acceptable _nisi-prius_ Judge, when holding court
in the rural counties, and, though bred in a city, where human
nature is not generally learned so well, he was especially
fortunate and successful in dealing with questions of fact
which grow out of the transactions of ordinary and humble
life in the country.  He manifested on one or two occasions
the gift of historical research and discussion for which his
uncle Francis was so distinguished.

It was my sorrowful duty to preside at a meeting of the Bar
of the Supreme Court of the United States to express their
sense of their great loss and that of the whole country,
after Gray's death.

I add some extracts from the remarks which I made on that
occasion:

The Bar of the Supreme Court of the United States come together
to pay a tribute of honor to a great lawyer and Judge.  I
shall have, I am sure, another opportunity to put on record
my own sense of the irreparable loss of a dear friend and
comrade of more than fifty years.  To-day we are to speak,
as members of the Bar, of an honored Judge whom the inexorable
shaft has stricken in his high place.

He was in his seat in the Supreme Court of the United States
for the last time Monday, February 3, 1902.  On the evening
of that day he had a slight paralytic shock, which seriously
affected his physical strength.  He retained his mental strength
and activity unimpaired until just before his death.  On the
9th day of July, 1902, he sent his resignation to the President,
to take effect on the appointment and qualifying of his successor.
So, he died in office, September 15, 1902.

On his mother's side Judge Gray was the grandson of Jabez
Upham, one of the great lawyers of the day, who died in 1811,
at the age of forty-six, after a brief service in the National
House of Representatives.  He was settled in Brookfield, Worcester
County.  But the traditions of his great ability were fresh
when I went there to live, nearly forty years after his death.
The memory of the beauty and sweetness and delightful accomplishment
of Mr. Upham's daughter, Judge Gray's mother, who died in
the Judge's early youth, was still fragrant among the old
men and women who had been her companions.  She is mentioned
repeatedly in the letters of that accomplished Scotch lady
--friend of Walter Scott and of so many of the English and
Scotch men of letters in her time--Mrs. Grant of Laggan.
Mrs. Grant says in a letter published in her Memoir:  "My
failing memory represents my short intercourse with Mrs.
Gray as if some bright vision from a better world had come
and, vanishing, left a trail behind."  In another letter she
speaks of the enchantment of Mrs. Gray's character: "Anything
so pure, so bright, so heavenly I have rarely met with."

The title, which the kindness of our countrymen has given
to Massachusetts, that of Model Commonwealth, I think has
been earned largely by the character of her Judiciary, and
never could have been acquired without it.  Among the great
figures that have adorned that Bench in the past, the figure
of Justice Gray is among the most conspicuous and stately.

Judge Gray has had from the beginning a reputation for wonderful
research.  Nothing ever seemed to escape his industry and
profound learning.  This was shown on a few occasions when
he undertook some purely historical investigation, as in his
notes on the case of the Writs of Assistance, argued by James
Otis and reported in Quincy's Reports, and his recent admirable
address at Richmond, on Chief Justice Marshall.  But while
all his opinions are full of precedent and contain all the
learning of the case, he was, I think, equally remarkable
for the wisdom, good sense, and strength of his judgments.
I do not think of any Judge of his time anywhere, either here
or in England, to whom the profession would ascribe a higher
place if he be judged only by the correctness of his opinions
in cases where there were no precedents on which to lean and
for the excellent original reasons which he had to give.  I
think Judge Gray's fame, on the whole, would have been greater
as a man of original power if he had resisted, sometimes,
the temptation to marshal an array of cases, and had suffered
his judgments to stand on his statement of legal principles
without the authorities.  He manifested another remarkable
quality when he was on the Bench of Massachusetts.  He was
an admirable _nisi-prius_ Judge.  I think we rarely have had
a better.  He possessed that faculty which made the jury,
in the old days, so admirable a mechanism for performing their
part in the administration of justice.  He had the rare gift,
especially rare in men whose training has been chiefly upon
the Bench, of discerning the truth of the fact, in spite of
the apparent weight of the evidence.  That Court, in his time,
had exclusive jurisdiction of divorces and other matters affecting
the marital relations.  The Judge had to hear and deal with
transactions of humble life and of country life.  It was surprising
how this man, bred in a city, in high social position, having
no opportunity to know the modes of thought and of life of
poor men and of rustics, would settle these interesting and
delicate questions, affecting so deeply the life of plain
men and country farmers, and with what unerring sagacity he
came to the wise and righteous result.

Judge Gray's opinions for the eighteen years during which
he sat on the Bench of Massachusetts constitute an important
body of jurisprudence, from which the student can learn the
whole range of the law as it rests on principle and on authority.

And so it came to pass when the place of Mr. Justice Clifford
became vacant that by the almost universal consent of the
New England Circuit, with the general approval of the profession
throughout the whole country, Mr. Justice Gray became his
successor.  Of his service here there are men better qualified
to speak than I am.  He took his place easily among the great
Judges of the world.  He has borne himself in his great office
so, I believe, as to command the approbation of his countrymen
of all sections and of all parties.  He has been every inch
a Judge.  He has maintained the dignity of his office everywhere.
He has endeared himself to a large circle of friends here
at the National Capital by his elegant and gracious hospitality.
His life certainly has been fortunate.  The desire of his
youth has been fulfilled.  From the time, more than fifty
years ago, when he devoted himself to his profession, there
has been, I suppose, no moment when he did not regard the
office of a Justice of the Supreme Court as not only the most
attractive but also the loftiest of human occupations.  He
has devoted himself to that with a single purpose.  He has
sought no fame or popularity by any other path.  Certainly
his life has been fortunate.  It has lasted to a good old age.
But the summons came for him when his eye was not dimmed nor
his natural force abated.  He drank of the cup of the waters
of life while it was sweetest and clearest, and was not left
to drink it to the dregs.  He was fortunate also, almost beyond
the lot of humanity, in that by a rare felicity, the greatest
joy of youth came to him in an advanced age.  Everything that
can make life honorable, everything that can make life happy--
honor, success, the consciousness of usefulness, the regard
of his countrymen, and the supremest delight of family life--
all were his.  His friends take leave of him as another of
the great and stately figures in the long and venerable procession
of American Judges.


Next to Judge Wilde in seniority upon the Bench among the
associate Judges was Mr. Justice Charles A. Dewey of Northampton.
He had had a good deal of experience as a prosecuting attorney
in a considerable general practice in the western part of
the State.  He was careful in his opinions never to go beyond
what was necessary for the case at bar.  It is said that there
is no instance that any opinion of his was ever overruled
in a very long judicial service.

Judge Dewey was a man of absolute integrity and faithful
in the discharge of his judicial duty.  He had no sentiment
and, so far as I ever knew, took little interest in matters
outside of his important official duties.  He was very careful
in the management of property.  When the Democrats were in
power in Massachusetts in 1843 they reduced the salaries of
the Judges of the Supreme Court in violation of the Constitutional
provision.  Chief Justice Shaw refused to touch a dollar of
his salary until the Legislature the next year restored the
old salary and provided for the payment of the arrears.  Judge
Dewey held out for one quarter.  But the next quarter he went
quietly to the State House, drew his quarter's salary, went
down on to State Street and invested it, and did the same
every quarter thereafter.

In the days of my early practice the Supreme Court used to
sit in Worcester for about five or six weeks, beginning in
April.  It had exclusive jurisdiction of real actions, and
limited equity jurisdiction.  All suits where the matter in
issue was more than three hundred dollars might be brought
originally in that court or removed there by the defendant
from the Common Pleas if the plaintiff began it below.  So
the court had a great deal of business.  It also had jurisdiction
of divorce cases, appeals from the Probate Court and some
special writs such as habeas corpus, certiorari and mandamus.
But after all, the old Court of Common Pleas was the place
where the greater part of the law business of the county was
transacted.  There were at first four civil terms in the year,
and, after Fitchburg became a half shire, there were two more
terms held there.  The Common Pleas had jurisdiction of all
crimes except capital.

There were some very interesting characters among the old
Judges of the Common Pleas.  Among the most remarkable was
Judge Edward Mellen, who was first side Judge and afterward
Chief Justice.  He was a man of great law-learning, indefatigable
industry and remarkable memory for cases, diffuse and long-
winded in his charges, and apt to take sides.  He took everything
very seriously.  It is said that he would listen to the most
pathetic tale of human suffering unmoved, but would burst
into tears at the mention of a stake and stones or two chestnut
staddles.

Mellen with the other Judges of the old Common Pleas Court
was legislated off the Bench by the abolition of that court
in 1858.  He moved from Middlesex to Worcester and resumed
practice, but was never largely employed.  He was a repository
of the old stories of the Middlesex Bar, many of which died
with him.

A Lowell lawyer told me this story of Judge Mellen.  My informant
had in his office a law student who spent most of his time
in reading novels and poetry and writing occasionally for
the newspapers.  He was anxious to get admitted to the Bar
and had crammed for the examination.  In those days, unless
the applicant had studied three years, when he was admitted
as of course, the Judge examined him himself.  The Judge was
holding court at Concord, and an arrangement was made that
the youngster should go to the Judge's room in the evening
and submit himself to the examination.  He kept the appointment,
but in about ten minutes came out.  My informant, who had
recommended him, asked him what was the matter.  He said he
didn't know.  The Judge had asked him one question only.  He
was sure he answered it right, but the Judge immediately dismissed
him with great displeasure.  The next morning the lawyer
went up to Judge Mellen in court and said, "Judge, what was
the matter with the young man last night?  Did you not find
him fitted?"

"Fitted?" said the Judge.  "No sir.  I asked him what was
the rule in Shelley's Case, and he told me the rule in Shelley's
Case was that when the father was an atheist the Lord Chancellor
would appoint a guardian for his children."

"Ah," was the reply.  "I see.  The trouble is that neither
of you ever heard of the other's Shelley."

Judge Byington of Stockbridge in Berkshire used to come to
Worcester a great deal to hold the old Common Pleas Court.
He was an excellent lawyer and an excellent Judge--dry, fond
of the common law, and of black letter authorities.  He had
a curious habit of giving his charge in one long sentence
without periods, but with a great many parentheses.  But he
had great influence with the juries and was very sound and
correct in his law.  I once tried a case before him for damages
for the seizure of a stock of liquors under the provisions
of the Statute of 1852, known as the Maine Liquor Law, which
had been held unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.  He began:
"The Statute of 1852 chapter so-and-so gentlemen of the jury
commonly known as the Maine Liquor Law which has created great
feeling throughout this Commonwealth some very good men were
in favor of it and some very good men were against it read
literally part of it would be ridiculous and you may take
your seats if you please gentlemen of the jury I shall be
occupied some time in my charge and I do not care to keep
you standing and some of it would be absurd and some of it
reads very well." And so on.

A neighbor of Judge Byington from Berkshire County was Judge
Henry W. Bishop of Stockbridge.  He was an old Democratic
politician and at one time the candidate of his party for
Governor.  He was not a very learned lawyer, but was quick-
witted and picked up a good deal from the arguments of counsel.
Aided by a natural shrewdness and sense, he got along pretty
well.  He had a gift of rather bombastic speech.  His exuberant
eloquence was of a style more resembling that prevalent in
some other parts of the country than the more sober and severe
fashion of New England.  Just before he came to the Bench
he was counsel in a real estate case in Springfield where
Mr. Chapman, afterward Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
was on the other side.  The evidence of recent occupation
and the monuments tended in favor of Chapman's client.  But
it turned out that the one side had got a title under the
original grant of the town of Blandford, and the other under
the original grant of an adjoining town, and that the town
line had been maintained from the beginning where Bishop claimed
the true line to be.  When he came to that part of the case,
he rose mightily in his stirrups.  Turning upon Chapman, who
was a quiet, mild-mannered old gentleman, he said: "The gentleman's
eyes may twinkle like Castor and Pollux, twin stars; but he
can't wink out of sight that town line of Blandford.  He may
place one foot on Orion and the other on Arcturus, and seize
the Pleiades by the hair and wring all the water from their
dripping urns; but he can't wash out that town line of Blandford."
The local newspaper got hold of the speech and reported it,
and it used to be spoken occasionally by the school boys for
their declamation.  Bishop is said to have been much disturbed
by the ridicule it created, and to have refused ever to go to
Springfield again on any professional employment.

Judge Aldrich was appointed to the Bench of the Superior
Court of Massachusetts by Governor William B. Washburn after
I left the practice of law for public life.  I appeared before
him in a very few cases and must take his judicial quality
largely from the report of others.  He was a very powerful
and formidable advocate, especially in cases where moral principles
or the family relations were concerned, or where any element
of pathos enabled him to appeal to the jury.  The most tedious
hours of my life, I think, have been those when I was for
the defendant and he for the plaintiff, and I had to sit and
listen to his closing argument in reply to mine.  He had a
gift of simple eloquence; the influence with juries which
comes from earnestness and the profound conviction of the
righteousness of the cause he had advocated, and the weight
of an unsullied personal character and unquestioned integrity.

Mr. Aldrich's appointment to the Bench came rather late in
his life, so he was not promoted to the Supreme Court, which
would undoubtedly have happened if he had been younger.  He
was an excellent magistrate and the author of one or two valuable
law books.  Although my chief memories of him are of the many
occasions on which I have crossed swords with him, and of
battles when our feelings and sympathy were profoundly stirred,
still they are of the most affectionate character.  He had
a quick temper and was easily moved to anger in the trial
of a case.  But as an eminent western Judge is reported to
have said in speaking of some offence that had been committed
at the Bar, "This Court herself are naterally quick-tempered."
So the sparks of our quarrels went out as quickly as they
were kindled.  I think of P. Emory Aldrich as a stanch and
constant friend, from whom, so long as his life lasted, I received
nothing but friendliest sympathy and constant and powerful
support.

Judge Aldrich, as I just said, was a man of quick temper.
He was ready to accept any challenge to a battle, especially
one which seemed to have anything of a personal disrespect
in it.  I was present on one occasion when the ludicrous
misspelling of a word, it is very likely, saved him from coming
to blows with a very worthy and well-known citizen of Worcester
County.  Colonel Artemus Lee, of Templeton, one of the most
estimable citizens of northern Worcester County, a man imperious
and quick-tempered, who had been apt to have his own way in
the region where he dwelt, and not very willing to give up
to anybody, employed me once to bring suit for him against
the Town of Templeton to recover taxes which he claimed had
been illegally assessed and collected.  He was a man whose
spelling had been neglected in early youth.  Aldrich was for
the Town.  All the facts showing the illegality of the assessment,
of course, were upon the Town records.  So we thought if the
parties met with their counsel we could agree upon a statement
of facts and submit the question of law to the court.  We
met in Judge Aldrich's office, Colonel Lee and myself and
Judge Aldrich and some of the Town officers, to make up the
statement.  But Mr. Aldrich had not had time to look very
deeply into the law of the case, and made some difficulties in
agreeing upon the facts, which we thought rather unreasonable.
We sat up to a late hour in a hot summer evening trying to
get at a statement.  At last Lee's patience gave out.  He
had had one or two hot passages at arms with Mr. Aldrich
in the course of the discussion already.  He rose to his feet
and said in a very loud and angry tone--his voice was always
something like that of a bull of Basham--"This is a farce."
Aldrich rose from his seat and to the occasion and said very
angrily, "What's that you say, Sir?" Lee clenched both fists
by his side, thrust his own angry countenance close up to
that of his antagonist, and said, "A farce, Sir--F-A-R-S-
E, Farce."  Aldrich caught my eye as I was sitting behind
my client and noticed my look of infinite amusement.  His
anger yielded to the comedy of the occasion.  He burst into
a roar of laughter and peace was saved.  If Lee had spelled
the word farce with a "c," there would have been a battle
royal.


CHAPTER XXXIX
POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS FAITH

I close this book with a statement of the political principles
which I think define the duty of the American people in the
near future, and from which I hope the Republic will not depart
until time shall be no more; and of the simple religious faith
in which I was bred, and to which I now hold.

They cannot to my mind be separated.  One will be found in
some resolutions offered in the Senate December 20, 1899.
The other in what I said on taking the chair at the National
Unitarian Conference, at Washington, in October 1899.

"Mr. Hoar submitted the following resolution:

"WHEREAS the American people and the several States in the
Union have in times past, at important periods in their history,
especially when declaring their Independence, establishing
their Constitutions, or undertaking new and great responsibilities,
seen fit to declare the purposes for which the Nation or State
was founded and the important objects the people intend to
pursue in their political action; and

"WHEREAS the close of a great war, the liberation by the
United States of the people of Cuba and Porto Rico in the
Western Hemisphere and of the Philippine Islands in the far
East, and the reduction of those peoples to a condition of
practical dependence upon the United States, constitute an
occasion which makes such a declaration proper;  Therefore,
be it

_"Resolved,_ That this Republic adheres to the doctrines
which were in the past set forth in the Declaration of Independence
and in its National and State constitutions.

_"Resolved,_ That the purpose of its existence and the objects
to which its political action ought to be directed are the
ennobling of humanity, the raising from the dust its humblest
and coarsest members, and the enabling of persons coming lawfully
under its power or influence to live in freedom and in honor
under governments in whose forms they are to have a share
in determining and in whose administration they have an equal
voice.  Its most important and pressing obligations are:

"First.  To solve the difficult problem presented by the
presence of different races on our own soil with equal Constitutional
rights; to make the Negro safe in his home, secure in his
vote, equal in his opportunity for education and employment,
and to bring the Indian to a civilization and culture in accordance
with his need and capacity.

"Second.  To enable great cities to govern themselves in
freedom, in honor, and in purity.

"Third.  To make the ballot box as pure as a sacramental
vessel, and the election return as perfect in accord with
the law and the truth as a judgment of the Supreme Court.

"Fourth.  To banish illiteracy and ignorance from the land.

"Fifth.  To secure for every workman and for every working
woman wages enough to support a life of comfort and an old
age of leisure and quiet, as befits those who have an equal
share in a self-governing State.

"Sixth.  To grow and expand over the continent and over the
islands of the sea just so fast, and no faster, as we can
bring into equality and self-government under our Constitution
peoples and races who will share these ideals and help to
make them realities.

"Seventh.  To set a peaceful example of freedom which mankind
will be glad to follow, but never to force even freedom upon
unwilling nations at the point of the bayonet or at the cannon's
mouth.

"Eighth.  To abstain from interfering with the freedom and
just rights of other nations or peoples, and to remember
that the liberty to do right necessarily involves the liberty
to do wrong; and that the American people has no right to
take from any other people the birthright of freedom because
of a fear that they will do wrong with it."

SPEECH ON TAKING THE CHAIR AT THE NATIONAL UNITARIAN
  CONFERENCE, IN WASHINGTON, OCTOBER, 1899

"The part assigned to me, in the printed plan of our proceedings,
is the delightful duty of bidding you welcome.  But you find
a welcome from each other in the glance of the eye, in the
pressure of the hand, in the glad tone of the voice, better
than any that can be put into formal words.

  From hand to hand the greeting goes;
  From eye to eye the signals run;
  From heart to heart to bright hope glows;
  The seekers of the light are one.

Every Unitarian, man and woman, every lover of God or His
Son, every one who in loving his fellow-men loves God and
His Son, even without knowing it, is welcome in this company.

"We are sometimes told, as if it were a reproach, that we
cannot define Unitarianism.  For myself, I thank God that
it is not to be defined.  To define is to bound, to enclose, to
set limit.  The great things of the universe are not to be
defined.  You cannot define a human soul.  You cannot define
the intellect.  You cannot define immortality or eternity.
You cannot define God.

"I think, also, that the things we are to be glad of and to
be proud of and are to be thankful for are not those things
that separate us from the great body of Christians or the
great body of believers in God and in righteousness, but in
the things that unite us with them.  No Five Points, no Athanasian
Creed, no Thirty-nine Articles, separate the men and women
of our way of thinking from humanity or from Divinity.

"But still, although we do not define Unitarianism, we know
our own when we see them.  There are men and women who like
to be called by our name.  There are men and women for whom
Faith, Hope, and Charity forever abide; to whom Judea's news
are still glad tidings; who believe that one day Jesus Christ
came to this earth, bearing a Divine message and giving a
Divine example.  There are women who bear their own sorrows
of life by soothing the sorrows of others; youths who, when
Duty whispers low, 'Thou must,' reply, "I can'; and old men
to whom the experience of life has taught the same brave lesson;
examples of the patriotism that will give its life for its
country when in the right, and the patriotism that will make
itself of no reputation, if need be, to save its country from
being in the wrong.

"They do not comprehend the metaphysics of a Trinal Unity,
nor how it is just that innocence should be punished, that
guilt may go free.  They do not attribute any magic virtue
to the laying on of hands; nor do they believe that the traces
of an evil life in the soul can be washed out by the sprinkling
of a few drops of water, however pure, or by baptism in any
blood, however innocent, in the hour of death.  But they do
understand the Ten Commandments and the Golden Rule, and they
know and they love and they practise the great virtues which
the Apostle tells us are to abide.

"I think there can be found in this country no sectarianism
so narrow, so hide-bound, so dogma-clad, that it would like
to blot out from the history of the country what the men of
our faith have contributed to it.  On the first roll of this
Washington parish will be found close together the names of
John C. Calhoun and John Quincy Adams.  John Quincy Adams
had learned from his father and mother the liberal Christian
faith he transmitted to his illustrious son.  If we would
blot out Unitarianism from the history of the country, we
must erase the names of many famous statesmen, many famous
philanthropists, many great reformers, many great orators,
many famous soldiers, from its annals, and nearly all of our
great poets from its literature.

"I could exhaust not only the time I have a right to take,
but I could fill a week if I were to recall their names and
tell the story of their lives.  Still less could I speak
adequately of the men and women who, in almost every neighborhood
throughout the country, have found in this Unitarian faith
of ours a stimulant to brave and noble lives and a sufficient
comfort and support in the hour of a brave death.  As I stand
here on this occasion, my heart is full of one memory,--of
one who loved our Unitarian faith with the whole fervor of
his soul, who in his glorious prime, possessing everything
which could make life happy and precious, the love of wife
and children and friends, the joy of professional success,
the favor of his fellow-citizens, the fulness of health, the
consciousness of high talent, heard the voice of the Lord
speaking from the fever-haunted hospital and the tropical
swamp, and the evening dews and damps, saying, 'Where is the
messenger that will take his life in his hand, that I may
send him to carry health to my stricken soldiers and sailors?'
When the Lord said, 'Whom shall I send?' he answered, 'Here
am I:  send me.'*

[Footnote]
* Sherman Hoar, who after a brilliant public and professional career,
gave his life to his country by exposure in caring for the sick soldiers
of the Spanish war.