The high-sheriff made his appearance before his early and well-known
visiters with a desperate air of composure and unconcern, the effort to
attain which was readily perceptible to his companions. He could not, in
the first place, well get rid of those terrors of the domestic world
from which their interruption had timely shielded him; nor, on the other
hand, could he feel altogether assured that the visit now paid him would
not result in the exaction of some usurious interest. He had recently,
as we have said, as much through motives of worldly as spiritual policy,
become an active religionist, in a small way, in and about the section
of country in which he resided; and knowing that his professions were in
some sort regarded with no small degree of doubt and suspicion by some
of his brethren holding the same faith, he felt the necessity of playing
a close and cautious game in all his practices. He might well be
apprehensive, therefore, of the visits of those who never came but as so
many omens of evil, and whose claims upon, and perfect knowledge of, his
true character, were such, that he felt himself, in many respects, most
completely at their mercy.

Rivers did not give much time to preliminaries, but, after a few phrases
of commonplace, coming directly to the point, he stated the business in
hand, and demanded the assistance of the officer of justice for the
arrest of one of its fugitives. There were some difficulties of form in
the matter, which saved the sheriff in part, and which the outlaw had in
great part over looked. A warrant of arrest was necessary from some
officer properly empowered to issue one, and a new difficulty was thus
presented in the way of Colleton's pursuit. The sheriff had not the
slightest objections to making deputies of the persons recommended by
the outlaw, provided they were fully empowered to execute the commands
of some judicial officer; beyond this, the scrupulous executioner of
justice was unwilling to go; and having stood out so long in the
previous controversy with his spouse, it was wonderful what a vast stock
of audacious courage he now felt himself entitled, and ventured, to
manifest.

"I can not do it, Master Guy--it's impossible--seeing, in the first
place, that I ha'n't any right by the laws to issue any warrant, though
it's true, I has to serve them. Then, agin, in the next place, 'twont do
for another reason that's jist as good, you see. It's only the other
day, Master Guy, that the fear of the Lord come upon me, and I got
religion; and now I've set myself up as a worker in other courts, you
see, than those of man; and there be eyes around me that would see, and
hearts to rejoice at the backslidings of the poor laborer. Howbeit,
Master Guy, I am not the man to forget old sarvice; and if it be true
that this man has been put to death in this manner, though I myself can
do nothing at this time, I may put you in the way--for the sake of old
time, and for the sake of justice, which requires that the slayer of his
brother should also be slain--of having your wish."

Though something irritated still at the reluctance of his former
creature to lend himself without scruple to his purposes, the outlaw did
not hesitate to accept the overture, and to press for its immediate
accomplishment. He had expostulated with the sheriff for some time on
the point, and, baffled and denied, he was very glad, at the conclusion
of the dialogue with that worthy, to find that there was even so much of
a prospect of concert, though falling far short of his original
anticipations, from that quarter. He was too well aware, also, of the
difficulty in the way of any proceeding without something savoring of
authority in the matter; for, from a previous and rather correct
estimate of Colleton's character, he well foresaw that, knowing his
enemy, he would fight to the last against an arrest; which, under the
forms of law and with the sanction of a known officer, he would
otherwise readily recognise and submit to. Seizing, therefore, upon the
speech of the sheriff, Rivers eagerly availed himself of its opening to
obtain those advantages in the affair, of which, from the canting spirit
and newly-awakened morality of his late coadjutor, he had utterly begun
to despair. He proceeded to reply to the suggestion as follows:--

"I suppose, I must content myself, Maxson, with doing in this thing as
you say, though really I see not why you should now be so particular,
for there are not ten men in the county who are able to determine upon
any of your powers, or who would venture to measure their extent. Let us
hear your plan, and I suppose it will be effectual in our object, and
this is all I want. All I desire is, that our people, you know, should
not be murdered by strangers without rhyme or reason."

The sheriff knew well the hypocrisy of the sentiment with which Rivers
concluded, but made no remark. A single smile testified his knowledge of
the nature of his colleague, and indicated his suspicion of a deeper and
different motive for this new activity. Approaching the outlaw closely,
he asked, in a half whisper:--

"Who was the witness of the murder--who could swear for the magistrate?
You must get somebody to do that."

This was another point which Rivers, in his impatience, had not thought
to consider. But fruitful in expedient, his fertile mind suggested that
ground of suspicion was all that the law required for apprehension at
least, and having already arranged that the body of the murdered man
should be found under certain circumstances, he contented himself with
procuring commissions, as deputies, for his two officers, and posted
away to the village.

Here, as he anticipated, the intelligence had already been received--the
body of Forrester had been found, and sufficient ground for suspicion to
authorize a warrant was recognised in the dirk of the youth, which,
smeared with blood as it had been left by Rivers, had been found upon
the body. Rivers had but little to do. He contrived, however, to do
nothing himself. The warrant of Pippin, as magistrate, was procured, and
the two officers commissioned by the sheriff went off in pursuit of the
supposed murderer, against whom the indignation of all the village was
sufficiently heightened by the recollection of the close intimacy
existing between Ralph and Forrester, and the nobly characteristic
manner in which the latter had volunteered to do his fighting with
Rivers. The murdered man had, independent of this, no small popularity
of his own, which brought out for him a warm and active sympathy highly
creditable to his memory. Old Allen, too, suffered deeply, not less on
his own than his daughter's account. She, poor girl, had few words, and
her sorrow, silent, if not tearless, was confined to the solitude of her
own chamber.

In the prosecution of the affair against Ralph, there was but one person
whose testimony could have availed him, and that person was Lucy Munro.
As the chief particular in evidence, and that which established the
strong leading presumption against him, consisted in the discovery of
his dagger alongside the body of the murdered man, and covered with his
blood; it was evident that she who could prove the loss of the dagger by
the youth, and its finding by Munro, prior to the event, and
unaccompanied by any tokens of crime, would not only be able to free the
person suspected, at least from this point of suspicion, but would be
enabled to place its burden elsewhere, and with the most conclusive
distinctness.

This was a dilemma which Rivers and Munro did not fail to consider. The
private deliberation, for an hour, of the two conspirators, determined
upon the course which for mutual safety they were required to pursue;
and Munro gave his niece due notice to prepare for an immediate
departure with her aunt and himself, on some plausible pretence, to
another portion of the country.

To such a suggestion, as Lucy knew not the object, she offered no
objection; and a secret departure was effected of the three, who, after
a lonely ride of several hours through a route circuitously chosen to
mislead, were safely brought to the sheltered and rocky abiding-place of
the robbers, as we have already described it. Marks of its offensive
features, however, had been so modified as not to occasion much alarm.
The weapons of war had been studiously put out of sight, and apartments,
distinct from those we have seen, partly the work of nature, and partly
of man, were assigned for the accommodation of the new-comers. The
outlaws had their instructions, and did not appear, though lurking and
watching around in close and constant neighborhood.

Nor, in this particular alone, had the guilty parties made due provision
for their future safety. The affair of the guard had made more stir than
had been anticipated in the rash moment which had seen its consummation;
and their advices warned them of the approach of a much larger force of
state troops, obedient to the direction of the district-attorney, than
they could well contend with. They determined, therefore, prudently for
themselves, to keep as much out of the way of detection as they could;
and to avoid those risks upon which a previous conference had partially
persuaded them to adventure. They were also apprized of the greater
excitement attending the fate of Forrester, than could possibly have
followed the death, in his place, of the contemplated victim; and,
adopting a habit of caution, heretofore but little considered in that
region, they prepared for all hazards, and, at the same time, tacitly
determined upon the suspension of their numerous atrocities--at least,
while a controlling force was in the neighborhood. Previous impunity had
led them so far, that at length the neighboring country was aroused, and
all the better classes, taking advantage of the excitement, grew bolder
in the expression of their anger against those who had beset them so
long. The sheriff, Maxson, had been something tutored by these
influences, or, it had been fair to surmise that his scruples would have
been less difficult to overcome.

In the meantime, the pursuit of Ralph Colleton, as the murderer of
Forrester, had been hotly urged by the officers. The pursuers knew the
route, and having the control of new horses as they proceeded, at
frequent intervals, gained of course at every step upon the unconscious
travellers. We have seen the latter retiring to repose at a late hour of
the night. Under the several fatigues which all parties had undergone,
it is not strange that the sun should have arisen some little time
before those who had not retired quite so early as himself. At a
moderately late hour they breakfasted together--the family of the
wagoner, and Ralph, and our old friend the pedler. Pursuing the same
route, the two latter, after the repast, separated, with many
acknowledgments on both sides, from the emigrating party, and pursued
their way together.

On their road, Bunce gave the youth a long and particular account of all
those circumstances at the village-inn by which he had been deprived of
his chattels, and congratulated himself not a little on the adroit
thought which had determined him to retain the good steed of the Lawyer
Pippin in lieu of his losses. He spoke of it as quite a clever and
creditable performance, and one as fully deserving the golden honors of
the medal as many of those doings which are so rewarded.

On this point his companion said little; and though he could not
altogether comprehend the propriety of the pedler's morals, he certainly
did not see but that the necessity and pressing danger of his situation
somewhat sanctioned the deceit. He suggested this idea to Bunce, but
when he came to talk of the propriety of returning the animal the moment
he was fairly in safety, the speculator failed entirely to perceive the
moral of his philosophy.

The sheriff's officers came upon the wagoner a few hours after the two
had separated from him. The intelligence received from him quickened
their pace, and toward noon they descried our travellers ascending a
hill a few hundred yards in advance of them. A repeated application of
the spur brought them together, and, as had been anticipated by Rivers,
Ralph offered not the slightest objection, when once satisfied of the
legality of his arrest, to becoming their prisoner. But the
consternation of Bunce was inexpressible. He endeavored to shelter
himself in the adjoining woods, and was quietly edging his steed into
the covert for that purpose, on the first alarm, but was not permitted
by the sharp eyes and ready unscrupulosity of the robber representatives
of the law. They had no warrant, it is true, for the arrest of any other
person than "the said Ralph Colleton"--but the unlucky color of Pippin's
horse, and their perfect knowledge of the animal, readily identifying
him, did the business for the pedler.

Under the custody of the laws, therefore, we behold the youth retracing
his ground, horror-stricken at the death of Forrester--indignant at
the suspicions entertained of himself as the murderer, but sanguine
of the result, and firm and fearless as ever. Not so Bunce: there
were cruel visions in his sight of seven-sided pine-rails--fierce
regulators--Lynch's law, and all that rude and terrible sort of
punishment, which is studiously put in force in those regions for the
enjoyment of evil-doers. The next day found them both securely locked up
in the common jail of Chestatee.




CHAPTER XXX.

CHUB WILLIAMS.


The young mind of Colleton, excursive as it was, could scarcely realize
to itself the strange and rapidly-succeeding changes of the last few
days. Self-exiled from the dwelling in which so much of his heart and
hope had been stored up--a wanderer among the wandering--assaulted by
ruffians--the witness of their crimes--pursued by the officers of
justice, and finally the tenant of a prison, as a criminal himself!
After the first emotions of astonishment and vexation had
subsided--ignorant of the result of this last adventure, and preparing
for the worst--he called for pen and paper, and briefly, to his uncle,
recounted his adventures, as we have already related them, partially
acknowledging his precipitance in departing from his house, but
substantially insisting upon the propriety of those grounds which had
made him do so.

To Edith, what could he say? Nothing--everything. His letter to her,
enclosed in that to her uncle, was just such as might be expected from
one with a character such as we have endeavored to describe--that of the
genuine aristocrat of Carolina--gentle, but firm--soothing, but
manly--truly, but loftily affectionate--the rock touched, if not
softened by the sunbeam; warm and impetuous, but generally just in his
emotions--liberal in his usual estimate of mankind, and generous, to a
fault, in all his associations;--ignorant of any value in money, unless
for high purposes--as subservient to taste and civilization--a graceful
humanity and an honorable affection.

With a tenderness the most respectful, Ralph reiterated his love--prayed
for her prayers--frankly admitted his error in his abrupt flight, and
freely promised atonement as soon as he should be freed from his
difficulties; an event which, in speaking to her, he doubted not. This
duty over, his mind grew somewhat relieved, and, despatching a note by
the jailer's deputy to the lawyer Pippin, he desired immediately to see
him.

Pippin had looked for such an invitation, and was already in attendance.
His regrets were prodigious, but his gratification not less, as it would
give him an opportunity, for some time desired, for serving so excellent
a gentleman. But the lawyer shook his head with most professional
uncertainty at every step of his own narration of the case, and soon
convinced Ralph that he really stood in a very awkward predicament. He
described the situation of the body of Forrester when found; the bloody
dirk which lay beside it, having the initials of his name plainly carved
upon it; his midnight flight; his close companionship with Forrester on
the evening of the night in which he had been murdered--a fact proved by
old Allen and his family; the intimate freedom with which Forrester had
been known to confide his purposes to the youth, deducible from the
joint call which they had made upon the sweetheart of the former; and
many other smaller details, unimportant in themselves, but linked
together with the rest of the particulars, strengthening the chain of
circumstances against him to a degree which rendered it improbable that
he should escape conviction.

Pippin sought, however, to console his client, and, after the first
development of particulars, the natural buoyancy of the youth returned.
He was not disposed readily to despair, and his courage and confidence
rose with the pressure of events. He entered into a plain story of all
the particulars of his flight--the instrumentality of Miss Munro in that
transaction, and which she could explain, in such a manner as to do away
with any unfavorable impression which that circumstance, of itself,
might create. Touching the dagger, he could say nothing. He had
discovered its loss, but knew not at what time he had lost it. The
manner in which it had been found was, of course, fatal, unless the fact
which he alleged of its loss could be established; and of this the
consulting parties saw no hope. Still, they did not despair, but
proceeded to the task of preparing the defence for the day of trial,
which was at hand. The technical portions of the case were managed by
the lawyer, who issued his subpoenas--made voluminous notes--wrote out
the exordium of his speech--and sat up all night committing it to
memory.

Having done all that the occasion called for in his interview with
Ralph, the lawyer proceeded to visit, uncalled-for, one whom he
considered a far greater criminal than his client. The cell to which the
luckless pedler, Bunce, had been carried, was not far from that of the
former, and the rapid step of the lawyer soon overcame the distance
between.

Never was man seemingly so glad to see his neighbor as was Bunce, on
this occasion, to look upon Pippin. His joy found words of the most
honeyed description for his visiter, and his delight was truly
infectious. The lawyer was delighted too, but his satisfaction was of a
far different origin. He had now some prospect of getting back his
favorite steed--that fine animal, described by him elsewhere to the
pedler, as docile as the dog, and fleet as the deer. He had heard of the
safety of his horse, and his anger with the pedler had undergone some
abatement; but, with the consciousness of power common to inferior
minds, came a strong desire for its use. He knew that the pedler had
been guilty in a legal sense of no crime, and could only be liable in a
civil action for his breach of trust. But he suspected that the dealer
in wares was ignorant of the advantageous distinctions in morals which
the law had made, and consequently amused himself with playing upon the
fears of the offender. He put on a countenance of much commiseration,
and, drawing a long sigh, regretted the necessity which had brought him
to prepare the mind of his old friend for the last terrors of justice.

But Bunce was not a man easily frightened. As he phrased it himself, he
had been quite too long knocking about among men to be scared by
shadows, and replied stoutly--though really with some internal
misgivings--to the lachrymalities of the learned counsel. He gave him to
understand that, if he got into difficulty, he knew some other persons
whom his confessions would make uncomfortable; and hinted pretty
directly at certain practices of a certain professional gentleman,
which, though the pedler knew nothing of the technical significant might
yet come under the head of barratry, and so forth.

The lawyer was the more timid man of the two, and found it necessary to
pare down his potency. He soon found it profitable to let the matter
rest, and having made arrangements with the pedler for bringing suit for
damages against two of the neighboring farmers concerned in the
demolition of his wares--who, happening to be less guilty than their
accessaries, had ventured to remain in the country--Bunce found no
difficulty in making his way out of the prison. There had been no right
originally to detain him; but the consciousness of guilt, and some other
ugly misgivings, had so relaxed the nerves of the tradesman, that he had
never thought to inquire if his name were included in the warrant of
arrest. It is probable that his courage and confidence would have been
far less than they appear at present, had not Pippin assured him that
the regulators were no longer to be feared; that the judge had arrived;
that the grand-jury had found bills against several of the offenders,
and were still engaged in their labors; that a detachment of the state
military had been ordered to the station; and that things looked as
civil as it was altogether possible for such warlike exhibition to
allow. It is surprising to think how fearlessly uncompromising was the
conduct of Bunce under this new condition of affairs.

But the pedler, in his own release from custody, was not forgetful of
his less-fortunate companion. He was a frequent visiter in the dungeon
of Ralph Colleton; bore all messages between the prisoner and his
counsel; and contributed, by his shrewd knowledge of human kind, not a
little to the material out of which his defence was to be made.

He suggested the suspicion, never before entertained by the youth, or
entertained for a moment only, that his present arrest was the result of
a scheme purposely laid with a reference to this end; and did not
scruple to charge upon Rivers the entire management of the matter.

Ralph could only narrate what he knew of the malignant hatred of the
outlaw to himself--another fact which none but Lucy Munro could
establish. Her evidence, however, would only prove Rivers to have
meditated one crime; it would not free him from the imputation of having
committed another. Still, so much was important, and casualties were to
be relied upon for the rest.

But what was the horror of all parties when it was known that neither
Lucy nor any of the landlord's family were to be found! The process of
subpoena was returned, and the general opinion was, that alarmed at the
approach of the military in such force, and confident that his agency in
the late transactions could not long remain concealed in the possession
of so many, though guilty like himself, Munro had fled to the west.

The mental agony of the youth, when thus informed, can not well he
conceived. He was, for a time, utterly prostrate, and gave himself up to
despair. The entreaties of the pedler, and the counsels and exhortings
of the lawyer, failed equally to enliven him; and they had almost come
to adopt his gloomy resignation, when, as he sat on his low bench, with
head drooping on his hand, a solitary glance of sunshine fell through
the barred window--the only one assigned to his cell.

The smile of God himself that solitary ray appeared to the diseased
spirit of the youth, and he grew strong in an instant. Talk of the
lessons of the learned, and the reasonings of the sage!--a vagrant
breeze, a rippling water, a glance of the sweet sunlight, have more of
consolation in them for the sad heart than all the pleadings of
philosophy. They bring the missives of a higher teacher.

Bunce was an active coadjutor with the lawyer in this melancholy case.
He made all inquiries--he went everywhere. He searched in all places,
and spared no labor; but at length despaired. Nothing could be elicited
by his inquiries, and he ceased to hope himself, and ceased to persuade
Ralph into hope. The lawyer shook his head in reply to all questions,
and put on a look of mystery which is the safety-valve to all swollen
pretenders.

In this state of affairs, taking the horse of the youth, with a last
effort at discoveries, Bunce rode forth into the surrounding country. He
had heretofore taken all the common routes, to which, in his previous
intercourse with the people, he had been accustomed; he now determined
to strike into a path scarcely perceptible, and one which he never
remembered to have seen before. He followed, mile after mile, its
sinuosities. It was a wild, and, seemingly, an untrodden region. The
hills shot up jaggedly from the plain around him--the fissures were rude
and steep--more like embrasures, blown out by sudden power from the
solid rock. Where the forest appeared, it was dense and
intricate--abounding in brush and underwood; where it was deficient, the
blasted heath chosen by the witches in Macbeth would have been no unfit
similitude.

Hopeless of human presence in this dreary region, the pedler yet rode
on, as if to dissipate the unpleasant thoughts, following upon his
frequent disappointment. Suddenly, however, a turn in the winding path
brought him in contact with a strange-looking figure, not more than five
feet in height, neither boy nor man, uncouthly habited, and seemingly
one to whom all converse but that of the trees and rocks, during his
whole life, had been unfamiliar.

The reader has already heard something of the Cherokee pony--it was upon
one of these animals he rode. They are a small, but compactly made and
hardy creature--of great fortitude, stubborn endurance, and an activity,
which, in the travel of day after day, will seldom subside from the
gallop. It was the increasing demand for these animals that had
originally brought into existence and exercise a company, which, by a
transition far from uncommon, passed readily from the plundering of
horses to the cutting of throats and purses; scarcely discriminating in
their reckless rapacity between the several degrees of crime in which
such a practice involved them.

Though somewhat uncouth in appearance, the new-comer seemed decidedly
harmless--nay, almost idiotic in appearance. His smile was pleasant,
though illuminating features of the ruggedest description, and the tones
of his voice were even musical in the ears of the pedler, to whom any
voice would probably have seemed so in that gloomy region. He very
sociably addressed Bunce in the _patois_ of that section; and the
ceremonial of introduction, without delay or difficulty, was overcome
duly on both sides. In the southern wilderness, indeed, it does not call
for much formality, nor does a strict adherence to the received rules of
etiquette become at all necessary, to make the traveller "hail fellow,
well met." Anything in that quarter, savoring of reserve or stiffness,
is punished with decided hostility or openly-avowed contempt; and, in
the more rude regions, the refusal to partake in the very social
employments of wrestling or whiskey-drinking, has brought the scrupulous
personage to the more questionable enjoyments of a regular gouging match
and fight. A demure habit is the most unpopular among all classes.
Freedom of manner, on the other hand, obtains confidence readily, and
the heart is won, at once, by an off-handed familiarity of demeanor,
which fails to recognise any inequalities in human condition. The
society and the continued presence of Nature, as it were, in her own
peculiar abode, put aside all merely conventional distinctions, and men
meet upon a common footing. Thus, even when perfect strangers to one
another, after the usual preliminaries of "how are you, friend," or
"strannger?"--"_whar_ from?"--"_whar_ going?"--"fair" or "foul
weather"--as the case may be--the acquaintance is established, and
familiarity well begun. Such was the case in the present instance. Bunce
knew the people well, and exhibited his most unreluctant manner. The
horses of the two, in like manner with their masters, made similar
overtures; and in a little while, their necks were drawn in parallel
lines together.

Bunce was less communicative, however, than the stranger. Still his head
and heart, alike, were full, and he talked more freely than was
altogether consistent with his Yankee character. He told of Ralph's
predicament, and the clown sympathized; he narrated the quest which had
brought him forth, and of his heretofore unrewarded labors; concluded
with naming the ensuing Monday as the day of the youth's trial, when, if
nothing in the meantime could be discovered of the true criminal--for
the pedler never for a moment doubted that Ralph was innocent--he
"mortally feared things would go agin him."

"That will be hard, too--a mighty tough difficulty, now, strannger--to
be hanged for other folks' doings. But, I reckon, he'll have to make up
his mind to it."

"Oh, no! don't say so, now, my friend, I beg you. What makes you think
so?" said the anxious pedler.

"Why, only from what I _heer'd_ you say. You said so yourself, and I
believed it as if I had seed it," was the reply of the simple
countryman.

"Oh, yes. It's but a poor chance with him now, I guess. I'd a notion
that I could find out some little particular, you see--"

"No, I don't see."

"To be sure you don't, but that's my say. Everybody has a say, you
know."

"No, I don't know."

"To be sure, of course you don't know, but that's what I tell you. Now
you must know--"

"Don't say _must_ to me, strannger, if you want that we shall keep hands
off. I don't let any man say _must_ to me."

"No harm, my friend--I didn't mean no harm," said the worried pedler,
not knowing what to make of his acquaintance, who spoke shrewdly at
times, but occasionally in a speech, which awakened the doubts of the
pedler as to the safety of his wits. Avoiding all circumlocution of
phrase, and dropping the "you sees," and "you knows" from his narration,
he proceeded to state his agency in procuring testimony for the youth,
and of the ill-success which had hitherto attended him. At length, in
the course of his story, which he contrived to tell with as much caution
as came within the scope of his education, he happened to speak of Lucy
Munro; but had scarcely mentioned her name when his queer companion
interrupted him:--

"Look you, strannger, I'll lick you now, off-hand, if you don't put Miss
for a handle to the gal's name. She's Miss Lucy. Don't I know her, and
han't I seen her, and isn't it I, Chub Williams, as they calls me, that
loves the very airth she treads?"

"You know Miss Lucy?" inquired the pedler, enraptured even at this
moderate discovery, though carefully coupling the prefix to her name
while giving it utterance--"now, do you know Miss Lucy, friend, and will
you tell me where I can find her?"

"Do you think I will, and you may be looking arter her too? 'Drot my old
hat, strannger, but I do itch to git at you."

"Oh, now, Mr. Williams--"

"I won't answer to that name. Call me Chub Williams, if you wants to be
perlite. Mother always calls me Chub, and that's the reason I like it."

"Well, Chub,"--said the other, quite paternally--"I assure you I don't
love Miss Munro--and--"

"What! you don't love Miss Lucy. Why, everybody ought to love her. Now,
if you don't love her, I'll hammer you, strannger, off hand."

The poor pedler professed a proper sort of love for the young lady--not
exactly such as would seek her for a wife, however, and succeeded in
satisfying, after a while, the scruples of one who, in addition to
deformity, he also discovered to labor under the more serious curse of
partial idiocy. Having done this, and flattered, in sundry other ways,
the peculiarities of his companion, he pursued his other point with
laudable pertinacity.

He at length got from Chub his own history: how he had run into the
woods with his mother, who had suffered from the ill-treatment of her
husband: how, with his own industry, he had sustained her wants, and
supplied her with all the comforts which a long period had required; and
how, dying at length, she had left him--the forest boy--alone, to pursue
those toils which heretofore had an object, while she yielded him in
return for them society and sympathy. These particulars, got from him in
a manner the most desultory, were made to preface the more important
parts of the narrative.

It appears that his harmlessness had kept him undisturbed, even by the
wild marauders of that region, and that he still continued to procure a
narrow livelihood by his woodland labors, and sought no association with
that humanity which, though among fellow-creatures, would still have
lacked of fellowship for him. In the transfer of Lucy from the village
to the shelter of the outlaws, he had obtained a glimpse of her person
and form, and had ever since been prying in the neighborhood for a
second and similar enjoyment. He now made known to the pedler her place
of concealment, which he had, some time before this event, himself
discovered; but which, through dread of Rivers, for whom he seemed to
entertain an habitual fear, he had never ventured to penetrate.

"Well, I must see her," exclaimed Bunce. "I a'n't afraid, 'cause you
see, Mr. Williams--Chub, I mean, it's only justice, and to save the poor
young gentleman's life. I'm sure I oughtn't to be afraid, and no more I
a'n't. Won't you go there with me, Chub?"

"Can't think of it, strannger. Guy is a dark man, and mother said I must
keep away when he rode in the woods. Guy don't talk--he shoots."

The pedler made sundry efforts to procure a companion for his adventure;
but finding it vain, and determined to do right, he grew more resolute
with the necessity, and, contenting himself with claiming the guidance
of Chub, he went boldly on the path. Having reached a certain point in
the woods, after a very circuitous departure from the main track, the
guide pointed out to the pedler a long and rude ledge of rocks, so rude,
so wild, that none could have ever conjectured to find them the abode of
anything but the serpent and the wolf. But there, according to the
idiot, was Lucy Munro concealed. Chub gave the pedler his directions,
then alighting from his nag, which he concealed in a clump of
neighboring brush, hastily and with the agility of a monkey ran up a
neighboring tree which overhung the prospect.

Bunce, left alone, grew somewhat staggered with his fears. He now
half-repented of the self-imposed adventure; wondered at his own rash
humanity, and might perhaps have utterly forborne the trial, but for a
single consideration. His pride was concerned, that the deformed Chub
should not have occasion to laugh at his weakness. Descending,
therefore, from his horse, he fastened him to the hanging branch of a
neighboring tree, and with something of desperate defiance in his
manner, resolutely advanced to the silent and forbidding mass of rocks,
which rose up so sullenly around him. In another moment, and he was lost
to sight in the gloomy shadow of the entrance-passage pointed out to him
by the half-witted, but not altogether ignorant dwarf.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE ROCK CASTLE OF THE ROBBERS.


But the preparations of Bunce had been foreseen and provided for by
those most deeply interested in his progress; and scarcely had the
worthy tradesman effected his entrance fairly into the forbidden
territory, when he felt himself grappled from behind. He struggled with
an energy, due as much to the sudden terror as to any exercise of the
free will; but he struggled in vain. The arms that were fastened about
his own bound them down with a grasp of steel; and after a few moments
of desperate effort, accompanied with one or two exclamations,
half-surprise, half-expostulation, of "Hello, friend, what do you mean?"
and "I say, now, friend, you'd better have done--" the struggle ceased,
and he lay supine in the hold of the unseen persons who had secured him.

These persons he could not then discern; the passage was cavernously
dark, and had evidently been as much the work of nature as of art. A
handkerchief was fastened about his eyes, and he felt himself carried on
the shoulders of those who made nothing of the burden. After the
progress of several minutes, in which the anxiety natural to his
situation led Bunce into frequent exclamations and entreaties, he was
set down, the bandage was removed from his eyes, and he was once more
permitted their free exercise.

To his great wonder, however, nothing but women, of all sizes and ages,
met his sight. In vain did he look around for the men who brought him.
They were no longer to be seen, and so silent had been their passage
out, that the unfortunate pedler was compelled to satisfy himself with
the belief that persons of the gentler sex had been in truth his
captors.

Had he, indeed, given up the struggle so easily? The thought was
mortifying enough; and yet, when he looked around him, he grew more
satisfied with his own efforts at resistance. He had never seen such
strongly-built women in his life: scarcely one of them but could easily
have overthrown him, without stratagem, in single combat. The faces of
many of them were familiar to him; but where had he seen them before?
His memory failed him utterly, and he gave himself up to his
bewilderment.

He looked around, and the scene was well calculated to affect a nervous
mind. It was a fit scene for the painter of the supernatural. The small
apartment in which they were, was formed in great part from the natural
rock; where a fissure presented itself, a huge pine-tree, overthrown so
as to fill the vacuity, completed what nature had left undone; and,
bating the one or two rude cavities left here and there in the
sides--themselves so covered as to lie hidden from all without--there
was all the compactness of a regularly-constructed dwelling. A single
and small lamp, pendent from a beam that hung over the room, gave a
feeble light, which, taken in connection with that borrowed from
without, served only to make visible the dark indistinct of the place.
With something dramatic in their taste, the old women had dressed
themselves in sombre habiliments, according to the general aspect of all
things around them; and, as the unfortunate pedler continued to gaze in
wonderment, his fear grew with every progressive step in his
observation. One by one, however, the old women commenced stirring, and,
as they moved, now before and now behind him--his eyes following them on
every side--he at length discovered, amid the group, the small and
delicate form of the very being for whom he sought.

There, indeed, were Lucy Munro and her aunt, holding a passive character
in the strange assembly. This was encouraging; and Bunce, forgetting his
wonder in the satisfaction which such a prospect afforded him,
endeavored to force his way forward to them, when a salutary twitch of
the arm from one of the beldam troop, by tumbling him backward upon the
floor of the cavern, brought him again to a consideration of his
predicament. He could not be restrained from speech, however--though, as
he spoke, the old women saluted his face on all hands with strokes from
brushes of fern, which occasioned him no small inconvenience. But he had
gone too far now to recede; and, in a broken manner--broken as much by
his own hurry and vehemence as by the interruptions to which he was
subjected--he contrived to say enough to Lucy of the situation of
Colleton, to revive in her an interest of the most painful character.
She rushed forward, and was about to ask more from the beleaguered
pedler; but it was not the policy of those having both of them in charge
to permit such a proceeding. One of the stoutest of the old women now
came prominently upon the scene, and, with a rough voice, which it is
not difficult to recognise as that of Munro, commanded the young girl
away, and gave her in charge to two attendants. But she struggled still
to hear, and Bunce all the while speaking, she was enabled to gather
most of the particulars in his narration before her removal was
effected.

The mummery now ceased, and Bunce having been carried elsewhere, the
maskers resumed their native apparel, having thrown aside that which had
been put on for a distinct purpose. The pedler, in another and more
secure department of the robbers' hiding-place, was solaced with the
prospect of a long and dark imprisonment.

In the meantime, our little friend Chub Williams had been made to
undergo his own distinct punishment for his share in the adventure. No
sooner had Bunce been laid by the heels, than Rivers, who had directed
the whole, advanced from the shelter of the cave, in company with his
lieutenant, Dillon, both armed with rifles, and, without saying a word,
singling out the tree on which Chub had perched himself, took deliberate
aim at the head of the unfortunate urchin. He saw the danger in an
instant, and his first words were characteristic: "Now don't--don't,
now, I tell you, Mr. Guy--you may hit Chub!"

"Come down, then, you rascal!" was the reply, as, with a laugh, lowering
the weapon, he awaited the descent of the spy. "And now, Bur, what have
you to say that I shouldn't wear out a hickory or two upon you?"

"My name ain't Bur, Mr. Guy; my name is Chub, and I don't like to be
called out of my name. Mother always called me Chub."

"Well, Chub--since you like it best, though at best a bur--what were you
doing in that tree? How dare you spy into my dwelling, and send other
people there? Speak, or I'll skin you alive!"

"Now, don't, Mr. Guy! Don't, I beg you! 'Taint right to talk so, and I
don't like it!--But is that your dwelling, Mr. Guy, in truth?--you
really live in it, all the year round? Now, you don't, do you?"

The outlaw had no fierceness when contemplating the object before him.
Strange nature! He seemed to regard the deformities of mind and body, in
the outcast under his eyes, as something kindred. Was there anything
like sympathy in such a feeling? or was it rather that perversity of
temper which sometimes seems to cast an ennobling feature over violence,
and to afford here and there, a touch of that moral sunshine which can
now and then give an almost redeeming expression to the countenance of
vice itself? He contemplated the idiot for a few moments with a close
eye, and a mind evidently busied in thought. Laying his hand, at length,
on his shoulder, he was about to speak, when the deformed started back
from the touch as if in horror--a feeling, indeed, fully visible in
every feature of his face.

"Now, don't touch Chub, Mr. Guy! Mother said you were a dark man, and
told me to keep clear of you. Don't touch me agin, Mr. Guy; I don't like
it."

The outlaw, musingly, spoke to his lieutenant: "And this is education.
Who shall doubt its importance? who shall say that it does not overthrow
and altogether destroy the original nature? The selfish mother of this
miserable outcast, fearing that he might be won away from his service to
her, taught him to avoid all other persons, and even those who had
treated her with kindness were thus described to this poor dependant. To
him the sympathies of others would have been the greatest blessing; yet
she so tutored him, that, at her death, he was left desolate. You hear
his account of me, gathered, as he says, and as I doubt not, from her
own lips. That account is true, so far as my other relationships with
mankind are concerned; but not true as regards my connection with her. I
furnished that old creature with food when she was starving, and when
this boy, sick and impotent, could do little for her service. I never
uttered a harsh word in her ears, or treated her unkindly; yet this is
the character she gives of me--and this, indeed, the character which she
has given of all others. A feeling of the narrowest selfishness has led
her deliberately to misrepresent all mankind, and has been productive of
a more ungracious result, in driving one from his species, who, more
than any other, stands in need of their sympathy and association."

While Rivers spoke thus, the idiot listened with an air of the most
stupid attention. His head fell on one shoulder, and one hand partially
sustained it. As the former concluded his remarks, Chub recovered a
posture as nearly erect as possible, and remarked, with as much
significance as could comport with his general expression--

"Chub's mother was good to Chub, and Mr. Guy mustn't say nothing agin
her."

"But, Chub, will you not come and live with me? I will give you a good
rifle--one like this, and you shall travel everywhere with me."

"You will beat Chub when you are angry, and make him shoot people with
the rifle. I don't want it. If folks say harm to Chub, he can lick 'em
with his fists. Chub don't want to live with you."

"Well, as you please. But come in and look at my house and see where I
live."

"And shall I see the strannger agin? I can lick _him_, and I told him
so. But he called me Chub, and I made friends with him."

"Yes, you shall see him, and--"

"And Miss Lucy, too--I want to see Miss Lucy--Chub saw her, and she
spoke to Chub yesterday."

The outlaw promised him all, and after this there was no further
difficulty. The unconscious idiot scrupled no longer, and followed his
conductors into--prison. It was necessary, for the further safety of the
outlaws in their present abode, that such should be the case. The secret
of their hiding-place was in the possession of quite too many; and the
subject of deliberation among the leaders was now as to the propriety of
its continued tenure. The country, they felt assured, would soon be
overrun with the state troops. They had no fears of discovery from this
source, prior to the affair of the massacre of the guard, which rendered
necessary the secretion of many in their retreat, who, before that time,
were perfectly unconscious of its existence. In addition to this, it was
now known to the pedler and the idiot, neither of whom had any reason
for secrecy on the subject in the event of their being able to make it
public. The difficulty, with regard to the two latter, subjected them to
no small risk of suffering from the ultimate necessities of the rogues,
and there was a sharp and secret consultation as to the mode of
disposing of the two captives; but so much blood had been already
spilled, that the sense of the majority revolted at the further resort
to that degree of violence--particularly, too, when it was recollected
that they could only hold their citadel for a certain and short period
of time. It was determined, therefore, that so long as they themselves
continued in their hiding-place, Bunce and Chub should, perforce,
continue prisoners. Having so determined, and made their arrangements
accordingly, the two last-made captives were assigned a cell, chosen
with reference to its greater security than the other portions of their
hold--one sufficiently tenacious of its trust, it would seem, to answer
well its purpose.

In the meantime, the sufferings of Lucy Munro were such as may well be
understood from the character of her feelings, as we have heretofore
beheld their expression. In her own apartment--her cell, we may style
it, for she was in a sort of honorable bondage--she brooded with deep
melancholy over the narrative given by the pedler. She had no reason to
doubt its correctness, and, the more she meditated upon it, the more
acute became her misery. But a day intervened, and the trial of Ralph
Colleton must take place; and, without her evidence, she was well aware
there could be no hope of his escape from the doom of felony--from the
death of shame and physical agony. The whole picture grew up before her
excited fancy. She beheld the assembled crowd--she saw him borne to
execution--and her senses reeled beneath the terrible conjurations of
her fancy. She threw herself prostrate upon her couch, and strove not to
think, but in vain. Her mind, growing hourly more and more intensely
excited, at length almost maddened, and she grew conscious herself--the
worst of all kinds of consciousness--that her reason was no longer
secure in its sovereignty. It was with a strong effort of the still-firm
will that she strove to meditate the best mode of rescuing the victim
from the death suspended above him; and she succeeded, while
deliberating on this object, in quieting the more subtle workings of her
imagination.

Many were the thoughts which came into her brain in this examination. At
one time she thought it not impossible to convey a letter, in which her
testimony should be carefully set down; but the difficulty of procuring
a messenger, and the doubt that such a statement would prove of any
avail, decided her to seek for other means. An ordinary mind, and a
moderate degree of interest in the fate of the individual, would have
contented itself with some such step; but such a mind and such
affections were not those of the high-souled and spirited Lucy. She
dreaded not personal danger; and to rescue the youth, whom she so much
idolized, from the doom that threatened him, she would have willingly
dared to encounter that doom itself, in its darkest forms. She
determined, therefore, to rely chiefly upon herself in all efforts which
she should make for the purpose in view; and her object, therefore, was
to effect a return to the village in time to appear at the trial.

Yet how should this be done? She felt herself to be a captive; she knew
the restraints upon her--and did not doubt that all her motions were
sedulously observed. How then should she proceed? An agent was
necessary; and, while deliberating with herself upon the difficulty thus
assailing her at the outset, her ears were drawn to the distinct
utterance of sounds, as of persons engaged in conversation, from the
adjoining section of the rock.

One of the voices appeared familiar, and at length she distinctly made
out her own name in various parts of the dialogue. She soon
distinguished the nasal tones of the pedler, whose prison adjoined her
own, separated only by a huge wall of earth and rock, the rude and
jagged sides of which had been made complete, where naturally imperfect,
for the purposes of a wall, by the free use of clay, which, plastered in
huge masses into the crevices and every fissure, was no inconsiderable
apology for the more perfect structures of civilization.

Satisfied, at length, from what she heard, that the two so confined were
friendly, she contrived to make them understand her contiguity, by
speaking in tones sufficiently low as to be unheard beyond the apartment
in which they were. In this way she was enabled to converse with the
pedler, to whom all her difficulties were suggested, and to whom she did
not hesitate to say that she knew that which would not fail to save the
life of Colleton.

Bunce was not slow to devise various measures for the further promotion
of the scheme, none of which, however, served the purpose of showing to
either party how they should get out, and, but for the idiot, it is more
than probable, despairing of success, they would at length have thrown
aside the hope of doing anything for the youth as perfectly illusory.

But Chub came in as a prime auxiliar. From the first moment in which he
heard the gentle tones of Lucy's voice, he had busied himself with his
long nails and fingers in removing the various masses of clay which had
been made to fill up sundry crevices of the intervening wall, and had so
far succeeded as to detach a large square of the rock itself, which,
with all possible pains and caution, he lifted from the embrasure. This
done, he could distinguish objects, though dimly, from one apartment in
the other, and thus introduced the parties to a somewhat nearer
acquaintance with one another. Having done so much, he reposed from his
labors, content with a sight of Lucy, on whom he continued to gaze with
a fixed and stupid admiration.

He had pursued this work so noiselessly, and the maiden and Bunce had
been so busily employed in discussing their several plans, that they had
not observed the vast progress which Chub had made toward furnishing
them with a better solution of their difficulties than any of their own
previous cogitations. When Bunce saw how much had been done in one
quarter, he applied himself resolutely to similar experiments on the
opposite wall: and had the satisfaction of discovering that, as a
dungeon, the dwelling in which they were required to remain was sadly
deficient in some few of the requisites of security. With the aid of a
small pick of iron, which Lucy handed him from her cell, he pierced the
outer wall in several places, in which the clay had been required to do
the offices of the rock, and had the satisfaction of perceiving, from
the sudden influx of light in the apartment, succeeding his application
of the instrument, that, with a small labor and in little time, they
should be enabled to effect their escape, at least into the free air,
and under the more genial vault of heaven.

Having made this discovery, it was determined that nothing more should
be done until night, and having filled up the apertures which they had
made, with one thing or another, they proceeded to consult, with more
deliberate composure, on the future progress. It was arranged that the
night should be permitted to set in fairly--that Lucy should retire
early, having first taken care that Munro and her aunt, with whom she
more exclusively consorted--Rivers having kept very much out of sight
since her removal--should see her at the evening meal, without any
departure from her usual habits. Bunce undertook to officiate as guide,
and as Chub expressed himself willing to do whatever Miss Lucy should
tell him, it was arranged that he should remain, occasionally making
himself heard in his cell, as if in conversation, for as long a period
after their departure as might be thought necessary to put them
sufficiently in advance of pursuit--a requisition to which Chub readily
gave his consent. He was the only one of the party who appeared to
regard the whole matter with comparative indifference. He knew that a
man was in danger of his life--he felt that he himself was in prison,
and he said he would rather be out among the pine-trees--but there was
no rush of feeling, such as troubled the heart of the young girl, whose
spirit, clothing itself in all the noblest habiliments of humanity,
lifted her up into the choicest superiority of character--nor had the
dwarf that anxiety to do a service to his fellow, which made the pedler
throw aside some of his more worldly characteristics--he did simply as
he was bid, and had no further care.

Miss Lucy, he said, talked sweetly, like his mother, and Chub would do
for Miss Lucy anything that she asked him. The principle of his
government was simple, and having chosen a sovereign, he did not
withhold his obedience. Thus stood the preparations of the three
prisoners, when darkness--long-looked-for, and hailed with trembling
emotions--at length came down over the silent homestead of the outlaws.




CHAPTER XXXII.

ESCAPE.


The night gathered apace, and the usual hour of repose had come. Lucy
retired to her apartment with a trembling heart but a courageous spirit,
full of a noble determination to persevere in her project. Though full
of fear, she never for a moment thought of retreat from the decision
which she had made. Her character afforded an admirable model for the
not unfrequent union that we find in woman, of shrinking delicacy with
manly and efficient firmness.

Munro and Rivers, having first been assured that all was quiet, by a
ramble which they took around their hiding-place, returned to the little
chamber of the latter, such as we have described it in a previous
portion of our narrative, and proceeded to the further discussion of
their plans. The mind of the landlord was very ill at ease. He had
arrived at that time of life when repose and a fixed habitation became
necessary; and when, whatever may have been the habits of earlier
manhood, the mind ceases to crave the excitements of adventure, and
foregoes, or would fain forego, all its roving characteristics. To this
state of feeling had he come, and the circumstances which now denied him
the fruition of that prospect of repose which he had been promising
himself so long, were regarded with no little restlessness and
impatience. At the moment, the colleagues could make no positive
arrangements for the future. Munro was both to give up the property
which, in one way or other, he had acquired in the neighborhood, and
which it was impossible for him to remove to any other region; and,
strange to say, a strong feeling of inhabitiveness--the love of home--if
home he could be thought to have anywhere--might almost be considered a
passion with his less scrupulous companion.

Thus situated, they lingered on in the hope that the military would soon
be withdrawn from the neighborhood, as it could only be maintained at
great expense by the state; and then, as the country was but nominally
settled, and so sparsely as to scarcely merit any consideration, they
felt assured that they might readily return to their old, or any
practices, and without any further apprehension. The necessity, however,
which made them thus deliberate, had the effect, at the same time, of
impressing them with a gloomy spirit, not common to either of them.

"Let us see, Munro," said the more desperate ruffian; "there is, after
all, less to apprehend than we first thought. In a week, and the court
will be over; in another week, and the guard will be withdrawn; and for
this period only will it be necessary that we should keep dark. I think
we are now perfectly safe where we are. The only persons who know of our
retreat, and might be troublesome, are safe in our possession. They will
hardly escape until we let them, and before we do so we shall first see
that they can give us no further necessity for caution. Of our own
party, none are permitted to know the secrets of our hiding-place, but
those in whom we may trust confidently. I have taken care to provide for
the doubtful at some distance in the adjoining woods, exaggerating so
greatly the danger of exposure, that they will hardly venture to be seen
under any circumstances by anybody. Once let these two weeks go over,
and I have no fears; we shall have no difficulties then."

"And what's to be done with the pedler and the fool? I say, Guy, there
must be no more blood--I will not agree to it. The fact is, I feel more
and more dismal every day since that poor fellow's death; and now that
the youngster's taken, the thought is like fire in my brain, which tells
me he may suffer for our crime."

"Why, you are grown parson. Would you go and save him, by giving up the
true criminal? I shall look for it after this, and consider myself no
longer in safety. If you go on in this manner, I shall begin to meditate
an off-hand journey to the Mississippi."

"Ay, and the sooner we all go the better--though, to be plain, Guy, let
this affair once blow over and I care not to go with _you_ any longer.
We must then cut loose for ever. I am not a good man, I know--anything
but that; but you have carried me on, step by step, until I am what I am
afraid to name to myself. You found me a rogue--you have made me a--"

"Why do you hesitate? Speak it out, Munro; it is a large step gained
toward reform when we learn to name truly our offences to ourselves."

"I dare not. The thought is sufficiently horrible without the thing. I
hear some devil whispering it too frequently in my ears, to venture upon
its utterance myself. But you--how you can live without feeling it,
after your experience, which has been so much more dreadful than mine, I
know not."

"I do feel it, Munro, but have long since ceased to fear it. The
reiteration takes away the terror which is due rather to the novelty
than to the offence. But when I began, I felt it. The first sleep I had
after the affair of Jessup was full of tortures. The old man, I thought,
lay beside me in my bed; his blood ran under me, and clotted around me,
and fastened me there, while his gashed face kept peering into mine, and
his eyes danced over me with the fierce light of a threatening comet.
The dream nearly drove me mad, and mad I should have been had I gone to
my prayers. I knew that, and chose a different course for relief."

"What was that?"

"I sought for another victim as soon after as I conveniently could. The
one spectre superseded the other, until all vanished. They never trouble
me now, though sometimes, in my waking moments, I have met them on the
roadside, glaring at me from bush or tree, until I shouted at them
fiercely, and then they were gone. These are my terrors, and they do
sometimes unman me."

"They would do more with me; they would destroy me on the spot. But, let
us have no more of this. Let us rather see if we can not do something
towards making our visions more agreeable. Do you persevere in the
sacrifice of this youngster? Must he die?"

"Am I a child, Walter Munro, that you ask me such a question? Must I
again tell over the accursed story of my defeat and of his success? Must
I speak of my thousand defeats--of my overthrown pretensions--my blasted
hopes, where I had set my affections--upon which every feeling of my
heart had been placed? Must I go over a story so full of pain and
humiliation--must I describe my loss, in again placing before your eyes
a portraiture like this? Look, man, look--and read my answer in the
smile, which, denying me, teaches me, in this case, to arm myself with a
denial as immutable as hers."

He placed before his companion the miniature of Edith, which he took
from his bosom, where he seemed carefully to treasure it. He was again
the envenomed and the excited savage which we have elsewhere seen him,
and in which mood Munro knew well that nothing could be done with him in
the shape of argument or entreaty. He went on:--

"Ask me no questions, Munro, so idle, so perfectly unnecessary as this.
Fortune has done handsomely here. He falls through _me_, yet falls by
the common hangman. What a double blow is this to both of them. I have
been striving to imagine their feelings, and such a repast as that
effort has procured me--I would not exchange it--no--not for worlds--for
nothing less, Munro, than my restoration back to that society--to that
place in society, from which my fierce passions, and your cruel
promptings, and the wrongs of society itself, have for ever exiled me."

"And would you return, if you could do so?"

"To-morrow--to-night--this instant. I am sanguinary,
Munro--revengeful--fierce--all that is bad, because I am not permitted
to be better. My pride, my strong feelings and deeply absorbing
mood--these have no other field for exercise. The love of home, the high
ambition, which, had society done me common justice, and had not, in
enslaving itself, dishonored and defrauded me--would, under other
circumstances, have made me a patriot. My pride is even now to command
the admiration of men--I never sought their love. Their approbation
would have made me fearless and powerful in their defence and for their
rights--their injustice makes me their enemy. My passions, unprovoked
and unexaggerated by mortifying repulses, would have only been a warm
and stimulating influence, perpetually working in their service--but,
pressed upon and irritated as they have been they grew into so many wild
beasts, and preyed upon the cruel or the careless keepers, whose gentle
treatment and constant attention had tamed them into obedient servants.
Yet, would I could, even now, return to that condition in which there
might be hope. The true spectre of the criminal--such as I am--the
criminal chiefly from the crimes and injustice of society, not
forgetting the education of my boyhood, which grew out of the same
crimes, and whose most dreadful lesson is selfishness--is despair! The
black waters once past, the blacker hills rise between, and there is no
return to those regions of hope, which, once lost, are lost for ever.
This is the true punishment--the worst punishment which man inflicts
upon his fellow--the felony of public opinion. The curse of society is
no unfit illustration of that ban which its faith holds forth as the
penal doom of the future. There is no return!"

The dialogue, mixed up thus, throughout, with the utterance of opinions
on the part of the outlaw, many of which were true or founded in truth,
yet coupled with many false deductions--was devoted, for some little
while longer, to the discussion of their various necessities and plans
for the future. The night had considerably advanced in this way, when,
of a sudden, their ears were assailed with an eldritch screech, like
that of the owl, issuing from one of the several cells around them.

The quick sense of Rivers immediately discerned the voice of the idiot,
and without hesitation he proceeded to that division of the rock which
contained the two prisoners. To each of these apartments had been
assigned a sentinel, or watch, whose own place of abode--while covered
completely and from sight, and in all respects furnishing a dwelling,
though rather a confined one for himself--enabled him to attend to the
duty assigned him without himself being seen. The night had been fairly
set in, when Bunce, with the aid of Chub Williams, with all due caution
proceeded to his task, and with so much success, that, in the course of
a couple of hours, they had succeeded, not only in making a fair outlet
for themselves, but for Lucy Munro too.

The watchman, in the meantime, holding his duty as merely nominal, gave
himself as little trouble as possible; and believing all things quiet,
had, after a little while, insinuated himself into the good graces of as
attractive a slumber as may usually be won in the warm summer season in
the south, by one to whom a nightwatch is a peculiarly ungracious
exercise. Before this conclusion, however, he looked forth every now and
then, and deceived by the natural stillness of earth and sky, he
committed the further care of the hours, somewhat in anticipation of the
time, to the successor who was to relieve him on the watch.

Without being conscious of this decision in their favor, and ignorant
entirely of the sentinel himself, the pedler fortunately chose this
period for his own departure with the young lady whom he was to escort;
and who, with probably far less fear than her gallant, did not scruple,
for a single instant, to go forth under his guidance. Chub took his
instructions from the lips of Lucy, and promised the most implicit
obedience.

They had scarcely been well gone when the sentinels were changed, and
one something more tenacious of discipline, or something less drowsy
than his predecessor, took his place. After muttering at intervals, as
directed, for the space of an hour, probably, from the time at which his
companion had departed, Chub thought it only prudent to sally forth too.
Accordingly, ascending to the break in the wall, through which his
companion had made his way, the urchin emerged from the cavern at the
unlucky moment, when, at some ten or fifteen paces in front of him, the
sentinel came forth from his niche to inspect the order of his watch.
Chub saw his adversary first, and his first impulse originated the
scream which drew the attention of Rivers, as already narrated. The
outlaw rushed quickly to the scene of difficulty, and before the
sentinel had well recovered from the astonishment occasioned by the
singularly sudden appearance and wild screech of the urchin.

"Why, what is this, Briggs; what see you?" was the hasty inquiry of
Rivers.

"There, sir, there," exclaimed the watch, still half bewildered, and
pointing to the edge of the hill, where, in a condition seemingly of
equal incertitude with himself, stood the imbecile.

"Seize upon him--take him at once--let him not escape you!" were the
hasty orders of the outlaw. Briggs set forward, but his approach had the
effect of giving determination also to Chub; who, just as the pursuer
thought himself sure of his captive, and was indeed indirectly upon him,
doubled himself up, as it were into a complete ball, and without effort
rolled headlong down the hill; gathering upon his feet as he attained
the level, seemingly unhurt, and with all the agility of the monkey.

"Shall I shoot, sir?" was the inquiry of Briggs, as the urchin stood
off, laughing wildly at his good fortune.

"Now, don't"--was the cry--"Now, don't"--was the exclamation of Chub
himself, who, however, trusting nothing to the effect of his entreaty,
ran vigorously on his way.

"Yes, shoot him down," was the sudden exclamation of Munro; but Rivers
struck the poised weapon upward in the hands of the sentinel, to the
astonishment, not less of him than of the landlord.

"No--let him live, Munro. Let him live. Such as he should be spared. Is
he not alone--without fellowship--scorned--an outcast--without
sympathy--like myself. Let him live, let him live!"

The word of mercy from his lips utterly confounded his companion. But,
remembering that Rivers was a monster of contradictions, Munro turned
away, and gave directions to see after the other prisoners.

A few moments sufficed for this, and the panic was universal among the
inmates of the rock. The secret was now lost, unless immediate pursuit
could avail in the recovery of the fugitives. This pursuit was
immediately undertaken, and both Rivers and Munro, taking different
directions, and dispersing their whole force about the forest, set off
on the search.

Apprehensive of pursuit, the policy of Bunce, to whom Lucy gave up the
entire direction of their flight, was determined upon with not a little
judgment. Assured that his pursuers would search chiefly on the direct
route between their abode and the village, to which they would
necessarily surmise the flight was directed, he boldly determined upon a
course, picked sinuously out, obliquing largely from the true direction,
which, while it would materially lengthen the distance, would at least
secure them, he thought, from the danger of contact with the scouring
party.

By no means ignorant of the country, in and about which he had
frequently travelled in the pursuit of trade, he contrived, in this way,
completely to mislead the pursuers; and the morning found them still
some distance from the village, but in a direction affording few chances
of interruption in their contemplated approach to it.

Lucy was dreadfully fatigued, and a frequent sense of weariness almost
persuaded her to lay down life itself in utter exhaustion: but the
encouraging words of the pedler, and the thought of _his_ peril, for
whose safety--though herself hopeless of all besides--she would
willingly peril all, restored her, and invigorated her to renewed
effort.

At the dawn of day they approached a small farmhouse, some of the
inmates of which happened to know Lucy; and, though they looked somewhat
askant at her companion, and wondered not a little at the circumstance
of her travelling at such a time of night, yet, as she was generally
well respected, their surmises and scruples were permitted to sleep;
and, after a little difficulty, they were persuaded to lend her the
family pony and side-saddle, with the view to the completion of her
journey. After taking some slight refreshment, she hurried on; Bunce,
keeping the road afoot, alongside, with all the patient docility of a
squire of the middle ages; and to the great satisfaction of all parties,
they arrived in sight of the village just as Counsellor Pippin, learned
in the law, was disputing with the state attorney upon the
non-admissibility of certain points of testimony, which it was the
policy of the former to exclude.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

DOOM.


The village of Chestatee was crowded with visiters of all descriptions.
Judges and lawyers, soldiers and citizens and farmers--all classes were
duly represented, and a more wholesome and subordinate disposition in
that quarter, may be inferred as duly resulting from the crowd.
Curiosity brought many to the spot from portions of country twenty,
thirty, and even forty miles off--for, usually well provided with good
horses, the southron finds a difference of ten or twenty miles no great
matter.

Such had been the reputation of the region here spoken of, not less for
its large mineral wealth than for the ferocious character of those in
its neighborhood, that numbers, who would not otherwise have adventured,
now gladly took advantage of the great excitement, and the presence of
so many, to examine a section of country of which they had heard so
much. There came the planter, of rather more wealth than his neighbors,
solicitous for some excitement and novelty to keep himself from utter
stagnation. There came the farmer, discontented with his present
abiding-place, and in search of a new spot of more promise, in which to
drive stakes and do better. The lawyer, from a neighboring county, in
search of a cause; the creditor in search of his runaway debtor--the
judge and the jury also adding something, not less to the number than
the respectability of the throng.

The grand-jury had found several bills, and most of them for the more
aggravated offences in the estimation of the law. Rivers, Munro,
Blundell, Forrester, were all severally and collectively included in
their inquiries; but as none of the parties were to be found for the
present at least, as one of them had been removed to another and higher
jurisdiction, the case of most importance left for trial was that which
charged Colleton with Forrester's murder.

There was no occasion for delay; and, in gloomy and half-desponding
mood, though still erect and unshrinking to the eye of the beholder,
Ralph refused the privilege of a traverse, and instructed Pippin to go
on with the case. The lawyer himself had not the slightest objection to
this procedure, for, not to be harsh in our estimate of his humanities,
there is no reason to believe that he regarded for a single instant the
value of his client's life, but as its preservation was to confer credit
upon his capacity as his legal friend and adviser. The issue was
consequently made up without delay--the indictment was read--the
prisoner put himself upon God and the country, according to the usual
forms, and the case proceeded.

The general impression of the spectators was decidedly in favor of the
accused. His youth--the noble bearing--the ease, the unobtrusive
confidence--the gentle expression, pliant and, though sad, yet entirely
free from anything like desponding weakness--all told in his favor. He
was a fine specimen of the southern gentleman--the true nobleman of that
region, whose pride of character is never ostentatiously displayed and
is only to be felt in the influence which it invariably exercises over
all with whom it may have contact or connection. Though firm in every
expression, and manly in every movement, there was nothing in the habit
and appearance of Ralph, which, to the eye of those around, savored of
the murderer. There was nothing ruffianly or insincere. But, as the
testimony proceeded--when the degree of intimacy was shown which had
existed between himself and the murdered man--when they heard that
Forrester had brought him wounded and fainting to his home--had attended
him--had offered even to fight for him with Rivers; when all these facts
were developed, in connection with the sudden flight of the person so
befriended--on the same night with him who had befriended him--he having
a knowledge of the proposed departure of the latter-and with the finding
of the bloody dagger marked with the youth's initials--the feeling of
sympathy very perceptibly underwent a change. The people, proverbially
fickle, and, in the present instance justifiably so, veered round to the
opposite extreme of opinion, and a confused buzz around, sometimes made
sufficiently audible to all senses, indicated the unfavorable character
of the change. The witnesses were closely examined, and the story was
complete and admirably coherent. The presumptions, as they were coupled
together, were conclusive; and, when it was found that not a solitary
witness came forward even to say that the accused was a man of character
and good connections--a circumstance which could not materially affect
the testimony as it stood, but which, wanting, gave it additional
force--the unhappy youth, himself, felt that all was over.

A burning flush, succeeded by a deathlike paleness, came over his face
for a moment--construed by those around into a consciousness of guilt;
for, where the prejudices of men become active, all appearances of
change, which go not to affect the very foundation of the bias, are only
additional proofs of what they have before believed. He rested his head
upon his hands in deep but momentary agony. What were his feelings then?
With warm, pure emotions; with a pride only limited by a true sense of
propriety; with an ambition whose eye was sunward ever; with affections
which rendered life doubly desirable, and which made love a high and
holy aspiration: with these several and predominating feelings
struggling in his soul, to be told of such a doom; to be stricken from
the respect of his fellows; to forfeit life, and love, and reputation;
to undergo the punishment of the malefactor, and to live in memory only
as a felon--ungrateful, foolish, fiendish--a creature of dishonest
passions, and mad and merciless in their exercise!

The tide of thought which bore to his consciousness all these harrowing
convictions, was sudden as the wing of the lightning, and nearly
shattered, in that single instant, the towering manhood whose high
reachings had attracted it. But the pride consequent to his education,
and the society in which he had lived, came to his relief; and, after
the first dreadful agony of soul, he again stood erect, and listened,
seemingly unmoved, to the defences set up by his counsel.

But how idle, even to his mind, desirous as he must have been of every
species of defence, were all the vainglorious mouthings of the
pettifogger! He soon discovered that the ambition of Pippin chiefly
consisted in the utterance of his speech. He saw, too, in a little
while, that the nonsense of the lawyer had not even the solitary
merit--if such it be--of being extemporaneous; and in the slow and
monotonous delivery of a long string of stale truisms, not bearing any
analogy to the case in hand, he perceived the dull elaborations of the
closet.

But such was not the estimate of the lawyer himself. He knew what he was
about; and having satisfied himself that the case was utterly hopeless,
he was only solicitous that the people should see that he could still
make a speech. He well knew that his auditory, perfectly assured with
himself of the hopelessness of the defence, would give him the credit of
having made the most of his materials, and this was all he wanted. In
the course of his exhortations, however, he was unfortunate enough to
make an admission for his client which was, of itself, fatal; and his
argument thence became unnecessary. He admitted that the circumstances
sufficiently established the charge of killing, but proceeded, however,
to certain liberal assumptions, without any ground whatever, of
provocation on the part of Forrester, which made his murder only matter
of self-defence on the side of the accused, whose crime therefore became
justifiable: but Ralph, who had for some time been listening with
manifest impatience to sundry other misrepresentations, not equally evil
with this, but almost equally annoying, now rose and interrupted him;
and, though the proceeding was something informal, proceeded to correct
the statement.

"No one, may it please your honor, and you, gentlemen, now presiding
over my fate, can be more conscious than myself, from the nature of the
evidence given in this case, of the utter hopelessness of any defence
which may be offered on my behalf. But, while recognising, in their
fullest force, the strong circumstantial proofs of crime which you have
heard, I may be permitted to deny for myself what my counsel has been
pleased to admit for me. To say that I have _not_ been guilty of this
crime, is only to repeat that which was said when I threw myself upon
the justice of the country. I denied any knowledge of it then--I deny
any knowledge of, or participation in it, now. I am _not_ guilty of this
killing, whether with or without justification. The blood of the
unfortunate man Forrester is _not_ upon my hands; and, whatever may be
your decree this day, of this sweet consciousness nothing can deprive
me."

"I consider, may it please your honor, that my counsel, having virtually
abandoned my cause, I have the right to go on with it myself--"

But Pippin, who had been dreadfully impatient heretofore, started
forward with evident alarm.

"Oh, no--no, your honor--my client--Mr. Colleton--how can you think such
a thing? I have not, your honor, abandoned the case. On the contrary,
your honor will remember that it was while actually proceeding with the
case that I was interrupted."

The youth, with a singular degree of composure, replied:--

"Your honor will readily understand me, though the gentleman of the bar
does not. I conceive him not only to have abandoned the case, your
honor, but actually to have joined hand and hand with the prosecuting
counsel. It is true, sir, that he still calls himself _my_ counsel--and
still, under that name, presumes to harangue, as he alleges, in my
behalf; but, when he violates the truth, not less than my
instructions--when he declares all that is alleged against me in that
paper _to be true_, all of which I declare to be _false_--when he admits
me to be guilty of a crime of which I am _not_ guilty--I say that he has
not only abandoned my case, but that he has betrayed the trust reposed
in him. What, your honor, must the jury infer from the confession which
he has just made?--what, but that in my conference with him _I_ have
made the same confession? It becomes necessary, therefore, may it please
your honor, not only that I take from him, thus openly, the power which
I confided to him, but that I call upon your honor to demand from him,
upon oath, whether such an admission was ever made to him by me. I know
that my own words will avail me nothing here--I also know why they
should not--but I am surely entitled to require that he should speak
out, as to the truth, when _his_ misrepresentations are to make weight
against me in future. His oath, that I made no such confession to him,
will avail nothing for my defence, but will avail greatly with those
who, from present appearances, are likely to condemn me. I call upon
him, may it please your honor, as matter of right, that he should be
_sworn_ to this particular. This, your honor will perceive, if my
assertion be true, is the smallest justice which he can do me; beyond
this I will ask and suggest nothing--leaving it to your own mind how far
the license of his profession should be permitted to one who thus not
only abandons, but betrays and misrepresents his client."

The youth was silent, and Pippin rose to speak in his defence. Without
being sworn, he admitted freely that such a confession had not been
made, but that he had inferred the killing from the nature of the
testimony, which he thought conclusive on the point; that his object had
been to suggest a probable difficulty between the parties, in which he
would have shown Forrester as the aggressor. He bungled on for some time
longer in this manner, but, as he digressed again into the defence of
the accused, Ralph again begged to interrupt him.

"I think it important, may it please your honor, that the gentleman
should be sworn as to the simple fact which he has uttered. _I want it
on record_, that, at some future day, the few who have any interest in
my fate should feel no mortifying doubts of my innocence when reminded
of the occurrence--which this strange admission, improperly circulated,
might otherwise occasion. Let him swear, your honor, to the fact: this,
I think, I may require."

After a few moments of deliberation, his honor decided that the demand
was one of right, strictly due, not merely to the prisoner and to the
abstract merits of the case, but also to the necessity which such an
event clearly occasioned, of establishing certain governing principles
for restraining those holding situations so responsible, who should so
far wilfully betray their trusts. The lawyer was made to go through the
humiliating process, and then subjected to a sharp reprimand from the
judge; who, indeed, might have well gone further, in actually striking
his name from the rolls of court.

It was just after this interesting period in the history of the
trial--and when Pippin, who could not be made to give up the case, as
Ralph had required, was endeavoring to combat with the attorney of the
state some incidental points of doctrine, and to resist their
application to certain parts of the previously, recorded testimony--that
our heroine, Lucy Munro, attended by her trusty squire, Bunce, made her
appearance in the courthouse.

She entered the hall more dead than alive. The fire was no longer in her
eye--a thick haze had overspread its usually rich and lustrous
expression; her form trembled with the emotion--the strong and
struggling emotion of her soul; and fatigue had done much toward the
general enervation of her person. The cheek was pale with the innate
consciousness; the lips were blanched, and slightly parted, as if
wanting in the muscular exercise which could bring them together. She
tottered forward to the stand upon which the witnesses were usually
assembled, and to which her course had been directed, and for a few
moments after her appearance in the courtroom her progress had been as
one stunned by a sudden and severe blow.

But, when roused by the confused hum of human voices around her, she
ventured to look up, and her eye, as if by instinct, turned upon the
dark box assigned for the accused--she again saw the form, in her mind
and eye, of almost faultless mould and excellence--then there was no
more weakness, no more struggle. Her eye kindled, the color rushed into
her cheeks, a sudden spirit reinvigorated her frame; and, with clasped
hands, she boldly ascended the small steps which led to the stand from
which her evidence was to be given, and declared her ability, in low
tones, almost unheard but by the judge, to furnish matter of interest
and importance to the defence. Some little demur as to the formality of
such a proceeding, after the evidence had been fairly closed, took place
between the counsel; but, fortunately for justice, the judge was too
wise and too good a man to limit the course of truth to prescribed
rules, which could not be affected by a departure, in the present
instance, from their restraints. The objection was overruled, and the
bold but trembling girl was called upon for her testimony.

A new hope had been breathed into the bosoms of the parties most
concerned, on the appearance of this interruption to the headlong and
impelling force of the circumstances so fatally arrayed against the
prisoner. The pedler was overjoyed, and concluded that the danger was
now safely over. The youth himself felt his spirit much lighter in his
bosom, although he himself knew not the extent of that testimony in his
favor which Lucy was enabled to give. He only knew that she could
account for his sudden flight on the night of the murder, leading to a
fair presumption that he had not premeditated such an act; and knew not
that it was in her power to overthrow the only fact, among the
circumstances arrayed against him, by which they had been so connected
as to make out his supposed guilt.

Sanguine, herself, that the power was in her to effect the safety of the
accused, Lucy had not for a moment considered the effect upon others,
more nearly connected with her than the youth, of the development which
she was prepared to make. These considerations were yet to come.

The oath was administered; she began her narration, but at the very
outset, the difficulties of her situation beset her. How was she to save
the man she loved? How, but by showing the guilt of her uncle? How was
she to prove that the dirk of the youth was not in his possession at the
time of the murder? By showing that, just before that time, it was in
the possession of Munro, who was setting forth for the express purpose
of murdering the very man, now accused and held guilty of the same
crime. The fearful gathering of thoughts and images, thus, without
preparation, working in her mind, again destroyed the equilibrium by
which her truer senses would have enforced her determination to proceed.
Her head swam, her words were confused and incoherent, and perpetually
contradictory. The hope which her presence had inspired as suddenly
departed; and pity and doubt were the prevailing sentiments of the
spectators.

After several ineffectual efforts to proceed, she all at once seemed
informed of the opinions around her, and gathering new courage from the
dreadful thought now forcing itself upon her mind, that what she had
said had done nothing toward her object, she exclaimed impetuously,
advancing to the judge, and speaking alternately from him to the jury
and the counsel--

"He is _not_ guilty of this crime, believe me. I may not say what I
know--I can not--you would not expect me to reveal it. It would involve
others whom I dare not name. I must not say _that_--but, believe me, Mr.
Colleton is not guilty--he did not commit the murder--it was somebody
else--I know, I will swear, he had no hand in the matter."

"Very well, my young lady, I have no doubt you think, and honestly
believe, all that you say; but what reasons have you for this bold
assertion in the teeth of all the testimony which has already been
given? You must not be surprised, if we are slow in believing what you
tell us, until you can show upon what grounds you make your statement.
How know you that the prisoner did not commit this crime? Do you know
who did? Can you reveal any facts for our knowledge? This is what you
must do. Do not be terrified--speak freely--officer! a chair for the
lady--tell us all that you know--keep nothing back--remember, you are
sworn to speak _the truth_--the _whole truth_."

The judge spoke kindly and encouragingly, while, with considerable
emphasis, he insisted upon a full statement of all she knew. But the
distress of the poor girl increased with every moment of thought, which
warned her of the predicament in which such a statement must necessarily
involve her uncle. "Oh, how can I speak all this? How can I tell that
which must destroy him--"

"Him?--Of whom do you speak, lady? Who is _he_?" inquired the attorney
of the state.

"He--who?--Oh, no, I can say nothing. I can tell you nothing. I know
nothing but that Mr. Colleton is _not_ guilty. He struck no blow at
Forrester. I am sure of it--some other hand--some other person. How can
you believe that he would do so?"

There was no such charitable thought for him, however, in the minds of
those who heard--as how should there be? A whispering dialogue now took
place between the judge and the counsel, in which, while they evidently
looked upon her as little better than demented with her love for the
accused, they still appeared to hold it due to justice, not less than to
humanity, to obtain from her every particular of testimony bearing on
the case, which, by possibility, she might really have in her
possession. Not that they really believed that she knew anything which
might avail the prisoner. Regarding her as individually and warmly
interested in his life, they looked upon her appearance, and the
evidence which she tendered--if so it might be styled--as solely
intended to provoke sympathy, gain time, or, possibly, as the mere
ebullition of feelings so deeply excited as to have utterly passed the
bounds of all restraining reason. The judge, who was a good, not less
than a sensible man, undertook, in concluding this conference, to pursue
the examination himself, with the view to bringing out such portions of
her information as delicacy or some other more influential motive might
persuade her to conceal.

"You are sure, Miss Munro, of the innocence of the prisoner so sure that
you are willing to swear to it. Such is your conviction, at least; for,
unless you saw the blow given by another hand, or could prove Mr.
Colleton to have been elsewhere at the time of the murder, of course you
could not, of a certainty, swear to any such fact. You are not now to
say whether you believe him _capable_ of such an act or not. You are to
say whether you _know_ of any circumstances which shall acquit him of
the charge, or furnish a plausible reason, why others, not less than
yourself, should have a like reason with yourself to believe him
innocent. Can you do this, Miss Munro? Can you show anything, in this
chain of circumstances, against him, which, of your own knowledge, you
can say to be untrue? Speak out, young lady, and rely upon every
indulgence from the court."

Here the judge recapitulated all the evidence which had been furnished
against the prisoner. The maiden listened with close attention, and the
difficulties of her situation became more and more obvious. Finding her
slow to answer, though her looks were certainly full of meaning, the
presiding officer took another course for the object which he had in
view. He now proceeded to her examination in the following form:--

"You know the prisoner?"

"I do."

"You knew the murdered man?"

"Perfectly."

"Were they frequently together since the appearance of the prisoner in
these regions?"

"Frequently."

"At the house in which you dwell?"

"Yes."

"Were they together on the day preceding the night of the murder?"

"They were--throughout the better portion of it."

"Did they separate at your place of residence, and what was the
employment of the prisoner subsequently on the same day?"

"They did separate while at our house, Mr. Colleton retiring at an early
hour of the evening to his chamber."

"So far, Miss Munro, your answers correspond directly with the evidence,
and now come the important portions. You will answer briefly and
distinctly. After that, did you see anything more of the prisoner, and
know you of his departure from the house--the hour of the night--the
occasion of his going--and the circumstances attending it?"

These questions were, indeed, all important to the female delicacy of
the maiden, as well as to the prisoner, and as her eye sunk in
confusion, and as her cheek paled and kindled with the innate
consciousness, the youth, who had hitherto been silent, now rose, and
without the slightest hesitancy of manner, requested of the maiden that
she would say no more.

"See you not, your honor, that her mind wavers--that she speaks and
thinks wildly? I am satisfied that though she might say something, your
honor, in accounting for my strange flight, yet, as that constitutes but
a small feature in the circumstances against me, what she can allege
will avail me little. Press her no farther, therefore, I entreat you.
Let her retire. Her word can do me no good, and I would not, that, for
my sake and life, she should feel, for a single instant an embarrassment
of spirit, which, though it be honorable in its character, must
necessarily be distressing in its exercise. Proceed with your judgment,
I pray you--whatever it may be; I am now ready for the worst, and though
innocent as the babe unborn of the crime urged against me, I am not
afraid to meet its consequences. I am not unwilling to die."

"But you must _not_ die--they will not--they _can not_ find you guilty!
How know they you are guilty? Who dares say you are guilty, when _I_
know you are innocent? Did I not see you fly? Did I not send you on your
way--was it not to escape from murder yourself that you flew, and how
should you have been guilty of that crime of which you were the destined
victim yourself? Oh, no--no! you are not guilty--and the dagger--I heard
that!--that is not true--oh, no, the dagger,--you dropt it--"

The eye of the inspired girl was caught by a glance--a single
glance--from one at the opposite corner of the court-room, and that
glance brought her back to the full consciousness of the fearful
development she was about to make. A decrepit old woman, resting with
bent form upon a staff, which was planted firmly before her, seemed
wrapped in the general interest pervading the court. The woman was huge
of frame and rough of make; her face was large and swollen, and the
tattered cap and bonnet, the coarse and soiled materials which she wore,
indicated one of the humblest caste in the country. Her appearance
attracted no attention, and she was unmarked by all around; few having
eyes for anything but the exciting business under consideration.

But the disguise did not conceal her uncle from the glance of his niece.
That one look had the desired effect--the speech was arrested before its
conclusion, and the spectators, now more than ever assured of the
partial sanity of the witness, gave up any doubts which had previously
began to grow in behalf of the accused. A second look of the landlord
was emphatic enough for the purpose of completely silencing her farther
evidence. She read in its fearful expression, as plainly as if spoken in
words--"The next syllable you utter is fatal to your uncle--your father.
Now speak, Lucy, if you can."

For a single moment she was dumb and stationary--her eye turned from her
uncle to the prisoner. Horror, and the agonies natural to the strife in
her bosom, were in its wild expression, and, with a single cry of "I can
not--I must not save him!" from her pallid lips, she sunk down senseless
upon the floor, and was borne out by several of the more sympathizing
spectators.

There was nothing now to delay the action of the court. The counsel had
closed with the argument, and the judge proceeded in his charge to the
jury. His remarks were rather favorable than otherwise to the prisoner.
He dwelt upon his youth--his manliness--the seeming excellence of his
education, and the propriety which had marked his whole behavior on
trial. These he spoke of as considerations which must, of course, make
the duty, which they had to perform, more severely painful to all. But
they could not do away with the strong and tenacious combination of
circumstances against him. These were all closely knit, and all tended
strongly to the conviction of the guilt of the accused. Still they were
circumstantial; and the doubts of the jury were, of course, so many
arguments on the side of mercy. He concluded.

But the jury had no doubts. How should they doubt? They deliberated,
indeed, for form's sake, but not long. In a little while they returned
to their place, and the verdict was read by the clerk.

"Guilty."

"Guilty," responded the prisoner, and for a moment his head dropped upon
his clasped hands, and his frame shivered as with an ague.

"Guilty--guilty--Oh, my father--Edith--Edith--have I lived for this?"

There was no other sign of human weakness. He arose with composure, and
followed, with firm step, the officer to his dungeon. His only thought
was of the sorrows and the shame of others--of those of whom he had been
the passion and the pride--of that father's memory and name, of whom he
had been the cherished hope--of that maiden of whom he had been the
cherished love. His firm, manly bearing won the esteem of all those who,
nevertheless, at the same moment, had few if any doubts of the justice
of his doom.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

PRAYERS AND PROMISES.


Ralph Colleton was once more in his dungeon--alone and without hope. For
a moment during the progress of his trial, and at the appearance of
Lucy, he deemed it possible that some providential fortune might work a
change in the aspect of things, favorable to his escape from what, to
his mind, was far worse than any thought of death, in the manner of his
death. But when, after a moment of reflection, he perceived that the
feminine delicacy of the maiden must suffer from any further testimony
from her lips--when he saw that, most probably, in the minds of all who
heard her narration, the circumstance of her appearance in his chamber
and at such an hour of the night, and for any object, would be fatal to
her reputation--when he perceived this consciousness, too, weighing down
even to agony the soul of the still courageous witness--the high sense
of honor which had always prompted him, not less than that chivalrous
consideration of the sex taught in the south among the earliest lessons
of society to its youth--compelled him to interpose, and prevent, if
possible, all further utterance, which, though possibly all-important to
him, would be fatally destructive to her.

He did so at his own self-sacrifice! We have seen how the poor girl was
silenced. The result was, that Ralph Colleton was again in his
dungeon--hope shut out from its walls, and a fearful death and ignominy
written upon them. When the officers attending him had retired--when he
heard the bolt shot, and saw that the eyes of curiosity were
excluded--the firm spirit fled which had supported him. There was a
passing weakness of heart which overcame its energies and resolve, and
he sunk down upon the single chair allotted to his prison. He buried his
face in his hands, and the warm tears gushed freely through his fingers.
While thus weeping, like a very child, he heard the approach of
footsteps without. In a moment he recovered all his manliness and calm.
The traces of his weakness were sedulously brushed from his cheeks, and
the handkerchief employed for the purpose studiously put out of sight.
He was not ashamed of the pang, but he was not willing that other eyes
should behold it. Such was the nature of his pride--the pride of
strength, moral strength, and superiority over those weaknesses, which,
however natural they may be, are nevertheless not often held becoming in
the man.

It was the pedler, Bunce, who made his appearance--choosing, with a
feature of higher characteristic than would usually have been allotted
him, rather to cheer the prison hours of the unfortunate, than to pursue
his own individual advantages; which, at such a time, might not have
been inconsiderable. The worthy pedler was dreadfully disappointed in
the result of his late adventure. He had not given himself any trouble
to inquire into the nature of those proofs which Lucy Munro had assured
him were in her possession; but satisfied as much by his own hope as by
her assurance, that all would be as he wished it, he had been elevated
to a pitch of almost indecorous joy which strongly contrasted with his
present depression. He had little now to say in the way of consolation,
and that little was coupled with so much that was unjust to the maiden,
as to call forth, at length, the rebuke of Colleton.

"Forbear on this subject, my good sir--she did what she could, and what
she might have said would not have served me much. It was well she said
no more. Her willingness--her adventuring so much in my behalf--should
alone be sufficient to protect her from everything like blame. But tell
me, Bunce, what has become of her--where is she gone, and who is now
attending her?"

"Why, they took her back to the old tavern. A great big woman took her
there, and looked after her. I did go and had a sight on her, and there,
to be sure, was Munro's wife, though her I did see, I'll be sworn, in
among the rocks where they shut us up."

"And was Munro there?"

"Where--in the rocks?"

"No--in the tavern?--You say his wife had come back--did he trust
himself there?"

"I rather guess not--seeing as how he'd stand a close chance of
'quaintance with the rope. No, neither him, nor Rivers, nor any of the
regulators--thank the powers--ain't to be seen nowhere. They're all
off--up into the nation, I guess, or off, down in Alabam by this time,
clear enough."

"And who did you see at the rocks, and what men were they that made you
prisoners?"

"Men--if I said men, I was 'nation out, I guess. Did I say men?"

"I understood you so."

"'Twan't men at all. Nothing better than women, and no small women
neither. Didn't see a man in the neighborhood, but Chub, and he ain't no
man neither."

"What is he?"

"Why, for that matter, he's neither one thing nor another--nothing, no
how. A pesky little creature! What they call a hobbe-de-hoy will suit
for his name sooner than any other that I know on. For he ain't a man
and he ain't a boy; but jest a short, half-grown up chunk of a fellow,
with bunchy shoulders, and a big head, with a mouth like an oven, and
long lap ears like saddle flaps."

In this manner the pedler informed Ralph of all those previous
particulars with which he had not till then been made acquainted. This
having been done, and the dialogue having fairly reached its
termination--and the youth exhibiting some strong symptoms of
weariness--Bunce took his departure for the present, not, however,
without again proffering his services. These Ralph did not scruple to
accept--giving him, at the same time, sundry little commissions, and
among them a message of thanks and respectful consideration to Miss
Munro.

She, in the meanwhile, had, upon fainting in the court-room, been borne
off in a state of utter insensibility, to the former residence of Munro,
to which place, as the pedler has already informed us, the wife of the
landlord had that very morning returned, resuming, precisely as before,
all the previous order of her domestic arrangements. The reason for this
return may be readily assigned. The escape of the pedler and of Lucy
from their place of temporary confinement had completely upset all the
prior arrangements of the outlaws. They now conceived it no longer safe
as a retreat; and failing as they did to overtake the fugitives, it was
determined that, in the disguises which had been originally suggested
for their adoption, they should now venture into the village, as many of
them as were willing, to obtain that degree of information which would
enable them to judge what further plans to adopt.

As Rivers had conjectured, Chub Williams, so far from taking for the
village, had plunged deeper into the woods, flying to former and well
known haunts, and regarding the face of man as that of a natural enemy.
The pedler had seen none but women, or those so disguised as such as to
seem none other than what they claimed to be--while Lucy had been
permitted to see none but her uncle and aunt, and one or two persons she
had never met before.

Under these circumstances, Rivers individually felt no apprehensions
that his wild refuge would be searched; but Munro, something older, less
sanguine, and somewhat more timid than his colleague, determined no
longer to risk it; and having, as we have seen, effectually checked the
utterance of that evidence which, in the unconscious excitation of his
niece, must have involved him more deeply in the meshes of the law,
besides indicating his immediate and near neighborhood, he made his way,
unobserved, from the village, having first provided for her safety, and
as he had determined to keep out of the way himself, having brought his
family back to their old place of abode.

He had determined on this course from a variety of considerations.
Nothing, he well knew, could affect his family. He had always studiously
kept them from any participation in his offences. The laws had no terror
for them; and, untroubled by any process against him, they could still
remain and peaceably possess his property, of which he well knew, in the
existing state of society in the South, no legal outlawry of himself
would ever avail to deprive them. This could not have been his hope in
their common flight. Such a measure, too, would only have impeded his
progress, in the event of his pursuit, and have burdened him with
encumbrances which would perpetually involve him in difficulty. He
calculated differently his chances. His hope was to be able, when the
first excitements had overblown, to return to the village, and at least
quietly to effect such a disposition of his property, which was not
inconsiderable, as to avoid the heavy and almost entire loss which would
necessarily follow any other determination.

In all this, however, it may be remarked that the reasonings of Rivers,
rather than his own, determined his conduct. That more adventurous
ruffian had, from his superior boldness and greater capacities in
general, acquired a singular and large influence over his companion: he
governed him, too, as much by his desire of gain as by any distinct
superiority which he himself possessed; he stimulated his avarice with
the promised results of their future enterprises in the same region
after the passing events were over; and thus held him still in that
fearful bondage of subordinate villany whose inevitable tendency is to
make the agent the creature, and finally the victim. The gripe which, in
a moral sense, and with a slight reference to character, Rivers had upon
the landlord, was as tenacious as that of death--but with this
difference, that it was death prolonged through a fearful, and, though
not a protracted, yet much too long a life.

The determination of Munro was made accordingly; and, following hard
upon the flight of Lucy from the rocks, we find the landlady quietly
reinstated in her old home as if nothing had happened. Munro did not,
however, return to the place of refuge; he had no such confidence in
circumstances as Rivers; his fears had grown active in due proportion
with his increase of years; and, with the increased familiarity with
crime, had grown up in his mind a corresponding doubt of all persons,
and an active suspicion which trusted nothing. His abode in all this
time was uncertain: he now slept at one deserted lodge, and now at
another; now in the disguise of one and now of another character; now on
horseback, now on foot--but in no two situations taking the same feature
or disguise. In the night-time he sometimes adventured, though with
great caution, to the village, and made inquiries. On all hands, he
heard of nothing but the preparations making against the clan of which
he was certainly one of the prominent heads. The state was roused into
activity, and a proclamation of the governor, offering a high reward for
the discovery and detention of any persons having a hand in the murder
of the guard, was on one occasion put into his own hands. All these
things made caution necessary, and, though venturing still very
considerably at times, he was yet seldom entirely off his guard.

Rivers kept close in the cover of his den. That den had numberless
ramifications, however, known only to himself; and his calm indifference
was the result of a conviction that it would require two hundred men,
properly instructed, and all at the same moment, to trace him through
its many sinuosities. He too, sometimes, carefully disguised, penetrated
into the village, but never much in the sight of those who were not
bound to him by a common danger. To Lucy he did not appear on such
occasions, though he did to the old lady, and even at the family
fireside.

Lucy, indeed, had eyes for few objects, and thoughts but for one. She
sat as one stupified with danger, yet sufficiently conscious of it as to
be conscious of nothing besides. She was bewildered with the throng of
horrible circumstances which had been so crowded on her mind and memory
in so brief a space of time. At one moment she blamed her own weakness
in suffering the trial of Ralph to progress to a consummation which she
shuddered to reflect upon. Had she a right to withhold her
testimony--testimony so important to the life and the honor of one
person, because others might suffer in consequence--those others the
real criminals, and he the innocent victim? and loving him as she did,
and hating or fearing his enemies? Had she performed her duty in
suffering his case to go to judgment? and such a judgment--so horrible a
doom! Should she now suffer it to go to its dreadful execution, when a
word from her would stay the hand of the officer, and save the life of
the condemned? But would such be its effect? What credence would be
given now to one who, in the hall of justice, had sunk down like a
criminal herself--withholding the truth, and contradicting every word of
her utterance? To whom, then, could she apply? who would hear her plea,
even though she boldly narrated all the truth, in behalf of the
prisoner? She maddened as she thought on all these difficulties; her
blood grew fevered, a thick haze overspread her senses, and she raved at
last in the most wild delirium.

Some days went by in her unconsciousness, and when she at length grew
calm--when the fever of her mind had somewhat subsided--she opened her
eyes and found, to her great surprise, her uncle sitting beside her
couch. It was midnight; and this was the hour he had usually chosen when
making his visits to his family. In these stolen moments, his attendance
was chiefly given to that hapless orphan, whose present sufferings he
well knew were in great part attributable to himself.

The thought smote him, for, in reference to her, all feeling had not yet
departed from his soul. There was still a lurking sensibility--a
lingering weakness of humanity--one of those pledges which nature gives
of her old affiliation, and which she never entirely takes away from the
human heart. There are still some strings, feeble and wanting in energy
though they be, which bind even the most reckless outcast in some little
particular to humanity; and, however time, and the world's variety of
circumstance, may have worn them and impaired their firm hold, they
still sometimes, at unlooked-for hours, regrapple the long-rebellious
subject, and make themselves felt and understood as in the first moments
of their creation.

Such now was their resumed sway with Munro. While his niece--the young,
the beautiful, the virtuous--so endowed by nature--so improved by
education--so full of those fine graces, beyond the reach of any
art--lay before him insensible--her fine mind spent in incoherent
ravings--her gentle form racked with convulsive shudderings--the still,
small, monitorial voice, unheard so long, spoke out to him in terrible
rebukings. He felt in those moments how deeply he had been a criminal;
how much, not of his own, he had appropriated to himself and sacrificed;
and how sacred a trust he had abused, in the person of the delicate
creature before him, by a determination the most cruel and perhaps
unnecessary.

Days had elapsed in her delirium; and such were his newly-awakened
feelings, that each night brought him, though at considerable risk, an
attendant by her bed. His hand administered--his eyes watched over; and,
in the new duties of the parent, he acquired a new feeling of duty and
domestic love, the pleasures of which he had never felt before. But she
grew conscious at last, and her restoration relieved his mind of one
apprehension which had sorely troubled it. Her condition, during her
illness, was freely described to her. But she thought not of
herself--she had no thought for any other than the one for whom thoughts
and prayers promised now to avail but little.

"Uncle--" she spoke at last--"you are here, and I rejoice to see you. I
have much to say, much to beg at your hands: oh, let me not beg in vain!
Let me not find you stubborn to that which may not make me happy--I say
not that, for happy I never look to be again--but make me as much so as
human power can make me. When--" and she spoke hurriedly, while a strong
and aguish shiver went through her whole frame--"when is it said that he
must die?"

He knew perfectly of whom she spoke, but felt reluctant to indulge her
mind in a reference to the subject which had already exercised so large
an influence over it. But he knew little of the distempered heart, and
fell into an error by no means uncommon with society. She soon convinced
him of this, when his prolonged silence left it doubtful whether he
contemplated an answer.

"Why are you silent? do you fear to speak? Have no fears now. We have no
time for fear. We must be active--ready--bold. Feel my hand: it trembles
no longer. I am no longer a weak-hearted woman."

He again doubted her sanity, and spoke to her soothingly, seeking to
divert her mind to indifferent subjects; but she smiled on the endeavor,
which she readily understood, and putting aside her aunt, who began to
prattle in a like strain, and with a like object, she again addressed
her uncle.

"Doubt me not, uncle: I rave no longer. I am now calm--calm as it is
possible for me to be, having such a sorrow as mine struggling at my
heart. Why should I hide it from you? It will not be hidden. I love
him--love him as woman never loved man before--with a soul and spirit
all unreservedly his, and with no thought in which he is not always the
principal. I know that he loves another; I know that the passion which I
feel I must feel and cherish alone; that it must burn itself away,
though it burn away its dwelling-place. I am resigned to such a fate;
but I am not prepared for more. I can not bear that he too should
die--and such a death! He must not die--he must not die, my uncle;
though we save him--ay, save him--for another."

"Shame on you, my daughter!--how can you confess so much? Think on your
sex--you are a woman--think on your youth!" Such was the somewhat
strongly-worded rebuke of the old lady.

"I have thought on all--on everything. I feel all that you have said,
and the thought and the feeling have been my madness. I must speak, or I
shall again go mad. I am not the tame and cold creature that the world
calls woman. I have been differently made. I can love in the world's
despite. I can feel through the world's freeze. I can dare all, when my
soul is in it, though the world sneer in scorn and contempt. But what I
have said, is said to _you_. I would not--no, not for worlds, that he
should know I said it--not for worlds!" and her cheeks were tinged
slightly, while her head rested for a single instant upon the pillow.

"But all this is nothing!" she started up, and again addressed herself
to the landlord. "Speak, uncle! tell me, is there yet time--yet time to
save him I When is it they say he must die?"

"On Friday next, at noon."

"And this--?"

"Is Monday."

"He must not die--no, not die, then, my uncle! _You_ must save him--you
_must_ save him! You have been the cause of his doom: you must preserve
him from its execution. You owe it him as a debt--you owe it me--you owe
it to yourself. Believe not, my uncle, that there is no other day than
this--no other world--no other penalties than belong to this. You read
no bible, but you have a thought which must tell you that there are
worlds--there is a life yet to come. I know you can not doubt--you must
not doubt--you must believe. Have a fear of its punishments, have a hope
of its rewards, and listen to my prayer. You must save Ralph Colleton;
ask me not how--talk not of difficulties. You must save him--you
must--you must!"

"Why, you forget, Lucy, my dear child--you forget that I too am in
danger. This is midnight: it is only at this hour that I can steal into
the village; and how, and in what manner, shall I be able to do as you
require?"

"Oh, man!--man!--forgive me, dear uncle, I would not vex you! But if
there were gold in that dungeon--broad bars of gold, or shining silver,
or a prize that would make you rich, would you ask me the how and the
where? Would that clumsy block, and those slight bars, and that dull
jailer, be an obstacle that would keep you back? Would you need a poor
girl like me to tell you that the blocks might be pierced--that the bars
might be broken--that the jailer might be won to the mercy which would
save? You have strength--you have skill--you have the capacity, the
power--there is but one thing wanting to my prayer--the will, the
disposition!"

"You do me wrong, Lucy--great wrong, believe me. I feel for this young
man, and the thought has been no less painful to me than to you, that my
agency has contributed in great measure to his danger. But what if I
were to have the will, as you say--what if I went forward to the jailer
and offered a bribe--would not the bribe which the state has offered for
my arrest be a greater attraction than any in my gift? To scale the
walls and break the bars, or in any forcible manner to effect the
purpose, I must have confederates, and in whom could I venture to
confide? The few to whom I could intrust such a design are like myself,
afraid to adventure or be seen, and such a design would be defeated by
Rivers himself, who so much hates the youth, and is bent on his
destruction."

"Speak not of _him_--_say to him nothing_--you must do it _yourself_ if
you do it all. You can effect much if you seriously determine. You can
design, and execute all, and find ready and able assistance, if you once
willingly set about it. I am not able to advise, nor will you need my
counsel. Assure me that you will make the effort--that you will put your
whole heart in it--and I have no fears--I feel confident of his escape."

"You think too highly of my ability in this respect. There was a time,
Lucy, when such a design had not been so desperate, but now--"

"Oh, not so desperate now, uncle, uncle--I could not live--not a
moment--were he to perish in that dreadful manner. Have I no claim upon
your mercy--will you not do for me what you would do for money--what you
have done at the bidding of that dreadful wretch, Rivers? Nay, look not
away, I know it all--I know that you had the dagger of Colleton--that
you put it into the hands of the wretch who struck the man--that you saw
him strike--that you strove not to stop his hand. Fear you not I shall
reveal it? Fear you not?--but I will not--I can not! Yet this should be
enough to make you strive in this service. Heard you not, too, when lie
spoke and stopped my evidence, knowing that my word would have saved
him--rather than see me brought to the dreadful trial of telling what I
knew of that night--that awful night--when you both sought his life? Oh,
I could love him for this--for this one thing--were there nothing else
besides worthy of my love!"

The incident to which she referred had not been unregarded by the
individual she addressed, and while she spoke, his looks assumed a
meditative expression, and he replied as in soliloquy, and in broken
sentences:--

"Could I pass to the jail unperceived--gain admittance--then--but who
would grapple with the jailer--how manage that?--let me see--but
no--no--that is impossible!"

"What is impossible?--nothing is impossible in this work, if you will
but try. Do not hesitate, dear uncle--it will look easier if you will
reflect upon it. You will see many ways of bringing it about. You can
get aid if you want it. There's the pedler, who is quite willing, and
Chub--Chub will do much, if you can only find him out."

The landlord smiled as she named these two accessaries "Bunce--why, what
could the fellow do?--he's not the man for such service; now Chub might
be of value, if he'd only follow orders: but that he won't do. I don't
see how we're to work it, Lucy--it looks more difficult the more I think
on it."

"Oh, if it's only difficult--if it's not impossible--it will be done. Do
not shrink back, uncle; do not scruple. The youth has done you no
wrong--you have done him much. You have brought him where he is, he
would have been safe otherwise You must save him. Save him, uncle--and
hear me as I promise. You may then do with me as you please. From that
moment I am your slave, and then, if it must be so--if you will then
require it, I am willing then to become _his_ slave too--him whom you
have served so faithfully and so unhappily for so long a season."

"Of whom speak you?"

"Guy Rivers! yes--I shall then obey you, though the funeral come with
the bridal."

"Lucy!"

"It is true. I hope not to survive it. It will be a worse destiny to me
than even the felon death to the youth whom I would save. Do with me as
you please then, but let him not perish. Rescue him from the doom you
have brought upon him--and oh, my uncle, in that other world--if there
we meet--the one good deed shall atone, in the thought of my poor
father, for the other most dreadful sacrifice to which his daughter now
resigns herself."

The stern man was touched. He trembled, and his lips quivered
convulsively as he took her hand into his own. Recovering himself, in a
firm tone, as solemn as that which she had preserved throughout the
dialogue, he replied--

"Hear me, Lucy, and believe what I assure you. I _will_ try to save this
youth. I will do what I can, my poor child, to redeem the trust of your
father. I have been no father to you heretofore, not much of one, at
least, but it is not too late, and I will atone. I will do my best for
Colleton--the thing is full of difficulty and danger, but I will try to
save him. All this, however, must be unknown--not a word to anybody; and
Rivers must not see you happy, or he will suspect. Better not be
seen--still keep to your chamber, and rest assured that all will be
done, in my power, for the rescue of the youth."

"Oh, now you are, indeed, my father--yet--uncle, shall I see you at the
time when it is to be done? Tell me at what moment you seek his
deliverance, that I may be upon my knees. Yet say not to him that I have
done anything or said anything which has led to your endeavors. He will
not think so well of me if you do; and, though he may not love, I would
have him think always of me as if--as if I were a woman."

She was overcome with exertion, and in the very revival of her hope, her
strength was exhausted; but she had sunk into a sweet sleep ere her
uncle left the apartment.




CHAPTER XXXV.

NEW PARTIES ON THE STAGE.


A day more had elapsed, and the bustle in the little village was
increased by the arrival of other travellers. A new light came to the
dungeon of Ralph Colleton, in the persons of his uncle and cousin Edith,
whom his letters, at his first arrest, had apprized of his situation.
They knew that situation only in part, however; and the first intimation
of his doom was that which he himself gave them.

The meeting was full of a painful pleasure. The youth himself was
firm--muscle and mind all over; but deeply did his uncle reproach
himself for his precipitation and sternness, and the grief of Edith,
like all deep grief, was dumb, and had no expression. There was but the
sign of wo--of wo inexpressible--in the ashy lip, the glazed, the
tearless and half-wandering eye, and the convulsive shiver, that at
intervals shook her whole frame, like strong and sudden gusts among the
foliage. The youth, if he had any at such an hour, spared his
reproaches. He narrated in plain and unexaggerated language, as if
engaged in the merest narration of commonplace, all the circumstances of
his trial. He pointed out the difficulties of his situation, to his mind
insuperable, and strove to prepare the minds of those who heard, for the
final and saddest trial of all, even as his own mind was prepared. In
that fearful work of preparation, the spirit of love could acknowledge
no restraining influence, and never was embrace more fond than that of
Ralph and the maiden. Much of his uncle's consolation was found in the
better disposition which he now entertained, though at too late a day,
in favor of their passion. He would now willingly consent to all.

"Had you not been so precipitate, Ralph--" he said, "had you not been so
proud--had you thought at all, or given me time for thought, all this
trial had been spared us. Was I not irritated by other things when I
spoke to you unkindly? You knew not how much I had been chafed--you
should not have been so hasty."

"No more of this, uncle, I pray you. I was wrong and rash, and I blame
you not. I have nobody but myself to reproach. Speak not of the matter;
but, as the best preparation for all that is to come, let your thought
banish me rather from contemplation. Why should the memory of so fair a
creature as this be haunted by a story such as mine? Why should she
behold, in her mind's eye, for ever, the picture of my dying
agonies--the accursed scaffold--the--" and the emotion of his soul, at
the subject of his own contemplation, choked him in his utterance, while
Edith, half-fainting in his arms, prayed his forbearance.

"Speak not thus--not of this, Ralph, if you would not have me perish. I
am fearfully sick now, my head swims, and all is commotion at my heart.
Not water--not water--give me hope--consolation. Tell me that there is
still some chance--some little prospect--that some noble people are
striving in your cause--that somebody is gone in search of evidence--in
search of hope. Is there no circumstance which may avail? Said you not
something of--did you not tell me of a person who could say for you that
which would have done much towards your escape? A woman, was it
not--speak, who is she--let me go to her--she will not refuse to tell me
all, and do all, if she be a woman."

Ralph assured her in the gentlest manner of the hopelessness of any such
application; and the momentary dream which her own desires had conjured
into a promise, as suddenly subsided, leaving her to a full
consciousness of her desolation. Her father at length found it necessary
to abridge the interview. Every moment of its protraction seemed still
more to unsettle the understanding of his daughter. She spoke wildly and
confusedly, and in that thought of separation which the doom of her
lover perpetually forced upon her, she contemplated, in all its fearful
extremities, her own. She was borne away half delirious--the feeling of
wo something blunted, however, by the mental unconsciousness following
its realization.

Private apartments were readily found them in the village, and having
provided good attendance for his daughter, Colonel Colleton set out,
though almost entirely hopeless, to ascertain still farther the
particulars of the case, and to see what might be done in behalf of one
of whose innocence he felt perfectly assured. He knew Ralph too well to
suspect him of falsehood; and the clear narrative which he had given,
and the manly and unhesitating account of all particulars having any
bearing on the case which had fallen from his lips, he knew, from all
his previous high-mindedness of character, might safely be relied on.
Assured of this himself, he deemed it not improbable that something
might undergo development, in a course of active inquiry, which might
tend to the creation of a like conviction in the minds of those in whom
rested the control of life and judgment.

His first visit was to the lawyer, from whom, however, he could procure
nothing, besides being compelled, without possibility of escape, to
listen to a long string of reproaches against his nephew.

"I could, and would have saved him, Colonel Colleton, if the power were
in mortal," was the self-sufficient speech of the little man; "but he
would not--he broke in upon me when the very threshold was to be passed,
and just as I was upon it. Things were in a fair train, and all might
have gone well but for his boyish interruption. I would have come over
the jury with a settler. I would have made out a case, sir, for their
consideration, which every man of them would have believed he himself
saw. I would have shown your nephew, sir, riding down the narrow trace,
like a peaceable gentleman; anon, sir, you should have seen Forrester
coming along full tilt after him. Forrester should have cried out with a
whoop and a right royal oath; then Mr. Colleton would have heard him,
and turned round to receive him. But Forrester is drunk, you know, and
will not understand the young man's civilities. He blunders out a volley
of curses right and left, and bullies Master Colleton for a fight, which
he declines. But Forrester is too drunk to mind all that. Without more
ado, he mounts the young gentleman and is about to pluck out his eyes,
when he feels the dirk in his ribs, and then they cut loose. He gets the
dirk from Master Colleton, and makes at him; but he picks up a hatchet
that happens to be lying about, and drives at his head, and down drops
Forrester, as he ought to, dead as a door-nail."

"Good heavens! and why did you not bring these facts forward? They
surely could not have condemned him under these circumstances."

"Bring them forward! To be sure, I would have done so but, as I tell
you, just when on the threshold, at the very entrance into the
transaction, up pops this hasty young fellow--I'm sorry to call your
nephew so, Colonel Colleton--but the fact is, he owes his situation
entirely to himself. I would have saved him, but he was obstinately bent
on not being saved; and just as I commenced the affair, up he pops and
tells me, before all the people, that I know nothing about it. A pretty
joke, indeed. I know nothing about it, and it my business to know all
about it. Sir, it ruined him. I saw, from that moment, how the cat would
jump. I pitied the poor fellow, but what more could I do?"

"But it is not too late--we can memorialize the governor, we can put
these facts in form, and by duly showing them with the accompanying
proofs, we can obtain a new trial--a respite."

"Can't be done now--it's too late. Had I been let alone--had not the
youth come between me and my duty--I would have saved him, sir, as under
God, I have saved hundreds before. But it's too late now."

"Oh, surely not too late! with the facts that you mention, if you will
give me the names of the witnesses furnishing them, so that I can obtain
their affidavits--"

"Witnesses!--what witnesses?"

"Why, did you not tell me of the manner in which Forrester assaulted my
nephew, and forced upon him what he did as matter of self-defense? Where
is the proof of this?"

"Oh, proof! Why, you did not think that was the true state of the
case--that was only the case I was to present to the jury."

"And there is, then, no evidence for what you have said?"

"Not a tittle, sir. Evidence is scarcely necessary in a case like this,
sir, where the state proves more than you can possibly disprove. Your
only hope, sir is to present a plausible conjecture to the jury. Just
set their fancies to work, and they have a taste most perfectly
dramatic. What you leave undone, they will do. Where you exhibit a
blank, they will supply the words wanting. Only set them on trail, and
they'll tree the 'possum. They are noble hands at it, and, as I now live
and talk to you, sir, not one of them who heard the plausible story
which I would have made out, but would have discovered more common sense
and reason in it than in all the evidence you could possibly have given
them. Because, you see, I'd have given them a reason for everything.
Look, how I should have made out the story. Mr. Colleton and Forrester
are excellent friends, and both agree to travel together. Well, they're
to meet at the forks by midnight. In the meantime, Forrester goes to see
his sweetheart, Kate Allen--a smart girl, by the way, colonel, and well
to look on. Parting's a very uncomfortable thing, now, and they don't
altogether like it. Kate cries, and Forrester storms. Well, _must_ come
comes at last. They kiss, and are off--different ways. Well, grief's but
a dry companion, and to get rid of him, Forrester takes a drink; still
grief holds on, and then he takes another and another, until grief gets
off at last, but not before taking with him full half, and not the worst
half either, of the poor fellow's senses. What then? Why, then he
swaggers and swears at everything, and particularly at your nephew, who,
you see, not knowing his condition, swears at him for keeping him
waiting--"

"Ralph Colleton never swears, Mr. Pippin," said the colonel, grimly.

"Well, well, if he didn't swear then, he might very well have sworn, and
I'll be sworn but he did on that occasion; and it was very pardonable
too. Well, he swears at the drunken man, not knowing his condition, and
the drunken man rolls and reels like a rowdy, and gives it to him back,
and then they get at it. Your nephew, who is a stout colt, buffets him
well for a time, but Forrester, who is a mighty, powerful built fellow,
he gets the better in the long run, and both come down together in the
road. Then Forrester, being uppermost, sticks his thumb into Master
Colleton's eye--the left eye, I think, it was--yes, the left eye it
was--and the next moment it would have been out, when your nephew, not
liking it, whipped out his dirk, and, 'fore Forrester could say Jack
Robinson, it was playing about in his ribs; and, then comes the hatchet
part, just as I told it you before."

"And is none of this truth?"

"God bless your soul, no! Do you suppose, if it was the truth, it would
have taken so long a time in telling? I wouldn't have wasted the breath
on it. The witnesses would have done that, if it were true; but in this
was the beauty of my art, and had I been permitted to say to the jury
what I've said to you, the young man would have been clear. It wouldn't
have been gospel, but where's the merit of a lawyer, if he can't go
through a bog? This is one of the sweetest and most delightful features
of the profession. Sir, it is putting the wings of fiction to the
lifeless and otherwise immovable body of the fact."

Colonel Colleton was absolutely stunned by the fertility and volubility
of the speaker, and after listening for some time longer, as long as it
was possible to procure from him anything which might be of service, he
took his departure, bending his way next to the wigwam, in which, for
the time being, the pedler had taken up his abode. It will not be
necessary that we should go with him there, as it is not probable that
anything materially serving his purpose or ours will be adduced from the
narrative of Bunce. In the meantime, we will turn our attention to a
personage, whose progress must correspond, in all respects, with that of
our narrative.

Guy Rivers had not been unapprized of the presence of the late comers at
the village. He had his agents at work, who marked the progress of
things, and conveyed their intelligence to him with no qualified
fidelity. The arrival of Colonel Colleton and his daughter had been made
known to him within a few hours after its occurrence, and the feelings
of the outlaw were of a nature the most complex and contradictory.
Secure within his den, the intricacies of which were scarcely known to
any but himself, he did not study to restrain those emotions which had
prompted him to so much unjustifiable outrage. With no eye to mark his
actions or to note his speech, the guardian watchfulness which had
secreted so much, in his association with others, was taken off; and we
see much of that heart and those wild principles of its government, the
mysteries of which contain so much that it is terrible to see. Slowly,
and for a long time after the receipt of the above-mentioned
intelligence, he strode up and down the narrow cell of his retreat; all
passions at sway and contending for the mastery--sudden action and
incoherent utterance occasionally diversifying the otherwise monotonous
movements of his person. At one moment, he would clinch his hands with
violence together, while an angry malediction would escape through his
knitted teeth--at another, a demoniac smile of triumph, and a fierce
laugh of gratified malignity would ring through the apartment, coming
back upon him in an echo, which would again restore him to
consciousness, and bring back the silence so momentarily banished.

"They are here; they have come to witness his degradation--to grace my
triumph--to feel it, and understand my revenge. We will see if the proud
beauty knows me now--if she yet continues to discard and to disdain me.
I have her now upon my own terms. She will not refuse; I am sure of her;
I shall conquer her proud heart; I will lead her in chains, the heaviest
chains of all--the chains of a dreadful necessity. He must die else! I
will howl it in her ears with the voice of the wolf; I will paint it
before her eyes with a finger dipped in blood and in darkness! She shall
see him carried to the gallows; I shall make her note the halter about
his neck--that neck, which, in her young thought, her arms were to have
encircled only; nor shall she shut her eyes upon the last scene, nor
close her ears to the last groan of my victim! She shall see and hear
all, or comply with all that I demand! It must be done: but how? How
shall I see her? how obtain her presence? how command her attention?
Pshaw! shall a few beardless soldiers keep me back, and baffle me in
this? Shall I dread the shadow now, and shrink back when the sun shines
out that makes it? I will not fear. I will see her. I will bid defiance
to them all! She shall know my power, and upon one condition only will I
use it to save him. She will not dare to refuse the condition; she will
consent; she will at last be mine: and for this I will do so much--go so
far--ay, save him whom I would yet be so delighted to destroy!"

Night came; and in a small apartment of one of the lowliest dwellings of
Chestatee, Edith and her father sat in the deepest melancholy, conjuring
up perpetually in their minds those images of sorrow so natural to their
present situation. It was somewhat late, and they had just returned from
an evening visit to the dungeon of Ralph Colleton. The mind of the youth
was in far better condition than theirs, and his chief employment had
been in preparing them for a similar feeling of resignation with
himself. He had succeeded but indifferently. They strove to appear firm,
in order that he should not be less so than they found him; but the
effort was very perceptible, and the recoil of their dammed-up emotions
was only so much more fearful and overpowering. The strength of Edith
had been severely tried, and her head now rested upon the bosom of her
father, whose arms were required for her support, in a state of
feebleness and exhaustion, leaving it doubtful, at moments, whether the
vital principle had not itself utterly departed.

At this period the door opened, and a stranger stood abruptly before
them. His manner was sufficiently imposing, though his dress was that of
the wandering countryman, savoring of the jockey, and not much unlike
that frequently worn by such wayfarers as the stagedriver and carrier of
the mails. He had on an overcoat made of buckskin, an article of the
Indian habit; a deep fringe of the same material hung suspended from two
heavy capes that depended from the shoulder. His pantaloons were made of
buckskin also; a foxskin cap rested slightly upon his head, rather more
upon one side than the other; while a whip of huge dimensions occupied
one of his hands. Whiskers, of a bushy form and most luxuriant growth,
half-obscured his cheek, and the mustaches were sufficiently small to
lead to the inference that the wearer had only recently decided to
suffer the region to grow wild. A black-silk handkerchief, wrapped
loosely about his neck, completed the general outline; and the _tout
ensemble_ indicated one of those dashing blades, so frequently to be
encountered in the southern country, who, despising the humdrum monotony
of regular life, are ready for adventure--lads of the turf, the
muster-ground, the general affray--the men who can whip their weight in
wild-cats--whose general rule it is to knock down and drag out.

Though startling at first to both father and daughter, the manner of the
intruder was such as to forbid any further alarm than was incidental to
his first abrupt appearance. His conduct was respectful and
distant--closely observant of the proprieties in his address, and so
studiously guarded as to satisfy them, at the very outset, that nothing
improper was intended. Still, his entrance without any intimation was
sufficiently objectionable to occasion a hasty demand from Colonel
Colleton as to the meaning of his intrusion.

"None, sir, is intended, which may not be atoned for," was the reply. "I
had reason to believe, Colonel Colleton, that the present melancholy
circumstances of your family were such as might excuse an intrusion
which may have the effect of making them less so; which, indeed, may go
far toward the prevention of that painful event which you now
contemplate as certain."

The words were electrical in their effect upon both father and daughter.
The former rose from his chair, and motioned the stranger to be seated;
while the daughter, rapidly rising also, with an emotion which gave new
life to her form, inquired breathlessly--

"Speak, sir! say--how!"--and she lingered and listened with figure bent
sensibly forward, and hand uplifted and motionless, for reply. The
person addressed smiled with visible effort, while slight shades of
gloom, like the thin clouds fleeting over the sky at noonday, obscured
at intervals the otherwise subdued and even expression of his
countenance. He looked at the maiden while speaking, but his words were
addressed to her father.

"I need not tell you, sir, that the hopes of your nephew are gone. There
is no single chance upon which he can rest a doubt whereby his safety
may be secured. The doom is pronounced, the day is assigned, and the
executioner is ready."

"Is your purpose insult, sir, that you tell us this?" was the rather
fierce inquiry of the colonel.

"Calmly, sir," was the response, in a manner corresponding well with the
nature of his words; "my purpose, I have already said, is to bring, or
at least to offer, relief; to indicate a course which may result in the
safety of the young man whose life is now at hazard; and to contribute,
myself, to the object which I propose."

"Go on--go on, sir, if you please, but spare all unnecessary reference
to his situation," said the colonel, as a significant pressure of his
arm on the part of his daughter motioned him to patience. The stranger
proceeded:--

"My object in dwelling upon the youth's situation was, if possible, by
showing its utter hopelessness in every other respect, to induce you the
more willingly to hear what I had to offer, and to comply with certain
conditions which must be preparatory to any development upon my part."

"There is something strangely mysterious in this. I am willing to do
anything and everything, in reason and without dishonor, for the safety
of my nephew; the more particularly as I believe him altogether innocent
of the crime laid to his charge. More than this I dare not; and I shall
not be willing to yield to unknown conditions, prescribed by a stranger,
whatever be the object: but speak out at once, sir, and keep us no
longer in suspense. In the meantime, retire, Edith, my child; we shall
best transact this business in your absence. You will feel too acutely
the consideration of this subject to listen to it in discussion. Go, my
daughter."

But the stranger interposed, with a manner not to be questioned:--

"Let her remain, Colonel Colleton; it is, indeed, only to her that I can
reveal the mode and the conditions of the assistance which I am to
offer. This was the preliminary condition of which I spoke. To her alone
can my secret be revealed, and my conference must be entirely with her."

"But, sir, this is so strange--so unusual--so improper."

"True, Colonel Colleton; in the ordinary concerns, the everyday offices
of society, it would be strange, unusual, and improper; but these are
not times, and this is not a region of the world, in which the common
forms are to be insisted upon. You forget, sir, that you are in the wild
abiding-place of men scarcely less wild--with natures as stubborn as the
rocks, and with manners as uncouth and rugged as the woodland growth
which surrounds us. I know as well as yourself that my demand is
unusual; but such is my situation--such, indeed, the necessities of the
whole case, that there is no alternative. I am persuaded that your
nephew can be saved; I am willing to make an effort for that purpose,
and my conditions are to be complied with: one of them you have
heard--it is for your daughter to hear the rest."

The colonel still hesitated. He was very tenacious of those forms of
society, and of intercourse between the sexes, which are rigidly
insisted upon in the South, and his reluctance was manifest. While he
yet hesitated, the stranger again spoke:

"The condition which I have proposed, sir, is unavoidable, but I ask you
not to remove from hearing: the adjoining room is not so remote but that
you can hear any appeal which your daughter may be pleased to make. Her
call would reach your ears without effort. My own security depends, not
less than that of your nephew, upon your compliance with the condition
under which only will I undertake to save him."

These suggestions prevailed. Suspecting the stranger to be one whose
evidence would point to the true criminal, himself an offender, he at
length assented to the arrangement, and, after a few minutes' further
dialogue, he left the room. As he retired, the stranger carefully locked
the door, a movement which somewhat alarmed the maiden; but the
respectful manner with which he approached her, and her own curiosity
not less than interest in the progress of the event, kept her from the
exhibition of any apprehensions.

The stranger drew nigh her. His glances, though still respectful, were
fixed, long and searchingly, upon her face. He seemed to study all its
features, comparing them, as it would seem, with his own memories. At
length, as with a sense of maidenly propriety, she sternly turned away,
he addressed her:--

"Miss Colleton has forgotten me, it appears, though I have some claim to
be an old acquaintance. I, at least, have a better memory for my
friends--I have not forgotten _her_."

Edith looked up in astonishment, but there was no recognition in her
glance. A feeling of mortified pride might have been detected in the
expression of his countenance, as, with a tone of calm unconsciousness,
she replied--

"You are certainly unremembered, if ever known, by me, sir. I am truly
sorry to have forgotten one who styles himself my friend."

"Who was--who is--or, rather, who is now willing again to be your
friend, Miss Colleton," was the immediate reply.

"Yes, and so I will gladly call you, sir, if you succeed in what you
have promised."

"I have yet promised nothing, Miss Colleton."

"True, true! but you say you have the power, and surely would not
withhold it at such a time. Oh, speak, sir! tell me how you can serve us
all, and receive my blessings and my thanks for ever."

"The reward is great--very great--but not greater--perhaps not as great,
as I may demand for my services. But we should not be ignorant of one
another in such an affair, and at such a time as this. Is it true, then,
that Miss Colleton has no memory which, at this moment, may spare me
from the utterance of a name, which perhaps she herself would not be
altogether willing to hear, and which it is not my policy to have
uttered by any lips, and far less by my own? Think--remember--lady, and
let me be silent still on that one subject. Let no feeling of pride
influence the rejection of a remembrance which perhaps carries with it
but few pleasant reflections."

Again were the maiden's eyes fixed searchingly upon the speaker, and
again, conflicting with the searching character of his own glance, were
they withdrawn, under the direction of a high sense of modest dignity.
She had made the effort at recognition--that was evident even to
him--and had made it in vain.

"Entirely forgotten--well! better that than to have been remembered as
the thing I was. Would it were possible to be equally forgotten by the
rest--but this, too, is vain and childish. She must be taught to
remember me."

Thus muttered the stranger to himself; assuming, however, an increased
decision of manner at the conclusion, he approached her, and tearing
from his cheeks the huge whiskers that had half-obscured them, he spoke
in hurried accents:--

"Look on me now, Miss Colleton--look on me now, and while you gaze upon
features once sufficiently well known to your glance, let your memory
but retrace the few years when it was your fortune, and my fate, to
spend a few months in Gwinnett county. Do you remember the time--do you
remember that bold, ambitious man, who, at that time, was the claimant
for a public honor--who was distinguished by you in a dance, at the ball
given on that occasion--who, maddened by wine, and a fierce passion
which preyed upon him then, like a consuming fire, addressed you, though
a mere child, and sought you for his bride, who--but I see you remember
all!"

"And are you then Creighton--Mr. Edward Creighton--and so changed!" And
she looked upon him with an expression of simple wonder.

"Ay, that was the name once-but I have another now. Would you know me
better--I am Guy Rivers, where the name of Creighton must not again be
spoken. It is the name of a felon--of one under doom of outlawry--whom
all men are privileged to slay. I have been hunted from society--I can
no longer herd with my fellows--I am without kin, and am almost without
kind. Yet, base and black with crime--doomed by mankind--banished all
human abodes--the slave of fierce passions--the leagued with foul
associates, I dared, in your girlhood, to love you; and, more daring
still, I dare to love you now. Fear not, lady--you are Edith Colleton to
me; and worthless, and vile, and reckless, though I have become, for you
I can hold no thought which would behold you other than you are--a
creature for worship rather than for love. As such I would have you
still; and for this purpose do I seek you now. I know your feeling for
this young man--I saw it then, when you repulsed me. I saw that you
loved each other, though neither of you were conscious of the truth. You
love him now--you would not have him perish--I know well how you regard
him, and I come, knowing this, to make hard conditions with you for his
life."

"Keep me no longer in suspense--speak out, Mr. Creighton"--she cried,
gaspingly.

"Rivers--Rivers--I would not hear the other--it was by that name I was
driven from my fellows."

"Mr. Rivers, say what can be done--what am I to do--money--thanks, all
that we can give shall be yours, so that you save him from this fate."

"And who would speak thus for me? What fair pleader, fearless of man's
opinion--that blights or blesses, without reference to right or
merit--would so far speak for me!"

"Many--many, Mr. Rivers--I hope there are many. Heaven knows, though I
may have rejected in my younger days, your attentions, I know not many
for whom I would more willingly plead and pray than yourself. I do
remember now your talents and high reputation, and deeply do I regret
the unhappy fortune which has denied them their fulfilment."

"Ah, Edith Colleton, these words would have saved me once--now they are
nothing, in recompense for the hopes which are for ever gone. Your
thoughts are gentle, and may sooth all spirits but my own. But sounds
that lull others, lull me no longer. It is not the music of a rich
dream, or of a pleasant fancy, which may beguile me into pleasure. I am
dead--dead as the cold rock--to their influence. The storm which
blighted me has seared, and ate into the very core. I am like the tree
through which the worm has travelled--it still stands, and there is
foliage upon it, but the heart is eaten out and gone. Your words touch
me no longer as they did--I need something more than words and mere
flatteries--flatteries so sweet even as those which come from your
lips--are no longer powerful to bind me to your service. I can save the
youth--I will save him, though I hate him; but the conditions are fatal
to your love for him."

There was much in this speech to offend and annoy the hearer; but she
steeled herself to listen, and it cost her some effort to reply.

"I can listen--I can hear all that you may say having reference to him.
I know not what you may intend; I know not what you may demand for your
service. But name your condition. All in honor--all that a maiden may
grant and be true to herself, all--all, for his life and safety."

"Still, I fear, Miss Colleton--your love for him is not sufficiently
lavish to enable your liberality to keep pace with the extravagance of
my demand--"

"Hold, sir--on this particular there is no need of further speech.
Whatever may be the extent of my regard for Ralph, it is enough that I
am willing to do much, to sacrifice much--in return for his rescue from
this dreadful fate. Speak, therefore, your demand--spare no word--delay
me, I pray, no longer."

"Hear me, then. As Creighton, I loved you years ago--as Guy Rivers I
love you still. The life of Ralph Colleton is forfeit--for ever
forfeit--and a few days only interpose between him and eternity. I alone
can save him--I can give him freedom; and, in doing so, I shall risk
much, and sacrifice not a little. I am ready for this risk--I am
prepared for every sacrifice--I will save him at all hazards from his
doom, upon one condition!"

"Speak! speak!"

"That you be mine--that you fly with me--that in the wild regions of the
west, where I will build you a cottage and worship you as my own forest
divinity, you take up your abode with me, and be my wife. My wife!--all
forms shall be complied with, and every ceremony which society may call
for. Nay, shrink not back thus--" seeing her recoil in horror and scorn
at the suggestion--"beware how you defy me--think, that I have his life
in my hands--think, that I can speak his doom or his safety--think,
before you reply!"

"There is no time necessary for thought, sir--none--none. It can not be.
I can not comply with the conditions which you propose. I would die
first."

"And he will die too. Be not hasty, Miss Colleton--remember--it is not
merely your death but his--his death upon the gallows--"

"Spare me! spare me!"

"The halter--the crowd--the distorted limb--the racked frame--"

"Horrible--horrible!"

"Would you see this--know this, and reflect upon the shame, the mental
agony, far greater than all, of such a death to him?"

With a strong effort, she recovered her composure, though but an instant
before almost convulsed--

"Have you no other terms, Mr. Rivers?"

"None--none. Accept them, and he lives--I will free him, as I promise.
Refuse them--deny me, and he must die, and nothing may save him then."

"Then he must die, sir!--we must both die--before we choose such terms.
Sir, let me call my father. Our conference must end here. You have
chosen a cruel office, but I can bear its infliction. You have
tantalized a weak heart with hope, only to make it despair the more. But
I am now strong, sir--stronger than ever--and we speak no more on this
subject."

"Yet pause--to relent even to-morrow may be too late. To-night you must
determine, or never."

"I have already determined. It is impossible that I can determine
otherwise. No more, sir!"

"There is one, lady--one young form--scarcely less beautiful than
yourself, who would make the same--ay, and a far greater--sacrifice than
this, for the safety of Ralph Colleton. One far less happy in his love
than you, who would willingly die for him this hour. Would you be less
ready than she is for such a sacrifice?"

"No, not less ready for death--as I live--not less willing to free him
with the loss of my own life. But not ready for a sacrifice like
this--not ready for this."

"You have doomed him!"

"Be it so, sir. Be it so. Let me now call my father."

"Yet think, ere it be too late--once gone, not even your words shall
call me back."

"Believe me, I shall not desire it."

The firmness of the maiden was finely contrasted with the disappointment
of the outlaw. He was not less mortified with his own defeat than awed
by the calm and immoveable bearing, the sweet, even dignity, which the
discussion of a subject so trying to her heart, and the overthrow of all
hope which her own decision must have occasioned, had failed utterly to
affect. He would have renewed his suggestions, but while repeating them,
a sudden commotion in the village--the trampling of feet--the buzz of
many voices, and sounds of wide-spread confusion, contributed to abridge
an interview already quite too long. The outlaw rushed out of the
apartment, barely recognising, at his departure, the presence of Colonel
Colleton, whom his daughter had now called in. The cause of the uproar
we reserve for another chapter.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

PROPOSED RESCUE.


The pledge which Munro had given to his niece in behalf of Colleton was
productive of no small inconvenience to the former personage. Though
himself unwilling--we must do him the justice to believe--that the youth
should perish for a crime so completely his own, he had in him no great
deal of that magnanimous virtue, of itself sufficiently strong to have
persuaded him to such a risk, as that which he had undertaken at the
supplication of Lucy. The more he reflected upon the matter, the more
trifling seemed the consideration. With such a man, to reflect is simply
to _calculate_. Money, now--the spoil or the steed of the
traveller--would have been a far more decided stimulant to action. In
regarding such an object, he certainly would have overlooked much of the
danger, and have been less heedful of the consequences. The selfishness
of the motive would not merely have sanctioned, but have smoothed the
enterprise; and he thought too much with the majority--allowing for any
lurking ambition in his mind--not to perceive that where there is gain
there must be glory.

None of these consolatory thoughts came to him in the contemplation of
his present purpose. To adventure his own life--perhaps to exchange
places with the condemned he proposed to save--though, in such a risk,
he only sought to rescue the innocent from the doom justly due to
himself--was a flight of generous impulse somewhat above the usual aim
of the landlord; and, but for the impelling influence of his niece--an
influence which, in spite of his own evil habits, swayed him beyond his
consciousness--we should not now have to record the almost redeeming
instance in the events of his life at this period--the _one_ virtue,
contrasting with, if it could not lessen or relieve, the long tissue of
his offences.

There were some few other influences, however--if this were not
enough--coupled with that of his niece's entreaty, which gave strength
and decision to his present determination. Munro was not insensible to
the force of superior character, and a large feeling of veneration led
him, from the first, to observe the lofty spirit and high sense of honor
which distinguished the bearing and deportment of Ralph Colleton. He
could not but admire the native superiority which characterized the
manner of the youth, particularly when brought into contrast with that
of Guy Rivers, for whom the same feeling had induced a like, though not
a parallel respect, on the part of the landlord.

It may appear strange to those accustomed only to a passing and
superficial estimate of the thousand inconsistencies which make up that
contradictory creation, the human mind, that such should be a feature in
the character of a ruffian like Munro; but, to those who examine for
themselves, we shall utter nothing novel when we assert, that a respect
for superiority of mental and even mere moral attribute, enters largely
into the habit of the ruffian generally. The murderer is not
unfrequently found to possess benevolence as well as veneration in a
high degree; and the zealots of all countries and religions are almost
invariably creatures of strong and violent passions, to which the
extravagance of their zeal and devotion furnishes an outlet, which is
not always innocent in its direction or effects. Thus, in their
enthusiasm--which is only a minor madness--whether the Hindoo bramin or
the Spanish bigot, the English roundhead or the follower of the "only
true faith" at Mecca, be understood, it is but a word and a blow--though
the word be a hurried prayer to the God of their adoration, and the blow
be aimed with all the malevolence of hell at the bosom of a
fellow-creature. There is no greater inconsistency in the one character
than in the other. The temperament which, under false tuition, makes the
zealot, and drives him on to the perpetration of wholesale murder, while
uttering a prayer to the Deity, prompts the same individual who, as an
assassin or a highwayman, cuts your throat, and picks your pocket, and
at the next moment bestows his ill-gotten gains without reservation upon
the starving beggar by the wayside.

There was yet another reason which swayed Munro not a little in his
determination, if possible, to save the youth--and this was a lurking
sentiment of hostility to Rivers. His pride, of late, on many occasions,
had taken alarm at the frequent encroachments of his comrade upon its
boundaries. The too much repeated display of that very mental
superiority in his companion, which had so much fettered him, had
aroused his own latent sense of independence; and the utterance of
sundry pungent rebukes on the part of Rivers had done much towards
provoking within him a new sentiment of dislike for that person, which
gladly availed itself of the first legitimate occasion for exercise and
development. The very superiority which commanded, and which he honored,
he hated for that very reason; and, in our analysis of moral dependence,
we may add, that, in Greece, and the mere Hob of the humble farmhouse,
Munro might have been the countryman to vote Aristides into banishment
because of his reputation for justice. The barrier is slight, the space
short, the transition easy, from one to the other extreme of injustice;
and the peasant who voted for the banishment of the just man, in another
sphere and under other circumstances, would have been a Borgia or a
Catiline. With this feeling in his bosom, Munro was yet unapprized of
its existence. It is not with the man, so long hurried forward by his
impulses as at last to become their creature, to analyze either their
character or his own. Vice, though itself a monster, is yet the slave of
a thousand influences, not absolutely vicious in themselves; and their
desires it not uncommonly performs when blindfolded. It carries the
knife, it strikes the blow, but is not always the chooser of its own
victim.

But, fortunately for Ralph Colleton, whatever and how many or how few
were the impelling motives leading to this determination, Munro had
decided upon the preservation of his life; and, with that energy of
will, which, in a rash office, or one violative of the laws, he had
always heretofore displayed, he permitted no time to escape him
unemployed for the contemplated purpose. His mind immediately addressed
itself to its chosen duty, and, in one disguise or another, and those
perpetually changing, he perambulated the village, making his
arrangements for the desired object. The difficulties in his way were not
trifling in character nor few in number; and the greatest of these was
that of finding coadjutors willing to second him. He felt assured that
he could confide in none of his well-known associates, who were to a man
the creatures of Rivers; that outlaw, by a liberality which seemed to
disdain money, and yielding every form of indulgence, having acquired
over them an influence almost amounting to personal affection.
Fortunately for his purpose, Rivers dared not venture much into the
village or its neighborhood; therefore, though free from any fear of
obstruction from one in whose despite his whole design was undertaken,
Munro was yet not a little at a loss for his co-operation. To whom, at
that moment, could he turn, without putting himself in the power of an
enemy? Thought only raised up new difficulties in his way, and in utter
despair of any better alternative, though scarcely willing to trust to
one of whom he deemed so lightly, his eyes were compelled to rest, in
the last hope, upon the person of the pedler, Bunce.

Bunce, if the reader will remember, had, upon his release from prison,
taken up his abode temporarily in the village. Under the protection now
afforded by the presence of the judge, and the other officers of
justice--not to speak of the many strangers from the adjacent parts,
whom one cause or another had brought to the place--he had presumed to
exhibit his person with much more audacity and a more perfect freedom
from apprehension than he had ever shown in the same region before. He
now--for ever on the go--thrust himself fearlessly into every cot and
corner. No place escaped the searching analysis of his glance; and, in a
scrutiny so nice, it was not long before he had made the acquaintance of
everybody and everything at all worthy, in that region, to be known. He
could now venture to jostle Pippin with impunity; for, since the trial
in which he had so much blundered, the lawyer had lost no small portion
of the confidence and esteem of his neighbors. Accused of the
abandonment of his client--an offence particularly monstrous in the
estimation of those who are sufficiently interested to acquire a
personal feeling in such matters--and compelled, as he had been--a worse
feature still in the estimation of the same class--to "eat his own
words"--he had lost caste prodigiously in the last few days, and his
fine sayings lacked their ancient flavor in the estimation of his
neighbors. His speeches sunk below par along with himself; and the
pedler, in his contumelious treatment of the disconsolate jurist, simply
obeyed and indicated the direction of the popular opinion. One or two
rude replies, and a nudge which the elbow of Bunce, effected in the ribs
of the lawyer, did provoke the latter so far as to repeat his threat on
the subject of the prosecution for the horse; but the pedler snapped his
fingers in his face as he did so, and bade him defiance. He also
reminded Pippin of the certain malfeasances to which he had referred
previously, and the consciousness of the truth was sufficiently strong
and awkward to prevent his proceeding to any further measure of disquiet
with the offender. Thus, without fear, and with an audacity of which he
was not a little proud, Bunce perambulated the village and its
neighborhood, in a mood and with a deportment he had never ventured upon
before in that quarter.

He had a variety of reasons for lingering in the village seemingly in a
state of idleness. Bunce was a long-sighted fellow, and beheld the
promise which it held forth, at a distance, of a large and thriving
business in the neighborhood; and he had too much sagacity not to be
perfectly aware of the advantage, to a tradesman, resulting from a prior
occupation of the ground. He had not lost everything in the
conflagration which destroyed his cart-body and calicoes; for, apart
from sundry little debts due him in the surrounding country, he had
carefully preserved around his body, in a black silk handkerchief,
a small wallet, holding a moderate amount of the best bank paper.
Bunce, among other things, had soon learned to discriminate between
good and bad paper, and the result of his education in this respect
assured him of the perfect integrity of the three hundred and odd
dollars which kept themselves snugly about his waist--ready to be
expended for clocks and calicoes, horn buttons and wooden combs, knives,
and negro-handkerchiefs, whenever their proprietor should determine upon
a proper whereabout in which to fix himself. Bunce had grown tired of
peddling--the trade was not less uncertain than fatiguing. Besides,
travelling so much among the southrons, he had imbibed not a few of
their prejudices against his vocation, and, to speak the truth, had
grown somewhat ashamed of his present mode of life. He was becoming
rapidly aristocratic, as we may infer from a very paternal and somewhat
patronizing epistle, which he despatched about this time to his elder
brother and copartner, Ichabod Bunce, who carried on his portion of the
business at their native place in Meriden, Connecticut. He told him, in
a manner and vein not less lofty than surprising to his coadjutor, that
it "would not be the thing, no how, to keep along, lock and lock with
him, in the same gears." It was henceforward his "idee to drive on his
own hook. Times warn't as they used to be;" and the fact was--he did not
say it in so many words--the firm of Ichabod Bunce and Brother was
scarcely so creditable to the latter personage as he should altogether
desire among his southern friends and acquaintances. He "guessed,
therefore, best haul off," and each--here Bunce showed his respect for
his new friends by quoting their phraseology--"must paddle his own
canoe."

We have minced this epistle, and have contented ourselves with providing
a scrap, here and there, to the reader--despairing, as we utterly do, to
gather from memory a full description of a performance so perfectly
unique in its singular compound of lofty vein, with the patois and
vulgar contractions of his native, and those common to his adopted
country.

It proved to his more staid and veteran brother, that Jared was the only
one of his family likely to get above his bread and business; but, while
he lamented the wanderings and follies of his brother, he could not help
enjoying a sentiment of pride as he looked more closely into the matter.
"Who knows," thought the clockmaker to himself, "but that Jared, who is
a monstrous sly fellow, will pick up some southern heiress, with a
thousand blackies, and an hundred acres of prime cotton-land to each,
and thus ennoble the blood of the Bunces by a rapid ascent, through the
various grades of office in a sovereign state, until a seat in
Congress--in the cabinet itself--receives him;"--and Ichabod grew more
than ever pleased and satisfied with the idea, when he reflected that
Jared had all along been held to possess a goodly person, and a very
fair development of the parts of speech. He even ventured to speculate
upon the possibility of Jared passing into the White House--the dawn of
that era having already arrived, which left nobody safe from the
crowning honors of the republic.

Whether the individual of whom so much was expected, himself entertained
any such anticipations or ideas, we do not pretend to say; but, certain
it is, that the southern candidate for the popular suffrage could never
have taken more pains to extend his acquaintance or to ingratiate
himself among the people, than did our worthy friend the pedler. In the
brief time which he had passed in the village after the arrest of
Colleton, he had contrived to have something to say or do with almost
everybody in it. He had found a word for his honor the judge; and having
once spoken with that dignitary, Bunce was not the man to fail at future
recognition. No distance of manner, no cheerless response, to the
modestly urged or moderate suggestion, could prompt him to forego an
acquaintance. With the jurors he had contrived to enjoy a sup of whiskey
at the tavern bar-room, and had actually, and with a manner the most
adroit, gone deeply into the distribution of an entire packet of
steel-pens, one of which he accommodated to a reed, and to the fingers
of each of the worthy twelve, who made the panel on that
occasion--taking care, however, to assure them of the value of the gift,
by saying, that if he were to sell the article, twenty-five cents each
would be his lowest price, and he could scarcely save himself at that.
But this was not all. Having seriously determined upon abiding at the
south, he ventured upon some few of the practices prevailing in that
region, and on more than one occasion, a gallon of whiskey had
circulated "free gratis," and "_pro bono publico_," he added, somewhat
maliciously, at the cost of our worthy tradesman. These things, it may
not be necessary to say, had elevated that worthy into no moderate
importance among those around him; and, that he himself was not
altogether unconscious of the change, it may be remarked that an ugly
_kink_, or double in his back--the consequence of his pack and past
humility--had gone down wonderfully, keeping due pace in its descent
with the progress of his upward manifestations.

Such was the somewhat novel position of Bunce, in the village and
neighborhood of Chestatee, when the absolute necessity of the case
prompted Munro's application to him for assistance in the proposed
extrication of Ralph Colleton. The landlord had not been insensible to
the interest which the pedler had taken in the youth's fortune, and not
doubting his perfect sympathy with the design in view, he felt the fewer
scruples in approaching him for the purpose. Putting on, therefore, the
disguise, which, as an old woman, had effectually concealed his true
person from Bunce on a previous occasion, he waited until evening had
set in fairly, and then proceeded to the abode of him he sought.

The pedler was alone in his cottage, discussing, most probably, his
future designs, and calculating to a nicety the various profits of each
premeditated branch of his future business. Munro's disguise was
intended rather to facilitate his progress without detection through the
village, than to impose upon the pedler merely; but it was not unwise
that he should be ignorant also of the person with whom he dealt.
Affecting a tone of voice, therefore, which, however masculine, was yet
totally unlike his own, the landlord demanded a private interview, which
was readily granted, though, as the circumstance was unusual, with some
few signs of trepidation. Bunce was no lover of old women, nor, indeed,
of young ones either. He was habitually and constitutionally cold and
impenetrable on the subject of all passions, save that of trade, and
would rather have sold a dress of calico, than have kissed the prettiest
damsel in creation. His manner, to the old woman who appeared before
him, seemed that of one who had an uncomfortable suspicion of having
pleased rather more than he intended; and it was no small relief,
therefore, the first salutation being over, when the masculine tones
reassured him. Munro, without much circumlocution, immediately proceeded
to ask whether he was willing to lend a hand for the help of Colleton,
and to save him from the gallows?

"Colleton!--save Master Colleton!--do tell--is that what you mean?"

"It is. Are you the man to help your friend--will you make one along
with others who are going to try for it?"

"Well, now, don't be rash; give a body time to consider. It's pesky full
of trouble; dangerous, too. It's so strange!--" and the pedler showed
himself a little bewildered by the sudden manner in which the subject
had been broached.

"There's little time to be lost, Bunce: if we don't set to work at once,
we needn't set to work at all. Speak out, man! will you join us, now or
never, to save the young fellow?"

With something like desperation in his manner, as if he scrupled to
commit himself too far, yet had the will to contribute considerably to
the object, the pedler replied:--

"Save the young fellow? well, I guess I will, if you'll jest say what's
to be done. I'll lend a hand, to be sure, if there's no trouble to come
of it. He's a likely chap, and not so stiff neither, though I did count
him rather high-headed at first; but after that, he sort a smoothed
down, and now I don't know nobody I'd sooner help jest now out of the
slush: but I can't see how we're to set about it."

"Can you fight, Bunce? Are you willing to knock down and drag out, when
there's need for it?"

"Why, if I was fairly listed, and if so be there's no law agin it. I
don't like to run agin the law, no how; and if you could get a body
clear on it, why, and there's no way to do the thing no other how, I
guess I shouldn't stand too long to consider when it's to help a
friend."

"It may be no child's play, Bunce, and there must be stout heart and
free hand. One mustn't stop for trifles in such cases; and, as for the
law, when a man's friend's in danger, he must make his own law."

"That wan't my edication, no how; my principles goes agin it. I must
think about it. I must have a little time to consider." But the landlord
saw no necessity for consideration, and, fearful that the scruples of
Bunce would be something too strong, he proceeded to smooth away the
difficulty.

"After all, Bunce, the probability is, we shall be able to manage the
affair without violence: so we shall try, for I like blows just as
little as anybody else; but it's best, you know, to make ready for the
worst. Nobody knows how things will turn up; and if it comes to the
scratch, why, one mustn't mind knocking a fellow on the head if he
stands in the way."

"No, to be sure not. 'Twould be foolish to stop and think about what's
law, and what's not law, and be knocked down yourself."

"Certainly, you're right, Bunce; that's only reason."

"And yet, mister, I guess you wouldn't want that I should know your raal
name, now, would you? or maybe you're going to tell it to me now?
Well--"

"To the business: what matters it whether I have a name or not? I have a
fist, you see, and--"

"Yes, yes, I see," exclaimed he of the notions, slightly retreating, as
Munro, suiting the action to the word, thrust, rather more closely to
the face of his companion than was altogether encouraging, the ponderous
mass which courtesy alone would consider a fist--

"Well, I don't care, you see, to know the name, mister; but somehow it
raally aint the thing, no how, to be mistering nobody knows who. I see
you aint a woman plain enough from your face, and I pretty much conclude
you must be a man; though you have got on--what's that, now? It's a kind
of calico, I guess; but them's not fast colors, friend. I should say,
now, you had been taken in pretty much by that bit of goods. It aint the
kind of print, now, that's not afeard of washing."

"And if I have been taken in, Bunce, in these calicoes, you're the man
that has done it," said the landlord, laughing. "This piece was sold by
you into my own hands, last March was a year, when you came back from
the Cherokees."

"Now, don't! Well, I guess there must be some mistake; you aint sure,
now, friend: might be some other dealer that you bought from?"

"None other than yourself, Bunce. You are the man, and I can bring a
dozen to prove it on you."

"Well, I 'spose what you say's true, and that jest let's me know how to
mister you now, 'cause, you see, I do recollect now all about who I sold
that bit of goods to that season."

The landlord had been overreached; and, amused with the ingenuity of the
trader, he contented himself with again lifting the huge fist in a
threatening manner, though the smile which accompanied the action fairly
deprived it of its terrors.

"Well, well," said the landlord "we burn daylight in such talk as this.
I come to you as the only man who will or can help me in this matter;
and Lucy Munro tells me you will--you made her some such promise."

"Well, now, I guess I must toe the chalk, after all; though, to say
truth, I don't altogether remember giving any such promise. It must be
right, though, if she says it; and sartain she's a sweet body--I'll go
my length for her any day."

"You'll not lose by it; and now hear my plan. You know Brooks, the
jailer, and his bulldog brother-in-law, Tongs? I saw you talking with
both of them yesterday."

"Guess you're right. Late acquaintance, though; they aint neither on 'em
to my liking."

"Enough for our purpose. Tongs is a brute who will drink as long as he
can stand, and some time after it. Brooks is rather shy of it, but he
will drink enough to stagger him, for he is pretty weak-headed. We have
only to manage these fellows, and there's the end of it. They keep the
jail."

"Yes, I know; but you don't count young Brooks?"

"Oh, he's a mere boy. Don't matter about him. He's easily managed. Now
hear to my design. Provide your jug of whiskey, with plenty of eggs and
sugar, so that they shan't want anything, and get them here. Send for
Tongs at once, and let him only know what's in the wind; then ask
Brooks, and he will be sure to force him to come. Say nothing of the
boy; let him stay or come, as they think proper. To ask all might make
them suspicious. They'll both come. They never yet resisted a spiritual
temptation. When here, ply them well, and then we shall go on according
to circumstances. Brooks carries the keys along with him: get him once
in for it, and I'll take them from him. If he resists, or any of them--"

"Knock 'em down?"

"Ay, quickly as you say it!"

"Well, but how if they do not bring the boy, and they leave him in the
jail?"

"What then! Can't we knock him down too?"

"But, then, they'll fix the whole business on my head. Won't Brooks and
Tongs say where they got drunk, and then shan't I be in a scant fixin'?"

"They dare not. They won't confess themselves drunk--it's as much as
their place is worth. They will say nothing till they got sober, and
then they'll get up some story that will hurt nobody."

"But--"

"But what? will you never cease to but against obstacles? Are you a
man--are you ready--bent to do what you can? Speak out, and let me know
if I can depend on you," exclaimed the landlord, impatiently.

"Now, don't be in a passion! You're as soon off as a fly-machine, and a
thought sooner. Why, didn't I say, now, I'd go my length for the young
gentleman? And I'm sure I'm ready, and aint at all afeared, no how. I
only did want to say that, if the thing takes wind, as how it raaly
stood, it spiles all my calkilations. I couldn't 'stablish a consarn
here, I guess, for a nation long spell of time after."

"And what then? where's your calculations? Get the young fellow clear,
and what will his friends do for you? Think of that, Bunce. You go off
to Carolina with him, and open store in his parts, and he buys from you
all he wants--his negro-cloths, his calicoes, his domestics, and
stripes, and everything. Then his family, and friends and neighbors,
under his recommendation--they all buy from you; and then the presents
they will make you--the fine horses--and who knows but even a plantation
and negroes may all come out of this one transaction?"

"To be sure--who knows? Well, things do look temptatious enough, and
there's a mighty deal of reason, now, in what you say. Large business
that, I guess, in the long run. Aint I ready? Let's see--a gallon of
whiskey--aint a gallon a heap too much for only three people?"

"Better have ten than want. Then there must be pipes, tobacco, cigars;
and mind, when they get well on in drinking, I shall look to you through
that window. Be sure and come to me then. Make some pretence, for, as
Brooks may be slow and cautious, I shall get something to drop into his
liquor--a little mixture which I shall hand you."

"What mixture? No pizen, I hope! I don't go that, not I--no pizening for
me."

"Pshaw! fool--nonsense! If I wanted their lives, could I not choose a
shorter method, and a weapon which I could more truly rely upon than I
ever can upon you? It is to make them sleep that I shall give you the
mixture."

"Oh, laudnum. Well, now why couldn't you say laudnum at first, without
frightening people so with your mixtures'?--There's no harm in laudnum,
for my old aunt Tabitha chaws laudnum-gum jest as other folks chaws
tobacco."

"Well, that's all--it's only to get them asleep sooner. See now about
your men at once. We have no time to lose; and, if this contrivance
fails, I must look about for another. It must be done to-night, or it
can not be done at all. In an hour I shall return; and hope, by that
time, to find you busy with their brains. Ply them well--don't be slow
or stingy--and see that you have enough of whiskey. Here's money--have
everything ready."

The pedler took the money--why not? it was only proper to spoil the
Egyptians--and, after detailing fully his plans, Munro left him. Bunce
gave himself but little time and less trouble for reflection. The
prospects of fortune which the landlord had magnified to his vision,
were quite too enticing to be easily resisted by one whose _morale_ was
not of a sort to hold its ground against his habitual cupidity and
newly-awakened ambition; and having provided everything, as agreed upon,
necessary for the accommodation of the jailer and his assistant, Bunce
sallied forth for the more important purpose of getting his company.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

SACK AND SUGAR.


The task of getting the desired guests, as Munro had assured him, was by
no means difficult, and our pedler was not long in reporting progress.
Tongs, a confirmed toper, was easily persuaded to anything that
guarantied hard drinking. He luxuriated in the very idea of a debauch.
Brooks, his brother-in-law, was a somewhat better and less pregnable
person; but he was a widower, had been a good deal with Tongs, and, what
with the accustomed loneliness of the office which he held, and the
gloomy dwelling in which it required he should live, he found it not
such an easy matter to resist the temptation of social enjoyment, and
all the pleasant associations of that good-fellowship, which Bunce had
taken care to depict before the minds of both parties. The attractions
of Bunce himself, by-the-way, tended, not less than the whiskey and
cigars, to persuade the jailer, and to neutralize most of the existing
prejudices current among those around him against his tribe. He had
travelled much, and was no random observer. He had seen a great deal, as
well of human nature as of places; could tell a good story, in good
spirit; and was endowed with a dry, sneaking humor, that came out
unawares upon his hearers, and made them laugh frequently in spite of
themselves.

Bunce had been now sufficiently long in the village to enable those
about him to come at a knowledge of his parts; and his accomplishments,
in the several respects referred to, were by this time generally well
understood. The inducement was sufficiently strong with the jailer; and,
at length, having secured the main entrance of the jail carefully, he
strapped the key to a leathern girdle, which he wore about him, lodging
it in the breast-pocket of his coat, where he conceived it perfectly
safe, he prepared to go along with his worthy brother-in-law. Nor was
the younger Brooks forgotten. Being a tall, good-looking lad of sixteen,
Tongs insisted it was high time he should appear among men; and the
invitation of the pedler was opportune, as affording a happy occasion
for his initiation into some of those practices, esteemed, by a liberal
courtesy, significant of manliness.

With everything in proper trim, Bunce stood at the entrance of his
lodge, ready to receive them. The preliminaries were soon despatched,
and we behold them accordingly, all four, comfortably seated around a
huge oaken table in the centre of the apartment. There was the jug, and
there the glasses--the sugar, the peppermint, the nutmegs--the pipes and
tobacco--all convenient, and sufficiently tempting for the unscrupulous.
The pedler did the honors with no little skill, and Tongs plunged
headlong into the debauch. The whiskey was never better, and found, for
this reason, anything but security where it stood. Glass after glass,
emptied only to be replenished, attested the industrious hospitality of
the host, not less than its own excellence. Tongs, averaging three
draughts to one of his companion's, was soon fairly under way in his
progress to that state of mental self-glorification in which the world
ceases to have vicissitudes, and the animal realizes the abstractions of
an ancient philosophy, and denies all pain to life.

Brooks, however, though not averse to the overcoming element, had more
of that vulgar quality of prudence than his brother-in-law, and far
more than was thought amiable in the opinion of the pedler. For some
time, therefore, he drank with measured scrupulousness; and it was
with no small degree of anxiety that Bunce plied him with the
bottle--complaining of his unsociableness, and watching, with the
intensity of any other experimentalist, the progress of his scheme upon
him. As for the lad--the younger Brooks--it was soon evident that, once
permitted, and even encouraged to drink, as he had been, by his
superiors, he would not, after a little while, give much if any
inconvenience to the conspirators. The design of the pedler was
considerably advanced by Tongs, who, once intoxicated himself, was not
slow in the endeavor to bring all around him under the same influence.

"Drink, Brooks--drink, old fellow," he exclaimed; "as you are a true
man, drink, and don't fight shy of the critter! Whiskey, my boy--old
Monongahely like this, I say--whiskey is wife and children--house and
horse--lands and niggers--liberty and [hiccup] plenty to live on! Don't
you see how I drive ahead, and don't care for the hind wheels? It's all
owing to whiskey! Grog, I say--Hark ye, Mr. Pedler--grog, I say, is the
wheels of life: it carries a man _for'ad_. Why don't men go _for'ad_ in
the world? What's the reason now? I'll tell you. They're afeared. Well,
now, who's afeared when he's got a broadside of whiskey in him?
Nobody--nobody's afeared but you--you, Ben Brooks, you're a d----d
crick--crick--you're always afeared of something, or nothing; for, after
all, whenever you're afeared of something, it turns out to be nothing!
All 'cause you don't drink like a man. That's his cha-cha-_rack_-ter,
Mr. Bunce; and it's all owing 'cause he won't drink!"

"Guess there's no sparing of reason in that bit of argument, now, I tell
you, Mr. Tongs. Bless my heart--it's no use talking, no how, but I'd a
been clean done up, dead as a door-nail, if it hadn't been for drink.
Strong drink makes strong. Many's the time, and the freezing cold, and
the hard travelling in bad roads, and other dreadful fixins I've seed,
would soon ha' settled me up, if it hadn't been for that same good stuff
there, that Master Brooks does look as if he was afeared on. Now, don't
be afeared, Master Brooks. There's no teeth in whiskey, and it never
bites nobody."

"No," said Brooks, with the utmost simplicity; "only when they take too
much."

"How?" said the pedler, looking as if the sentence contained some
mysterious meaning. Brooks might have explained, but for Tongs, who
dashed in after this fashion:--

"And who takes too much? You don't mean to say I takes too much, Ben
Brooks. I'd like to hear the two-legged critter, now, who'd say I takes
more of the stuff than does me good. I drinks in reason, for the benefit
of my health; and jest, you see, as a sort of medicine, Mr. Bunce; and,
Brooks, you knows I never takes a drop more than is needful."

"Sometimes--sometimes, Tongs, you know you ain't altogether right under
it--now and then you take a leetle too much for your good," was the mild
response of Brooks, to the almost fierce speech of his less scrupulous
brother-in-law. The latter, thus encountered, changed his ground with
singular rapidity.

"Well, by dogs!--and what of that?--and who is it says I shan't, if it's
my notion? I'd like now to see the boy that'll stand up agin me and make
such a speech. Who says I shan't take what I likes--and that I takes
more than is good for me? Does you say so, Mr. Bunce?"

"No, thank ye, no. How should I say what ain't true? You don't take half
enough, now, it's my idee, neither on you. It's all talk and no cider,
and that I call monstrous dry work. Come, pass round the bottle. Here's
to you, Master Tongs--Master Brooks, I drink your very good health. But
fill up, fill up--you ain't got nothing in your tumbler."

"No, he's a sneak--you're a sneak, Brooks, if you don't fill up to the
hub. Go the whole hog, boy, and don't twist your mouth as if the stuff
was physic. It's what I call nation good, now; no mistake in it, I tell
you."

"Hah! that's a true word--there's no mistake in this stuff. It is jest
now what I calls ginywine."

"True Monongahely, Master Bunce. Whoever reckoned to find a Yankee
pedler with a _raal_ good taste for Monongahely? Give us your fist, Mr.
Bunce; I see you know's what's what. You ain't been among us for
nothing. You've larned something by travelling; and, by dogs! you'll
come to be something yit, if you live long enough--if so be you can only
keep clear of the _old range_."

The pedler winced under the equivocal compliments of his companion, but
did not suffer anything of this description to interfere with the
vigorous prosecution of his design. He had the satisfaction to perceive
that Brooks had gradually accommodated himself not a little to the
element in which his brother-in-law, Tongs, was already floating
happily; and the boy, his son, already wore the features of one over
whose senses the strong liquor was momentarily obtaining the mastery.
But these signs did not persuade him into any relaxation of his labors;
on the contrary, encouraged by success, he plied the draughts more
frequently and freely than before, and with additional evidence of the
influence of the potation upon those who drank, when he found that he
was enabled, unperceived, to deposit the contents of his own tumbler, in
most instances, under the table around which they gathered. In the cloud
of smoke encircling them, and sent up from their several pipes, Bunce
could perceive the face of his colleague in the conspiracy peering in
occasionally upon the assembly, and at length, on some slight pretence,
he approached the aperture agreeably to the given signal, and received
from the hands of the landlord a vial containing a strong infusion of
opium, which he placed cautiously in his bosom, and awaited the moment
of more increased stupefaction to employ it. So favorably had the liquor
operated by this time upon the faculties of all, that the elder Brooks
grew garrulous and full of jest at the expense of his son--who now,
completely overcome, had sunk down with his head upon the table in a
profound slumber. The pedler joined, as well as Tongs, in the
merriment--this latter personage, by the way, having now put himself
completely under the control of the ardent spirit, and exhibiting all
the appearance of a happy madness. He howled like the wolf, imitated
sundry animals, broke out into catches of song, which he invariably
failed to finish, and, at length, grappling his brother-in-law, Brooks,
around the neck, with both arms, as he sat beside him, he swore by all
that was strong in _Monongahely_, he should give them a song.

"That's jest my idee, now, Master Tongs. A song is a main fine thing,
now, to fill up the chinks. First a glass, then a puff or two, and then
a song."

Brooks, who, in backwood parlance, was "considerably up a stump"--that
is to say, half drunk--after a few shows of resistance, and the
utterance of some feeble scruples, which were all rapidly set aside by
his companions, proceeded to pour forth the rude melody which follows:--

    THE HOW-D'YE-DO BOY.

      "For a how-d'ye-do boy, 'tis pleasure enough
       To have a sup of such goodly stuff--
       To float away in a sky of fog,
       And swim the while in a sea of grog;
               So, high or low,
               Let the world go,
    The how-d'ye-do boy don't care for it--no--no--no--no."

Tonga, who seemed to be familiar with the uncouth dithyrambic, joined in
the chorus, with a tumultuous discord, producing a most admirable
effect; the pedler dashing in at the conclusion, and shouting the
_finale_ with prodigious compass of voice. The song proceeded:--

      "For a how-d'ye-do boy, who smokes and drinks,
       He does not care who cares or thinks;
       Would Grief deny him to laugh and sing,
       He knocks her down with a single sling--
               So, high or low,
               Let the world go,
    The how-d'ye-do boy don't care for it--no--no--no--no.

      "The how-d'ye-do boy is a boy of the night--
       It brings no cold, and it does not fright;
       He buttons his coat and laughs at the shower,
       And he has a song for the darkest hour--
               So, high or low,
               Let the world go,
    The how-d'ye-do boy don't care for it--no--no--no--no."

The song gave no little delight to all parties. Tongs shouted, the
pedler roared applause, and such was the general satisfaction, that it
was no difficult thing to persuade Brooks to the demolition of a bumper,
which Bunce adroitly proposed to the singer's own health. It was while
the hilarity thus produced was at its loudest, that the pedler seized
the chance to pour a moderate portion of the narcotic into the several
glasses of his companions, while a second time filling them; but,
unfortunately for himself, not less than the design in view, just at
this moment Brooks grew awkwardly conscious of his own increasing
weakness, having just reason enough left to feel that he had already
drunk too much. With a considerable show of resolution, therefore, he
thrust away the glass so drugged for his benefit, and declared his
determination to do no more of that business. He withstood all the
suggestions of the pedler on the subject, and the affair began to look
something less than hopeless when he proceeded to the waking up of his
son, who, overcome by the liquor, was busily employed in a profound
sleep, with his head upon the table.

Tongs, who had lost nearly all the powers of action, though retaining
not a few of his parts of speech, now came in fortunately to the aid of
the rather-discomfited pedler. Pouring forth a volley of oaths, in which
his more temperate brother-in-law was denounced as a mean-spirited
critter, who couldn't drink with his friend or fight with his enemy, he
made an ineffectual effort to grapple furiously with the offender, while
he more effectually arrested his endeavor to waken up his son. It is
well, perhaps, that his animal man lacked something of its accustomed
efficiency, and resolutely refused all co-operation with his mood; or,
it is more than probable, such was his wrath, that his more staid
brother-in-law would have been subjected to some few personal tests of
blow and buffet. The proceedings throughout suggested to the mind of the
pedler a mode of executing his design, by proposing a bumper all round,
with the view of healing the breach between the parties, and as a final
draught preparatory to breaking up.

A suggestion so reasonable could not well be resisted; and, with the
best disposition in the world toward sobriety, Brooks was persuaded to
assent to the measure. Unhappily, however, for the pedler, the measure
was so grateful to Tongs, that, before the former could officiate, the
latter, with a desperate effort, reached forward, and, possessing
himself of his own glass, he thrust another, which happened to be the
only undrugged one, and which Bunce had filled for himself, into the
grasp of the jailer. The glass designed for Brooks was now in the
pedler's own hands, and no time was permitted him for reflection. With a
doubt as to whether he had not got hold of the posset meant for his
neighbor, Bunce was yet unable to avoid the difficulty; and, in a
moment, in good faith, the contents of the several glasses were fairly
emptied by their holders. There was a pause of considerable duration;
the several parties sank back quietly into their seats; and, supposing
from appearances that the effect of the drug had been complete, the
pedler, though feeling excessively stupid and strange, had yet
recollection enough to give the signal to his comrade. A moment only
elapsed, when Munro entered the apartment, seemingly unperceived by all
but the individual who had called him; and, as an air of considerable
vacancy and repose overspread all the company he naturally enough
concluded the potion had taken due hold of the senses of the one whom it
was his chief object to overcome. Without hesitation, therefore, and
certainly asking no leave, he thrust one hand into the bosom of the
worthy jailer, while the other was employed in taking a sure hold of his
collar. To his great surprise, however, he found that his man suffered
from no lethargy, though severely bitten by the drink. Brooks made
fierce resistance; though nothing at such a time, or indeed at any time,
in the hands of one so powerfully built as Munro.

"Hello! now--who are you, I say? Hands off!--Tongs! Tongs!--Hands
off!--Tongs, I say--"

But Tongs heard not, or heeded not, any of the rapid exclamations of the
jailer, who continued to struggle. Munro gave a single glance to the
pedler, whose countenance singularly contrasted with the expression
which, in the performance of such a duty, and at such a time, it might
have been supposed proper for it to have worn. There was a look from his
eyes of most vacant and elevated beatitude; a simper sat upon his lips,
which parted ineffectually with the speech that he endeavored to make. A
still lingering consciousness of something to be done, prompted him to
rise, however, and stumble toward the landlord, who, while scuffling
with the jailer, thus addressed him:--

"Why, Bunce, it's but half done!--you've bungled. See, he's too sober by
half!"

"Sober? no, no--guess he's drunk--drunk as a gentleman. I say, now--what
must I do?"

"Do?" muttered the landlord, between his teeth, and pointing to Tongs,
who reeled and raved in his seat, "do as I do!" And, at the word, with a
single blow of his fist, he felled the still refractory jailer with as
much ease as if he had been an infant in his hands. The pedler, only
half conscious, turned nevertheless to the half-sleeping Tongs, and
resolutely drove his fist into his face.

It was at that moment that the nostrum, having taken its full effect,
deprived him of the proper force which alone could have made the blow
available for the design which he had manfully enough undertaken. The
only result of the effort was to precipitate him, with an impetus not
his own, though deriving much of its effect from his own weight, upon
the person of the enfeebled Tongs: the toper clasped him round with a
corresponding spirit, and they both rolled upon the floor in utter
imbecility, carrying with them the table around which they had been
seated, and tumbling into the general mass of bottles, pipes, and
glasses, the slumbering youth, who, till that moment, lay altogether
ignorant of the catastrophe.

Munro, in the meanwhile, had possessed himself of the desired keys; and
throwing a sack, with which he had taken care to provide himself, over
the head of the still struggling but rather stupified jailer, he bound
the mouth of it with cords closely around his body, and left him
rolling, with more elasticity and far less comfort than the rest of the
party, around the floor of the apartment.

He now proceeded to look at the pedler; and seeing his condition, though
much wondering at his falling so readily into his own temptation--never
dreaming of the mistake which he had made--he did not waste time to
rouse him up, as he plainly saw he could get no further service out of
him. A moment's reflection taught him, that, as the condition of Bunce
himself would most probably free him from any suspicion of design, the
affair told as well for his purpose as if the original arrangement had
succeeded. Without more pause, therefore, he left the house, carefully
locking the doors on the outside, so as to delay egress, and hastened
immediately to the release of the prisoner.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

FREEDOM--FLIGHT.


The landlord lost no time in freeing the captive. A few minutes sufficed
to find and fit the keys; and, penetrating at once to the cell of Ralph
Colleton, he soon made the youth acquainted with as much of the
circumstances of his escape as might be thought necessary for the
satisfaction of his immediate curiosity. He wondered at the part taken
by Munro in the affair, but hesitated not to accept his assistance.
Though scrupulous, and rigidly so, not to violate the laws, and having a
conscientious regard to all human and social obligations, he saw no
immorality in flying from a sentence, however agreeable to law, in all
respects so greatly at variance with justice. A second intimation was
not wanting to his decision; and, without waiting until the landlord
should unlock the chain which secured him, he was about to dart forward
into the passage, when the restraining check which it gave to his
forward movement warned him of the difficulty.

Fortunately, the obstruction was small: the master-key, not only of the
cells, but of the several locks to the fetters of the prison, was among
the bunch of which the jailer had been dispossessed; and, when found, it
performed its office. The youth was again free; and a few moments only
had elapsed, after the departure of Munro from the house of the pedler,
when both Ralph and his deliverer were upon the high-road, and bending
their unrestrained course toward the Indian nation.

"And now, young man," said the landlord, "you are free. I have performed
my promise to one whose desire in this matter jumps full with my own. I
should have been troubled enough had you perished for the death of
Forrester, though, to speak the truth, I should not have risked myself,
as I have done to-night, but for my promise to her."

"Who?--of whom do you speak? To whom do I owe all this, if it comes not
of your own head?"

"And you do not conjecture? Have you not a thought on the subject? Was
it likely, think you, that the young woman, who did not fear to go to a
stranger's chamber at midnight, in order to save him from his enemy,
would forget him altogether when a greater danger was before him?"

"And to Miss Munro again do I owe my life? Noble girl! how shall I
requite--how acknowledge my deep responsibility to her?"

"You can not! I have not looked on either of you for nothing; and my
observation has taught me all your feelings and hers. You can not reward
her as she deserves to be rewarded--as, indeed, she only can be rewarded
by you, Mr. Colleton. Better, therefore, that you seek to make no
acknowledgments."

"What mean you? Your words have a signification beyond my comprehension.
I know that I am unable to requite services such as hers, and such an
endeavor I surely should not attempt; but that I feel gratitude for her
interposition may not well be questioned--the deepest gratitude; for in
this deed, with your aid, she relieves me, not merely from death, but
the worse agony of that dreadful form of death. My acknowledgments for
this service are nothing, I am well aware; but these she shall have: and
what else have I to offer, which she would be likely to accept?"

"There is, indeed, one thing, Mr. Colleton--now that I reflect--which it
may be in your power to do, and which may relieve you of some of the
obligations which you owe to her interposition, here and elsewhere."

The landlord paused for a moment, and looked hesitatingly in Ralph's
countenance. The youth saw and understood the expression, and replied
readily:--

"Doubt not, Mr. Munro, that I shall do all things consistent with
propriety, in my power to do, that may take the shape and character of
requital for this service; anything for Miss Munro, for yourself or
others, not incompatible with the character of the gentleman. Speak,
sir: if you can suggest a labor of any description, not under this head,
which would be grateful to yourself or her, fear not to speak, and rely
upon my gratitude to serve you both."

"I thank you, Mr. Colleton; your frankness relieves me of some heavy
thoughts, and I shall open my mind freely to you on the subject which
now troubles it. I need not tell you what my course of life has been. I
need not tell you what it is now. Bad enough, Mr. Colleton--bad enough,
as you must know by this time. Life, sir, is uncertain with all persons,
but far more uncertain with him whose life is such as mine. I know not
the hour, sir, when I may be knocked on the head. I have no confidence
in the people I go with; I have nothing to hope from the sympathies of
society, or the protection of the laws; and I have now arrived at that
time of life when my own experience is hourly repeating in my ears the
words of scripture: 'The wages of sin is death.' Mine has been a life of
sin, Mr. Colleton, and I must look for its wages. These thoughts have
been troubling me much of late, and I feel them particularly heavy now.
But, don't think, sir, that fear for myself makes up my suffering. I
fear for that poor girl, who has no protector, and may be doomed to the
control of one who would make a hell on earth for all under his
influence. He has made a hell of it for me."

"Who is he? whom do you mean?"

"You should know him well enough by this time, for he has sought your
life often enough already--who should I mean, if not Guy Rivers?"

"And how is she at the mercy of this wretch?"

The landlord continued as if he had not heard the inquiry:

"Well, as I say, I know not how long I shall be able to take care of and
provide for that poor girl, whose wish has prompted me this night to
what I have undertaken. She was my brother's child, Mr. Colleton, and a
noble creature she is. If I live, sir, she will have to become the wife
of Rivers; and, though I love her as my own--as I have never loved my
own--yet she must abide the sacrifice from which, _while I live_, there
is no escape. But something tells me, sir, I have not long to live. I
have a notion which makes me gloomy, and which has troubled me ever
since you have been in prison. One dream comes to me every
night--whenever I sleep--and I wake, all over perspiration, and with a
terror I'm ashamed of. In this dream I see my brother always, and always
with the same expression. He looks at me long and mournfully, and his
finger is uplifted, as if in warning. I hear no word from his lips, but
they are in motion as if he spoke, and then he walks slowly away. Thus,
for several nights, has my mind been haunted, and I'm sure it is not for
nothing. It warns me that the time is not very far distant when I shall
receive the wages of a life like mine--the wages of sin--the death,
perhaps--who knows?--the death of the felon!"

"These are fearful fancies, indeed, Mr. Munro; and, whether we think on
them or not, will have their influence over the strongest-minded of us
all: but the thoughts which they occasion to your mind, while they must
be painful enough, may be the most useful, if they awaken regret of the
past, and incite to amendment in the future. Without regarding them as
the presentiments of death, or of any fearful change, I look upon them
only as the result of your own calm reflections upon the unprofitable
nature of vice; its extreme unproductiveness in the end, however
enticing in the beginning; and the painful privations of human sympathy
and society, which are the inevitable consequences of its indulgence.
These fancies are the sleepless thoughts, the fruit of an active memory,
which, at such a time, unrestrained by the waking judgment, mingles up
the counsels and the warnings of your brother and the past, with all the
images and circumstances of the present time. But--go on with your
suggestion. Let me do what I can for the good of those in whom you are
interested."

"You are right: whatever may be my apprehensions, life is uncertain
enough, and needs no dreams to make it more so. Still, I can not rid
myself of this impression, which sticks to me like a shadow. Night after
night I have seen him--just as I saw him a year before he died. But his
looks were full of meaning; and when his lips opened, though I heard not
a word, they seemed to me to say, 'The hour is at hand!' I am sure they
spoke the truth, and I must prepare for it. _If I live_, Mr. Colleton,
Lucy must marry Rivers: there's no hope for her escape. If I die,
there's no reason for the marriage, for she can then bid him defiance.
She is willing to marry him now merely on my account; for, to say in
words, what you no doubt understand, _I_ am at his mercy. If I perish
before the marriage take place, it will not take place; and she will
then need a protector--"

"Say no more," exclaimed the youth, as the landlord paused for an
instant--"say no more. It will be as little as I can say, when I assure
you, that all that my family can do for her happiness--all that I can
do--shall be done. Be at ease on this matter, and believe me that I
promise you nothing which my heart would not strenuously insist upon my
performing. She shall be a sister to me."

As he spoke, the landlord warmly pressed his hand, leaning forward from
his saddle as he did so, but without a single accompanying word. The
dialogue was continued, at intervals, in a desultory form, and without
sustaining, for any length of time, any single topic. Munro seemed heavy
with gloomy thoughts; and the sky, now becoming lightened with the
glories of the ascending moon, seemed to have no manner of influence
over his sullen temperament. Not so with the youth. He grew elastic and
buoyant as they proceeded; and his spirit rose, bright and gentle, as if
in accordance with the pure lights which now disposed themselves, like
an atmosphere of silver, throughout the forest. The thin clouds,
floating away from the parent-orb, and no longer obscuring her progress,
became tributaries, and were clothed in their most dazzling
draperies--clustering around her pathway, and contributing not a little
to the loveliness of that serene star from which they received so much.
But the contemplations of the youth were not long permitted to run on in
the gladness of his newly-found liberty. On a sudden, the action of his
companion became animated: he drew up his steed for an instant, then
applying the rowel, exclaimed in a deep but suppressed tone--

"We are pursued--ride, now--for your life, Mr. Colleton; it is three
miles to the river, and our horses will serve us well. They are
chosen--ply the spur, and follow close after me."

Let us return to the village. The situation of the jailer, Brooks, and
of his companions, as the landlord left them, will be readily remembered
by the reader. It was not until the fugitives were fairly on the road,
that the former, who had been pretty well stunned by the severe blow
given him by Munro, recovered from his stupor; and he then laboured
under the difficulty of freeing himself from the bag about his head and
shoulders, and his incarceration in the dwelling of the pedler.

The blow had come nigh to sobering him, and his efforts, accordingly,
were not without success. He looked round in astonishment upon the
condition of all things around him, ignorant of the individual who had
wrested from him his charge, besides subjecting his scull to the heavy
test which it had been so little able to resist or he to repel; and,
almost ready to believe, from the equally prostrate condition of the
pedler and his brother, that, in reality, the assailant by which he
himself was overthrown was no other than the potent bottle-god of his
brother's familiar worship.

Such certainly would have been his impression but for the sack in which
he had been enveloped, and the absence of his keys. The blow, which he
had not ceased to feel, might have been got by a drunken man in a
thousand ways, and was no argument to show the presence of an enemy; but
the sack, and the missing keys--they brought instant conviction, and a
rapidly increasing sobriety, which, as it duly increased his capacity
for reflection, was only so much more unpleasant than his drunkenness.

But no time was to be lost, and the first movement--having essayed,
though ineffectually, to kick his stupid host and snoring brother-in-law
into similar consciousness with himself--was to rush headlong to the
jail, where he soon realized all the apprehensions which assailed him
when discovering the loss of his keys. The prisoner was gone, and the
riotous search which he soon commenced about the village collected a
crowd whose clamors, not less than his own, had occasioned the uproar,
which concluded the conference between Miss Colleton and Guy Rivers, as
narrated in a previous chapter.

The mob, approaching the residence of Colonel Colleton, as a place which
might probably have been resorted to by the fugitive, brought the noise
more imperiously to the ears of Rivers, and compelled his departure. He
sallied forth, and in a little while ascertained the cause of the
disorder. By this time the dwelling of Colonel Colleton had undergone
the closest scrutiny. It was evident to the crowd, that, so far from
harboring the youth, they were not conscious of the escape; but of this
Rivers was not so certain. He was satisfied in his own mind that the
stern refusal of Edith to accept his overtures for the rescue, arose
only from the belief that they could do without him. More than ever
irritated by this idea, the outlaw was bold enough, relying upon his
disguise, to come forward, and while all was indecisive in the
multitude, to lay plans for a pursuit. He did not scruple to instruct
the jailer as to what course should be taken for the recovery of the
fugitive; and by his cool, strong sense and confidence of expression, he
infused new hope into that much-bewildered person. Nobody knew who he
was, but as the village was full of strangers, who had never been seen
there before, this fact occasioned neither surprise nor inquiry.

His advice was taken, and a couple of the Georgia guard, who were on
station in the village, now making their appearance, he suggested the
course which they should pursue, and in few words gave the reasons which
induced the choice. Familiar himself with all the various routes of the
surrounding country, he did not doubt that the fugitive, under whatever
guidance, for as yet he knew nothing of Munro's agency in the business,
would take the most direct course to the Indian nation.

All this was done, on his part, with an excited spirit, the result of
that malignant mood which now began to apprehend the chance of being
deprived of all its victims. Had this not been the case--had he not been
present--the probability is, that, in the variety of counsel, there
would have been a far greater delay in the pursuit; but such must always
be the influence of a strong and leading mind in a time of trial and
popular excitement. Such a mind concentrates and makes effective the
power which otherwise would be wasted in air. His superiority of
character was immediately manifest--his suggestions were adopted without
dissent; and, in a few moments the two troopers, accompanied by the
jailer, were in pursuit upon the very road taken by the fugitives.

Rivers, in the meanwhile, though excessively anxious about the result of
the pursuit, was yet too sensible of his own risk to remain much longer
in the village. Annoyed not a little by the apprehended loss of that
revenge which he had described as so delicious in contemplation to his
mind, he could not venture to linger where he was, at a time of such
general excitement and activity. With a prudent caution, therefore, more
the result of an obvious necessity than of any accustomed habit of his
life, he withdrew himself as soon as possible from the crowd, at the
moment when Pippin--who never lost a good opportunity--had mounted upon
a stump in order to address them. Breaking away just as the lawyer was
swelling with some old truism, and perhaps no truth, about the rights of
man and so forth, he mounted his horse, which he had concealed in the
neighborhood, and rode off to the solitude and the shelter of his den.

There was one thing that troubled his mind along with its other
troubles, and that was to find out who were the active parties in the
escape of Colleton. In all this time, he had not for a moment suspected
Munro of connection with the affair--he had too much overrated his own
influence with the landlord to permit of a thought in his mind
detrimental to his conscious superiority. He had no clue, the guidance
of which might bring him to the trail; for the jailer, conscious of his
own irregularity, was cautious enough in suppressing everything like a
detail of the particular circumstances attending the escape; contenting
himself, simply, with representing himself as having been knocked down
by some persons unknown, and rifled of the keys while lying insensible.

Rivers could only think of the pedler, and yet, such was his habitual
contempt for that person, that he dismissed the thought the moment it
came into his mind. Troubled thus in spirit, and filled with a thousand
conflicting notions, he had almost reached the rocks, when he was
surprised to perceive, on a sudden, close at his elbow, the dwarfish
figure of our old friend Chub Williams. Without exhibiting the slightest
show of apprehension, the urchin resolutely continued his course along
with the outlaw, unmoved by his presence, and with a degree of cavalier
indifference which he had never ventured to manifest to that dangerous
personage before.

"Why, how now, Chub--do you not see me?" was the first inquiry of
Rivers.

"Can the owl see?--Chub is an owl--he can't see in the moonlight."

"Well, but, Chub--why do you call yourself an owl? You don't want to see
me, boy, do you?"

"Chub wants to see nobody but his mother--there's Miss Lucy now--why
don't you let me see her? she talks jest like Chub's mother."

"Why, you dog, didn't you help to steal her away? Have you forgotten how
you pulled away the stones? I should have you whipped for it, sir--do
you know that I can whip--don't the hickories grow here?"

"Yes, so Chub's mother said--but you can't whip Chub. Chub laughs--he
laughs at all your whips. _That_ for your hickories. Ha! ha! ha! Chub
don't mind the hickories--you can't catch Chub, to whip him with your
hickories. Try now, if you can. Try--" and as he spoke he darted along
with a rickety, waddling motion, half earnest in his flight, yet
seemingly, partly with the desire to provoke pursuit. Something
irritated with what was so unusual in the habit of the boy, and what he
conceived only so much impertinence, the outlaw turned the horse's head
down the hill after him, but, as he soon perceived, without any chance
of overtaking him in so broken a region. The urchin all the while, as if
encouraged by the evident hopelessness of the chase on the part of the
pursuer, screeched out volley after volley of defiance and
laughter--breaking out at intervals into speeches which he thought most
like to annoy and irritate.

"Ha, ha, ha! Chub don't mind your hickories--Chub's fingers are long--he
will pull away all the stones of your house, and then you will have to
live in the tree-top."

But on a sudden his tune was changed, as Rivers, half-irritated by the
pertinacity of the dwarf, pull out a pistol, and directed it at his
head. In a moment, the old influence was predominant, and in undisguised
terror he cried out--

"Now don't--don't, Mr. Guy--don't you shoot Chub--Chub won't laugh
again--he won't pull away the stones--he won't."

The outlaw now laughed himself at the terror which he had inspired, and
beckoning the boy near him, he proceeded, if possible, to persuade him
into a feeling of amity. There was a strange temper in him with
reference to this outcast. His deformity--his desolate condition--his
deficient intellect, inspired, in the breast of the fierce man, a
feeling of sympathy, which he had not entertained for the whole world of
humanity beside.

Such is the contradictory character of the misled and the erring spirit.
Warped to enjoy crime--to love the deformities of all moral things--to
seek after and to surrender itself up to all manner of perversions, yet
now and then, in the long tissue, returning, for some moments, to the
original temper of that first nature not yet utterly departed; and few
and feeble though the fibres be which still bind the heart to her
worship, still strong enough at times to remind it of the _true_,
however it may be insufficient to restrain it in its wanderings after
the _false_.

But the language and effort of the outlaw, though singularly kind,
failed to have any of the desired effect upon the dwarf. With an
unhesitating refusal to enter the outlaw's dwelling-place in the rocks,
he bounded away into a hollow of the hills, and in a moment was out of
sight of his companion. Fatigued with his recent exertions, and somewhat
more sullen than usual, Rivers entered the gloomy abode, into which it
is not our present design to follow him.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

PURSUIT--DEATH.


The fugitives, meanwhile, pursued their way with the speed of men
conscious that life and death hung upon their progress. There needed no
exhortations from his companion to Ralph Colleton. More than life, with
him, depended upon his speed. The shame of such a death as that to which
he had been destined was for ever before his eyes, and with a heart
nerved to its utmost by a reference to the awful alternative of flight,
he grew reckless in the audacity with which he drove his horse forward
in defiance of all obstacle and over every impediment. Nor were the
present apprehensions of Munro much less than those of his companion. To
be overtaken, as the participant of the flight of one whose life was
forfeit, would necessarily invite such an examination of himself as must
result in the development of his true character, and such a discovery
must only terminate in his conviction and sentence to the same doom. His
previously-uttered presentiment grew more than ever strong with the
growing consciousness of his danger; and with an animation, the fruit of
an anxiety little short of absolute fear, he stimulated the progress of
Colleton, while himself driving the rowel ruthlessly into the smoking
sides of the animal he bestrode.

"On, sir--on, Mr. Colleton--this is no moment for graceful attitude.
Bend forward--free rein--rashing spur. We ride for life--for life. They
must not take us alive--remember _that_. Let them shoot--strike, if they
please--but they must put no hands on us as living men. If we must die,
why--any death but a dog's. Are you prepared for such a finish to your
ride?"

"I am--but I trust it has not come to that. How much have we yet to the
river?"

"Two miles at the least, and a tough road. They gain upon us--do you not
hear them--we are slow--very slow. These horses--on, Syphax, dull
devil--on--on!"

And at every incoherent and unconnected syllable, the landlord struck
his spurs into his animal, and incited the youth to do the same.

"There is an old mill upon the branch to our left, where for a few hours
we might lie in secret, but daylight would find us out. Shall we try a
birth there, or push on for the river?" inquired Munro.

"Push on, by all means--let us stop nowhere--we shall be safe if we make
the nation," was the reply.

"Ay, safe enough but that's the rub. If we could stretch a mile or two
between us, so as to cross before they heave in sight, I could take you
to a place where the whole United States would never find us out--but
they gain on us--I hear them every moment more and more near. The sounds
are very clear to-night--a sign of rain, perhaps to-morrow. On, sir!
Push! The pursuers must hear us, as we hear them."

"But I hear them not--I hear no sounds but our own--" replied the youth.

"Ah, that's because you have not the ears of an outlaw. There's a
necessity for using our ears, one of the first that we acquire, and I
can hear sounds farther, I believe, than any man I ever met, unless it
be Guy Rivers. He has the ears of the devil, when his blood's up. Then
he hears further than I can, though I'm not much behind him even then.
Hark! they are now winding the hill not more than half a mile off, and
we hear nothing of them now until they get round--the hill throws the
echo to the rear, as it is more abrupt on that side than on this. At
this time, if they heard us before, they can not hear us. We could now
make the old mill with some hope of their losing our track, as we strike
into a blind path to do so. What say you, Master Colleton--shall we turn
aside or go forward?"

"Forward, I say. If we are to suffer, I would suffer on the high road,
in full motion, and not be caught in a crevice like a lurking thief.
Better be shot down--far better--I think with you--than risk recapture."

"Well, it's the right spirit you have, and we may beat them yet! We
cease again to hear them. They are driving through the close grove where
the trees hang so much over. God--it is but a few moments since we went
through it ourselves--they gain on us--but the river is not far--speed
on--bend forward, and use the spur--a few minutes more close pushing,
and the river is in sight. Kill the beasts--no matter--but make the
river."

"How do we cross?" inquired the youth, hurriedly, though with a
confidence something increased by the manner of his companion.

"Drive in--drive in--there are two fords, each within twenty yards of
the other, and the river is not high. You take the path and ford to the
right, as you come in sight of the water, and I'll keep the left. Your
horse swims well--so don't mind the risk; and if there's any difficulty,
leave him, and take to the water yourself. The side I give you is the
easiest; though it don't matter which side I take. I've gone through
worse chances than this, and, if we hold on for a few moments, we are
safe. The next turn, and we are on the banks."

"The river--the river," exclaimed the youth, involuntarily, as the broad
and quiet stream wound before his eyes, glittering like a polished
mirror in the moonlight.

"Ay, there it is--now to the right--to the right! Look not behind you.
Let them shoot--let them shoot! but lose not an instant to look. Plunge
forward and drive in. They are close upon us, and the flat is on the
other side. They can't pursue, unless they do as we, and they have no
such reason for so desperate a course. It is swimming and full of snags!
They will stop--they will not follow. In--in--not a moment is to be
lost--" and speaking, as they pursued their several ways, he to the
left, and Ralph Colleton to the right ford, the obedient steeds plunged
forward under the application of the rowel, and were fairly in the bosom
of the stream, as the pursuing party rode headlong up the bank.

Struggling onward, in the very centre of the stream, with the steed,
which, to do him all manner of justice, swam nobly, Ralph Colleton could
not resist the temptation to look round upon his pursuers. Writhing his
body in the saddle, therefore, a single glance was sufficient and, in
the full glare of the moonlight unimpeded by any interposing foliage,
the prospect before his eyes was imposing and terrible enough. The
pursuers were four in number--the jailer, two of the Georgia guard, and
another person unknown to him.

As Munro had predicted, they did not venture to plunge in as the
fugitives had done--they had no such fearful motive for the risk; and
the few moments which they consumed in deliberation as to what they
should do, contributed not a little to the successful experiment of the
swimmers.

But the youth at length caught a fearful signal of preparation; his ear
noted the sharp click of the lock, as the rifle was referred to in the
final resort; and his ready sense conceived but of one, and the only
mode of evading the danger so immediately at hand. Too conspicuous in
his present situation to hope for escape, short of a miracle, so long as
he remained upon the back of the swimming horse, he relaxed his hold,
carefully drew his feet from the stirrups, resigned his seat, and only a
second before the discharge of the rifle, was deeply buried in the bosom
of the Chestatee.

The steed received the bullet in his head, plunged forward madly, to the
no small danger of Ralph, who had now got a little before him, but in a
few moments lay supine upon the stream, and was borne down by its
current. The youth, practised in such exercises, pressed forward under
the surface for a sufficient time to enable him to avoid the present
glance of the enemy, and at length, in safety, rounding a jutting point
of the shore, which effectually concealed him from their eyes, he gained
the dry land, at the very moment in which Munro, with more success, was
clambering, still mounted, up the steep sides of a neighboring and
slippery bank.

Familiar with such scenes, the landlord had duly estimated the doubtful
chances of his life in swimming the river directly in sight of the
pursuers. He had, therefore, taken the precaution to oblique
considerably to the left from the direct course, and did not, in
consequence, appear in sight, owing to the sinuous windings of the
stream, until he had actually gained the shore.

The youth beheld him at this moment, and shouted aloud his own situation
and safety. In a voice indicative of restored confidence in himself, no
less than in his fate, the landlord, by a similar shout, recognised him,
and was bending forward to the spot where he stood, when the sharp and
joint report of three rifles from the opposite banks, attested the
discovery of his person; and, in the same instant, the rider tottered
forward in his saddle, his grasp was relaxed upon the rein, and, without
a word, he toppled from his seat, and was borne for a few paces by his
horse, dragged forward by one of his feet, which had not been released
from the stirrup.

He fell, at length, and the youth came up with him. He heard the groans
of the wounded man, and, though exposing himself to the same chance, he
could not determine upon flight. He might possibly have saved himself by
taking the now freed animal which the, landlord had ridden, and at once
burying himself in the nation. But the noble weakness of pity determined
him otherwise; and, without scruple or fear, he resolutely advanced to
the spot whore Munro lay, though full in the sight of the pursuers, and
prepared to render him what assistance he could. One of the troopers, in
the meantime, had swum the river; and, freeing the flat from its chains,
had directed it across the stream for the passage of his companions. It
was not long before they had surrounded the fugitives, and Ralph
Colleton was again a prisoner, and once more made conscious of the
dreadful doom from which he had, at one moment, almost conceived himself
to have escaped.

Munro had been shockingly wounded. One ball had pierced his thigh,
inflicting a severe, though probably not a fatal wound. Another, and
this had been enough, had penetrated directly behind the eyes, keeping
its course so truly across, as to tear and turn the bloody orbs
completely out upon the cheek beneath. The first words of the dying man
were--

"Is the moon gone down--lights--bring lights!"

"No, Munro; the moon is still shining without a cloud, and as brightly
as if it were day" was the reply of Ralph.

"Who speaks--speak again, that I may know how to believe him."

"It is I, Munro--I, Ralph Colleton."

"Then it is true--and I am a dead man. It is all over, and he came not
to me for nothing. Yet, can I have no lights--no lights?--Ah!" and the
half-reluctant reason grew more terribly conscious of his situation, as
he thrust his fingers into the bleeding sockets from which the fine and
delicate conductor of light had been so suddenly driven. He howled aloud
for several moments in his agony--in the first agony which came with
that consciousness--but, recovering, at length, he spoke with something
of calm and coherence.

"Well, Mr. Colleton, what I said was true. I knew it would be so. I had
warning enough to prepare, and I did try, but it's come over soon and
nothing is done. I have my wages, and the text spoke nothing but the
truth. I can not stand this pain long--it is too much--and--"

The pause in his speech, from extreme agony, was filled up by a shriek
that rung fearfully amid the silence of such a scene, but it lasted not
long. The mind of the landlord was not enfeebled by his weakness, even
at such a moment. He recovered and proceeded:--

"Yes, Mr. Colleton, I am a dead man. I have my wages--but my death is
your life! Let me tell the story--and save you, and save Lucy--and
thus--(oh, could I believe it for an instant)--save myself! But, no
matter--we must talk of other things. Is that Brooks--is that Brooks
beside me?"

"No, it is I--Colleton."

"I know--I know," impatiently--"who else?"

"Mr. Brooks, the jailer, is here--Ensign Martin and Brincle, of the
Georgia guard," was the reply of the jailer.

"Enough, then, for your safety, Mr. Colleton. They can prove it all, and
then remember Lucy--poor Lucy! You will be in time--save her from Guy
Rivers--Guy Rivers--the wretch--not Guy Rivers--no--there's a
secret--there's a secret for you, my men, shall bring you a handsome
reward. Stoop--stoop, you three--where are you?--stoop, and hear what I
have to say! It is my dying word!-and I swear it by all things, all
powers, all terrors, that can make an oath solemn with a wretch whose
life is a long crime! Stoop--hear me--heed all--lose not a word--not a
word--not a word! Where are you?"

"We are here, beside you--we hear all that you say. Go on!"

"Guy Rivers is not his name--he is not Guy Rivers--hear now--Guy Rivers
is the outlaw for whom the governor's proclamation gives a high
reward--a thousand dollars--the man who murdered Judge Jessup. Edward
Creighton, of Gwinnett courthouse--he is the murderer of Jessup--he is
the murderer of Forrester, for whose death the life of Mr. Colleton here
is forfeit! I saw him kill them both!--I saw more than that, but that is
enough to save the innocent man and punish the guilty! Take down all
that I have said. I, too, am guilty! would make amends, but it is almost
too late--the night is very dark, and the earth swings about like a
cradle. Ah!--have you taken down on paper what I said? I will tell you
nothing more till all is written--write it down--on-paper--every
word--write that before I say any more!"

They complied with his requisition. One of the troopers, on a sheet of
paper furnished by the jailer, and placed upon the saddle of his horse,
standing by in the pale light of the moon, recorded word after word,
with scrupulous exactness, of the dying man's confession. He proceeded
duly to the narration of every particular of all past occurrences, as we
ourselves have already detailed them to the reader, together with many
more, unnecessary to our narrative, of which we had heretofore no
cognizance. When this was done, the landlord required it to be read,
commenting, during its perusal, and dwelling, with more circumstantial
minuteness, upon many of its parts.

"That will do--that will do! Now swear me, Brooks!--you are in the
commission--lift my hand and swear me, so that nothing be wanting to the
truth! What if there is no bible?" he exclaimed, suddenly, as some one
of the individuals present suggested a difficulty on this subject.

"What!--because there is no bible, shall there be no truth? I
swear--though I have had no communion with God--I swear to the truth--by
him! Write down my oath--he is present--they say he is always present! I
believe it now--I only wish I had always believed it! I swear by him--he
will not falsify the truth!--write down my oath, while I lift my hand to
him! Would it were a prayer--but I can not pray--I am more used to oaths
than prayers, and I can not pray! Is it written--is it written? Look,
Mr. Colleton, look--you know the law. If you are satisfied, I am. Will
it do?"

Colleton replied quickly in the affirmative, and the dying man went
on:--

"Remember Lucy--the poor Lucy! You will take care of her. Say no harsh
words in her ears--but, why should I ask this of you, whom--Ah!--it goes
round--round--round--swimming--swimming. Very dark--very dark night, and
the trees dance--Lucy--"

The voice sunk into a faint whisper whose sounds were unsyllabled--an
occasional murmur escaped them once after, in which the name of his
niece was again heard; exhibiting, at the last, the affection, however
latent, which he entertained in reality for the orphan trust of his
brother. In a few moments, and the form stiffened before them in all the
rigid sullenness of death.




CHAPTER XL.

WOLF'S NECK--CAPTURE.


The cupidity of his captors had been considerably stimulated by the
dying words of Munro. They were all of them familiar with the atrocious
murder which, putting a price upon his head, had driven Creighton, then
a distinguished member of the bar in one of the more civilized portions
of the state, from the pale and consideration of society; and their
anxieties were now entirely addressed to the new object which the
recital they had just heard had suggested to them. They had gathered
from the narrative of the dying man some idea of the place in which
they would most probably find the outlaw; and, though without a guide
to the spot, and altogether ignorant of its localities, they
determined--without reference to others, who might only subtract from
their own share of the promised reward, without contributing much, if
any, aid, which they might not easily dispense with--at once to attempt
his capture. This was the joint understanding of the whole party, Ralph
Colleton excepted.

In substance, the youth was now free. The evidence furnished by Munro
only needed the recognition of the proper authorities to make him so;
yet, until this had been effected, he remained in a sort of understood
restraint, but without any actual limitations. Pledging himself that
they should suffer nothing from the indulgence given him, he mounted the
horse of Munro, whose body was cared for, and took his course back to
the village; while, following the directions given them, the guard and
jailer pursued their way to the Wolf's Neck in their search after Guy
Rivers.

The outlaw had been deserted by nearly all his followers. The note of
preparation and pursuit, sounded by the state authorities, had inspired
the depredators with a degree of terror, which the near approximation of
the guard, in strong numbers, to their most secluded places, had not a
little tended to increase; and accordingly, at the period of which we
now speak, the outlaw, deserted by all but one or two of the most daring
of his followers--who were, however, careful enough of themselves to
keep in no one place long, and cautiously to avoid their accustomed
haunts--remained in his rock, in a state of gloomy despondency, not
usually his characteristic. Had he been less stubborn, less ready to
defy all chances and all persons, it is not improbable that Rivers would
have taken counsel by their flight, and removed himself, for a time at
least, from the scene of danger. But his native obstinacy, and that
madness of heart which, as we are told, seizes first upon him whom God
seeks to destroy, determined him, against the judgment of others, and in
part against his own, to remain where he was; probably in the fallacious
hope that the storm would pass over, as on so many previous occasions it
had already done, and leave him again free to his old practices in the
same region. A feeling of pride, which made him unwilling to take a
suggestion of fear and flight from the course of others, had some share
in this decision; and, if we add the vague hungering of his heart toward
the lovely Edith, and possibly the influence of other pledges, and the
imposing consideration of other duties, we shall not be greatly at a
loss in understanding the injudicious indifference to the threatening
dangers which appears to have distinguished the conduct of the otherwise
politic and circumspect ruffian.

That night, after his return from the village, and the brief dialogue
with Chub Williams, as we have already narrated it he retired to the
deepest cell of his den, and, throwing himself into a seat, covering his
face with his hands, he gave himself up to a meditation as true in its
philosophy as it was humiliating throughout in its application to
himself. Dillon, his lieutenant--if such a title may be permitted in
such a place, and for such a person--came to him shortly after his
arrival, and in brief terms, with a blunt readiness--which, coming
directly to the point, did not offend the person to whom it was
addressed--demanded to know what he meant to do with himself.

"We can't stay here any longer," said he; "the troops are gathering all
round us. The country's alive with them, and in a few days we shouldn't
be able to stir from the hollow of a tree without popping into the gripe
of some of our hunters. In the Wolf's Neck they will surely seek us;
for, though a very fine place for us while the country's thin, yet even
its old owners, the wolves, would fly from it when the horn of the
hunter rings through the wood. It won't be very long before they pierce
to the very 'nation,' and then we should have but small chance of a long
grace. Jack Ketch would make mighty small work of our necks, in his
hurry to go to dinner."

"And what of all this--what is all this to me?" was the strange and
rather phlegmatic response of the outlaw, who did not seem to take in
the full meaning of his officer's speech, and whose mind, indeed, was at
that moment wandering to far other considerations. Dillon seemed not a
little surprised by this reply, and looked inquiringly into the face of
the speaker, doubting for a moment his accustomed sanity. The stern look
which his glance encountered directed its expression elsewhere, and,
after a moment's pause, he replied--

"Why, captain, you can't have thought of what I've been saying, or you
wouldn't speak as you do. I think it's a great deal to both you and me,
what I've been telling you; and the sooner you come to think so too, the
better. It's only yesterday afternoon that I narrowly missed being seen
at the forks by two of the guard, well mounted, and with rifles. I had
but the crook of the fork in my favor, and the hollow of the creek at
the old ford where it's been washed away. They're all round us, and I
don't think we're safe here another day. Indeed, I only come to see if
you wouldn't be off with me, at once, into the 'nation.'"

"You are considerate, but must go alone. I have no apprehensions where I
am, and shall not stir for the present. For yourself, you must determine
as you think proper. I have no further hold on your service. I release
you from the oath. Make the best of your way into the 'nation'--ay, go
yet farther; and, hear me, Dillon, go where you are unknown--go where
you can enter society; seek for the fireside, where you can have those
who, in the dark hour, will have no wish to desert you. I have no claim
now upon you, and the sooner you 'take the range' the better."

"And why not go along with me, captain? I hate to go alone, and hate to
leave you where you are. I shan't think you out of danger while you stay
here, and don't see any reason for you to do so."

"Perhaps not, Dillon; but there is reason, or I should not stay. We may
not go together, even if I were to fly--our paths lie asunder. They may
never more be one. Go you, therefore, and heed me not; and think of me
no more. Make yourself a home in the Mississippi, or on the Red river,
and get yourself a fireside and family of your own. These are the things
that will keep your heart warm within you, cheering you in hours that
are dark, like this."

"And why, captain," replied the lieutenant, much affected--"why should
you not take the course which you advise for me? Why not, in the
Arkansas, make yourself a home, and with a wife--"

"Silence, sir!--not a word of that! Why come you to chafe me here in my
den? Am I to be haunted for ever with such as you, and with words like
these?" and the brow of the outlaw blackened as he spoke, and his white
teeth knit together, fiercely gnashing for an instant, while the foam
worked its way through the occasional aperture between them. The
ebullition of passion, however, lasted not long, and the outlaw himself,
a moment after, seemed conscious of its injustice.

"I do you wrong, Dillon; but on this subject I will have no one speak. I
can not be the man you would have me; I have been schooled otherwise. My
mother has taught me a different lesson; her teachings have doomed me,
and these enjoyments are now all beyond my hope."

"Your mother?" was the response of Dillon, in unaffected astonishment.

"Ay, man--my mother! Is there anything wonderful in that? She taught me
the love of evil with her milk--she sang it in lullabies over my
cradle--she gave it me in the playthings of my boyhood; her schoolings
have made me the morbid, the fierce criminal, the wilful, vexing spirit,
from whose association all the gentler virtues must always desire to
fly. If, in the doom which may finish my life of doom, I have any one
person to accuse of all, that person is--my mother!"

"Is this possible? Can it be true? It is strange--very strange!"

"It is not strange; we see it every day--in almost every family. She,
did not _tell_ me to lie, or to swindle, or to stab--no! oh, no! she
would have told me that all these things were bad; but she _taught_ me
to perform them all. She roused my passions, and not my _principles_,
into activity. She provoked the one, and suppressed the other. Did my
father reprove my improprieties, she petted me, and denounced him. She
crossed his better purposes, and defeated all his designs, until, at
last, she made my passions too strong for my government, not less than
hers; and left me, knowing the true, yet the victim of the false. Thus
it was that, while my intellect, in its calmer hours, taught me that
virtue is the only source of true felicity, my ungovernable passions set
the otherwise sovereign reason at defiance, and trampled it under foot.
Yes, in that last hour of eternal retribution, if called upon to
denounce or to accuse, I can point but to one as the author of all--the
weakly-fond, misjudging, misguiding woman who gave me birth!

"Within the last hour I have been thinking over all these things. I have
been thinking how I had been cursed in childhood by one who surely loved
me beyond all other things besides. I can remember how sedulously she
encouraged and prompted my infant passions, uncontrolled by her
authority and reason, and since utterly unrestrainable by my own. How
she stimulated me to artifices, and set me the example herself, by
frequently deceiving my father, and teaching me to disobey and deceive
him! She told me not to lie; and she lied all day to him, on my account,
and to screen me from his anger. She taught me the catechism, to say on
Sunday, while during the week she schooled me in almost every possible
form of ingenuity to violate all its precepts. She bribed me to do my
duty, and hence my duty could only be done under the stimulating promise
of a reward; and, without the reward, I went counter to the duty. She
taught me that God was superior to all, and that he required obedience
to certain laws; yet, as she hourly violated those laws herself in my
behalf, I was taught to regard myself as far superior to him! Had she
not done all this, I had not been here and thus: I had been what now I
dare not think on. It is all her work. The greatest enemy my life has
ever known has been my mother!"

"This is a horrible thought, captain; yet I can not but think it true."

"It is true! I have analyzed my own history, and the causes of my
character and fortunes now, and I charge it all upon her. From one
influence I have traced another, and another, until I have the sweeping
amount of twenty years of crime and sorrow, and a life of hate, and
probably a death of ignominy--all owing to the first ten years of my
infant education, where the only teacher that I knew was the woman who
gave me birth!--But this concerns not you. In my calm mood, Dillon, you
have the fruit of my reason: to abide its dictate, I should fly with
you; but I suffer from my mother's teachings even in this. My passions,
my pride, my fierce hope--the creature of a maddening passion--will not
let me fly; and I stay, though I stay alone, with a throat bare for the
knife of the butcher, or the halter of the hangman. I will not fly!"

"And I will stay with you. I can dare something, too, captain; and you
shall not say, when the worst comes to the worst, that Tom Dillon was
the man to back out. I will not go either, and, whatever is the chance,
you shall not be alone."

Rivers, for a moment, seemed touched by the devotion, of his follower,
and was silent for a brief interval; but suddenly the expression of his
eye was changed, and he spoke briefly and sternly:--

"You shall not stay with me, sir! What! am I so low as this, that I may
not be permitted to be alone when I will? Will my subordinates fly in my
face, and presume to disobey my commands? Go, Dillon--have I not said
that you _must_ fly--that I no longer need your services? Why linger,
then, where you are no longer needed? I have that to perform which
requires me to be alone, and I have no further time to spare you.
Go--away!"

"Do you really speak in earnest, captain?" inquired the lieutenant,
doubtingly, and with a look of much concern.

"Am I so fond of trifling, that my officer asks me such a question?" was
the stern response.

"Then I am your officer still--you will go with me, or I shall remain."

"Neither, Dillon. The time is past for such an arrangement. You are
discharged from my service, and from your oath. The club has no further
existence. Go--be a happy, a better man, in another part of the world.
You have some of the weaknesses of your better nature still in you. You
had no mother to change them into scorn, and strife, and bitterness.
Go--you may be a better man, and have something, therefore, for which to
live. I have not--my heart can know no change. It is no longer under the
guidance of reason. It is quite ungovernable now. There was a time
when--but why prate of this?--it is too late to think of, and only
maddens me the more. Besides, it makes not anything with you, and would
detain you without a purpose. Linger no longer, Dillon--speed to the
west, and, at some future day, perhaps you shall see me when you least
expect, and perhaps least desire it."

The manner of the outlaw was firm and commanding, and Dillon no longer
had any reason to doubt his desires, and no motive to disobey his
wishes. The parting was brief, though the subordinate was truly
affected. He would have lingered still, but Rivers waved him off with a
farewell, whose emphasis was effectual, and, in a few moments, the
latter sat once more alone.

His mood was that of one disappointed in all things, and, consequently,
displeased and discontented with all things--querulously so. In addition
to this temper, which was common to him, his spirit, at this time,
labored under a heavy feeling of despondency, and its gloomy sullenness
was perhaps something lighter to himself while Dillon remained with him.
We have seen the manner in which he had hurried that personage off. He
had scarcely been gone, however, when the inconsistent and variable
temper of the outlaw found utterance in the following soliloquy:--

"Ay, thus it is--they all desert me; and this is human feeling. They all
fly the darkness, and this is human courage. They love themselves only,
or you only while you need no love; and this is human sympathy. I need
all of these, yet I get none; and when I most need, and most desire, and
most seek to obtain, I am the least provided. These are the fruits which
I have sown, however; should I shrink to gather them?

"Yet, there is one--but one of all--whom no reproach of mine could drive
away, or make indifferent to my fate. But I will see her no more.
Strange madness! The creature, who, of all the world, most loves me, and
is most deserving of my love, I banish from my soul as from my sight.
And this is another fruit of my education--another curse that came with
a mother--this wilful love of the perilous and the passionate--this
scorn of the gentle and the soft--this fondness for the fierce
contradiction--this indifference to the thing easily won--this thirst
after the forbidden. Poor Ellen--so gentle, so resigned, and so fond of
her destroyer; but I will not see her again. I must not; she must not
stand in the way of my anxiety to conquer that pride which had ventured
to hate or to despise me. I shall see Munro, and he shall lose no time
in this matter. Yet, what can he be after--he should have been here
before this; it now wants but little to the morning, and--ah! I have not
slept. Shall I ever sleep again!"

Thus, striding to and fro in his apartment, the outlaw soliloquized at
intervals. Throwing himself at length upon a rude couch that stood in
the corner, he had disposed himself as it were for slumber, when the
noise, as of a falling rock, attracted his attention, and without
pausing, he cautiously took his way to the entrance, with a view to
ascertain the cause. He was not easily surprised, and the knowledge of
surrounding danger made him doubly observant, and more than ever
watchful.

Let us now return to the party which had pursued the fugitives, and
which, after the death of the landlord, had, as we have already
narrated, adopting the design suggested by his dying words, immediately
set forth in search of the notorious outlaw, eager for the reward put
upon his head. Having already some general idea of the whereabouts of
the fugitive, and the directions given by Munro having been of the most
specific character, they found little difficulty, after a moderate ride
of some four or five miles, in striking upon the path directly leading
to the Wolf's Neck.

At this time, fortunately for their object, they were encountered
suddenly by--our old acquaintance, Chub Williams, whom, but little
before, we have seen separating from the individual in whose pursuit
they were now engaged. The deformed quietly rode along with the party,
but without seeming to recognise their existence--singing all the while
a strange woodland melody of the time and region--probably the
production of some village wit:--

   "Her frock it was a _yaller_,
      And she was _mighty sprigh_
    And she bounced at many a _feller_
      Who came _a-fighting shy_.

   "Her eye was like a _sarpent's eye_.
      Her cheek was like a flower,
    But her tongue was like a pedler's clock,
      'Twas a-striking every hour.

   "And wasn't she the gal for me,
      And wasn't she, I pray, sir,
    And I'll be _drot_, if you say not,
      We'll fight this very day, sir.
      We'll fight this very day, sir."

Having delivered himself of this choice morsel of song, the half-witted
fellow conceitedly challenged the attention of the group whom he had not
hitherto been disposed to see.

"'Spose you reckon I don't see you, riding 'longside of me, and saying
nothing, but listening to my song. I'm singing for my own self, and you
oughtn't to listen--I didn't ax you, and I'd like to know what you're
doing so nigh Chub's house."

"Why, where's your house, Chub?" asked one of the party.

"You ain't looking for it, is you? 'cause you can't think to find it
a-looking down. I lives in the tree-top when weather's good like
to-night, and when it ain't, I go into the hollow. I've a better house
than Guy Rivers--he don't take the tree at all, no how."

"And where is his house, Chub?" was the common inquiry of all the party.
The dwarf looked at them for a few moments without speech, then with a
whisper and a gesture significant of caution, replied--

"If you're looking for Guy, 'tain't so easy to find him if he don't want
to be found, and you must speak softly if you hunt him, whether or no.
He's a dark man, that Guy Rivers--mother always said so--and he lives a
long way under the ground."

"And can't you show us where, Chub? We will give you money for your
service."

"Hain't you got 'tatoes? Chub's hungry--hain't eat nothing to-night. Guy
Rivers has plenty to eat, but he cursed Chub's mother."

"Well, show us where he is, and we'll give you plenty to eat. Plenty of
potatoes and corn," was the promise of the party.

"And build up Chub's house that the fire burnt? Chub lives in the tree
now. Guy Rivers' man burnt Chub's house, 'cause he said Chub was sassy."

"Yes, my boy, we'll build up your house, and give you a plenty to go
upon for a year. You shall have potatoes enough for your lifetime, if
you will show us how to come upon Guy Rivers to-night. He _is_ a bad
fellow, as you say; and we won't let him trouble you any more, if you'll
only show us where he is to be found."

"Well--I reckon I can," was the response, uttered in a confidential
whisper, and much more readily given than was the wont of the speaker.
"Chub and Guy talked together to-night, and Guy wanted Chub to go with
him into his house in Wolf's Neck. But Chub don't love the wolf, and he
don't love the Wolf's Neck, now that Miss Lucy's gone away from it. It's
a mighty dark place, the Wolf's Neck, and Chub's afear'd in the dark
places, where the moon and stars won't shine down."

"But you needn't be afraid now, little Chub. You're a good little
fellow, and we'll keep with you and follow close, and there shall be no
danger to you. We'll fight Guy Rivers for you, so that he can't hurt you
any more."

"You'll fight Guy! You! Guy kin fight to kill!"

"Yes, but we'll kill _him;_ only you show us where he is, so that we can
catch him and tie him, and he'll never trouble Chub any more."

"What! you'll tie Guy? How I'd like to see anybody tie Guy! You kain't
tie Guy. He'd break through the ropes, he would, if he on'y stretched
out his arms."

"You'll see! only show us how to find him, and we'll tie him, and we'll
build you a new house, and you shall have more potatoes and corn than
you can shake a stick at, and we'll give you a great jug of whiskey into
the bargain."

"Now will you! And a jug of whiskey too, and build a new house for
Chub's mother--and the corn, and the 'tatoes."

"All! you shall have all we promise."

"Come! come! saftly! put your feet down saftly, for Guy's got great
white owls that watch for him, and they hoot from the old tree when the
horses are coming. Saftly! saftly!"

There is an idiocy that does not lack the vulgar faculty of mere
shrewdness--that can calculate selfishly, and plan coolly--in short, can
show itself cunning, whenever it has a motive. Find the motive for the
insane and the idiotic, always, if you would see them exercise the full
extent of their little remaining wits.

Chub Williams had a sagacity of this sort. His selfishness was appealed
to, and all his faculties were on the alert. He gave directions for the
progress of the party--after his own manner, it is true--but with
sufficient promptness and intelligence to satisfy them that they might
rely upon him. Having reached a certain lonely spot among the hills,
contiguous to the crag, or series of crags, called the Wolf's Neck, Chub
made the party all dismount, and hide their horses in a thicket into
which they found it no easy matter to penetrate. This done, he led them
out again, cautiously moving along under cover, but near the margin of
the road. He stept as lightly himself as a squirrel, taking care, before
throwing his weight upon his foot, to feel that there was no rotting
branch or bough beneath, the breaking of which might occasion noise.

"Saftly! saftly!" he would say in a whisper, turning back to the party,
when he found them treading hurriedly and heavily upon the brush.
Sometimes, again, he ran ahead of all of them, and for a few moments
would be lost to sight; but he usually returned, as quickly and quietly
as he went, and would either lead them forward on the same route with
confidence, or alter it according to his discoveries. He was literally
feeling his way; the instincts and experience of the practised scout
finding no sort of obstacle in the deficiency of his reasoning powers.

His processes did not argue any doubts of his course; only a choice of
direction--such as would promise more ease and equal security. Some of
his changes of movement, he tried to explain, in his own fashion, when
he came back to guide them on other paths.

"Saftly back--saftly now, this way. Guy's in his dark house in the rock,
but there's a many rooms, and 't mout be, we're a walking jest now, over
his head. Then he mout hear, you see, and Guy's got ears like the great
owl. He kin hear mighty far in the night, and see too; and you mustn't
step into his holes. There's heap of holes in Guy's dark house. Saftly,
now--and here away."

Briefly, the rocky avenues were numerous in the Wolf's Neck, and some of
them ran near the surface. There were sinks upon the surface also,
covered with brush and clay, into which the unthinking wayfarer might
stumble, perhaps into the very cavern where the outlaw at that moment
housed himself. The group around the idiot did not fail to comprehend
the reasons for all his caution. They confided to his skill implicitly;
having, of themselves, but small knowledge of the wild precincts into
which they desired to penetrate.

Having, at length, brought them to points and places, which afforded
them the command of the avenues to the rock, the next object of their
guide was to ascertain where the outlaw was at that moment secreted. It
was highly important to know _where_ to enter--where to look--and not
waste time in fruitless search of places in which a single man might
have a dozen blind seekers at his mercy. The cunning of the idiot
conceived this necessity himself.

His policy made each of the party hide himself out of sight, though in a
position whence each might see.

All arranged as he desired, the urchin armed himself with a rock, not
quite as large as his own head, but making a most respectable approach
to it. This, with the aid of coat and kerchief he secured upon his back,
between his shoulders; and thus laden, he yet, with the agility of the
opossum, her young ones in her pouch, climbed up a tree which stood a
little above that inner chamber which Guy Rivers had appropriated for
himself, and where, on more occasions than one, our idiot had peeped in
upon him. Perched in his tree securely, and shrouded from sight among
its boughs, the urchin disengaged the rock from his shoulders, took it
in both his hands, and carefully selecting its route, he pitched it,
with all his might, out from the tree, and in such a direction, that,
after it had fairly struck the earth, it continued a rolling course down
the declivity of the rocks, making a heavy clatter all the way it went.

The _ruse_ answered its purpose. The keen senses of the outlaw caught
the sound. His vigilance, now doubly keen, awakened to its watch. We
have seen, in previous pages, the effect that the rolling stone had upon
the musing and vexed spirit of Guy Rivers, after the departure of
Dillon. He came forth, as we have seen, to look about for the cause of
alarm; and, as if satisfied that the disturbance was purely accidental,
had retired once more to the recesses of his den.

Here, throwing himself upon his couch, he seemed disposed to sleep.
Sleep, indeed! He himself denied that he ever slept. His followers were
all agreed that when he did sleep, it was only with half his faculties
shut up. One eye, they contended, was always open!

Chub Williams, and one of the hunters had seen the figure of the outlaw
as he emerged from the cavern. The former instantly identified him. The
other was too remote to distinguish anything but a slight human outline,
which he could only determine to be such, as he beheld its movements. He
was too far to assault, the light was too imperfect to suffer him to
shoot with any reasonable certainty of success, and the half of the
reward sought by his pursuers, depended upon the outlaw being taken
alive!

But, there was no disappointment among the hunters. Allowing the outlaw
sufficient time to return to his retreats, Chub Williams slipped down
his tree--the rest of the party slowly emerged from their several places
of watch, and drew together for consultation.

In this matter, the idiot could give them little help. He could, and
did, describe, in some particulars, such of the interior as he had been
enabled to see on former occasions, but beyond this he could do nothing;
and he was resolute not to hazard himself entering the dominion of a
personage, so fearful as Guy Rivers, in such companionship as would
surely compel the wolf to turn at bay. Alone, his confidence in his own
stealth and secresy, would encourage him to penetrate; but, _now!_--he
only grinned at the suggestion of the hunters saying shrewdly: "No!
thank you! I'll stay out here and keep Chub's company."

Accordingly, he remained without, closely gathered up into a lump,
behind a tree, while the more determined Georgians penetrated with
cautious pace into the dark avenue, known in the earlier days of the
settlement as a retreat for the wolves when they infested that portion
of the country, and hence distinguished by the appellation of the Wolf's
Neck.

For some time they groped onward in great uncertainty as to their
course; but a crevice in the wall, at one point, gave them a glimmer of
the moonlight, which, falling obliquely upon the sides of the cavern,
enabled them to discern the mouth of another gorge diverging from that
in which they were. They entered, and followed this new route, until
their farther progress was arrested by a solid wall which seemed to
close them in, hollowly caved from all quarters, except the one narrow
point from which they had entered it.

Here, then, they were at a stand; but, according to Chub's directions,
there must be a mode of ingress to still another chamber from this; and
they prepared to seek it in the only possible way; namely, by feeling
along the wall for the opening which their eye had failed to detect.
They had to do this on hands and knees, so low was the rock along the
edges of the cavern.

The search was finally successful. One of the party found the wall to
give beneath his hands. There was an aperture, a mere passage-way for
wolf or bear, lying low in the wall, and only closed by a heavy curtain
of woollen.

This was an important discovery. The opening led directly into the
chamber of the outlaw. How easily it could be defended, the hunters
perceived at a glance. The inmate of the cavern, if wakeful and
courageous, standing above the gorge with a single hatchet, could brain
every assailant on the first appearance of his head. How serious, then,
the necessity of being able to know that the occupant of the chamber
slept--that occupant being Guy Rivers. The pursuers well knew what they
might expect at his hands, driven to his last fastness, with the spear
of the hunter at his throat. Did he sleep, then--the man who never
slept, according to the notion of his followers, or with one eye always
open!

He did sleep, and never more soundly than now, when safety required that
he should be most on the alert. But there is a limit to the endurance of
the most iron natures, and the outlaw had overpassed his bounds of
strength. He was exhausted by trying and prolonged excitements, and
completely broken down by physical efforts which would have destroyed
most other men outright. His subdued demeanor--his melancholy--were all
due to this condition of absolute exhaustion. He slept, not a refreshing
sleep, but one in which the excited spirit kept up its exercises, so as
totally to neutralize what nature designed as compensation in his
slumbers. His sleep was the drowse of incapacity, not the wholesome
respite of elastic faculties. It was actual physical imbecility, rather
than sleep; and, while the mere animal man, lay incapable, like a log,
the diseased imagination was at work, conjuring up its spectres as
wildly and as changingly, as the wizard of the magic-lanthorn evokes his
monsters against the wall.

His limbs writhed while he slept. His tongue was busy in audible speech.
He had no secrets, in that mysterious hour, from night, and silence, and
his dreary rocks. His dreams told him of no other auditors.

The hunter, who had found and raised the curtain that separated his
chamber from the gloomy gorges of the crag, paused, and motioned his
comrades back, while he listened. At first there was nothing but a deep
and painful breathing. The outlaw breathed with effort, and the sigh
became a groan, and he writhed upon the bed of moss which formed his
usual couch in the cavern. Had the spectator been able to see, the lamp
suspended from a ring in the roof of the cavern, though burning very
dimly, would have shown him the big-beaded drops of sweat that now
started from the brows of the sleeper. But he could hear; and now a
word, a name, falls from the outlaw's lips--it is followed by murmured
imprecations. The feverish frame, tortured by the restless and
guilt-goading spirit, writhed as he delivered the curses in broken
accents. These, finally, grew into perfect sentences.

"Dying like a dog, in her sight! Ay, she shall see it! I will hiss in
her ears as she gazes--'It is _my_ work! this is _my_ revenge!' Ha! ha!
where her pride then?--her high birth and station?--wealth, family?
Dust, shame, agony, and death!"

Such were the murmured accents of the sleeping man, when they were
distinguishable by the hunter, who, crouching, beneath the curtain,
listened to his sleeping speech. But all was not exultation. The change
from the voice of triumph to that of woe was instantaneous; and the
curse and the cry, as of one in mortal agony, pain or terror, followed
the exulting speech.

The Georgian, now apprehensive that the outlaw would awaken, crept
forward, and, still upon his hands and knees, was now fairly within the
vaulted chamber. He was closely followed by one of his companions.
Hitherto, they had proceeded with great caution, and with a stealth and
silence that were almost perfect. But the third of the party to
enter--who was Brooks, the jailer--more eager, or more unfortunate, less
prudent certainly--not sufficiently stooping, as the other two had done,
or rising too soon--contrived to strike with his head the pole which
bore the curtain, and which, morticed in the sides of the cavern, ran
completely across the awkward entrance. A ringing noise was the
consequence, while Brooks himself was precipitated back into the
passage, with a smart cut over his brows.

The noise was not great, but quite sufficient to dissipate the slumbers
of the outlaw, whose sleep was never sound. With that decision and
fierce courage which marked his character, he sprang to his feet in an
instant, grasped the dirk which he always carried in his bosom, and
leaped forward, like a tiger, in the direction of the narrow entrance.
Familiar with all the sinuosities of his den, as well in daylight as in
darkness, the chances might have favored him even with two powerful
enemies within it. Certainly, had there been but one, he could have
dealt with him, and kept out others. But the very precipitation of the
jailer, while it occasioned the alarm, had the effect, in one
particular, of neutralizing its evil consequences. The two who had
already penetrated the apartment, had net yet risen from their knees--in
the dim light of the lamp, they remained unseen--they were crouching,
indeed, directly under the lamp, the rays of which lighted dimly the
extremes, rather than the centre of the cell. They lay in the way of the
outlaw, as he sprang, and, as he dashed forward from his couch toward
the passage-way, his feet were caught by the Georgian who had first
entered, and so great was the impetus of his first awakening effort,
that he was precipitated with a severe fall over the second of the
party; and, half stunned, yet still striking furiously, the dirk of
Rivers found a bloodless sheath in the earthen floor of the cell. In a
moment, the two were upon him, and by the mere weight of their bodies
alone, they kept him down.

"Surrender, Guy! we're too much for you, old fellow!"

There was a short struggle. Meanwhile, Brooks, the jailer, joined the
party.

"We're _three_ on you, and there's more without."

The outlaw was fixed to the ground, beneath their united weight, as
firmly as if the mountain itself was on him. As soon as he became
conscious of the inutility of further struggle--and he could now move
neither hand nor foot--he ceased all further effort; like a wise man
economizing his strength for future occasions. Without difficulty the
captors bound him fast, then dragged him through the narrow entrance,
the long rocky gorges which they had traversed, until they all emerged
into the serene light of heaven, at the entrance of the cavern.

Here the idiot boy encountered them, now coming forward boldly, and
staring in the face of the captive with a confidence which he had never
known before. He felt that his fangs were drawn; and his survey of the
person his mother had taught him so to dread, was as curious as that
which he would have taken of some foreign monster. As he continued this
survey, Rivers, with a singular degree of calmness for such a time, and
such circumstances, addressed him thus:--

"So, Chub, this is your work;--you have brought enemies to my home, boy!
Why have you done this? What have I done to you, but good? I gave bread
to your mother and yourself!"

"Psho! Chub is to have his own bread, his own corn, and 'taters, too,
and a whole jug of whiskey."

"Ah! you have sold yourself for these, then, to my enemies. You are a
bad fellow, Chub--a worse fellow than I thought you. As an idiot, I
fancied you might be honest and grateful."

"You're bad yourself, Mr. Guy. You cursed Chub, and you cursed Chub's
mother; and your man burnt down Chub's house, and you wanted to shoot
Chub on the tree."

"But I didn't shoot, Chub; and I kept the men from shooting you when you
ran away from the cave."

"You can't shoot now," answered the idiot, with an exulting chuckle;
"and they'll keep you in the ropes, Mr. Guy; they've got you on your
back, Mr. Guy; and I'm going to laugh at you all the way as you go. Ho!
ho! ho! See if I don't laugh, till I scares away all your white owls
from the roost."

The outlaw looked steadily in the face of the wretched urchin, with a
curious interest, as he half murmured to himself:--

"And that I should fall a victim to such a thing as this! The only
creature, perhaps, whom I spared or pitied--so wretched, yet so
ungrateful. But there is an instinct in it. It is surely in consequence
of a law of nature. He hates in proportion as he fears. Yet he has had
nothing but protection from me, and kindness. Nothing! I spared him,
when--but--" as if suddenly recollecting himself, and speaking aloud and
with recovered dignity:--

"I am your prisoner, gentlemen. Do with me as you please."

"Hurrah!" cried the urchin, as he beheld the troopers lifting and
securing the outlaw upon the horse, while one of the party leaped up
behind him--one of his hands managing the bridle, and the other grasping
firmly the rope which secured the captive; "hurrah! Guy's in the rope!
Guy's in the rope!"

Thus cried the urchin, following close behind the party, upon his
mountain-tacky. That cry, from such a quarter, more sensibly than
anything besides, mocked the outlaw with the fullest sense of his
present impotence. With a bitter feeling of humiliation, his head
dropped upon his breast, and he seemed to lose all regard to his
progress. Daylight found him safely locked up in the jail of Chestatee,
the occupant of the very cell from which Colleton had escaped.

But no such prospect of escape was before him. He could command none of
the sympathies that had worked for his rival. He had no friends left.
Munro was slain, Dillon gone, and even the miserable idiot had turned
his fangs upon the hand that fed him. Warned, too, by the easy escape of
Colleton, Brooks attended no more whiskey-parties, nor took his
brother-in-law Tongs again into his friendly counsels. More--he doubly
ironed his prisoner, whose wiles and resources he had more reason to
fear than those which his former captive could command. To cut off more
fully every hope which the outlaw might entertain of escape from his
bonds and durance, a detachment of the Georgia guard, marching into the
village that very day, was put in requisition, by the orders of the
judge, for the better security of the prisoner, and of public order.




CHAPTER XLI.

QUIET PASSAGES AND NEW RELATIONS.


We have already reported the return of Lucy Munro to the village-inn of
Chestatee. Here, to her own and the surprise of all other parties, her
aunt was quietly reinstated in her old authority--a more perfect one
now--as housekeeper of that ample mansion. The reasons which determined
her liege upon her restoration to the household have been already
reported to the reader. His prescience as to his own approaching fate
was perhaps not the least urgent among them. He fortunately left her in
possession, and we know how the law estimates this advantage. Of her
trials and sorrows, when she was made aware of her widowhood, we will
say nothing. Sensitive natures will easily conjecture their extent and
intensity. It is enough for the relief of such natures, if we say that
the widow Munro was not wholly inconsolable. As a good economist, a
sensible woman, with an eye properly regardful of the future, we are
bound to suppose that she needed no lessons from Hamlet's mother to make
the cold baked funeral-meats answer a double purpose.

But what of her niece? We are required to be something more full and
explicit in speaking to her case. The indisposition of Lucy was not
materially diminished by the circumstances following the successful
effort to persuade the landlord to the rescue of Ralph Colleton. The
feverish excitements natural to that event, and even the fruit of its
fortunate issue, in the death of Munro, for whom she really had a
grateful regard, were not greatly lessened, though certainly something
relieved, by the capture of Rivers, and his identification with the
outlawed Creighton. She was now secure from him: she had nothing further
to apprehend from the prosecution of his fearful suit; and the death of
her uncle, even if the situation of Rivers had left him free to urge it
further, would, of itself, have relieved her from the only difficulty in
the way of a resolute denial.

So far, then, she was at peace. But a silent sorrow had made its way
into her bosom, gnawing there with the noiselessness and certainty of
the imperceptible worm, generated by the sunlight, in the richness of
the fresh leaf, and wound up within its folds. She had no word of sorrow
in her speech--she had no tear of sorrow in her eye--but there was a
vacant sadness in the vague and wan expression of her face, that needed
neither tears nor words for its perfect development. She was the victim
of a passion which--as hers was a warm and impatient spirit--was doubly
dangerous; and the greater pang of that passion came with the
consciousness, which now she could no longer doubt, that it was entirely
unrequited. She had beheld the return of Ralph Colleton; she had heard
from other lips than his of his release, and of the atoning particulars
of her uncle's death, in which he furnished all that was necessary in
the way of testimony to the youth's enlargement and security; and though
she rejoiced, fervently and deeply, at the knowledge that so much had
been done for him, and so much by herself, she yet found no relief from
the deep sadness of soul which necessarily came with her hopelessness.
Busy tongues dwelt upon the loveliness of the Carolina maiden who had
sought him in his prison--of her commanding stature, her elegance of
form, her dignity of manner and expression, coupled with the warmth of a
devoted love and a passionate admiration of the youth who had also so
undesiringly made the conquest of her own heart. She heard all this in
silence, but not without thought. She thought of nothing besides. The
forms and images of the two happy lovers were before her eyes at all
moments; and her active fancy pictured their mutual loves in colors so
rich and warm, that, in utter despondency at last, she would throw
herself listlessly upon her couch, with sometimes an unholy hope that
she might never again rise from it.

But she was not forgotten. The youth she had so much served, and so
truly saved, was neither thoughtless nor ungrateful. Having just
satisfied those most near and dear to him of his safety, and of the
impunity which, after a few brief forms of law, the dying confession of
the landlord would give him and having taken, in the warm embrace of a
true love, the form of the no-longer-withheld Edith to his arms, he felt
that his next duty was to her for whom his sense of gratitude soon
discovered that every form of acknowledgment must necessarily prove
weak.

At an early hour, therefore--these several duties having been
done--Ralph made his appearance at the village-inn, and the summons of
the youth soon brought Lucy from her chamber.

She came freely and without hesitation, though her heart was tremulous
with doubt and sorrow. She had nothing now to learn of her utter
hopelessness, and her strength was gathered from her despair. Ralph was
shocked at the surprising ravages which a few days of indisposition had
made upon that fine and delicate richness of complexion and expression
which had marked her countenance before. He had no notion that she was
unhappy beyond the cure of time. On the contrary, with a modesty almost
akin to dullness--having had no idea of his own influence over the
maiden--he was disposed to regard the recent events--the death of Munro
and the capture of Rivers--as they relieved her from a persecution which
had been cruelly distressing, rather calculated to produce a degree of
relief, to which she had not for a long time been accustomed; and which,
though mingled up with events that prevented it from being considered
matter for rejoicing, was yet not a matter for one in her situation very
greatly to deplore.

Her appearance, however, only made him more assiduously gentle and
affectionate in the duties he had undertaken to perform. He approached
her with the freedom of one warranted by circumstances in recognising in
her person a relation next to the sweetest and the dearest in life. With
the familiar regard of a brother, he took her hand, and, placing her
beside him on the rude sofa of the humble parlor, he proceeded to those
little inquiries after her health, and of those about her, which usually
form the opening topics of all conversation. He proceeded then to remind
her of that trying night, when, in defiance of female fears, and
laudably regardless of those staid checks and restraints by which her
sex would conceal or defend its weaknesses, she had dared to save his
life.

His manner, generally warm and eager, dilated something beyond its wont;
and if ever gratitude had yet its expression from human lips and in
human language, it was poured forth at that moment from his into the
ears of Lucy Munro.

And she felt its truth; she relied upon the uttered words of the
speaker; and her eyes grew bright with a momentary kindling, her check
flushed under his glance, while her heart, losing something of the
chillness which had so recently oppressed it, felt lighter and less
desolate in that abode of sadness and sweetness, the bosom in which it
dwelt.

Yet, after all, when thought came again under the old aspect--when she
remembered his situation and her own, she felt the shadow once more come
over her with an icy influence. It was not gratitude which her heart
craved from that of Ralph Colleton. The praise and the approval and the
thanks of others might have given her pleasure, but these were not
enough from him; and she sighed that he from whom alone love would be
precious, had nothing less frigid than gratitude to offer. But even that
was much, and she felt it deeply. His approbation was not a little to a
spirit whose reference to him was perpetual; and when--her hand in
his--he recounted the adventures of that night--when he dwelt upon her
courage--upon her noble disregard of opinions which might have chilled
in many of her sex the fine natural currents of that godlike humanity
which conventional forms, it is well to think, can not always fetter or
abridge--when he expatiated upon all these things with all the fervor of
his temperament--she with a due modesty, shrinking from the recital of
her own performances--she felt every moment additional pleasure in his
speech of praise. When, at length, relating the particulars of the
escape and death of Munro, he proceeded, with all the tender caution of
a brother, softening the sorrow into sadness, and plucking from grief as
much of the sting as would else have caused the wound to rankle, she
felt that though another might sway his heart and its richer affections,
she was not altogether destitute of its consideration and its care.

"And now, Lucy--my sweet sister--for my sister you are now--you will
accede to your uncle's prayer and mine--you will permit me to be your
brother, and to provide for you as such. In this wild region it fits not
that you should longer abide. This wilderness is uncongenial--it is
foreign to a nature like yours. You have been too long its
tenant--mingling with creatures not made for your association, none of
whom are capable of appreciating your worth. You must come with us, and
live with my uncle--with my cousin Edith--"

"Edith!"--and she looked inquiringly, while a slight flush of the cheek
and kindling of the eye in him followed the utterance of the single word
by her, and accompanied his reply.

"Yes, Edith--Edith Colleton, Lucy, is the name of my cousin, and the
relationship will soon be something closer between us. You will love
her, and she, I know, will love you as a sister, and as the preserver of
one so very humble as myself. It was a night of danger when you first
heard her name, and saw her features; and when you and she will converse
over that night and its events, I feel satisfied that it will bring you
both only the closer to one another."

"We will not talk of it farther, Mr. Colleton--I would not willingly
hear of it again. It is enough that you are now free from all such
danger--enough that all things promise well for the future. Let not any
thought of past evil, or of risk successfully encountered, obscure the
prospect--let no thought of me produce an emotion, hostile, even for a
moment, to your peace."

"And why should you think, my sweet girl, and with an air of such
profound sorrow, that such a thought must be productive of such an
emotion. Why should the circumstances so happily terminating, though
perilous at first, necessarily bring sorrow with remembrance. Surely you
are now but exhibiting the sometimes coy perversity which is ascribed to
your sex. You are now, in a moment of calm, but assuming those winning
playfulnesses of a sex, conscious of charm and power, which, in a time
of danger, your more masculine thought had rejected as unbecoming. You
forget, Lucy, that I have you in charge--that you are now my
sister--that my promise to your departed uncle, not less than my own
desire to that effect, makes me your guardian for the future--and that I
am now come, hopeful of success, to take you with me to my own country,
and to bring you acquainted with her--(I must keep no secret from you,
who are my sister)--who has my heart--who--but you are sick, Lucy. What
means this emotion?"

"Nothing, nothing, Mr. Colleton. A momentary weakness from my late
indisposition--it will soon be over. Indeed, I am already well. Go on,
sir--go on!"

"Lucy, why these titles? Why such formality? Speak to me as if I were
the new friend, at least, if you will not behold in me an old one. I
have received too much good service from you to permit of this
constraint. Call me Ralph--or Colleton--or--or--nay, look not so
coldly--why not call me your brother?"

"Brother--brother be it then, Ralph Colleton--brother--brother. God
knows, I need a brother now!" and the ice of her manner was thawed
quickly by his appeal, in which her accurate sense, sufficiently
unclouded usually by her feelings, though themselves at all times
strong, discovered only the honest earnestness of truth.

"Ah, now, you look--and now you are indeed my sister. Hear me, then,
Lucy, and listen to all my plans. You have not seen Edith--my Edith
now--you must be _her_ sister too. She is now, or will be soon,
something nearer to me than a sister--she is something dearer already.
We shall immediately return to Carolina, and you will go along with us."

"It may not be, Ralph--I have determined otherwise. I will be your
sister--as truly so as sister possibly could be--but I can not go with
you. I have made other arrangements."

The youth looked up in astonishment. The manner of the maiden was very
resolute, and he knew not what to understand. She proceeded, as she saw
his amazement:--

"It may not be as you propose, Mr.--Ralph--my brother--circumstances
have decreed another arrangement--another, and perhaps a less grateful
destiny for me."

"But why, Lucy, if a less pleasant, or at least a doubtful arrangement,
why yield to it--why reject my solicitation? What is the plan to which,
I am sad to see, you so unhesitatingly give the preference?"

"Not unhesitatingly--not unhesitatingly, I assure you. I have thought
upon it deeply and long, and the decision is that of my cooler thought
and calmer judgment. It may be in a thousand respects a less grateful
arrangement than that which you offer me; but, at least, it will want
one circumstance which would couple itself with your plan, and which
would alone prompt me to deny myself all its other advantages."

"And what is that one circumstance, dear Lucy, which affrights you so
much? Let me know. What peculiarity of mine--what thoughtless
impropriety--what association, which I may remove, thus prevents your
acceptance of my offer, and that of Edith? Speak--spare me not in what
you shall say--but let your thoughts have their due language, just as if
you were--as indeed you are--my sister."

"Ask me not, Ralph. I may not utter it. It must not be whispered to
myself, though I perpetually hear it. It is no impropriety--no
peculiarity--no wrong thought or deed of yours, that occasions it. The
evil is in me; and hence you can do nothing which can possibly change my
determination."

"Strange, strange girl! What mystery is this? Where is now that feeling
of confidence, which led you to comply with my prayer, and consider me
as your brother? Why keep this matter from me--why withhold any
particular, the knowledge of which might be productive of a remedy for
all the difficulty."

"Never--never. The knowledge of it would be destructive of all beside.
It would be fatal--seek not, therefore, to know it--it would profit you
nothing, and me it would crush for ever to the earth. Hear me, Ralph--my
brother!--hear me. Hitherto you have known me--I am proud to think--as a
strong-minded woman, heedless of all things in her desire for the
good--for the right. In a moment of peril to you or to another, I would
be the same woman. But the strength which supports through the trial,
subsides when it is over. The ship that battles with the storms and the
seas, with something like a kindred buoyancy, goes down with the calm
that follows their violence. It is so with me. I could do much--much
more than woman generally--in the day of trial, but I am the weakest of
my sex when it is over. Would you have the secret of these weaknesses in
your possession, when you must know that the very consciousness, that it
is beyond my own control, must be fatal to that pride of sex which,
perhaps, only sustains me now? Ask me not further, Ralph, on this
subject. I can tell you nothing; I _will_ tell you nothing; and to press
me farther must only be to estrange me the more. It is sufficient that I
call you brother--that I pledge myself to love you as a sister--as
sister never loved brother before. This is as much as I can do, Ralph
Colleton--is it not enough?"

The youth tried numberless arguments and entreaties, but in vain to
shake her purpose; and the sorrowful expression of his voice and manner,
not less than of his language, sufficiently assured her of the deep
mortification which he felt upon her denial. She soothed his spirit with
a gentleness peculiarly her own, and, as if she had satisfied herself
that she had done enough for the delicacy of her scruples in one leading
consideration, she took care that her whole manner should be that of the
most confiding and sisterly regard. She even endeavored to be cheerful,
seeing that her companion, with her unlooked-for denial, had lost all
his elasticity; but without doing much to efface from his countenance
the traces of dissatisfaction.

"And what are your plans, Lucy? Let me know them, at least. Let mo see
how far they are likely to be grateful to your character, and to make
you happy."

"Happy! happy!" and she uttered but the two words, with a brief interval
between them, while her voice trembled, and the gathering suffusion in
her large and thickly-fringed blue eyes attested, more than anything
besides, the prevailing weakness of which she had spoken.

"Ay, happy, Lucy! That is the word. You must not be permitted to choose
a lot in life, in which the chances are not in favor of your happiness."

"I look not for that now, Ralph," was her reply, and with such hopeless
despondency visible in her face as she spoke, that, with a deeper
interest, taking her hand, he again urged the request she had already so
recently denied.

"And why not, my sweet sister? Why should you not anticipate happiness
as well as the rest of us? Who has a better right to happiness than the
young, the gentle, the beautiful, the good?--and you are all of these,
Lucy! You have the charms--the richer and more lasting charms--which, in
the reflective mind, must always awaken admiration! You have animation,
talent, various and active--sentiment, the growth of truth, propriety,
and a lofty aim--no flippancy, no weak vanity--and a gentle beauty, that
woos while it warms."

Her face became very grave, as she drew back from him.

"Nay, my sweet Lucy! why do you repulse me? I speak nothing but the
truth."

"You mock me!--I pray you, mock me not. I have suffered much, Mr.
Colleton--very much, in the few last years of my life, from the sneer,
and the scorn, and the control of others! But I have been taught to hope
for different treatment, and a far gentler estimate. It is ill in you to
take up the speech of smaller spirits, and when the sufferer is one so
weak, so poor, so very wretched as I am now! I had not looked for such
scorn from you!"

Ralph was confounded. Was this caprice? He had never seen any proof of
the presence of such an infirmity in her. And yet, how could he account
for those strange words--that manner so full of offended pride? What had
he been saying? How had she misconceived him? He took her hand earnestly
in his own. She would have withdrawn it; but no!--he held it fast, and
looked pleadingly into her face, as he replied:--

"Surely, Lucy, you do me wrong! How could you think that I would design
to give you pain? Do you really estimate me by so low a standard, that
my voice, when it speaks in praise and homage, is held to be the voice
of vulgar flattery, and designing falsehood?"

"Oh, no, Ralph! not that--anything but that!"

"That I should sneer at _you_, Lucy--feel or utter scorn--_you_, to whom
I owe so much! Have I then been usually so flippant of speech--a
trifler--when we have spoken together before?--the self-assured fopling,
with fancied superiority, seeking to impose upon the vain spirit and the
simple confidence? Surely, I have never given you cause to think of me
so meanly!"

"No! no! forgive me! I know not what I have said! I meant nothing so
unkind--so unjust!"

"Lucy, your esteem is one of my most precious desires. To secure it, I
would do much--strive earnestly--make many sacrifices of self.
Certainly, for this object, I should be always truthful."

"You are, Ralph! I believe you."

"When I praised you, I did not mean merely to praise. I sought rather to
awaken you to a just appreciation of your own claims upon a higher order
of society than that which you can possibly find in this frontier
region. I have spoken only the simple truth of your charms and
accomplishments. I have _felt_ them, Lucy, and paint them only as they
are. Your beauties of mind and person--"

"Oh, do not, I implore you!"

"Yes, I must, Lucy! though of these beauties I should not have
spoken--should not now speak--were it not that I feel sure that your
superior understanding would enable you to listen calmly to a voice,
speaking from my heart to yours, and speaking nothing but a truth which
it honestly believes! And it is your own despondency, and humility of
soul, that prompts me thus to speak in your praise. There is no good
reason, Lucy, why you should not be happy--why fond hearts should not be
rejoiced to win your sympathies--why fond eyes should not look gladly
and gratefully for the smiles of yours! You carry treasures into
society, Lucy, which society will everywhere value as beyond price!"

"Ah! why will you, sir--why, Ralph?--"

"You must not sacrifice yourself, Lucy. You must not defraud society of
its rights. In a more refined circle, whose chances of happiness will be
more likely to command than yours? You must go with me and Edith--go to
Carolina. There you will find the proper homage. You will see the
generous and the noble;--they will seek you--honorable gentlemen, proud
of your favor, happy in your smiles--glad to offer you homes and hearts,
such as shall be not unworthy of your own."

The girl heard him, but with no strengthening of self-confidence. The
thought which occurred to her, which spoke of her claims, was that _he_
had not found them so coercive. But, of course, she did not breathe the
sentiment. She only sighed, and shook her head mournfully; replying,
after a brief pause:--

"I must not hear you, Ralph. I thank you, I thank Miss Colleton, for the
kindness of this invitation, but I dare not accept it. I can not go with
you to Carolina. My lot is here with my aunt, or where she goes. I must
not desert her. She is now even more destitute than myself."

"Impossible! Why, Lucy, your aunt tells me that she means to continue in
this establishment. How can you reconcile it to yourself to remain here,
with the peril of encountering the associations, such as we have already
known them, which seem naturally to belong to such a border region."

"You forget, Ralph, that it was here I met with you," was the sudden
reply, with a faint smile upon her lips.

"Yes; and I was driven here--by a fate, against my will--that we
_should_ meet, Lucy. But though we are both here, now, the region is
unseemly to both, and neither need remain an hour longer than it is
agreeable. Why should you remain out of your sphere, and exposed to
every sort of humiliating peril."

"You forget--my aunt."

"Ay, but what security is there that she will not give you another
uncle?"

"Oh, fie, Ralph!"

"Ay, she is too feeble of will, too weak, to be independent. She will
marry again, Lucy, and is not the woman to choose wisely. Besides, she
is not your natural aunt. She is so by marriage only. The tie between
you is one which gives her no proper claim upon you."

"She has been kind to me, Ralph."

"Yet she would have seen you sacrificed to this outlaw!"

Lucy shuddered. He continued:--

"Her kindness, lacking strength and courage, would leave you still to be
sacrificed, whenever a will, stronger than her own, should choose to
assert a power over you. She can do nothing for you--not even for your
security. You must not remain here, Lucy."

"Frankly, then, Ralph, I do not mean to do so long; nor does my aunt
mean it. She is feeble, as you say; and, knowing it, I shall succeed in
persuading her to sell out here, and we shall then remove to a more
civilized region, to a better society, where, indeed, if you knew it,
you would find nothing to regret, and see no reason to apprehend either
for my securities or tastes. We shall seek refuge among my
kindred--among the relatives of my mother--and I shall there be as
perfectly at home, and quite as happy, as I can be any where."

"And where is it that you go, Lucy?"

"Forgive me, Ralph, but I must not tell you."

"Not tell me!"

"Better that I should not--better, far better! The duties for which the
high Providence brought us together have been, I think, fairly
accomplished. I have done my part, and you, Mr. Colleton--Ralph, I
mean--you have done yours. There is nothing more that we may not do
apart. Here, then, let our conference end. It is enough that you have
complied with the dying wish of my uncle--that I have not, is not your
fault."

"Not my fault, Lucy, but truly my misfortune. But I give not up my hope
so easily. I still trust that you will think better of your
determination, and conclude to go with us. We have a sweet home, and
should not be altogether so happy in it, with the thought of your
absence for ever in our minds."

"What!--not happy, and she with you!"

"Happy!--yes!--but far happier with both of you. You, my sister, and--"

"Say no more--"

"No more now, but I shall try other lips, perhaps more persuasive than
mine. Edith shall come--"

His words were suddenly arrested by the energetic speech and action of
his companion. She put her hand on his wrist--grasped it--and
exclaimed--

"Let her not come! Bring her not here, Ralph Colleton! I have no wish to
see her--_will not_ see her, I tell you--would not have her see _me_ for
the world!"

Ralph was confounded, and recoiled from the fierce, spasmodic energy of
the speaker, so very much at variance with the subdued tone of her
previous conversation. He little knew what an effort was required
hitherto, on her part, to maintain that tone, and to speak coolly and
quietly of those fortunes, every thought of which brought only
disappointment and agony to her bosom.

She dropped his hand as she concluded, and with eyes still fixed upon
him, she half turned round, as if about to leave the room. But the
crisis of her emotions was reached. She sickened with the effort. Her
limbs grew too weak to sustain her; a sudden faintness overspread all
her faculties--her eyes closed--she gasped hysterically, and tottering
forward, she sank unconscious into the arms of Ralph, which were barely
stretched out in time to save her from falling to the floor. He bore her
to the sofa, and laid her down silently upon it.

He was struck suddenly with the truth to which he had hitherto shown
himself so blind. He would have been the blindest and most obtuse of
mortals, did he now fail to see. That last speech, that last look, and
the fearful paroxysm which followed it, had revealed the poor girl's
secret. Its discovery overwhelmed him, at once with the consciousness of
his previous and prolonged dullness--which was surely mortifying--as
with the more painful consciousness of the evil which he had unwittingly
occasioned. But the present situation of the gentle victim called for
immediate attention; and, hastily darting out to another apartment, he
summoned Mrs. Munro to the succor of her niece.

"What is the matter, Mr. Colleton?"

"She faints," answered the other hoarsely, as he hurried the widow into
the chamber.

"Bless my soul, what _can_ be the matter!"

The wondering of the hostess was not permitted to consume her time and
make her neglectful; Colleton did not suffer this. He hurried her with
the restoratives, and saw them applied, and waiting only till he could
be sure of the recovery of the patient, he hurried away, without giving
the aunt any opportunity to examine him in respect to the cause of
Lucy's illness.

Greatly excited, and painfully so, Ralph hastened at once to the
lodgings of Edith. She was luckily alone. She cried out, as he entered--

"Well, Ralph, she will come with us?"

"No!"

"No!--and why not, Ralph! I must go and see her."

"She will not see you, Edith."

"Not see me!"

"No! She positively declines to see you."

"Why, Ralph, that is very strange. What can it mean?"

"Mean, Edith, it means that I am very unfortunate. I have been a blind
fool if nothing worse."

"Why, what can _you_ mean, Ralph. What is this new mystery? This is,
surely, a place of more marvels than--"

"Hear me, Edith, my love, and tell me what you think. I am bewildered,
mortified, confounded."

He proceeded, as well as he could, to relate what had occurred; to give,
not only the words, but to describe the manner of Lucy--so much of it
had been expressed in this way--and he concluded, with a warm suffusion
of his cheeks, to mention the self-flattering conclusion to which he had
come:--

"Now, Edith, you who know me so well, tell me, can you think it possible
that I have done, or said anything which has been calculated to make her
suppose that I loved her--that I sought her. In short, do you think me
capable of playing the scoundrel. I feel that I have been
blind--something of a fool, Edith--but, on my soul, I can not recall a
moment in which I have said or shown anything to this poor girl which
was unbecoming in the gentleman."

The maiden looked at him curiously. At first there was something like an
arch smile playing upon her lips and in her light lively eyes. But when
she noted how real was his anxiety--how deeply and keenly he felt his
own doubt--she felt that the little jest which occurred to her fancy,
would be unseemly and unreasonable. So, she answered promptly, but
quietly--

"Pshaw, Ralph, how can you afflict yourself with, any such notions? I
have no doubt of the perfect propriety of your conduct; and I will
venture to say that Miss Munro entertains no reproaches."

"Yet, feeling so grateful to her, Edith--and when I first came here,
lonely, wounded and suffering every way--feeling so much the want of
sympathy--I may have shown to her--almost the only being with whom I
could sympathize--I may have shown to her a greater degree of interest,
than--"

"My dear Ralph, you are certainly one of the most modest young men of
the present generation; that is, if you do not deceive yourself now, in
your conjectures touching the state of Miss Munro's affections. After
all, it may be a sudden illness from exhaustion, excitement,
terror--which you have undertaken to account for by supposing her
desperately in love."

"Heaven grant it be so," answered Ralph.

"Well, whether so or not, do not distress yourself. I will answer for
it, you are not to blame. And here, let me whisper a little secret in
your ears. However forbidden by all the wise, solemn, staid regulations
of good society, there are young women--very few I grant you--who will,
without the slightest call for it, or provocation, suffer their little
hearts to go out of their own keeping--who will--I am ashamed to confess
it--positively suffer themselves to love even where the case is
hopeless--where no encouragement is given to them--where they can have
no rights at all, and where they can only sigh, and mourn, and envy the
better fortunes of other people. I have no doubt that Miss Munro is one
of these very unsophisticated persons; and that you have been all the
while, and only the innocent cause of all her troubles. I acquit you of
_lèse majesté_, Ralph, so put off your doleful faces."

"Don't speak so carelessly of the matter, Edith. We owe this dear girl a
heavy debt--I do, at least."

"And we shall try and pay it, Ralph. But you must leave this matter to
me. I will go and see Lucy."

"But she refuses to see you."

"I will not be refused. I _will_ see her, and she _shall_ see me, and I
trust we shall succeed in taking her home with us. It may be, Ralph,
that she will feel shy in thinking of you as a brother, but I will do my
best to make her adopt me as a sister."

"My own, my generous Edith--it was ever thus--you are always the noble
and the true. Go, then--you are right--you must go alone. Relieve me
from this sorrow if you can. I need not say to you, persuade her, if in
your power; for much I doubt whether her prospects are altogether so
good as she has represented them to me. So fine a creature must not be
sacrificed."

Edith lost no time in proceeding to the dwelling and into the chamber of
Lucy Munro. She regarded none of the objections of the old lady, the
aunt of her she sought, who would have denied her entrance. Edith's was
a spirit of the firmest mould--tenacious of its purpose, and influenced
by no consideration which would have jostled with the intended good. She
approached the sufferer, who lay half-conscious only on her couch. Lucy
could not be mistaken as to the person of her visiter. The noble
features, full of generous beauty and a warm spirit, breathing affection
for all human things, and doubly expanded with benevolent sweetness when
gazing down upon one needing and deserving of so much--all told her that
the beloved and the betrothed of Ralph Colleton was before her. She
looked but once; then, sighing deeply, turned her head upon the pillow,
so as to shut out a presence so dangerously beautiful.

But Edith was a woman whose thoughts--having deeply examined the minute
structure of her own heart--could now readily understand that of another
which so nearly resembled it. She perceived the true course for
adoption; and, bending gently over the despairing girl, she possessed
herself of one of her hands, while her lips, with the most playful
sweetness of manner, were fastened upon those of the sufferer. The
speech of such an action was instantaneous in its effect.

"Oh, why are you here--why did you come?" was the murmured inquiry of
the drooping maiden.

"To know you--to love you--to win you to love me, Lucy. I would be
worthy of your love, dear girl, if only to be grateful. I know how
worthy you are of all of mine. I have heard all."

"No! no! not all--not all, or you never would be here."

"It is for that very reason that I am here. I have discovered more than
Ralph Colleton could report, and love you all the better, Lucy, as you
can feel with me how worthy he is of the love of both."

A deep sigh escaped the lips of the lovely sufferer, and her face was
again averted from the glance of her visiter. The latter passed her arm
under her neck, and, sitting on the bedside, drew Lucy's head to her
bosom.

"Yes, Lucy, the woman has keener instincts than the man, and feels even
where he fails to see. Do not wonder, therefore, that Edith Colleton
knows more than her lover ever dreamed of. And now I come to entreat you
to love _me_ for _his_ sake. You shall be my sister, Lucy, and in time
you may come to love me for my own sake. My pleasant labor, Lucy, shall
be to win your love--to force you to love me, whether you will or no. We
can not alter things; can not change the courses of the stars; can not
force nature to our purposes in the stubborn heart or the wilful fancy:
and the wise method is to accommodate ourselves to the inevitable, and
see if we can not extract an odor from the breeze no matter whence it
blows. Now, I am an only child, Lucy. I have neither brother nor sister,
and want a friend, and need a companion, one whom I can love--"

"You will have--have--your husband."

"Yes, Lucy, and as a husband! But I am not content. I must have _you_,
also, Lucy."

"Oh, no, no! I can not--can not!"

"You _must_! I can not and will not go without you. Hear me. You have
mortified poor Ralph very much. He swore to your uncle, in his dying
moments--an awful moment--that you should be his sister--that you should
enjoy his protection. His own desires--mine--my father's--all concur to
make us resolute that Ralph shall keep his oath! And he must! and you
must consent to an arrangement upon which we have set our hearts."

"To live with _him_--to see _him_ daily!" murmured the suffering girl.

"Ay, Lucy," answered the other boldly; "and to love him, and honor him,
and sympathize with him in his needs, as a true, devoted woman and
sister, so long as he shall prove worthy in your eyes and mine. I know
that I am asking of you, Lucy, what I would ask of no ordinary woman. If
I held you to be an ordinary woman, to whom we simply owe a debt of
gratitude, I should never dream to offer such an argument. But it is
because you _do_ love him, that I wish you to abide with us; your love
hallowed by its own fires, and purifying itself, as it will, by the
exercise of your mind upon it."

The cheeks of Lucy flushed suddenly, but she said nothing. Edith stooped
to her, and kissed her fondly; Then she spoke again, so tenderly, so
gently, with such judicious pleading--appealing equally to the exquisite
instincts of the loving woman and the thoughtful mind--that the
suffering girl was touched.

But she struggled long. She was unwilling to be won. She was vexed that
she was so weak: she was so weary of all struggle, and she needed
sympathy and love so much!

How many various influences had Edith to combat! how many were there
working in her favor! What a conflict was it all in the poor heart of
the sorrowful and loving Lucy!

Edith was a skilful physician for the heart--skilful beyond her years.

Love was the great want of Lucy.

Edith soon persuaded her that she knew how to supply it. She was so
solicitous, so watchful, so tender, so--

Suddenly the eyes of Lucy gushed with a volume of tears, and she buried
her face in Edith's bosom; and she wept--how passionately!--the sobbings
of an infant succeeding to the more wild emotions of the soul, and
placing her, like a docile and exhausted child, at the entire control of
her companion, even as if she had been a mother.

"Do with me as you will, Edith, my sister."

There was really no argument, there were no reasons given, which could
persuade any mind, having first resolved on the one purpose, to abandon
it for the other. How many reasons had Lucy for being firm in the first
resolution she had made!

But the ends of wisdom do not depend upon the reasons which enforce
conviction. Nay, conviction itself, where the heart is concerned, is
rarely to be moved by any efforts, however noble, of the simply
reasoning faculty.

Shall we call them _arts_--the processes by which Edith Colleton had
persuaded Lucy Munro to her purposes? No! it was the sweet nature, the
gentle virtues, the loving tenderness, the warm sympathies, the delicate
tact--these, superior to art and reason, were made evident to the
suffering girl, in the long interview in which they were together; and
her soul melted under their influence, and the stubborn will was
subdued, and again she murmured lovingly--

"Do with me as you will, my sister."




CHAPTER XLII.

"LAST SCENE OF ALL."


There was no little stir in the village of Chestatee on the morning
following that on which the scene narrated in the preceding chapter had
taken place. It so happened that several of the worthy villagers had
determined to remove upon that day; and Colonel Colleton and his family,
consisting of his daughter, Lucy Munro, and his future son-in-law,
having now no further reason for delay, had also chosen it as their day
of departure for Carolina. Nor did the already named constitute the sum
total of the cavalcade setting out for that region. Carolina was about
to receive an accession in the person of the sagacious pedler, who, in a
previous conversation with both Colonel Colleton and Ralph, had made
arrangements for future and large adventures in the way of trade--having
determined, with the advice and assistance of his newly-acquired
friends, to establish one of those wonders of various combinations,
called a country store, among the good people of Sumter district. Under
their direction, and hopeful of the Colleton patronage and influence,
Bunce never troubled himself to dream of unprofitable speculations; but
immediately drawing up letters for his brother and some other of his
kinsmen engaged in the manufacture, in Connecticut, of one kind of
_notion_ or other, he detailed his new designs, and furnished liberal
orders for the articles required and deemed necessary for the wants of
the free-handed backwoodsmen of the South. Lest our readers should lack
any information on the subject of these wants, we shall narrate a brief
dialogue between the younger Colleton and our worthy merchant, which
took place but a few hours before their departure:--

"Well, Bunce, are you ready? We shall be off now in a couple of hours or
so, and you must not keep us waiting. Pack up at once, man, and make
yourself ready."

"I guess you're in a little bit of a small hurry, Master Colleton,
'cause, you see, you've some reason to be so. You hain't had so easy a
spell on it, no how, and I don't wonder as how you're no little airnest
to get off. Well, you won't have to wait for me. I've jest got through
mending my little go-cart--though, to be sure, it don't look, no how,
like the thing it was. The rigilators made awful sad work of the box and
body, and, what with patching and piecing, there's no two eends on it
alike."

"Well, you're ready, however, and we shall have no difficulty at the
last hour?"

"None to speak on. Jared Bunce aint the chap for burning daylight; and
whenever you're ready to say, 'Go,' he's gone. But, I say, Master Ralph,
there's one little matter I'd like to look at."

"What's that? Be quick, now, for I've much to see to."

"Only a minute. Here, you see, is a letter I've jest writ to my brother,
Ichabod Bunce, down to Meriden. He's a 'cute chap, and quite a Yankee,
now, I tell you; and as I knows all his ways, I've got to keep a sharp
look-out to see he don't come over me. Ah, Master Ralph, it's a hard
thing to say one's own flesh and blood aint the thing, but the truth's
the truth to be sure, and, though it does hurt in the telling, that's no
reason it shouldn't be told."

"Certainly not!"

"Well, as I say, Ichabod Bunce is as close and 'cute in his dealings as
any man in all Connecticut, and that's no little to say, I'm sartin.
He's got the trick, if anybody's got it, of knowing how to make your
pocket his, and squaring all things coming in by double multiplication.
If he puts a shilling down, it's sure to stick to another; and if he
picks one up, it never comes by itself--there's always sure to be two on
'em."

"A choice faculty for a tradesman."

"You've said it."

"Just the man for business, I take it."

"Jest so; you're right there, Master Colleton--there's no mistake about
that. Well, as I tell'd you now, though he's my own brother, I have to
keep a raal sharp look out over him in all our dealings. If he says two
and two makes four, I sets to calkilate, for when he says so, I'm sure
there's something wrong in the calkilation; and tho' to be sure I do
know, when the thing stands by itself, that two and two does make four;
yet, somehow, whenever he says it, I begin to think it not altogether so
sartain. Ah, he's a main hand for trade, and there's no knowing when
he'll come over you."

"But, Bunce, without making morals a party to this question, as you are
in copartnership with your brother, you should rather rejoice that he
possesses so happy a faculty; it certainly should not be a matter of
regret with you."

"Why, how--you wouldn't have me to be a mean-spirited fellow, who would
live all for money, and not care how it comes. I can't, sir--'tain't my
way, I assure you. I do feel that I wasn't born to live nowhere except
in the South; and so I thought when I wrote Ichabod Bunce my last
letter. I told him every man on his own hook, now--for, you see, I
couldn't stand his close-fisted contrivances no longer. He wanted me to
work round the ring like himself, but I was quite too up-and-down for
that, and so I squared off from him soon as I could. We never did agree
when we were together, you see--'cause naterally, being brothers and
partners, he couldn't shave me as he shaved other folks, and so, 'cause
he couldn't by nature and partnership come 'cute over me, he was always
grumbling, and for every yard of prints, he'd make out to send two yards
of grunt and growls, and that was too much, you know, even for a pedler
to stand; so we cut loose, and now as the people say on the river--every
man paddle his own canoe."

"And you are now alone in the way of trade, and this store which you are
about to establish is entirely on your own account?"

"Guess it is; and so, you see, I must pull with single oar up stream,
and shan't quarrel with no friend that helps me now and then to send the
boat ahead."

"Rely upon us, Bunce. You have done too much in my behalf to permit any
of our family to forget your services. We shall do all that we can
toward giving you a fair start in the stream, and it will not be often
that you shall require a helping-hand in paddling your canoe."

"I know'd it, Master Colleton. 'Tain't in Carolina, nor in Georgy, nor
Virginny, no--nor down in Alabam, that a man will look long for
provisions, and see none come. That's the people for me. I guess I must
ha' been born by nature in the South, though I did see daylight in
Connecticut."

"No blarney, Bunce. We know you--what you are and what you are
not!--good and bad in fair proportions. But what paper is that in your
hand?"

"Oh, that? That's jest what I was going now to ax you about. That's my
bill of particulars, you see, that I'm going to send on by the post, to
Ichabod Bunce. He'll trade with me, now we're off partnership, and be as
civil as a lawyer jest afore court-time. 'Cause, you see, he'll be
trying to come over me, and will throw as much dust in my eyes as he
can. But I guess he don't catch me with mouth ajar. I know his tricks,
and he'll find me up to them."

"And what is it you require of me in this matter?"

"Oh, nothing, but jest to look over this list, and tell me how you
'spose the things will suit your part of the country. You see I must try
and larn how to please my customers, that is to be. Now, you see,
here's, in the first place--for they're a great article now in the
country, and turn out well in the way of sale--here's--"

But we need not report the catalogue. Enough, that he proceeded to
unfold (dwelling with an emphatic and precise description of each
article in turn) the immense inventory of wares and merchandises with
which he was about to establish. The assortment was various enough.
There were pen-knives, and jack-knives, and clasp-knives, and
dirk-knives, horn and wooden combs, calicoes and clocks, and tin-ware
and garden seeds; everything, indeed, without regard to fitness of
association, which it was possible to sell in the region to which he was
going.

Ralph heard him through his list with tolerable patience; but when the
pedler, having given it a first reading, proposed a second, with passing
comments on the prospects of sale of each separate article, by way of
recapitulation, the youth could stand it no longer. Apologizing to the
tradesman, therefore in good set terms, he hurried away to the
completion of those preparations called for by his approaching
departure. Bunce, having no auditor, was compelled to do the same;
accordingly a few hours after, the entire party made its appearance in
the court of the village-inn, where the carriages stood in waiting.

About this time another party left the village, though in a different
direction. It consisted of old Allen, his wife, and daughter Kate. In
their company rode the lawyer Pippin, who, hopeless of elevation in his
present whereabouts, was solicitous of a fairer field for the exhibition
of his powers of law and logic than that which he now left had ever
afforded him. He made but a small item in the caravan. His goods and
chattels required little compression for the purposes of carriage, and a
small _Jersey_--a light wagon in free use in that section, contained all
his wardrobe, books, papers, &c.--the heirlooms of a long and carefully
economized practice. We may not follow his fortunes after his removal to
the valley of the Mississippi. It does not belong to the narrative; but,
we may surely say to those in whom his appearance may have provoked some
interest, that subsequently he got into fine practice--was notorious for
his stump-speeches; and a random sheet of the "Republican Star and
Banner of Independence" which we now have before us, published in the
town of "Modern Ilium," under the head of the "Triumph of Liberty and
Principle," records, in the most glowing language, the elevation of
Peter Pippin, Esq., to the state legislature, by seven votes majority
over Colonel Hannibal Hopkins, the military candidate--Pippin 39,
Hopkins 32. Such a fortunate result, if we have rightly estimated the
character of the man, will have easily salved over all the hurts which,
in his earlier history, his self-love may have suffered.

But the hour of departure was at hand, and assisting the fair Edith into
the carriage, Ralph had the satisfaction of placing her beside the
sweetly sad, the lovely, but still deeply suffering girl, to whom he
owed so much in the preservation of his life. She was silent when he
spoke, but she looked her replies, and he felt that they were
sufficiently expressive. The aunt had been easily persuaded to go with
her niece, and we find her seated accordingly along with Colonel
Colleton in the same carriage with the young ladies. Ralph rode, as his
humor prompted, sometimes on horseback, and sometimes in a light gig--a
practice adopted with little difficulty, where a sufficient number of
servants enabled him to transfer the trust of one or the other
conveyance to the liveried outriders. Then came the compact, boxy,
buggy, buttoned-up vehicle of our friend the pedler--a thing for which
the unfertile character of our language, as yet, has failed to provide a
fitting name--but which the backwoodsman of the west calls a go-cart; a
title which the proprietor does not always esteem significant of its
manifold virtues and accommodations. With a capacious stomach, it is
wisely estimated for all possible purposes; and when opened with a
mysterious but highly becoming solemnity, before the gaping and
wondering woodsman, how "awful fine" do the contents appear to Miss
Nancy and the little whiteheads about her. How grand are its treasures,
of tape and toys, cottons and calicoes, yarn and buttons, spotted silks
and hose--knives and thimbles--scissors and needles--wooden clocks, and
coffee-mills, &c.--not to specify a closely-packed and various
assortment of tin-ware and japan, from the tea-kettle and coffee-pot to
the drinking mug for the pet boy and the shotted rattle for the infant.
A judicious distribution of the two latter, in the way of presents to
the young, and the worthy pedler drives a fine bargain with the parents
in more costly commodities.

The party was now fairly ready, but, just at the moment of departure,
who should appear in sight but our simple friend, Chub Williams. He had
never been a frequent visiter to the abodes of men, and of course all
things occasioned wonder. He seemed fallen upon some strange planet, and
was only won to attention by the travellers, on hearing the voice of
Lucy Munro calling to him from the carriage window. He could not be made
to understand the meaning of her words when she told him where she was
going, but contented himself with saying he would come for her, as soon
as they built up his house, and she should be his mother. It was for
this purpose he had come to the village, from which, though surprised at
all things he saw, he was anxious to get away. He had been promised, as
we remember, the rebuilding of his cabin, by the men who captured
Rivers; together with sundry other little acquisitions, which, as they
were associated with his animal wants, the memory of the urchin did not
suffer to escape him. Ralph placed in his hands a sum of money, trifling
in itself, but larger in amount than Chub had ever seen at any one time
before; and telling him it was his own, rejoined the party which had
already driven off. The pedler still lingered, until a bend in the road
put his company out of sight; when, driving up to the idiot, who stood
with open mouth wondering at his own wealth, he opened upon him the
preliminaries of trade, with a respectful address, duly proportioned to
the increased finances of the boy.

"I say, now, Chub--seeing you have the raal grit, if it ain't axing too
much, what do you think to do with all that money? I guess you'd like to
lay out a little on't in the way of trade; and as I ain't particular
where I sell, why, the sooner I begin, I guess, the better. You ain't in
want of nothing, eh? No knife to cut the saplings, and pare the nails,
nor nothing of no kind? Now I has everything from--"

Bunce threw up the lid of his box, and began to display his wares.

"There's a knife for you, Chub Williams--only two bits. With that knife
you could open the stone walls of any house, even twice as strong as Guy
Rivers's. And there's a handkerchief for your neck, Chub--Guy'll have to
wear one of rope, my lad: and look at the suspenders, Chub--fit for the
king; and--"

Where the pedler would have stopped, short of the display and
enumeration of all the wares in his wagon, it is not easy to say, but
for an unexpected interruption. One of the outsiders of the Colleton
party, galloped back at this moment, no other indeed, than our former
acquaintance, the blacky, Cæsar, the fellow whose friendship for Ralph
was such that he was reluctant to get him the steed upon which he left
his uncle's house in dudgeon. Ralph had sent him back to see what
detained the pedler, and to give him help in case of accident.

Cæsar at once divined the cause of the pedler's delay, as he saw the box
opened, and its gaudy contents displayed before the eyes of the
wondering idiot. He was indignant. The negro of the South has as little
reverence for the Yankee pedler as his master, and Cæsar was not slow to
express the indignation which he felt.

"Ki! Misser Bunce, aint you shame for try for draw de money out ob the
boy pocket, wha' massa gee um?"

"Why, Cæsar, he kaint eat the money, old fellow, and he kaint wear it;
and he'll have to buy something with it, whenever he wants to use it."

"But gee um time, Misser Bunce--gee um time! De money aint fair git warm
in de young man pocket. Gee um time! Le' um look 'bout um, and see wha'
he want; and ef you wants to be friendly wid um, gee um somet'ing
youse'f--dat knife burn bright in he eye! Gee um dat, and le's be
moving! Maussa da wait! Ef you's a coming for trade in we country, you
mus' drop de little bizness--'taint 'spectable in Car'lina."

The pedler was rebuked. He looked first at Cæsar, then at Chub, and
finally handed the boy the knife.

"You're right. There, Chub, there's a knife for you. You're a good
little fellow, as well as you knows how to be."

Chub grinned, took the knife, opened both blades, and nodding his head,
made off without a word.

"The etarnal little heathen! Never to say so much as thank ye."

"Nebber mind, Misser Bunce; dat's de 'spectable t'ing wha' you do. Always
'member, ef you wants to be gempleman's, dat you kaint take no money
from nigger and poor buckrah. You kin gib um wha' you please, but you
mustn't 'speck dem to be gibbing you."

"But in the way of _trade_, Cæsar," said the pedler, putting his horse
in motion.

"Der's a time for _trade_, and a time for _gib_, and you must do de
genteel t'ing, and nebber consider wha's de 'spense of it, or de profit.
De nigger hab he _task_ in de cornfiel', and he hab for do um; but
'spose maussa wants he nigger to do somet'ing dat aint in he task--dat's
to say in de nigger own time--wha' den? He _pays_ um han'some for it.
When you's a trading, trade and git you pay, but when you's a trabelling
with gemplemans and he family, da's no time for trade. Ef you open you
box at dem times, you must jest put in you hand, and take out de t'ing
wha' you hab for gib, and say, 'Yer Cæsar--somet'ing for you, boy!'"

"Hem! that's the how, is it?" said the pedler with a leer that was
good-humoredly knowing. "Well, old fellow, as you've given me quite a
lesson how to behave myself, I guess I must show you that I understand
how to prove that I'm thankful--so here, Cæsar, is a cut for you from
one of my best goods."

He accompanied the words with a smart stroke of his whip, a totally
unexpected salutation, over the shoulders, which set the negro off in a
canter. Bunce, however, called him back; holding up a flaming
handkerchief of red and orange, as a means of reconciliation. Cæsar was
soon pacified, and the two rode on together in a pleasant companionship,
which suffered no interruptions on the road; Cæsar all the way
continuing to give the pedler a proper idea of the processes through
which he might become a respectable person in Carolina.

There are still other parties to our story which it is required that we
should dispose of according to the rules of the novel.

Let us return to the dungeon of the outlaw, where we behold him in a
situation as proper to his deserts as it is new to his experience.
Hitherto, he has gone free of all human bonds and penalties, save that
of exile from society, and a life of continued insecurity. He has never
prepared his mind with resignation to endure patiently such a condition.
What an intellect was here allowed to go to waste--what fine talents
have been perverted in this man. Endowments that might have done the
country honor, have been made to minister only in its mischiefs.

How sad a subject for contemplation! The wreck of intellect, of genius,
of humanity. Fortunate for mankind, if, under the decree of a saving and
blessing Providence, there be no dark void on earth--when one bright
star falls from its sphere, if there is another soon lighted to fill its
place, and to shine more purely than that which has been lost. May we
not believe this--nay, we must, and exult, on behalf of humanity--that,
in the eternal progress of change, the nature which is its aliment no
less than its element, restores not less than its destiny removes. Yet,
the knowledge that we lose not, does not materially lessen the pang when
we behold the mighty fall--when we see the great mind, which, as a star,
we have almost worshipped, shooting with headlong precipitance through
the immense void from its place of eminence, and defrauding the eye of
all the glorious presence and golden promise which had become associated
with its survey.

The intellect of Guy Rivers had been gigantic--the mistake--a mistake
quite too common to society--consisted in an education limited entirely
to the mind, and entirely neglectful of the _morale_ of the boy. He was
taught, like thousands of others; and the standards set up for his moral
government, for his passions, for his emotions, were all false from the
first. The capacities of his mind were good as well as great--but they
had been restrained, while the passions had all been brought into
active, and at length ungovernable exercise. How was it possible that
reason, thus taught to be subordinate, could hold the strife long, when
passion--fierce passion--the passion of the querulous infant, and the
peevish boy, only to be bribed to its duty by the toy and the
sugarplum--is its uncompromising antagonist?

But let us visit him in his dungeon--the dungeon so lately the abode of
his originally destined, but now happily safe victim. What philosophy is
there to support _him_ in _his_ reverse--what consolation of faith, or
of reflection, the natural result of the due performance of human
duties? none! Every thought was self-reproachful. Every feeling was of
self-rebuke and mortification. Every dream was a haunting one of terror,
merged for ever in the deep midnight cry of a fateful voice which bade
him despair. "Curse God and die!"

In respect to his human fortunes, the voice was utterly without pity. He
had summed up for himself, as calmly as possible, all his chances of
escape. There was no hope left him. No sunlight, human or divine,
penetrated the crevices of his dungeon, as in the case of Ralph
Colleton, cheering him with promise, and lifting his soul with faith and
resignation. Strong and self-relying as was his mind by nature, he yet
lacked all that strength of soul which had sustained Ralph even when
there seemed no possible escape from the danger which threatened his
life. But Guy Rivers was not capable of receiving light or warmth from
the simple aspects of nature. His soul, indurated by crime, was as
insusceptible to the soothing influence of such aspects, as the cold
rocky cavern where he had harbored, was impenetrable to the noonday
blaze. The sun-glance through the barred lattice, suddenly stealing,
like a friendly messenger, with a sweet and mellow smile upon his lips,
was nailed as an angelic visiter, by the enthusiastic nature of the one,
without guile in his own heart. Rivers would have regarded such a
visiter as an intruder; the smile in his eyes would have been a sneer,
and he would have turned away from it in disgust. The mind of the strong
man is the medium through which the eyes see, and from which life takes
all its color. The heart is the prismatic conductor, through which the
affections show; and that which is seared, or steeled, or
ossified--perverted utterly from its original make--can exhibit no
rainbows--no arches of a sweet promise, linking the gloomy earth with
the bright and the beautiful and the eternal heavens.

The mind of Guy Rivers had been one of the strongest make--one of large
and leading tendencies. He could not have been one of the mere ciphers
of society. He must be something, or he must perish. His spirit would
have fed upon his heart otherwise, and, wanting a field and due
employment, his frame must have worn away in the morbid repinings of its
governing principles. Unhappily, he had not been permitted a choice. The
education of his youth had given a fatal direction to his manhood; and
we find him, accordingly, not satisfied with his pursuit, yet resolutely
inflexible and undeviating in the pursuit of error. Such are the
contradictions of the strong mind, to which, wondering as we gaze, with
unreasonable and unthinking astonishment, we daily see it subject. Our
philosophers are content with declaiming upon effects--they will not
permit themselves or others to trace them up to their causes. To heal
the wound, the physician may probe and find out its depth and extent;
the same privilege is not often conceded to the physician of the mind or
of the morals, else numberless diseases, now seemingly incurable, had
been long since brought within the healing scope of philosophical
analysis. The popular cant would have us forbear even to look at the
history of the criminal. Hang the wretch, say they, but say nothing
about him. Why trace his progress?--what good can come out of the
knowledge of those influences and tendencies, which have made him a
criminal? Let them answer the question for themselves!

The outlaw beheld the departing cavalcade of the Colletons from the
grated window. He saw the last of all those in whose fortunes he might
be supposed to have an interest. He turned from the sight with a bitter
pang at his heart, and, to his surprise, discovered that he was not
alone in the solitude of his prison. One ministering spirit sat beside
him upon the long bench, the only article of furniture afforded to his
dungeon.

The reader has not forgotten the young woman to whose relief, from fire,
Ralph Colleton so opportunely came while making his escape from his
pursuers. We remember the resignation--the yielding weakness of her
broken spirit to the will of her destroyer. We have seen her left
desolate by the death of her only relative, and only not utterly
discarded by him, to whose fatal influence over her heart, at an earlier
period, we may ascribe all her desolation. She then yielded without a
struggle to his will, and, having prepared her a new abiding-place, he
had not seen her after, until, unannounced and utterly unlooked-for,
certainly uninvited, she appeared before him in the cell of his dungeon.

Certainly, none are utterly forgotten! There are some who remember--some
who feel with the sufferer, however lowly in his suffering--some who can
not forget. No one perishes without a tearful memory becoming active
when informed of his fate; and, though the world scorns and despises,
some one heart keeps a warm sympathy, that gives a sigh over the ruin of
a soul, and perhaps plants a flower upon its grave.

Rivers had not surely looked to see, in his dungeon, the forsaken and
the defrauded girl, for whom he had shown so little love. He knew not,
at first, how to receive her. What offices could she do for him--what
influence exercise--how lighten the burden of his doom--how release him
from his chains? Nothing of this could she perform--and what did she
there? For sympathy, at such a moment, he cared little for such
sympathy, at least, as he could command. His pride and ambition,
heretofore, had led him to despise and undervalue the easy of
attainment. He was always grasping after the impossible. The fame which
he had lost for ever, grew doubly attractive to his mind's eye from the
knowledge of this fact. The society, which had expelled him from its
circle and its privileges, was an Eden in his imagination, simply on
that account. The love of Edith Colleton grew more desirable from her
scorn;--and the defeat of hopes so daring, made his fierce spirit writhe
within him, in all the pangs of disappointment, only neutralized by his
hope of revenge. And that hope was now gone; the dungeon and the doom
were all that met his eyes;--and what had she, his victim, to do in his
prison-cell, and with his prison feelings--she whom Providence, even in
her own despite, was now about to avenge? No wonder he turned away from
her in the bitterness of the thought which her appearance must
necessarily have inspired.

"Turn not away!--speak to me, Guy--speak to me, if you have pity in your
soul! You shall not drive me from you--you shall not dismiss me now. I
should have obeyed you at another time, though you had sent me to my
death--but I can not obey you now. I am strong now, strong--very strong
since I can say so much. I am come to be with you to the last, and, if
it be possible, to die with you; and you shall not refuse me. You shall
not--oh, you will not--you can not--"

And, as she spoke, she clung to him as one pleading herself for life to
the unrelenting executioner. He replied, in a sarcasm, true to his
general course of life.

"Yes, Ellen! your revenge for your wrongs would not be well complete,
unless your own eyes witnessed it; and you insist upon the privilege as
if you duly estimated the luxury. Well!--you may stay. It needed but
this, if anything had been needed, to show me my own impotence."

"Cruel to the last, Guy--cruel to the last! Surely the few hours between
this and that of death, are too precious to be employed in bitterness.
Were not prayer better--if you will not pray, Guy, let me. My prayer
shall be for you; and, in the forgiveness which my heart shall truly
send to my lips for the wrongs you have done to me and mine, I shall not
altogether despair, so that you join with me, of winning a forgiveness
far more important and precious! Guy, will you join me in prayer?"

"My knees are stiff, Ellen. I have not been taught to kneel."

"But it is not too late to learn. Bend, bow with me, Guy--if you have
ever loved the poor Ellen, bow with her now. It is her prayer; and, oh,
think, how weak is the vanity of this pride in a situation like yours.
How idle the stern and stubborn spirit, when men can place you in
bonds--when men can take away life and name--when men can hoot and hiss
and defile your fettered and enfeebled person! It was for a season and a
trial like this, Guy, that humility was given us. It was in order to
such an example that the Savior died for us."

"He died not for me. I have gained nothing by his death. Men are as bad
as ever, and wrong--the wrong which deprived me of my right in
society--has been as active and prevailing a principle of human action
as before he died. It is in his name now that they do the wrong, and in
his name, since his death, they have contrived to find a sanction for
all manner of crime. Speak no more of this, Ellen; you know nothing
about it. It is all folly."

"To you, Guy, it may be. To the wise all things are foolish. But to the
humble heart there is a truth, even in what are thought follies, which
brings us the best of teachings. That is no folly which keeps down, in
the even posture of humility, the spirit which circumstances would only
bind and crush in every effort to rise. That is no folly which prepares
us for reverses, and fortifies us against change and vicissitude. That
is no folly which takes away the sting from affliction--which has kept
me, Guy, as once before you said, from driving a knife into your heart,
while it lay beating against the one to which yours had brought all
manner of affliction. Oh, believe me, the faith and the feeling and the
hope, not less than the fear, which has made me what I am now--which has
taught me to rely only on the one--which has made me independent of all
things and all loves--ay, even of yours, when I refer to it--is no idle
folly. It is the only medicine by which the soul may live. It is that
which I bring to you now. Hear me, then--Guy, hear the prayer of the
poor Ellen, who surely has some right to be heard by you. Kneel for me,
and with me, on this dungeon floor, and pray--only pray."

"And what should I pray for, and what should I say--and whom should I
curse?"

"Oh, curse none!--say anything you please, so that it have the form of a
prayer. Say, though but a single sentence, but say it in the spirit
which is right."

"Say what?"

"Say--'the Lord's will be done,' if nothing more; but say it in the true
feeling--the feeling of humble reliance upon God."

"And wherefore say this? His will must be done, and will be done,
whether I say it or not. This is all idle--very idle--and to my mind
excessively ridiculous, Ellen."

"Not so, Guy, as your own sense will inform you. True, his will must be
done; but there is a vast difference between desiring that it be done,
and in endeavoring to resist its doing. It is one thing to pray that his
will have its way without stop, but quite another to have a vain wish in
one's heart to arrest its progress. But I am a poor scholar, and have no
words to prove this to your mind, if you are not willing to think upon
the subject. If the danger is not great enough in your thought--if the
happiness of that hope of immortality be not sufficiently impressive to
you--how can I make it seem different? The great misfortune of the
learned and the wise is, that they will not regard the necessity. If
they did--if they could be less self-confident--how much more readily
would all these lights from God shine out to them, than to us who want
the far sense so quickly to perceive and to trace them out in the thick
darkness. But it is my prayer, Guy, that you kneel with me in prayer;
that you implore the feeling of preparedness for all chances which can
only come from Heaven. Do this for me, Guy--Guy, my beloved--the
destroyer of my youth, of all my hope, and of all of mine, making me the
poor destitute and outcast that you find me now--do this one, one small
kindness for the poor Ellen you have so much wronged, and she forgives
you all. I have no other prayer than this--I have no other wish in
life."

As she spoke, she threw herself before him, and clasped his knees firmly
with her hands. He lifted her gently from the floor, and for a few
moments maintained her in silence in his arms. At length, releasing her
from his grasp, and placing her upon the bench, on which, until that
moment, he had continued to sit, he replied:--

"The prayer is small--very small, Ellen--which you make, and I know no
good reason why I should not grant it. I have been to you all that you
describe me. You have called me truly your destroyer, and the
forgiveness you promise in return for this prayer is desirable even to
one so callous as myself. I will do as you require."

"Oh, will you? then I shall be so happy!--" was her exclamation of
rejoicing. He replied gravely--

"We shall see. I will, Ellen, do as you require, but you must turn away
your eyes--go to the window and look out. I would not be seen in such a
position, nor while uttering such a prayer."

"Oh, be not ashamed, Guy Rivers. Give over that false sentiment of pride
which is now a weakness. Be the man, the--"

"Be content, Ellen, with my terms. Either as I please, or not at all. Go
to the window."

She did as he directed, and a few moments had elapsed only when he
called her to him. He had resumed his seat upon the bench, and his
features were singularly composed and quiet.

"I have done something more than you required, Ellen, for which you will
also have to forgive me. Give me your hand, now."

She did so, and he placed it upon his bosom, which was now streaming
with his blood! He had taken the momentary opportunity afforded him by
her absence at the window to stab himself to the heart with a penknife
which he had contrived to conceal upon his person. Horror-struck, the
affrighted woman would have called out for assistance, but, seizing her
by the wrist, he sternly stayed her speech and action.

"Not for your life, Ellen--not for your life! It is all useless. I first
carefully felt for the beatings of my heart, and then struck where they
were strongest. The stream flows now which will soon cease to flow, and
but one thing can stop it."

"Oh, what is that, Guy?--let me--"

"Death--which is at hand! Now, Ellen, do you forgive me? I ask no
forgiveness from others."

"From my heart I do, believe me."

"It is well. I am weak. Let me place my head upon your bosom. It is some
time, Ellen, since it has been there. How wildly does it struggle! Pray,
Ellen, that it beat not long. It has a sad office! Now--lips--give me
your lips, Ellen. You have forgiven me--all--everything?"

"All, all!"

"It grows dark--but I care not. Yet, throw open the window--I will not
rest--I will pursue! He shall not escape me!--Edith--Edith!" He was
silent, and sunk away from her embrace upon the floor. In the last
moment his mind had wandered to the scene in which, but an hour before,
he had witnessed the departure of Edith with his rival, Colleton.

The jailer, alarmed by the first fearful cry of Ellen succeeding this
event, rushed with his assistants into the cell, but too late. The
spirit had departed; and they found but the now silent mourner, with
folded arms, and a countenance that had in it volumes of unutterable wo,
bending over the inanimate form of one whose life and misnamed love had
been the bane of hers.


THE END.