THE

                            LOST MANUSCRIPT


                                A NOVEL


                                   BY
                             GUSTAV FREYTAG



        Authorized Translation from the Sixteenth German Edition
                        _COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME_



                       SECOND, UNALTERED EDITION



                                PART II





                        "_A noble human life does not end on earth
                        with death. It continues in the minds and
                        the deeds of friends, as well as in the
                        thoughts and the activity of the nation._"






                                CHICAGO
                   THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY
               LONDON: KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUEBNER & CO.
                                  1898



_No one who has written a book has of himself become what he is; every
one stands on the shoulders of his predecessor; all that was produced
before his time has helped to form his life and soul. Again, what he
has produced, has in some sort formed other men, and thus his soul has
passed to later times. In this way the contents of books form one great
soul-empire on earth, and all who now write, live and nourish
themselves on the souls of the past generations. From this point of
view the soul of mankind is an immeasurable unity, which comprises
every one who ever thus lived and worked, as well as those who breathe
and produce new works at present. The soul, which past generations felt
as their own, has been and is daily transmigrating into others. What is
written to-day may to-morrow become the possession of thousands of
strangers. Those who have long ago ceased to exist in the body continue
to live in new forms here on earthy and daily revive in thousands of
others._

                                              Gustav Freytag.




                               CONTENTS:


                              CHAPTER XXI.

The Butter Machine


                             CHAPTER XXII.

Three Councils


                             CHAPTER XXIII.

Philopena


                             CHAPTER XXIV.

Among the Students


                              CHAPTER XXV.

Chaos

                             CHAPTER XXVI.

The Drama


                             CHAPTER XXVII.

The Sovereign


                            CHAPTER XXVIII.

In the Pavilion


                             CHAPTER XXIX.

Two New Guests


                              CHAPTER XXX.

Vexations


                             CHAPTER XXXI.

Hummel's Triumph


                             CHAPTER XXXII.
A Chapter from Tacitus


                            CHAPTER XXXIII.

Caesarean Insanity in the Hummel Family


                             CHAPTER XXXIV.

Old Acquaintances


                             CHAPTER XXXV.

In the Princess's Tower


                             CHAPTER XXXVI.

Ilse's Flight


                            CHAPTER XXXVII.

The Lord High Steward


                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

The Magister's Exit


                             CHAPTER XXXIX.

Before the Crisis


                              CHAPTER XL.

On the Road to the Rock


                              CHAPTER XLI.

In the Cave


                             CHAPTER XLII.

Tobias Bachhuber









                             _CHAPTER XXI_.

                           THE BUTTER MACHINE


In the large hall of the University a select audience was assembled;
state and municipal dignitaries, and men of learning, and students,
were constantly streaming backwards and forwards through the doors of
the great entrance. The wives of the Professors sat above in the
gallery: Ilse was in the place of honor, in the middle of the front
row, with Laura. This was a great day for Ilse, for the splendor of the
highest academical dignity rested upon her husband's head. Felix Werner
had been chosen Rector Magnificus, and was now about to enter upon his
office.

The instructors of the University walked in a long procession into the
hall; before them went the beadles in their antique dress of office,
carrying great maces in their hands; the gentlemen themselves walked in
the order of their several faculties. Theology began the procession,
and Philosophy closed it; the latter, both from the number and
importance of its members, was the strongest division; altogether they
formed a stately company; by the side of some nonentities went men of
the highest repute, of whom the country might well be proud; and it was
a pleasure to every one to see so much learning assembled. These great
minds, however, did not make a very dignified appearance in the
procession: they kept their ranks badly; many looked as if they were
thinking more of their books than of the impression made by their
appearance on the public; one had come behind time--it was Raschke--he
entered carelessly, running behind the tutors and nodding familiarly to
his acquaintances. The procession was received by the Academical Choir
with a Latin song, solemn, but unintelligible. The Professors ranged
themselves on their seats; the ex-Rector mounted the platform, which
was decorated with flowers; he first made a learned speech upon the
benefits which medical science had long ago derived from the wandering
tribes of Arabia, and then read a report of the academical events of
the last year. The discourse was fine; the proceedings were imposing;
the distinguished guests from the city and government sat immovable;
the Professors listened attentively, the students rattled only a little
at the door; and if at times from the high ceiling of the great hall
the spirit of weariness waved its great bat-wings before the eyes of
the audience, as is inevitable at academical ceremonies, Ilse to-day
did not remark it. When the Rector had ended his discourse, with a
graceful wave of his hand and some complimentary words, he invited his
successor to join him on the platform. Felix did so. The Rector took
off his cap and the golden chain and mantle, which looked like an old
regal mantle, and put them all upon his successor, with warm wishes and
expressions of esteem. Laura whispered to her neighbor: "If our
Professor had a sword at his side he would look like one of the
Electors in the pictures up there." Ilse assented joyfully; it was
precisely what she thought. Now Werner came forward with his scarlet
mantle and chain. The beadles crossed their maces on both sides of the
chair, and the new Rector majestically began an address to the
Professors and students, in which he begged for their good will and
promised good government. Again the Academical Choir began a Latin song
of triumph, and the procession of University instructors retired into
the neighboring room, where the Professors surrounded their Rector,
shaking hands with him, and the beadles packed the scarlet mantle and
chain in a chest, to be preserved for future occasions. Ilse, too,
received the congratulations of the ladies, who placed themselves on
the gallery steps and greeted her gaily as "Magnifica."

As soon as she got home. Ilse threw her arms round her husband's neck,
and told him how stately he looked in his grand attire. "What the gipsy
said," she exclaimed, "has been fulfilled to-day: the man whom I love
has worn a prince's dress; I greet you, my Prince and Lord."

It was on the afternoon of this great day that the visit of the
Hereditary Prince was announced. Ilse once more looked into every
corner of her bright dwelling, that she might experience no disgrace as
mistress of the house, and made her husband instruct her as to the
right form of speaking to an illustrious prince; "In order that I may
know what to say if he addresses me. I am anxious, Felix, for it is a
great thing to meet the future Sovereign of one's country."

As the clock struck, the carriage drove up. Gabriel, in his best coat,
conducted the gentlemen to the Rector's room. Meanwhile Ilse walked up
and down, burning with expectation. It was not long before her door was
opened, and two gentlemen entered, introduced by her husband. The
Prince was of a slight figure, medium height, black hair, with small
face and features; over the delicate lips there was a dark line, which
showed the beginning of a mustache; his carriage was awkward and
embarrassed, and he gave one the impression of being a delicate and
weak man. He seemed confused when he approached Ilse, and he told her,
in so low a tone that she could scarcely make out his words, how much
he rejoiced in meeting with a countrywoman.

His shy manner gave Ilse courage; she was touched by the countenance of
her young Prince, and accosted him: "We in our country cling to our
home, and as I now have the opportunity of making your Highness's
acquaintance, I venture to say that I remember your Highness. You were
quite a young gentleman, and I was only a half-grown girl when I first
saw you in your father's capital. Your Highness was sitting on a very
small horse; whilst my father and I made our obeisances, the horse
stood still and would not go on. You looked kindly at me, just as you
do now. I had a couple of roses in my hand, and, as you were our young
Prince, I offered them to you. But you shook your head and could not
take them, as you had to hold the bridle, and I believe you were a
little timid about your horse: but the horse poked its head into the
flowers. Then a tall man in uniform rode up and held the horse, and we
retreated. You see I remember it all, for it was an important thing for
a country girl to remember.--But will your Highness do me the honor to
take a seat?"

The Prince's attendant, the Chamberlain von Weidegg, addressed Ilse
courteously; he was a man of middle age, tall, of good address, and not
bad looking; he took the lead in the conversation, and spoke pleasantly
of the hills and woods of their common country; it was an agreeable
interchange of words on every day subjects. The Prince was silent,
played with his eyeglass, and looked cautiously and wonderingly at the
stately wife of the Professor, who was sitting opposite him. At last
the Chamberlain inquired at what hour Ilse received strangers, and
expressed a wish that the Prince and he might be allowed occasionally
to visit her. "On account of the few persons with whom my illustrious
Prince can associate in this city, a house in which he may expect not
to be treated as a stranger will be particularly acceptable to him."
This was very pleasant and courteous, and when the Professor had
accompanied the strangers to the entrance, he said to his wife, "They
appear to be very amiable."

"I had imagined my Prince to be quite different, Felix, bold and
haughty; but he has not even a star on his breast."

"It must have been in his pocket," said the Professor, consolingly.

"But he looks like a good youth," concluded Ilse, "and, as he is my
countryman, he shall be well treated."

"That is right," replied the Professor, laughing.

In a short time the Hereditary Prince and his Chamberlain found out
that this good treatment was very pleasant. The Chamberlain proved
himself an agreeable man; he had travelled much, had experience of all
sorts, had seen much, and read a good deal on various subjects; he
collected autographs, had no vices and no bad habits. During a long
sojourn in Rome he had been intimate with old acquaintances of the
Professor, he had wandered through the ruins of Pompeii, and showed a
warm interest in the details of old Roman houses. Besides this he
understood how to listen and how to ask questions, and could, with
decorum, tell doubtful anecdotes of people of note. His conversation
was agreeable to the Professor, he was welcome at Ilse's tea-table, and
liked by her guests. It seemed also to give him pleasure to converse
with the learned men; he visited the Doctor and examined his old
wood-cuts; he treated Professor Raschke with considerate politeness,
and, with his Prince, accompanied the Philosopher on a fine winter
evening to his distant dwelling, and during the walk Raschke imparted
to them very interesting observations upon plants.

It cannot be said that the Hereditary Prince was much at home among the
Professors; he listened with toleration to their conversation, as
became an academical student, and said the right thing at the right
time; but he showed by an impatient jerk of his lorgnette that he would
much have preferred any other kind of entertainment.

Ilse was not pleased when he fidgeted with his glass, for she wished
that he should conduct himself with dignity among other men, and she
seemed to feel as if the gentlemen would reproach her because the
Prince took no real interest in serious subjects. As mistress of the
house, therefore, she was very attentive to him; she ventured to advise
him not to drink his tea too strong, and prepared it for him herself.
The Prince was pleased with this, and enjoyed sitting next to her or
watching her perform her duties at the table as hostess. It was only
with her that he ever lost his cautious reserve; he talked to her of
the remarkable things he had seen in the town, and when he had nothing
to say, he assisted her in her duties; he placed the cream jug before
her, and always passed the sugar-bowl when he thought that Ilse wanted
it.

One evening as the Prince was sitting silently by Ilse's side, and the
gentlemen present were engaged in passing indignant judgment on the
arbitrary management of the Vatican Library, Ilse proposed to him to
look over a work that her husband had bought, containing good portraits
of famous men of learning and artists. They went to examine it by a
lamp in the next room, and the Prince looked at the portraits with
languid interest. "Of many of them I only know," began Ilse, "what my
husband has told me; I have not read their books, and of the beautiful
things they have painted and composed, I know but little."

"That is just my case," replied the Prince, honestly, "it is only about
the musicians that I know anything."

"Yet it is a pleasure to look at their portraits," continued Ilse; "one
judges from them what the character and merits of these men may have
been, and when one asks any person who knows more, one finds one's
views sometimes confirmed and sometimes erroneous. That seems to make
us like the men and become intimate with them, and we seek for
opportunities of making acquaintance with their works of art and
learning. I long to know more about them. But when one has read about a
great man, and after a time sees his picture, then his face appears
like that of a dear friend."

"Do you like to read?" asked the Prince, looking up.

"I am beginning to like it," replied Ilse; "but unlearned heads do not
take in serious things at once, especially when they excite earnest
thoughts."

"I do not like to read," replied the Prince; "at least in the way in
which it is pressed upon me. It is tedious to me, for I have never
learned anything thoroughly, and I know nothing well."

He said this with bitterness. Ilse was shocked at the confession. "Your
Highness will find that that will change now,--you will have such
excellent opportunities here."

"Yes," replied the Prince, "from morning till evening, and one thing
after another. I am always glad when the lectures are over."

Ilse regarded the young Prince sympathizingly. "That is very
unfortunate for your Highness. Is there nothing that you would care to
know or possess? no collection of minerals or butterflies, or of rare
books or engravings, like the Doctor over there has? In this way one
can find enjoyment the whole year, and while collecting these valuable
things one learns a great deal."

"If I wish to have anything of the kind I can have any quantity of them
collected," replied the Prince; "but to what end? I have already so
many things about me. If I were to express a wish to collect minerals,
everybody about me would be in a state of excitement, and it would
either be forbidden or I should have a whole collection brought into
the house."

"That indeed is of no use," said Ilse, pityingly; "the only pleasure is
in looking after each individual thing one's self; no man can know all,
but everyone should have something which he understands thoroughly. If
I may venture to compare my insignificant life with the important one
that awaits your Highness, I should like to tell you my own experience.
When my good mother was laid on her deathbed I was quite a young girl,
but I wished to take her place in the household. I found, however, that
I was quite at a loss what to do. I did not even know whether the
people were industrious or lazy; I did not understand how to do
anything, and if it was done badly I could not teach them better. One
evening I sat discouraged and angry with myself, and I believe I wept.
Then my good father said, 'You should not undertake so much at once,
you should first learn some one thing accurately.' Then he took me into
the dairy. Does your Highness know what that is."

"Not exactly," replied the Prince.

She then explained to him the whole day's work of the dairy. "This was
the result: I took it in hand myself, learned the work thoroughly, and
thus was able to judge the maids. I learned everything about the cows
accurately, and which was the best kind for us, and why; for every
species does not thrive everywhere. I soon became ambitious of making
good butter and cheese. I obtained information from those who were
skilled in it, and sometimes read a book about it. Then I conferred
with my father about improvements, and just when I came away we were
thinking of getting a new machine instead of our large wooden churn. It
is now set up; it is said to be very good, and to make good butter; but
I have not seen it. Does your Highness know anything about churning?"

"No," replied the Prince.

Ilse described the process to him as far as she could, and continued:
"When my father made up his books at midsummer, it was my pride that
the dairy produce should every year increase in amount; but I was
provoked that my father laughed at my small profits; he valued the cows
for other reasons." Ilse gave a slight explanation on this point, and
then continued: "From this time, your Highness, I felt quite at home in
the world. Now, if I go to a factory, I find myself looking upon it as
another kind of dairy, and when state revenues and government
expenditure are talked of, I compare them with our house and farming
accounts. But it is very silly in me to talk to your Highness about
butter and cheese."

The Prince looked frankly into her eyes. "Ah kind lady," he said,
"yours has been a happy life; I have never been so fortunate as to be
able to enjoy quietly what I like. From morning to evening I have been
in leading-strings, and passed on from one person to another. When, as
a child, I went into the garden, the governess or tutor was always
there, and when I ran or jumped about on the grass, I was to do it in a
becoming manner; once, when I wished to turn a somersault, like other
boys, it excited the utmost dismay, on account of its indecorum. Every
moment it was said, 'that was not befitting a Prince,' or, 'this is not
the proper time.' When I came out of my room I was stared at by
strangers, and had always to take notice of them and bow to them; I was
told with whom I was or was not to shake hands, and who I was or was
not to accost. Every day passed thus. One was always to use empty forms
of speech in three languages, and every day the uppermost thought was,
whether one had conducted one's self well. Once I and my sister wished
to lay out a little garden; immediately the head gardener was called to
dig and plant for us, thus all our pleasure was spoilt. Then we wished
to act a little play, and had thought of a nice piece; again we were
told that it was foolish trash, and that we must learn a play by heart,
with French modes of speech, in which the children always exclaimed how
dearly they loved papa and mamma, whilst we had no mother. In this
training for mere show my childhood passed. I assure you I know nothing
thoroughly, and though I remain here at study forever, I feel that it
can do me no good, and I shall enter the world a very useless being."

"Ah, that is sad," exclaimed Ilse, with deep sympathy; "but I entreat
of your Highness not to lose courage. It is impossible that the life
here, among so many men of the highest capacity and worth, should not
be beneficial to you."

The Prince shook his head.

"Think what a future lies before your Highness," continued Ilse. "Ah,
you have every reason to be brave and confident. Your office is the
highest on earth. We others work, and are happy if we can only preserve
one human being from evil; but you will have the welfare and lives of
thousands in your power. What you do for schools and learning through
the selection of good or bad teachers, and your decisions as to peace
or war, may ruin or make the whole country happy. When I think of this
exalted vocation, I feel a deep respect for you, and I would implore
you on my knees to do your utmost to make yourself a worthy prince.
Therefore, the best advice for you is, that you should be willing to
learn even what is wearisome to you. For the rest, have confidence in
the future: you will yet have pleasure in life, and a feeling of worth
and capacity."

The Prince was silent; for every allusion to his future position as
Sovereign was forbidden at Court, and even less than others was the
heir to the throne allowed to indulge in such a thought or cherish such
a hope.

"I hear lectures enough," said the Prince, at last; "but I wish that I
might have been brought up by a country gentleman, as you have been."

They returned to the gentlemen, and the Prince paid much attention to
their conversation during the rest of the evening. When he went away,
Ilse said to her husband: "There is one who has what would make
thousands happy, yet he is unhappy, for they have bound up his honest
heart in leather like an automaton. Oh, be kind to him, Felix; open
your soul to him, that he may gain some of your confidence and power."

Her husband kissed her, and said, "That will be easier for you to do
than for me. But he has himself suggested the right thing; three years
with your father would be the best training for him and his country."

At breakfast the following morning the Chamberlain took the newspapers
from the hand of the lackey; the Prince was sitting silently at table,
playing with a tea-spoon, and watching a fly which was disrespectfully
trying to make its way from the edge of the cream-jug into the princely
cream. As the written instructions imposed upon the Chamberlain the
duty of guarding the Prince from all dangerous reading--by that was
meant all discontented newspapers and improper novels--he thought it
best to give him the inoffensive "Daily Gazette," whilst he himself
took up a loyal paper, in order to examine the court news and accounts
of promotions and the bestowal of decorations. He had long finished his
reading, but the Prince was still engaged with his shellfish and
oysters. The Chamberlain observed with regret how little interest
his young Highness took in the course of the world. An acquaintance
of the Chamberlain had been promoted to be master of the horse,
another announced his betrothal, and he did not fail to draw the
attention of the Prince to this news; but the latter only smiled in
his absent-minded way.

The Chamberlain then entered upon his next duty: he reflected upon the
programme of the day. As it was incumbent upon him to make the Prince
acquainted with the novelties in art and literature in the city, he
waited impatiently till the Prince had done with the "Daily Gazette,"
in order to obtain information from it on these points. At last the
Prince interrupted his cogitations by saying to him, "Mention is made
here of a permanent exhibition of agricultural implements; what is
there to see in such exhibitions?"

The Chamberlain tried to explain, and was delighted to make a proposal
to visit this exhibition. The Prince expressed his assent by a slight
nod, looked at his watch, and went up to his room to go through his
three hours' morning course: one for the science of politics, one for
mythology and aesthetics, and one for tactics and strategy; then he
accompanied his attendant to the exhibition.

Even the Chamberlain was bored as he followed his young master through
the great rooms, in which stood countless inexplicable machines. The
agent of the manufacturers began his explanations; the Chamberlain
asked such questions as would show a fitting love of knowledge; the
Prince went patiently from one unintelligible object to another, and
heard something of plows, scarifiers and rollers. At last, at the great
threshing-machine, the expounder had to call a workman to bring a
step-ladder, by ascending which they would be enabled to admire the
internal mechanism. The Prince left this labor to the Chamberlain;
played meanwhile with his lorgnette, and asked the agent, in the low
tone in which he was wont to speak:

"Have you any butter-machines?"

"Yes," was the reply, "several different kinds."

The Prince then quietly turned his attention to the great
threshing-machine, and learnt to value the beautiful arrangement by
which it threw out the straw into an invisible hayloft. At last they
came to the row of machines on which he had set his heart--the modern
successors of the old time-honored churn. There they stood beside each
other--the little hand-chum, by which, if the assertion of the guide
was to be trusted, a housewife could make her butter in an incredibly
short time; and the great machine, which could work sufficient to
supply the needs of the largest dairy. It was described to the Prince
how the cream, when poured in, was put in quick circular motion, and
how, as a result of this, the butter was separated from the milk. He
had already heard this much more agreeably told; but it gave him
pleasure to see the advantages of the modern invention, and he became
thoroughly convinced of its superiority. To the astonishment of his
attendant he asked intelligent questions, and took hold of the crooked
handle, endeavoring to turn it a little, but withdrew his hand with an
embarrassed smile. At last he inquired about the price. The Chamberlain
had rejoiced at the laudable desire of knowledge which his young master
had shown, but was much humiliated when the Prince turned to him and
said, in French, "What do you think? I have a mind to buy this little
machine." "For the sake of turning the handle," thought the
Chamberlain, with an inward shrug of the shoulders.

"How is it that your Highness takes an especial interest in this?"

"It pleases me," replied the Prince, "and one ought to buy something of
the man."

The pretty machine was bought, carried to the Prince's apartments, and
placed in his study. Towards evening, whilst the Prince was taking his
music lessons, the machine had to appear in the report which the
Chamberlain prepared for the reigning Prince. The writer extolled the
interest which his Prince had shown in the useful implements of German
agriculture. But seldom had it been so difficult to the poor
Chamberlain to perform the duty of a true courtier, whom it behooves to
suppress his own personal feelings and to gloss over agreeably what is
annoying; for, in truth, he felt deep humiliation at the silly trifling
of his Prince. But at Court one does not thoroughly learn all the
intricacies of a princely mind, however much one may study them. Even
to the wisest chamberlain there remain certain inscrutable depths.

The Hereditary Prince covered the butter-machine with a silk cloth, and
when he was alone, approached it carefully, turned the handle, and
examined the mechanism.

Some days after, when the valet had undressed the Prince, placed his
slippers for him, and made his bow for the night, the Prince, contrary
to custom, remained sitting in his chair, and stopped the departure of
the servant by thus accosting him: "Krueger, you must do me a favor."

"What are your Highness's commands?"

"Obtain for me to-morrow morning early, without any one seeing you, a
large jug of milk; but do not put the milk in the account."

"Does your Highness wish it boiled or not boiled?"

This was a difficult question. The Prince twirled his moustache
silently and looked helplessly at Krueger.

"I hardly know," he began at last. "I should like to try churning a
little."

Krueger was sharp enough to understand that this wish was connected with
the new machine, and, long accustomed not to be astonished at anything
in people of rank, he replied: "Then the machine must first be scalded,
otherwise the butter will taste bad; and, besides, I must order the
cream; so your Highness must wait patiently for a day."

"I leave everything to you," said the Prince, well pleased; "take the
machine, and be careful that no one hears anything about it."

When Krueger, two days after, entered the Prince's room, early in the
morning, he found his young master already dressed. Proud of his
confidential position, he informed him, "The Chamberlain is still
asleep, and all is ready."

The Prince hastened on tip-toes into the room. A large can of cream was
poured into the machine; full of expectation, the Prince seated himself
by the table and said; "I will turn it myself." He began to turn while
Krueger looked on.

"But it must be done with regularity, your Highness," admonished
Krueger.

The Prince could not resist opening the cover and looking in. "It will
not come, Krueger," he said, despondingly.

"Cheer up, your Highness," said Krueger, "and graciously permit me to go
on with the turning."

After that Krueger turned while the Prince looked on.

"It comes," cried the Prince, delighted, as he looked in.

"Yes, it's made," replied Krueger. "But now comes other work. The butter
must be taken out and washed, if it please your Highness?"

"No," said the Prince, doubtfully, "that will never do. But the machine
is good; bring me a spoon and some white bread, I will fish out what I
can; one must learn to help one's self."

The Prince plunged his spoon into the mess, took out some of the
half-made butter, and spread it on his white bread with a feeling of
satisfaction that was quite new to him. "It tastes a little sour,
Krueger," he said.

"Of course," replied Krueger; "the butter-milk is still in it."

"It does not matter," said the Prince, consoling himself. "Krueger, I
did not think there was so much to be attended to in churning."

"Yes, all things are difficult in the beginning," replied Krueger,
cheerfully.

"It is all right," concluded the Prince, graciously; "take the machine
out, and clean it properly."

After that the churn stood peacefully under the silk cloth; the Prince
in his lonely hours, would sometimes stand before it, and revolve in
his mind how he could deliver it into the hands of the person for whom
he had secretly intended it.

The stars themselves appeared to favor him; for the revolving earth had
rolled into the last sign of the zodiac, which guides the souls of our
people with magic power to the most charming festival of the year.
Christmas was near, and the ladies of the street near the Park moved
about in secret activity. Intercourse with intimate acquaintances was
interrupted, books that had been begun were laid aside, theatres and
concert-rooms were empty; the tones of the piano-forte and of new
bravuras rarely sounded to the rattling of carriage-wheels in the
street; inward struggles were hushed, and bad neighbors little thought
of. From morning to evening, little fingers were occupied with beads,
wools, silk, paint-brush and palette; the day lengthened into
eight-and-forty hours; even during the minutes of unquiet morning
slumber, obliging crickets and other invisible spirits worked in the
pay of the ladies. The nearer the festival approached, the more
numerous were the secrets: in every closet were concealed things which
no one was to see; from all sides, packages were brought into the
house, that were forbidden to be touched. But whilst the other inmates
of the house secretly slipped past one another, the lady of the house
was the quiet ruler in the invisible realm of presents, and the
confidant and clever adviser of all. She was never weary; she thought
and arranged for every one; the world had become to her like a great
cupboard with numerous compartments, from which she was incessantly
fetching things, and in which she was always cautiously stowing
covered packages. When on Christmas Eve the spangled stars shine, the
wax-lights drip, and the golden balls glimmer and glisten on the
Christmas tree, it is then that the fancies of the children celebrate
their great day; but the poetic vision of the housewife and her
daughters, for months before, have filled the room with joyful
splendor.

If one may regard the judgment of Mr. Hummel as valid, it is rarely
that the enthusiasm of Christmas week is fully developed in the men who
have the honor of being the representatives of the family. "Believe me,
Gabriel," said Mr. Hummel, one December evening, as he was watching
some children who were passing by with toys, "at this time man loses
his importance; he is nothing but a money-chest, in which the key is
turning from morning till evening; the best wives become barefaced and
foolish, all family confidence vanishes, everybody avoids everybody
else, the order of the house is disturbed, one's night's rest is
unscrupulously destroyed; when it is meal time, one's wife runs to the
market, and when the lamps ought to be extinguished, one's daughter
begins a new piece of embroidery. When at last the long bother is over,
then one must be delighted at a pair of new slippers which are an inch
too short, and for which later on one has to pay a long shoemaker's
bill, and to be pleased with a cigar case of beads, which is flat and
hard, like a dried flounder. Finally, after one has shot out golden
sparks like a rocket, the ladies expect one to show one's good feeling
by making them a present. Now, I have trained mine differently."

"But I have seen you yourself," rejoined Gabriel, "With a package and
bandbox under your arm."

"That is true," replied Mr. Hummel, "a bandbox is inevitable. But,
Gabriel, I have given up all worry, for that was the most humiliating
part of the affair. I go every year to the same milliner now, and say,
'a hood for Madame Hummel;' and the person says, 'You shall be served,
Mr. Hummel;' and she places the structure ready made before me. Besides
this, I go every year to the same shop and say, 'I want a dress for my
daughter Laura, at such and such a price, more or less,' and a dress
well worth its value is placed before me. In confidence I must tell you
I have a suspicion that the women have seen through my trick, and
select the things themselves beforehand, for now they are always very
much to their taste, whilst in former years they were often objected
to. They have the trouble now of selecting the finery, and in the
evening they practice all sorts of dissembling artifices, unfold and
examine the goods, pretend to be astonished, and praise my excellent
taste. This is my only satisfaction in the whole childish amusement.
But it is a poor one, Gabriel."

Such was the discordant strain in which the master of the house
indulged; but the dwellers in Park Street cared little for it, and like
opinions will always be regarded with like indifference. So much
sweeter is it to care for others than for one's self, and so much
happier to give pleasure than to receive it.

For Ilse also the festival this year was to be a great event; she
collected like a bee, and not only for the dear ones at home; in the
city also she had nestled many great and little children in her heart,
from the five young Raschke's down to the little barefooted creatures
with the soup-pot. The sofa-corners assumed a mysterious appearance
whenever her husband, or Laura, or the Doctor entered unexpectedly.

When the Chamberlain, some time before the holidays, deemed it becoming
for his Prince to pay a visit to the new Rector, the gentlemen found
Ilse and Laura busily at work, and the parlor of the Rector's wife was
changed into a great market stall. On a long table stood little
Christmas trees, and full sacks were leaning against the legs of the
table; the ladies were working with yard-measures and scissors,
dividing great hanks of wool, and unrolling pieces of linen, like
shop-keepers. When Ilse met the gentlemen and made excuses for the
state of her room, the Chamberlain entreated her not to disturb
herself. "We will remain here only if we are allowed to make ourselves
useful." The Prince also said, "I beg permission to help, if you have
anything for me to do."

"That is very kind," replied Ilse, "there is still much to be done
before evening. Permit me, your Highness, to give you your work. Pray
take the bag of nuts; and you, my Lord Chamberlain, have the goodness
to take the apples in charge; you, Felix, will have the gingerbread. I
beg the gentlemen to make little heaps, to each twenty nuts, six
apples, and a package of gingerbread."

The gentlemen went zealously to work. The Prince counted the nuts
conscientiously, and was provoked that they would always roll together
again, but discovered that he could keep the portions apart by means of
strips of paper folded together. The gentlemen laughed, and related how
once, in a foreign country, they had introduced this German Christmas
amusement. The perfume of the apples and of the fir-trees filled the
room, and gave a festive feeling to the souls of all present.

"May we ask the kind lady who are to benefit by our exertions?" said
the Chamberlain; "I hold here an uncommonly large apple, which I hope
may fall to the lot of one of your favorites. At all events, we are
doing what will give the poor children pleasure."

"Finally it will," replied Ilse; "but that is not all; we shall give
this to their mothers, for the greatest pleasure of a mother is to give
presents herself to her children, to adorn the Christmas tree and to
work what the little ones need. This pleasure we shall not deprive them
of, and therefore we send them the stuff unmade. The Christmas trees,
too, they prefer buying themselves, each according to their tastes;
those you see here are only for children who have no mothers. These
trees will be adorned by us. Everything for the festive evening will be
carried out of the house today, so that the people may receive them in
good time, and arrange them for themselves."

The Prince looked at the Chamberlain. "Will you allow us," he began,
hesitatingly, "to contribute something towards these presents."

"Very willingly," replied Ilse, joyfully. "If your Highness wishes it,
our servant can look after it immediately. He understands it, and is
trustworthy."

"I should like to go with him myself," said the Prince. The Chamberlain
listened with astonishment to this idea of his young master; but, as it
was laudable and not against instructions, he only smiled respectfully.
Gabriel was called. The Prince, much pleased, took his hat. "What shall
we buy?" he asked eagerly.

"We want some little tapers," replied Ilse, "besides some
playthings;--for the boys, leaden soldiers; and for the girls, little
kitchen things; but all must be strong and cheap." Gabriel followed the
Prince out of the house with a large basket.

"You heard what the lady ordered," said the Prince, in the street, to
Gabriel. "First the wax-tapers; you do the selecting and I will pay. We
are to buy them cheap; see that we are not cheated."

"We need not fear that, your Highness," replied Gabriel; "and if we
should pay a few pennies too much, other children will benefit by it."

At the end of an hour the Prince returned. Gabriel had a heavily-laden
basket, while the Prince also carried under his arms bundles of toys
and large paper bags full of sweetmeats. When the young gentleman
entered thus loaded, with color in his cheeks and as happy as a child,
he looked so good and pleasing that all were delighted with him. He
unpacked his treasures before the Professor's wife, and emptied the
contents of the paper bags on the table.

His embarrassment had disappeared: he played with childish pleasure
with the pretty things, showed the others the artistic work in the
marchpane plums, begged of Laura to keep a candy knight-templar for
herself, and moved about and arranged everything so gracefully and
actively on the table that all looked at him with admiration and joined
in his childish jokes. When the ladies began to adorn the Christmas
trees, the Prince declared he would help them. He placed himself before
the saucer with white of egg, and was shown the way to lay it upon the
fruits and then roll them in gold and silver foil. Ilse arranged as a
prize for the gentleman who worked best and did most, a large
gingerbread lady with a hooped petticoat and glass eyes; and a
praiseworthy contest arose among the gentlemen to produce the best
things. The Professor and the Chamberlain knew how to employ their old
skill; but the Prince as a novice worked somewhat carelessly--there
remained some bare spots, and in others the gold foil bulged out. He
was discontented with himself, but Ilse cheered him, saying, "But your
Highness must be more sparing with the gold, otherwise we shall not
have enough." Finally, the Chamberlain obtained the lady in the hooped
dress, and the Prince, as an extra reward for his activity, a babe in
swaddling-clothes which looked on the world with two glassy bead eyes.

Out of doors in the Christmas market, little children were standing
round the fir-trees and Christmas shops, looking hopefully and
longingly at the treasures there. And in Ilse's room the great children
were sitting at the table, playful and happy. Here there were no
cautious admonitions, and the Prince painted the outlines of a face
with the white of egg on the palm of his hand, and gilded it with a
gold-foil.

When the Hereditary Prince rose to go, the Professor asked, "May I
venture to inquire where your Highness intends to pass Christmas Eve?"

"We remain here," answered the Prince.

"As some remarkable musical performances are in prospect," added the
Chamberlain, "his princely Highness has denied himself the pleasure of
having the Prince with him at this festival; we are, therefore, to pass
a quiet Christmas here."

"We do not venture to invite you," continued the Professor; "but in
case your Highness should not pass this evening in other society, it
will be a great pleasure if you would do so with us."

Ilse looked thankfully at her husband, and the Prince this time did not
leave it to the Chamberlain to answer, but eagerly accepted the
invitation. As he walked with his attendant through the crowded
streets, he began, cautiously, "But we must contribute something to the
Christmas table."

"I had just thought of that," replied the Chamberlain; "but if your
Highness honors those worthy people with your company that evening, I
am not sure how your Highness's father will approve of a contribution
to the Christmas tree from my gracious Prince."

"I do not wish it to be any of those eternal brooches and ear-rings
from the court jeweler's cases," cried the Prince, with unwonted
energy; "it should be some trifle; best of all, something as a joke."

"That is my view," assented the Chamberlain; "but it is advisable to
leave the decision to his Grace, your father."

"Then I had rather remain at home," replied the Prince, bitterly. "I
will not enter with some stupid present in my hand. Can it not be
managed that the visit be without any ceremony, just as the invitation
was?"

The Chamberlain shrugged his shoulders. "A few days afterwards the
whole city will know that your Highness has shown Professor Werner this
unusual honor. Without doubt the occurrence will be reported to the
palace by persons who have no business to do so. Your Highness knows
better than I do how your father will receive such an account, coming
to him first from a stranger."

The Prince's pleasure was spoilt. "Write, then, to my father," he
cried, angrily; "but represent the invitation just as it was given, and
express yourself as opposed to any conventional present from the court:
it would only wound this family."

The Chamberlain rejoiced in the tact of his young master, and promised
to write the letter as he desired. This appeased the Prince, and after
a time he began: "It has just occurred to me, Weidegg, what we should
give. As the Professor's wife comes from the country, I will present
her with the machine which I lately bought, as a case for pretty
_bonbons_ or something of that kind, that I will put in it."

"Now he wishes to get rid of the useless plaything," thought the
Chamberlain. "That is impossible," he replied, aloud: "Your Highness is
not quite sure whether the lady would take the joke as it is intended.
It would not do to give a present which might give rise to
misinterpretation. Your Highness should on no account venture upon such
a thing. Even if the amiable lady herself did not object, it would be
much discussed in her circle. Your Highness's joke might be easily
considered as an ironical allusion to country manners, which
undoubtedly become the lady well, but might here and there occasion a
slight smile."

The Prince's heart froze within him; he was furious with the
Chamberlain, and, on the other hand, shocked at the thought of wounding
Ilse. The poetry of the festival was entirely spoilt for him. He went
silently to his apartment.

The answer to the Chamberlain's letter was to the effect that the
Prince, in spite of the apparent unsuitability, would not object to an
incidental visit, and that, if some mark of attention was unavoidable,
it might be procured from a gardener or confectioner. The Chamberlain,
therefore, bought a quantity of flowers and sweetmeats, and laid them
before the Prince. But he looked cold and silently on the gay bright
colors. Towards evening two lackeys carried the things to the Rector
with a little note from the Chamberlain, in which, in the name of his
Most Serene Prince, he begged the accompanying gift might be applied to
the ornamenting of the Christmas tree. Meanwhile the Prince stood
gloomily before his butter-machine, and quarrelled bitterly with his
princely dignity.

When at the proper hour he entered Werner's apartment, the Christmas
gifts had been distributed and the candles extinguished. Ilse had done
it purposely. "It is not necessary to let these strangers see what
delight we take in these presents." The Prince received Ilse's thanks
for the splendid adornment of her table with reserve, and sat before
the tea-kettle silent and absent-minded. Ilse thought, "He is sorry
that he has had no glad Christmas Eve: the poorest child is merry with
his Christmas tree, and he sits as if shut out from the pleasures of
this happy time." She made a sign to Laura, and said to the Prince:
"Would your Highness like to see our Christmas tree? The lights had to
be extinguished lest they should burn down, but if your Highness likes
we will light it up again in all its splendor, and it would be very
kind of your Highness to help us."

This was a welcome proposal to the Prince, and he went with the ladies
into the festive room. There he offered to take the staff, at the end
of which a wax-taper was fastened, in order to reach the highest lights
of the mighty tree. Whilst he was thus busily working at the tree his
heart became lighter, and he looked with interest at the presents which
were lying under the tree.

"Now will your Highness have the kindness to go out of the room," said
Ilse, "and when I ring it will signify to you and Mr. von Weidegg that
your Highness is wanted."

The Prince hastened out; the bell rang. When the gentlemen entered they
found two small tables laid out; on them small lighted trees, and under
each a large dish of pastry, made after the fashion of their own
country. "This is to be a remembrance of our home," said Ilse, "and on
the trees are the apples and nuts which you have gilded: those with the
red spots are your Highness's work. Here is a respectful gift sent from
the farm of my dear father. I beg the gentlemen to eat this smoked
goose's breast with a good appetite; we are not a little proud of this
dish. But here, my gracious Prince, there is, as a keepsake from me, a
small model of our churn; for this is at what I served my
apprenticeship as a child." On the Prince's seat stood this useful
instrument, made of march-pane. "On the bottom of it, your Highness, I
have written my motto of long ago. May the gentlemen accept my good
intentions!"

She said this so joyously, and offered her hand to the Chamberlain so
kindly, that all thoughts of his dignity were forgotten, and he shook
her hand right honestly. The Prince stood before his machine, and
thought: "Now is the moment, or never." He read below the simple words,
"If a person has devoted himself with honest perseverance to some one
thing, it will be a blessing to him throughout his whole life." Then,
without any thought of the threatening consequences of his daring, he
said: "May I propose an exchange to you? I have bought a small churn;
it has a large wheel and a small one for turning, and one can churn as
much as one wants each morning. It would be a great pleasure to me if
you would accept this."

Ilse thanked him with a bow; and the Prince requested that a servant
might at once be sent to his apartment for it. Whilst the Chamberlain
was still reflecting with amazement on the strange coincidence, the
piece of mechanism was brought into the room. The Prince placed it with
his own hands upon a corner of the table, explained the internal
arrangements to the company, and was much delighted when Ilse said she
had confidence in the invention. He was again the joyous child of the
other day, gaily drank his glass of wine, and, with charming grace,
proposed the health of the master and mistress of the house, so that
the Chamberlain scarcely knew his Telemachus again. On taking leave, he
himself packed up the marchpane, and carried it home in his pocket.




                            _CHAPTER XXII_.

                            THREE COUNCILS.


The year of the Rectorate had so changed the household and the current
of Ilse's thoughts that she remarked with astonishment to her husband,
"I feel as if I had just come from school into the bustle of the
world." Her husband's days were engrossed with distracting business:
difficult transactions between the University and Government, and
vexatious occurences among the students, took up a great portion of his
time.

The evening, also, did not pass as in the first year, when Ilse watched
the quiet labors of her husband, or listened to his friends; for many
were occupied by the sessions of the Senate, and others by large
parties, which, as Rector, he could not avoid. When their friends came
to tea, the master of the house was often absent.

Ilse had taken her father's lessons to heart; she lived in the present,
and avoided distracting thoughts. Her husband took pains to keep from
her anything that could disturb her repose of mind, and the
intellectual diet which he now gave her did her good. When he again saw
her in society in all her health and strength, with color in her cheeks
and a cheerful expression in her countenance, he felt it his duty for
ever to preserve this soul from the intrusion of conflicting ideas; and
he was pleased that, by frequent intercourse with various kinds of men,
and by the light bonds of a genial society, she began to feel at home
in his circle. It delighted him, too, to find that her ingenuous nature
was appreciated; and she was not only treated with distinction by the
men, but was also a favorite with the ladies.

Ilse would not, however, allow her private conclave--as she called the
hours during which she received her husband's instruction--to be
disturbed; she adhered to it with rigid strictness; and if a day was
missed, the lost time had to be made up on the following one. But even
these lessons took a different course. The Professor now read to her
small extracts from old writers, who portrayed, in prose and verse, the
attractive beauty of the life of the ancients; her innocent mind
entered into the cheerful enjoyment of this strange world, and the
impressions which she received agreed perfectly with the way in which
she now regulated her own life. The Professor explained to her some of
the poems of the Greek anthology and of Theocritus, and a few of the
Roman lyrics; and, by way of comparison, he read to her the poems of
the great German who, in a remarkable way, had been able to unite Greek
beauty with German feeling.

At her reception, Ilse showed all the dignity of her position as the
Rector's wife; every room was opened; the apartments were decorated and
brilliantly illuminated; the heads of the University and city, with
their wives, made their appearance in numbers; and the Prince and his
Chamberlain did not fail to be present. Laura assisted gracefully in
doing the honors, and quietly gave directions to the servants; cake and
wine were passed around; the guests made themselves very agreeable, and
separated in the highest spirits. The great evening had passed off
happily; the Doctor and Laura had left; Ilse gave her last injunctions
to Gabriel, and passed through the rooms once more, with the glad
feeling that she had done honor to Felix and herself. She came into her
dressing room, and glanced into the mirror.

"You need not examine yourself critically," said the husband,
"everything was beautiful; but the most beautiful of all was the
Rector's wife."

"Damon, my shepherd," replied Ilse, "you are blinded. It is not the
first time you have said this, but I like to hear it; you may still
tell it often to me. But Felix," she continued, as she unloosened her
hair, "there is something inspiring about such a society even where
people do nothing but talk. One does not carry away much of it, but
still there is a pleasure in being among them; they are all so
courteous and endeavor to appear to the best advantage, and each tries
to please the other."

"They do not all succeed in giving a fair idea of what they are on such
occasions, least of all we book-worms," replied Felix. "But there is no
doubt these gatherings give a certain similarity of language and
manner, and, finally, also of ideas to persons who live in the same
circle. This is very necessary, for even those who live together often
differ as much in their thoughts and feelings as if they had been born
in different centuries. How did you like the Chamberlain?"

Ilse shook her head. "He is the most courteous and lively of all, and
knows how to say something civil to every one; but one cannot trust
him, for, as with an eel, one has no hold on him, and can never for a
moment look into his heart. I prefer our Prince with his stiff manner.
He talked to me about his sister to-day; she must be very clever and
charming. To which of your centuries does he belong?"

"To the middle of the last," replied, her husband, laughing; "he is a
full century earlier than we are, of the period when men were divided
into two classes--those who were fit to be received at Court, and
serfs. But if you examine those about us, you will discover even
greater disparities. There is our Gabriel, who in his prejudices and
his poetry belongs to an age three centuries earlier than the present.
His ways of thinking remind one of the time in which the great
Reformers first educated our people to think. On the other hand, the
hostile neighbors are, in many points of view, the representatives of
two opposing tendencies which ran parallel to each other towards the
end of the last century--in our house, obstinate rationalism; in the
old people over there, a weak sentimentality."

"And what time do I belong to?" asked Ilse, placing herself before her
husband.

"You are my dear wife," he exclaimed, trying to draw her towards him.

"I will tell you," continued Ilse, eluding him: "in your opinion, I
belong to a former age, and once that made me more unhappy than I
can express. But I no longer care about it. For when I can compel you
to kiss my hand as often as I desire it"--the Professor was very
willing--"when I see that it requires no persuasion to induce you to
kiss me on the lips--it is not necessary that you should try it now,--I
believe you. Further, when I observe that the learned gentleman is not
disinclined to hand my slippers to me, and perhaps even my dressing
gown--I do not wish to give you trouble now, but unhook my ear-rings
and open the jewel-box,--and when I, besides, observe that you are
anxious to please me, that at my wish you took the wife of the
Consistorial Councillor to dinner, whom you could not bear, and that
you have bought me this beautiful dress, although you understand
nothing about buying; when I, further, see that Magnificus is quite
under my sway, that I have the keys of the pantry, and even manage the
accounts; and, lastly, when I bear in mind that you, good bookworm,
think me, your wife Ilse, worthy of a little discussion together with
your Greeks and Romans, and that it is a pleasure to you when I
understand a little of your learned writings--I come to the conclusion
that you belong entirely to me, you and your century, and that it is
quite indifferent to me in what period of the world's history my spirit
originated. Then when I, the relic of a distant century, pinch your
ear, as I do now, the great master of the present and future, and his
philosophizing on the different natures of men, become simply
ludicrous. Now that I have held this discourse, can you sleep quietly?"

"That would be difficult," replied the Professor, "whilst the learned
housewife is fluttering about the bed, holding discourses in her
dressing-gown which are more lengthy than those of a Roman philosopher,
and whilst she rattles the doors of the cupboards and wanders about the
room."

"My tyrant requires his coffee early in the morning, so it must be
given out now, and I cannot sleep if I have not all the keys near me."

"I see nothing will be of any use." said the Professor, "but a serious
exorcism."

"I must see whether there are any lights burning in the rooms." But
immediately afterwards she knelt down by the bed, and threw her arms
round his neck. "Everything is so charming in the world, Felix,"
exclaimed she; "let us humbly pray that our happiness may last."

Yes, you are happy. Ilse; but, as your father said, you have to thank
your prudence for it, not your courage.





When Ilse wrote to her father, to describe how the great evening party
had passed off, she did not forget to add that her future Sovereign had
been among the guests, and that she had had much intelligent
conversation with him. Her father did not appear to attach much value
to this last communication, for he answered, rather irritated, "If you
are so influential an adviser, exert yourself to obtain a decision for
us in regard to the highway. The affair has been before the magistrates
for ten years; it is a shame that we should be so cut off from all the
world. The gray has broken his leg. Our estate would be worth ten
thousand dollars more if the Government were not so dilatory."

Ilse read the letter to her husband, and said, "We can tell the Prince
about the road; he can arrange it with his father."

Her husband laughed. "I will not undertake this commission: it does not
appear to me as if the Prince would have great influence with the
Government."

"We will see about that," replied Ilse, gaily; "at the next opportunity
I shall speak to him about it."

This opportunity soon occurred. The Consistorial Councillor, who was
now Theological Dean, had a tea-party. It was a distinguished and
dignified assembly, but not agreeable to Ilse; she had long mistrusted
the piety of the Dean, for beneath the gown of the bland gentleman she
clearly saw a fox's tail peeping out; in the speeches of the Dean's
wife there was an unpleasant mixture of honey and gall. The rooms were
small and hot, and the guests seemed bored; but the Hereditary Prince
and his Chamberlain had promised to come. As he entered, the master of
the house and some of the guests who were acquainted with the customs
of the Court endeavored to form a line for his reception; but all their
attempts were vain, from the heedlessness or obstinacy of most of the
company. The Prince, led by the Dean, had to make his way through the
groups up to the mistress of the house. His eyes turned from her sharp
features and wandered about to where Ilse stood, like a being from
another planet; she looked quite majestic; her ribbon head-dress sat
like a coronet on her wavy hair, which in great abundance almost
surrounded her head. The Prince looked shyly up to her, and could
scarcely find proper words with which to accost her. When, after a
short greeting, he again turned to the rest of the company. Ilse was
displeased; she had expected more attention from their intimacy. She
did not consider that his position in society was not that of a private
man, and that he had to fulfill his princely duties before he could go
about like others. Whilst with inward disgust he did what his position
required of him, going slowly round, he went first to Ilse's husband,
then to the other dignitaries; had some presented to him, and asked the
questions that are considered right in these cases; but he waited
impatiently for the time when fate would allow him to have a little
conversation with his countrywoman. But he did his duty bravely; the
Professor of History expressed his pleasure that some old chronicles of
his country would be published, and endeavored, half-talking and
half-teaching, to impress him with their importance. Meanwhile the
Prince thought that the Rector's wife would, at least, sit at his left
hand, the Chamberlain having pointed out to him that the Dean's wife
might be at his right.

The affair was doubtful. The Dean's wife was certainly the hostess, but
the evening had a certain official University tone about it, and Ilse
was undoubtedly entitled to precedence among the professors' wives.
Nevertheless, all question ceased to exist when the fact was considered
that the Dean, on account of numerous presentations of theological
works, and many letters of admiring homage, had been made by the
reigning sovereign, Knight Commander of his order. He had been so
exalted by this, as the Chamberlain explained, that the difference of
dignity between the Magnificus and Dean was more than compensated, and
the Dean's wife had therefore the first place. The Chamberlain
acknowledged that in reality it was a matter of no consequence how
people were seated here, for there could be no question of any right of
rank in this society. But it would be more becoming for the Prince not
to neglect all distinctions.

At his left, at all events, the Prince hoped to have Ilse. But even
this hope was frustrated by the artfulness of the Dean's wife. For
there was amongst the company a Colonel's wife; they were people of old
family, but recently come to the place. The lady of the house lost no
time in taking the Colonel's wife up to the Chamberlain, and on
meeting, it turned out that they had common relations. By this the
whole arrangement of rank at supper was disturbed. The lady claimed her
right to be presented. The Chamberlain took her to the Prince, who
cleverly anticipated the former's intention, and expressed a wish to
make the lady's acquaintance.

"She allows herself to be presented to a student!" said little Mrs.
Guenther, astonished.

"That is a breach of social rights, which touches the dignity of
woman," said Mrs. Struvelius, displeased.

"But she did it very nicely," said Ilse; "her manner with him pleases
me."

The ladies did not know that the object of their remarks was, in this
moment of apparent humiliation, enjoying the triumph of a higher
position. The Prince, the Colonel's wife, and the Chamberlain for a
short time formed a group, from which the light of the evening
radiated, all three with the proud consciousness that they were united
in a bond of fellowship among strangers.

The consequence of this presentation was that the Colonel's wife sat at
the left of the Prince, and Ilse between two Deans opposite to him. It
did not make it easier for the Prince to preserve his princely dignity
when every time he looked up, he saw the eyes and curls of his
countrywoman opposite to him. The evening passed slowly for him, and it
was not till the party was breaking up that he had an opportunity of
speaking to Ilse without restraint.

"Just wait," thought Ilse; "you shall not escape the road."

"Have you heard from your father?" inquired the Prince, a question by
which he frequently began the conversation.

"My news is not good," replied Ilse; "only think, your Highness, one of
our horses has broken his leg. It was a grey which we raised ourselves,
a good gentle creature, which I have often ridden, though my father did
not much like my doing so. Then I must tell your Highness, the road
that leads to the great market-town, to which my father every year
sends his grain, is terribly bad, and the Government does nothing to
improve it. For ten years the matter has been agitated, but nothing
comes of it. If your Highness could help to obtain a good road for us,
I beg of you to do so; it will be a benefit to the whole district."

The Prince looked at her kindly, and said, with embarrassment:

"It is an affair of the Government, I believe my father knows nothing
of it."

"I am convinced of that," replied Ilse; "the gentlemen of the
Government have always reasons for doing nothing; they understand how
to make difficulties, and pretend they have no money."

The Chamberlain approached, and as the conversation had taken an
uncomfortable political turn, the Prince quickly retreated, bowing and
smiling, with these words:

"Let us hope for the best."

Ilse, on going home, said to her husband:

"Felix, I spoke to him about the road; he is a good youth, but in
society he uses only formal speeches."

Fortune would have it that some weeks after, the State Councillor, who
held the chief administrative office at Rossau, came to the University,
visited the Chamberlain, and was introduced by him to the Prince. He
was invited to dinner, and the Prince showed uncommon interest in the
condition of the district in question; he inquired about the estates in
the neighborhood and their proprietors; and, at last, when standing
alone by the window with the Councillor, drinking his coffee, said:

"How is it that there is no good road in the district? Could not you do
something about it?"

The official duly enumerated the difficulties. At last the Prince
replied:

"Yes, I know there are plenty of reasons; but I shall be obliged to you
if you will give yourself the trouble of taking the matter in hand."

Much impressed with these words, the Rossau official returned home. He
revolved them in his troubled mind for three days, and the more he
thought of them the more important they seemed; his own future might
depend upon the result. At last he came to the conclusion that an
extraordinary exertion was necessary; he therefore went at once to the
seat of Government and laid the whole case, and a large bundle of dusty
records concerning the road, before the minister. The minister thanked
him for his communication, and was also of opinion that this was an
incident which it would be prudent to make known to his Most Serene
Highness. When he had concluded his report on state affairs, he
mentioned that in the district of Rossau complaints had been made of
the bad condition of the roads, and that a strong desire had been
expressed for a new road, and the Hereditary Prince had shown a lively
interest in the matter. The Prince rose hastily from his seat.

"The Hereditary Prince? What does that mean? It is very satisfactory to
me to find that my son takes an interest in the condition of the
country," he added. "I will take the affair into consideration."

The same day a letter was written by the Prince himself to the
Chamberlain, saying:

"How comes the Hereditary Prince to take an interest in the building of
a new road at Rossau? I desire further information."

The Chamberlain was in great perplexity, and felt his position
endangered by the secret. At last, placed in a position between father
and son, he chose the path of frank disclosure to the rising sun, and
acquainted the Prince with his father's question.

"You see what importance his Serene Highness attaches to the
communication; the details must be imparted to him."

The Prince was equally confounded.

"It was only a word thrown out casually," he rejoined, with hesitation.

"So much the better," said the Chamberlain; "all that remains to be
said is, what gave rise to your Highness's wish. It may naturally seem
strange to the Prince that his subjects or magistrates should apply to
your Highness instead of to him. This, so far as I know, does not seem
to have been the case."

"No," replied the Prince, "I heard of it at the house of the Rector. I
simply asked the Councillor about it when he was here. I wanted to be
able to give an answer," he added, shrewdly.

The Chamberlain was satisfied, and in his report extolled the Professor
and Ilse, at whose house it was very pleasant to visit, and he did not
fail to observe that the Hereditary Prince enjoyed calling there. He
was rejoiced when, a few days after, a communication was made on
business by the Cabinet Secretary, and followed by a letter from the
Sovereign himself, in which he expressed his great satisfaction in the
conduct of the Hereditary Prince and the Chamberlain.

Ilse was equally rejoiced when her father wrote to her:

"Ilse, are you a witch? An order has been given to begin building the
road immediately; the surveyor is already here to mark it out."

At dinner Ilse took the letter out of her pocket with great delight,
saying:

"Read, you incredulous man, and see what our little Prince has been
able to accomplish; after all we did him injustice. My poor gray
excited his pity, and he wrote everything to his dear father."

The next time that Ilse met the Hereditary Prince, she began, after the
first greeting, in a low voice:

"My home owes warm thanks to your Highness, who has had the kindness to
exert yourself for our road."

"Is it to be built?" asked the Prince, surprised.

"Does not your Highness know it? Your intercession has induced his
Grace, your father, to have it made."

"My intercession would have had little effect," continued the Prince.
"No, no," he added, earnestly disowning it. "I did not write to my
father. It was altogether his own decision."

Ilse remained silent: she could not understand what should prevent the
son of a Prince from openly laying before his father a request on a
matter of business, the fulfillment of which would be beneficial to
many; that he should disown all participation in what he had evidently
done, appeared to her a quite inappropriate display of modesty.

The last letter from Court had confirmed the Chamberlain in his opinion
that the intimacy of the Hereditary Prince in the Rector's house was
not distasteful to his father. He reflected sometimes on the reasons
for this interest in persons, who were so far removed from the sphere
of princely notice. He could not understand it. At all events it was
his duty not to keep the Prince away from their home, and likewise to
make himself agreeable to the Rector and his wife. This he did
willingly and honestly, and oftentimes went to the Professor's without
the Prince; he asked him to recommend books to him, showed great
deference for his judgment about men, and was guided by the Professor's
advice in the choice of the Prince's teachers. The energetic dignity
and proud frank character of the learned man attracted the courtier,
and Werner became a valuable acquaintance to him. He was also sincerely
attached to Ilse, and there were times when she too could discover
something of the worth and depth of heart of the Chamberlain.

But although the Chamberlain possessed all the pliancy of a courtier,
and knew that the visits to the Rector's house were acceptable both to
his young master and the latter's father, he showed little complaisance
for the young Prince's wishes. Indeed, he was inclined to make
difficulties if the Hereditary Prince, which seldom happened, would
propose to join Werner's at tea; he went there with him at proper
intervals, but after the road affair he avoided any greater intimacy
for the Prince. On the other hand, the Chamberlain endeavored to make
the Prince at home with the students, and in a way that accorded with
his rank. Of the different associations which were denoted by colors,
customs, and statutes, the corps of the Markomanns was then the most
distinguished. It was the aristocratic club, included many sons of old
families and some of the best fencers; its members wore their colored
caps in the haughtiest manner, were much talked of, and not very
popular. The Chamberlain found a relative of his in this corps, and the
leaders were found to possess the qualifications necessary to
appreciate properly the social position of his young master.

Thus the Prince became intimate with the association, he invited the
students to his apartments, sometimes joined in their lesser drinking
bouts, and was agreeably introduced by them into the customs of
academic life. He took fencing lessons, and, in spite of his small
delicate figure, showed some aptitude for it, and the swing of the
rapier in his room daily endangered the mirror and chandelier.

Ilse expressed her astonishment to her husband that the Prince, who had
at first so quickly and easily opened his heart to them, had held back
so cautiously since the road affair.

"Has he thought me too forward?" she asked, with vexation; "it was said
with the best intentions. But I find, Felix, it is not with these great
people as with us. If we once put confidence in people we feel at home
with them; but they are like the birds that sing a song close to your
ear, and then at once fly off and seek another resting-place far away."

"The following year they will perhaps come again," replied her husband;
"any one who tries to domesticate them will be disappointed. If their
airy path brings them near, you may take pleasure in them; but one
should not trouble oneself about these triflers."

Nevertheless, in secret Ilse was vexed with the unfaithfulness of her
little songster.





"My duty brings me to you to-day," began the Chamberlain, on entering
the Professor's room. "Among the lectures which are desired for the
Hereditary Prince is one upon Heraldry. I beg of you to recommend to me
a teacher who could give him a short course upon the subject. In the
capital, there was no suitable person, and I confess without blushing
that my knowledge is much too scanty for me to be able to impart any to
the Prince."

The Professor reflected.

"Among my colleagues I know no one whom I could recommend. It is
possible that Magister Knips may have knowledge of that kind. He is
well informed in all these by-paths of learning; but he has grown
up in a low condition of life, and his manner is highly obsequious and
old-fashioned."

This old-fashioned obsequiousness did not appear any hindrance to the
Chamberlain; and as he himself wished to make use of the opportunity to
ascertain clearly the meaning of a mysterious figure in his own coat of
arms, which looked very much like a pitchfork, but which was really a
Celtic Druid's staff, he replied:

"There need not be many lectures, and I can be present myself."

Magister Knips was called, and was, as usual, at hand, and was
presented to the Chamberlain. The grotesque figure appeared comical to
the latter, but not at all objectionable. His modesty was undeniable;
his obsequiousness could not be greater. If one could put him into a
tolerable coat, he might, for a temporary object, be allowed to sit at
the same table with the Hereditary Prince and the Chamberlain. So the
Chamberlain asked whether Master Knips could undertake to give some
lectures upon heraldry.

"If the gracious and noble gentleman might be content perchance with
German and French emblazonry, I believe I may venture to offer him my
undoubtedly unsatisfactory knowledge. But of English coats of arms and
figures my knowledge is not extensive, because of lack of opportunity.
I would, however, endeavor to give some information upon the new
investigations concerning the Honorable Ordinary."

"That will not be necessary," replied the Chamberlain; and, turning to
the Professor, he said: "Will you allow me to arrange details with
Master Knips?"

The Professor left them to transact the business, and the Chamberlain
continued, more freely:

"I will, trusting to the recommendation of the Rector, endeavor to
ascertain whether the Hereditary Prince can avail himself of your
instruction and derive the proper advantages therefrom."

Knips bowed lower and lower, until he almost disappeared into the
ground; but his head was reverently bent towards the eye of the
Chamberlain. The latter mentioned a liberal sum as the price of the
lessons. Knips smiled, and his eyes twinkled.

"I must further request, Master Knips, that you will not object to
assume a becoming appearance for the intended lectures. A black coat,
and trousers to match."

"I have them," replied Knips, raising his voice.

"White waistcoat and white cravat," continued the Chamberlain.

"I have those likewise," warbled Knips.

The Chamberlain considered it preferable to ascertain, by his own
inspection, the capabilities of the candidate in this respect.

"Then I beg of you to make your appearance at the apartments of the
Hereditary Prince in fitting guise. There we will confer upon details."

Knips appeared the following morning in his state dress, and the
Chamberlain thought that the man did not look so bad after all. He gave
him to understand that a learned discussion was not required, but
rather a rapid survey, and, on his departure, presented to him a bottle
of perfume, for his white pocket-handkerchief, in order to consecrate
Knips' atmosphere.

Knips prepared himself for his first lesson. He began by drawing forth
his paint-box, several complete letter-writers, and a book or two on
etiquette. He painted several coats of arms, and from the books he
abstracted some respectful forms of speech, such as the servile
language of our Government officials have sanctioned in intercourse
with the great, and learnt them all by heart. At the proper hour he
presented himself to the Chamberlain, polished and fragrant, like a
flower whose strength of stem had been extracted by the heat of the
midday sun. Thus he was brought into the presence of the Prince, and
almost withered into nothingness as he approached the chair in which he
was to sit; he began his lecture by drawing out of a small portfolio a
design of the Prince's ancestral coat of arms and a sketch of the
Chamberlain's armorial bearings; he laid them before the Prince with
the deepest reverence, and added his first explanations.

His lecture, to use the Chamberlain's own words, was magnificent; his
obsequious arabesques which wound themselves into his discourse were
prolix, it is true, but not disagreeable; they were comical, yet
well-suited to the scrolls he was lecturing on. He frequently brought
drawings, and books on heraldry, and engravings from the library for
inspection, and showed himself more thoroughly informed than was,
perhaps, necessary. If he chanced to fall into historical discussions,
which were more interesting to him than his hearers, the Chamberlain
would simply have to raise his finger, and Knips respectfully resumed
the proper topic. The gentlemen took more pleasure in his lectures than
in many of those given by the Magister's patrons. The lessons were
continued throughout the term, for it was discovered accidentally that
Knips had a good deal of knowledge of tournaments, tilting, and other
knightly amusements. He told the Prince about the old festivities of
his noble house, described the ceremonial accurately, and even knew the
names of those who had assisted at them. His knowledge appeared
wonderful to his hearers, though it cost him little trouble to collect
this information. At the conclusion of the course he was richly
rewarded, and his hearers regretted that this strange figure, with his
old-fashioned knowledge, was no longer to lecture before them.

"Look here, mother," cried Knips, entering his room, and taking a small
roll of money out of his pocket; "that is the largest sum I have ever
earned."

The mother rubbed her hands. "My blessing upon the gracious gentlemen
who know how to value my son!"

"To value?" replied Knips, contemptuously. "They know nothing about me
or my learning, and the less one teaches them the better they are
pleased. It is a labor for them even to look for what stands at
everybody's disposal, and what has been put in hundreds of folios is
new to them. I treated them like little boys, and they did not find it
out. No, mother, they understand how to value me even less than the
Professor world here. No one appreciates my knowledge. Yes, there is
one that does," he murmured to himself, "but he has more pride than the
Chamberlain. The Chamberlain seems to wish to inform himself about the
old tilts and masquerades; I will send him my little edition of Rohr as
a present. There is so little in it that it is good enough for him. I
bought the book for four groschens; the parchment is still tolerably
white. I will wash it with sal-ammoniac, and paste his coat of arms
into it. Who knows what may come of it?"

He cleaned it, and prepared his paints.

"The world is full of tricks, mother. Who would have thought that I
could have earned anything by this old absurd nonsense of heraldry?" He
drew and painted at the coat of arms. "I have seldom brought gold into
the house, and then it was always for underhand traffic that did me no
honor." Here he broke off. "I will once more put on my livery when I
take him the book, then put it out of sight."





In the district of Rossau the road surveyors put up their stakes, and
at the University, Magister Knips placed the white pig's-skin binding
in the hands of his illustrious patron.

Ilse rejoiced that the road to her father's estate would be useful to
every one, and the professor heard with interest that the man whom he
had recommended had succeeded well, and he smiled kindly at the
expressions of gratitude tendered by the Magister. But for the good
formation of the new road, and the approved dexterity of the little
man, the happy couple, who in both cases had hit upon the right person,
were to receive thanks that they did not desire.




                            _CHAPTER XXIII_.

                               PHILOPENA.


One evening Ilse had placed the last remaining dainties of the holiday
season on the table; Laura was rattling an uncracked almond, and asked
the Doctor whence arose the time-honored custom of Philopena. The
Doctor doubted the antiquity of the custom and could not explain its
origin at the moment, but he was evidently perplexed at his uncertainty
in the matter. Thus, he neglected to request the mutual pledge of the
double almond. Laura cracked the shell and carelessly laid two almonds
between him and herself, saying: "There they are."

"Shall we share them?" cried the Doctor, gaily.

"If you like," replied Laura, "giving and taking, as is usually done.
But it must be only in joke," she added, thinking of her father; "and
no presents."

Both ate the almonds with the laudable intention of losing the game.
The consequence was that the affair did not advance. Laura, in the
course of the following week, handed books, tea-cups, and plates of
meat to the Doctor. He was dumb as a stick, and never said, "I am
thinking of it." Had he forgotten the agreement, or was it his usual
chivalry? But Laura could not remind him of his forgetfulness,
otherwise she would win the philopena. She again became very angry with
him.

"The learned gentleman does not hand anything to me," she said, to
Ilse; "he treats me as if I were a stick."

"It must be unintentional," replied Ilse; "he has forgotten it long
ago."

"Of course," cried Laura; "he has no memory for a pretty joke with such
an insignificant person as I am."

"Make an end of it," advised Ilse; "just remind him of it."

It so happened that the Doctor, on one occasion, could not avoid
picking up a pair of scissors, and handing them to her.

"I am thinking of it," said Laura; and added, pertly, "that's more than
you do."

After that she offered the Doctor the sugar-bowl; the Doctor took a
piece of sugar out civilly, but was silent.

"Good morning, philopena," she cried, contemptuously.

The Doctor laughed, and declared himself vanquished.

"It is not very nice of you," continued Laura, eagerly, "to have cared
so little about your philopena. I will never eat one with you again;
there is no honor in winning from gentlemen who are so absentminded."

Shortly after, the Doctor handed her a small printed book in beautiful
binding. On the first page there was written, "For Miss Laura," and on
the second, "The Origin of Philopena; a Tale." It was the history of
the beautiful daughter of a king, who liked to crack and eat nuts, but
would not marry; she accordingly invented the following stratagem.
She presented to every prince who sought her hand--and they were
countless--the half of a double almond, and she ate the other half.
Then she said; "If now your Highness can compel me to take something
out of your hand without saying the words, 'I am thinking of it,' I
shall consent to marry you; but if I can induce your Highness to take
something from my hand without saying these words, your Highness shall
have your princely head shaven and forthwith leave my country." But
there was a trick in the fulfillment of this contract; for according to
the customs of the court no one could put anything into the beautiful
Princess's own hand on pain of death, but he must give it to the
lady-in-waiting and she would hand it to the Princess. But if the
Princess herself chose to take or hand something, who could prevent
her? Thus it became a bitter pleasure for the wooers. For however much
they might endeavor to induce the Princess to take something out of
their hands without the intervention of the lady-in-waiting, the latter
always interposed and spoilt their best-laid plans. But when the
Princess wished to get rid of a suitor, she was so gracious to him for
a whole day that he was quite enchanted; and when he sat next to her,
and was already intoxicated with joy, she took, as if by accident,
something that was near her,--a pomegranate, or an egg,--and said,
softly, "Keep this in remembrance of me." As soon as the Prince took
the thing in his hand, and perhaps was preparing to say the saving
words, the thing burst asunder, and a frog, a hornet, or a bat, flew
out towards his hair, so that he drew back frightened, and, in his
fear, forgot the words; whereat he was shaven on the spot, and sent
about his business.

Thus years had passed, and in all the kingdoms roundabout, the princes
wore wigs,--these have since become fashionable. Then it happened that
the son of a foreign king, while traveling upon some business of his
own, by accident saw the almond-queen. He thought her beautiful, and at
the same he took note of the artifice that had ruined the hopes of her
former suitors. Now a little grey dwarf in whose favor he stood, had
given him an apple, at which he might smell once every year, and then a
clever idea would occur to him. He had, therefore, become very famous
amongst all kings on account of his clever ideas. Now the time of the
apple had come; he smelt, and at once this bright thought came to him:
"If you would win the game of giving and taking, you must under no
conditions either give anything to her or take anything from her." And
so he had his hands firmly bound in his girdle, went with his Marshal
to court, and said he also would be glad to eat an almond. The Princess
was much pleased with him, and had the almond handed to him. His
Marshal took it and put it in his mouth. Then the Princess inquired
what that meant, and why he always carried his hands in his girdle. He
answered that his Court customs were even stricter than hers; and he
must not take or give anything with his hands, but only with his feet
or head. The Princess laughed, and said:

"In this way we can never manage our game!"

He shrugged his shoulders and answered:

"Only in case you will condescend to take things from my boots."

"That can never be," cried the Court in chorus.

"Then why did you come here?" exclaimed the Princess, vexed, "if you
have such stupid customs?"

"Because you are so beautiful," returned the Prince; "and if I cannot
win you I can yet look upon you."

"I can say nothing against that," answered the Princess.

So the Prince remained at Court, and came to please her more and more.
But as she too was of a mischievous disposition, she endeavored in
every way to mislead him and persuade him to draw his hand out of his
girdle and take something from her. She conversed much with him, and
made him presents of flowers, bonbons, and smelling-bottles, and at
last even of her bracelet. Many times his hands twitched, but he felt
the pressure of the belt and recollected himself, nodded to the Marshal
who collected the things, and said:

"We think of it."

Now the Princess became impatient, and so one day she began after this
fashion:

"My handkerchief has fallen down; could your Highness pick it up for
me?"

The Prince took the handkerchief by the ends of his toes and waved it;
the Princess bent down, took the handkerchief from his feet, and cried
out, angrily:

"I am thinking of it."

A year had passed thus, and the Princess said to herself, "It cannot
continue so; an end must be made of the affair, in one way or the
other." So she began thus to the Prince:

"I have the loveliest garden in the world, which I will show your
Highness to-morrow."

The Prince smelt at his apple again. When they came to the garden the
Prince began:

"It is wonderfully beautiful here; that we may be able to walk together
in peace, and not be disturbed by our game, I beg, my dear Princess,
that you will adopt my Court custom, if only for an hour, and allow
your hands to be bound. Then we shall be sure of each other, and
nothing vexatious can happen to us."

This did not please the Princess, but he entreated and she could not
refuse him this trifle. Thus they walked together, with their hands
bound in their girdles. The birds sang, the sun shone warm, and from
the branches the red cherries hung down almost touching their cheeks.
The Princess looked up at the cherries, and exclaimed:

"What a pity it is that your Highness cannot pluck some of them for
me."

The Prince answered, "Necessity is the mother of invention;" and
seizing a cherry with his mouth he offered it to the Princess. Nothing
remains for her but to put her mouth to his in order to take the
cherry, and when she had the fruit between her lips, and a kiss from
him in addition, she could not at the moment say, "I am thinking
of it."

Then he exclaimed, aloud, "Good morning, Philopena," drew his hands out
of his girdle and embraced her; they were of course married and if they
have not since died, they still live together in peace and happiness.

This story the Doctor had written and caused to be printed especially
for Laura, so that no one else could have the book.

Laura carried the book to her private room, looked with pride on her
name in print, and repeatedly read the foolish little story. She walked
to and fro reflecting; and when she thus considered her relations with
Fritz Hahn, she could not feel easy in her conscience. From her
childhood she had been under obligations to him; he had always been
good and kind to her; and she, and still more her father, had always
caused him vexation. She thought penitently of all the past, up to the
cat's paws; the indefinite feeling she had concerning the "_Philopena_"
was now clear to her; she could not be as unembarrassed as she ought to
be, nor as indifferent as she would wish, because she was always under
the heavy burden of obligation. "I must come to an understanding with
him. Ah! but there is a barrier between him and me,--my father's
commands." She revolved in her mind how, without acting against his
commands, she could give the Doctor some pleasure. She had ventured
something of the kind with the orange-tree; if she could devise
anything that would remain unknown to those over the way there would be
no danger; no tender relations and no friendship would arise from it,
which her father might wish to avoid. She hastened down to Ilse,
saying, "My obligations to the Doctor oppress me more than I can
express; it is insupportable to feel myself always in his debt. Now I
have bethought me of something which will bring this state of things to
a conclusion."

"Take good care," replied Ilse, "that the affair is really brought to a
conclusion that will stand in the future."

Laura went at once to the Professor, whom she found in his study, and
asked in a merry voice if he could not aid her in playing a joke upon
her kindhearted, yet unmanageable, neighbor. "He collects all sorts of
antiquities," she said, "and I should like to get him something rare
that he would like. But nobody must know that I have anything to do
with it, himself least of all."

The Professor promised to think of something.

Some time afterwards he placed in Laura's hands a small torn volume,
that looked reduced to a pitiful state. "They are single copies of old
popular songs," said he, "that at some time or other have been bound
together. I hit upon them by a lucky accident. The little book is
valuable; to the amateur its worth is beyond proportion greater than
the price. Do not be disturbed at its bad appearance. Fritz Will take
out the separate songs, and arrange them in order in his collection. I
am convinced you could not make him a present that would please him
better."

"He shall have it," said Laura, contented, "but he shall suffer for it
nevertheless."

It was a fine collection: there were some very rare pieces among them,
an entirely unknown edition of the ballad of the unfortunate Knight
Tanhaeuser, the ballad of the Robber Toss Bowl, and a great many other
charming selections. Laura carried the book upstairs, and carefully cut
the thread of the bound sheets, which held them loosely together. She
then sat down to her writing-table, and commenced an anonymous
correspondence, which was made necessary by her father's tyranny,
writing the following in a disguised hand: "Dear Doctor, an unknown
person sends you this song for your collection; he has thirty more like
these, which are intended for you, but only on certain conditions.
First, you are to preserve towards every one, whoever it may be,
inviolate secrecy in the matter. Secondly, you are to send for every
poem another written by yourself, on any subject, addressed to O. W.,
at the Post-office. Thirdly, if you are willing to agree to this
compact, walk past No. 10 Park street, with a flower in your
button-hole, about three o'clock in the afternoon on one of the next
three days. The sender will be exceedingly gratified if you will enter
into this pleasantry. Truly Yours N. N." The song of Robber Toss Bowl
was enclosed with this letter.

It was five minutes after nine by the Doctor's watch, which was
confirmed by later investigations, when this letter was brought into
his room; the barometer was rising; light, feathery clouds fleeted
across the sky, and the moon's pale crescent shone forth from among
them. The Doctor opened the letter, the green-tinted paper of which
contrasted with the old printed sheet, yellow with age, that
accompanied it. He unfolded the yellow sheet hastily, and read:

                 "Stortebecker und Godecke Michael,
                  De rowten alle beede."
                 "Godecke Michael and Toks Bowl, Knight,
                  They fought all day and they fought all night."

There was no doubt it was the original low German text of the famous
ballad, which had hitherto been lost to the world, that lay bodily
before him. He was as pleased as a child with a Christmas-box. Then he
read the letter, and when he came to the end, he read it again. He
laughed. It was clearly all a roguish jest. But from whom? His thoughts
turned first to Laura, but she had only the evening before treated him
with cold contempt. Ilse was not to be thought of, and such playful
mischief was very unlike the Professor. What did the house No. 10 mean?
The young actress who lived there was said to be a very charming and
enterprising young lady. Was it possible she could have any knowledge
of folk-songs, and, the Doctor could not help thinking, a tender
feeling for himself? The good Fritz chanced to step before the mirror
for a moment, and he at once uttered an inward protest against the
possibility of such an idea, and, laughing, he went back to his
writing-table and to his popular song. He could not enter into the
pleasantry, that was clear, but it was a pity. He laid the Robber Toss
Bowl aside, and returned to his work. After a time, however, he took it
up again. This valuable contribution had been sent to him, at all
events, without any humiliating condition; perhaps he might be allowed
to keep it. He opened a portfolio of old folk-songs, and placed it in
its order as if it had been his own. Having laid the treasure in its
proper place, he restored the portfolio to the bookshelf, and thought,
it is a matter of indifference where the sheet lies.

In this way the Doctor argued with himself till after dinner. Shortly
before three o'clock he came to a decision. If it was only the joke of
an intimate acquaintance, he would not spoil it; and if there had been
some other motive, it must soon come to light. Meanwhile, he might keep
the document, but he would not treat it as his own possession till the
right of the sender and his object was clear. He must, in the first
place, communicate this view of the case to his unknown friend. After
he had made the necessary compromise between his conscience and his
love of collecting, he fetched a flower out of his father's
conservatory, placed it in his button-hole, and walked out into the
street. He looked suspiciously at the windows of the hostile house, but
Laura was not to be seen, for she had hid behind the curtains, and
snapped her fingers at the success of her jest when she saw the flower
in his buttonhole. The Doctor was embarrassed when he came in front of
the house appointed. The situation was humiliating, and he repented of
his covetousness. He looked at the window of the lower story, and
behold! the young actress was standing close to it. He looked at her
intelligent countenance and attractive features, took off his hat
courteously, and was weak enough to blush; the young lady returned the
civility tendered by the well-known son of the neighboring house. The
Doctor continued his walk some distance beyond; there appeared to him
something strange in this adventure. The presence and greeting of the
actress at the window certainly did not appear to be accidental. He
could not get rid of his perplexity; only one thing was quite clear to
him, he was for the present in possession of the ballad of the Robber
Toss Bowl.

As his qualms of conscience did not cease, he debated with himself for
two days whether he should enter upon any further interchange of
letters; on the third he silenced his remaining scruples. Thirty
ballads, very old editions--the temptation was overpowering! He
looked up his own attempts in rhyme,--effusions of his own lyrical
period,--examined and cast them aside. At last he found an innocent
romance which in no manner exposed him; he copied it, and accompanied
it by a few lines in which he made it a condition that he should
consider himself only the guardian of the songs.

Some days afterwards he received a second packet; it was a priceless
monastery ditty, in which the virtues of roast Martinmas goose were
celebrated. It was accompanied by a note which contained the
encouraging words: "Not bad; keep on."

Again Laura's figure rose before his eyes, and he laughed right
heartily at the Martinmas goose. This also was an old edition of which
there was no record. This time he selected an ode to Spring from his
poems and addressed it, as directed, to O. W.

The Professor was astonished that the Doctor kept silence about the
book of ballads, and expressed this to Ilse, who was partly in the
secret.

"He is bound not to speak," she said; "she treats him badly. But as it
is he, there is no danger in the joke for the bold girl."

But Laura was happy in her game of chess with masked moves. She put the
Doctor's poem carefully into her private album, and she thought that
the Hahn poetry was not so bad after all; nay, it was admirable. But
even more gratifying to her sportiveness than the correspondence, was
the thought that the Doctor was to be forced into a little affair of
sentiment with the actress. When she met him again at Ilse's, and one
of those present was extolling the talent of the young lady, she spoke
without embarrassment, and without turning to the Doctor, of the
curious whims of the actress, that once, when an admirer, whom she did
not like, had proposed to serenade her, she had placed her little dog
at the window with a night-cap on, and that she had a decided
preference for the company of strolling apprentices, and could converse
with them in the most masterly way in the dialect of her province.

The unsuspecting Doctor began to reflect. Was it then really the
actress who, without his knowing it, was in correspondence with him?

This gave Fritz a certain tacit respect for the lady.

Once when Laura was sitting with her mother at the play watching the
actress, she perceived Fritz Hahn in the box opposite. She observed
that he was looking fixedly through his opera-glass at the stage, and
sometimes broke out in loud applause. She had evidently succeeded in
putting him upon the wrong track.

Meanwhile he discovered that the unknown correspondent knew more than
how to write addresses. Laura had looked through the songs and studied
the text of the old poem of the Knight Tanhaeuser, who had lingered with
Venus in the mountain, and she sent the ballad with the following
lines:--

"While reading through this song I was overcome with emotion and horror
at the meaning of the old poetry. What, in the opinion of the poet,
became of the soul of poor Tanhaeuser? He had broken away from Venus,
and had returned penitent to the Christian faith; and when the stern
Pope said to him, 'It is as little possible for you to be saved as for
the staff that I hold in my hand to turn green,' he returned to Venus
and her mountain in proud despair. But afterwards the staff in the
hands of the Pope did turn green, and it was in vain that he sent his
messengers to fetch the knight back. What was the singer's view of
Tanhaeuser's return to evil? Would the 'Eternal love and mercy' still
forgive the poor man, although he had for the second time surrendered
himself up to the temptress? Was the old poet so liberal-minded that he
considered the return to the heathen woman as pardonable? Or is
Tanhaeuser now, in his eyes, eternally lost? and was the green staff
only to show that the Pope was to bear the blame? I should be glad to
hear your explanation of this. I think the poem very beautiful and
touching, and, when one thoroughly enters into its spirit, there is
powerful poetry in the simple words. But I feel much disturbed about
the fate of Tanhaeuser. Your N. N."

The Doctor answered immediately:

"It is sometimes difficult, from the deep feeling and terse expressions
of olden poetry, to understand the fundamental idea of the poet; and
most difficult of all in a poem which has been handed down for
centuries by popular tradition, and in which changes in the words and
meaning must certainly have taken place. The first idea of the song,
that mortals dwell in the mountains with the old heathen gods rests on
a notion which originated in ancient times. The idea that the God of
Christians is more merciful than his representative on earth has been
rooted in Germany since the time of the Hohenstaufens. One may refer
the origin of the poem to that period. It probably attained the form in
which it is now handed down to us, about the middle of the fifteenth
century, when the opposition to the hierarchy in Germany was general,
both among high and low. The grand idea of this opposition was that the
priests cannot forgive sins, and that only repentance, atonement, and
elevation of the heart to God can avail. The copy which you have so
kindly sent me, is of the early period of Luther, but we know that the
song is older, and we possess various texts, in some of which it is
more prominently set forth that Tanhaeuser after his second fall might
still trust in the divine mercy. But undoubtedly in the text you have
sent me the singer considers poor Tanhaeuser as lost if he did not
liberate himself from the power of Venus, but that he might be saved if
he did. According to popular tradition he remained with her. The great
and elevating thought that man may shake off the trammels of past sin
may be discovered in this poem, the poetical value of which I place as
high as you do."

When Laura received this answer,--Gabriel was again her confidential
messenger,--she jumped up with joy from her writing-table. She had with
Ilse grieved over poor Tanhaeuser, and given her friend a copy of the
poem; now she ran down to her with the Doctor's letter, proud that, by
means of a childish joke, at which Ilse had shaken her head, she had
entered into a learned discussion. From this day the secret
correspondence attained an importance for both Laura and Fritz which
they had little thought of in the beginning; for Laura now ventured,
when she could not satisfy herself on any subject, or took a secret
interest in anything, to impart to her neighbor thoughts which hitherto
had been confined to her writing-table, and the Doctor discovered with
astonishment and pleasure a female mind of strong and original cast,
which sought to obtain clear views from him, and unfolded itself to him
with unusual confidence. These feelings might be discovered in his
poems, which were no longer taken out of the portfolio, but assumed a
more personal character. Laura's eyes moistened as she read the pages
in which he expressed in verse his anxiety and impatience to become
acquainted with his unknown correspondent. The feeling evinced in his
lines was so pure, and one saw in them the good and refined character
of the man so clearly that one could not fail to place full confidence
in him. The old popular songs, in the first instance the main object,
became gradually only the accompaniments of the secret correspondence,
and the wings of Laura's enthusiastic soul soared over golden clouds,
whilst Mr. Hummel growled below and Mr. Hahn suspiciously awaited fresh
attacks from the enemy.

But this poetical relation with the neighbor's son, which had been
established by Laura's enterprising spirit, was exposed to the same
danger that threatens all poetic moods--of being at any moment
destroyed by rude reality. The Doctor was never to know that she was
his correspondent,--the daughter of the enemy whom he daily met, the
childish girl who quarreled with him in Ilse's room about bread and
butter and almonds. When they met, he was always as before the Doctor
with the spectacles, and she the little snappish Hummel, who had more
of her father's ill manners than Gabriel would admit. The sulking and
teasing between them went on every day as formerly. Nevertheless, it
was inevitable that a warm feeling should sometimes beam in Laura's
eyes, and that the friendly disposition with which she really regarded
the Doctor should sometimes be betrayed in a passing word. Fritz,
therefore, labored under an uncertainty over which he secretly
laughed, but which, nevertheless, tormented him. When he received the
well-disguised handwriting he always saw Laura before him; but when he
met his neighbor at his friend's she succeeded, by mocking remarks and
shy reserve, in perplexing him again. Necessity compelled her to this
coquetry, but it acted upon him each time like a cold blast; and then
it struck him, it can not be Laura,--is it the actress?

There was general astonishment at the tea-table when the Doctor once
hinted that he had been invited to a masked ball, and was not averse to
attending the noisy gathering. The ball was given by a large circle of
distinguished citizens, to which Mr. Hummel belonged. The peculiarity
of this party was that the chief actors of the city were admitted as
welcome guests. As the Doctor had hitherto never shown any inclination
for this kind of social entertainment, the Professor was astonished.
Laura alone guessed the cause, but all received the announcement of
this unusual intended dissipation with silent pleasure.

Mr. Hummel was not of the opinion that a masked ball was the place
where the worth of a German citizen was shown to greatest advantage. He
had unwillingly yielded to the coaxing of the ladies in his family, and
was now seen standing among the masks in the ball-room. He had thrown
the little black domino carelessly about his back like a priest's
mantle; his hat was pressed down over his eyes; the silk fringe of the
mask overshadowed his face on all sides, which was as unmistakable as a
full moon behind thin clouds. He looked mockingly on the throng of
masks that streamed past him, somewhat less comfortable and more silent
than they would have been without masks and colored coats. Obnoxious to
him more than all were the harlequins scattered about, who, at the
beginning of the festival, affected an extravagance of conduct which
was not natural to them. Mr. Hummel had good eyes, but it happened to
him, as to others, that he was not able to recognize every one who was
masked. All the world knew him, however. Some one tugged at his
clothes.

"How is your dog Spitehahn?" asked a gentleman in rococo dress, bowing
to him.

Hummel bowed in return. "Thanks for your kind inquiry. I would have
brought him for a bite of the calves of your legs if you had been
provided with that article."

"Does this kind of a Hummel-bee sting?" asked a green domino, in a
falsetto voice.

"Spare your remarks," replied Hummel, angrily; "your voice is fast
changing into a woman's. I quite pity your family."

He moved on.

"Will you buy a pack of hareskins, brother Hummel?" asked a wandering
pedlar.

"I thank you, brother," replied Hummel, fiercely; "you may let me have
the ass's skin that your wife tore from your face in your last
quarrel."

"There's the rough felt of our city," cried, pertly, a little clown, as
he gave Mr. Hummel a blow upon the stomach with his wand.

This was too much for Mr. Hummel: he seized the diminutive clown by the
collar, took his wand away from him, and held the refractory little
fellow on his knee. "Wait, my son," he cried; "you'll wish you had a
rough felt in another place than on your head."

But a burly Turk caught him by the arm. "Sir, how can you dare to lay
hold of my son in this manner?"

"Is this chattel yours?" returned Hummel, furiously; "your
blotting-paper physiognomy is unknown to me. If you, as Turk, devote
yourself to the rearing of ill-mannered buffoons, you must expect to
see Turkish bamboo on their backs, that is a principle of international
law. If you do not understand this you may come to me to-morrow morning
at my office; I will make the thing clear to you, and hand over to you
a bill for the watch-crystal that this creature from your harem has
broken for me."

Thereupon he threw the clown into the arms of the Turk, and the wand on
the ground, and clumsily made his way through the masks who surrounded
him.

"There is not a human soul among them," he growled; "one feels like
Robinson Crusoe among the savages." He moved about the ball-room
utterly regardless of the white shoulders and bright eyes that danced
about him, and again disappeared. At last he caught sight of two grey
bats whom he thought he knew, for it appeared to him that the masks
were his wife and daughter. He went up to them, but they avoided him
and mixed in the throng. They were undoubtedly of his party, but they
intended to remain unknown, and they knew that would be impossible if
Mr. Hummel was with them. The forsaken man turned and went into the
next room, seated himself in solitude at an empty table, took his mask
off, ordered a bottle of wine, asked for the daily paper, and lighted a
cigar.

"Pardon me, Mr. Hummel," said a little waiter; "no smoking here!"

"You too," replied Mr. Hummel, gloomily. "You see there _is_ smoking
here. This is my way of masquerading. Matters are becoming wearisome.
Every vestige of humanity and all consideration for others is being
trodden under foot to-day; and that is what they call a _bal masque_."

Meanwhile Laura slipped about among the masks, looking for the Doctor.
Fritz Hahn could easily be discovered by sharp eyes, for he wore his
spectacles over his mask. He was standing in a blue domino, near an
elegant lady in a red mantle. Laura pressed up to him. Fritz was
writing something in the hand of the lady, most likely her name, for
she nodded carelessly; then he wrote again in her hand, pointing to
himself. Probably it was his own name, for the lady nodded, and Laura
thought that she could see under her veil that she was laughing. Laura
heard the Doctor speaking to the lady of a _role_ in which he had
lately seen her on the stage, and he addressed her with the familiar
"thou." That was, indeed, the privilege of a masquerade ball, but it
was entirely unnecessary. The Doctor expressed his pleasure that in the
balcony scene the lady had so well understood how to represent the
glowing feeling of passion in such difficult metre. The red mantle
became attentive, and, turning to the Doctor, began to speak of the
_role_ she had taken. The lady spoke for some time, and then Doctor
Romeo would continue still longer. The actress stepped back some steps
into the shadow of a pillar; the Doctor followed her, and Laura saw
that the red mantle curtly answered some other male masks, and again
turned to the Doctor. At last the actress seated herself quite behind
the pillar, where she was little seen by strangers, and the Doctor
stood near her, leaning against it, and continuing the conversation.
Laura, who had also placed herself near the pillar, heard how animated
it was. The subject was passion. Now it was not the passion which one
felt for the other, but that of the stage; but even that was more than
a friend of the Doctor could approve of.

Laura stepped hastily forward, placed herself near Fritz Hahn, and
raised her finger warningly. The Doctor looked astonished at the bat,
and shrugged his shoulders. Then she seized his hand, and wrote his
name in it. The Doctor made a bow, upon which she held out her hand.
How could he know her in that disfiguring disguise? He gave decided
proof of his ignorance, and turned again to the lady in the red mantle.
Laura stepped back, and colored up to her temples under the mask. It
was in anger with herself, for she was the unfortunate one who had
brought him into this danger: and moreover she had come in such a
disguise that he could not recognize her.

She returned to her mother, who had at last been fortunate enough to
find a companion in Laura's godmother, and had got into the corner of
the room in order to exchange observations on the bodily development of
the baptized little Fritz. Laura placed herself next her mother, and
looked at the dancing masks with indifference. Suddenly she sprang up,
for Fritz Hahn was dancing with the lady in the red mantle. Was it
possible? He had long abjured dancing. More than once he had ridiculed
Laura for her pleasure in it; even she herself had at times, when
sitting before her private journal, thought how childish this
monotonous whirling movement was, and how incompatible with a nobler
conception of life;--now he was turning himself round like a top.

"What do I see?" cried her mother; "is not that ----? and the red one
is ----"

"It is immaterial with whom he dances," interrupted Laura, in order to
avoid hearing the hated confirmation of it. But she knew Fritz Hahn,
and she was aware there was some signification in this waltz. Juliet
pleased him much, otherwise he would never have done it; he had never
shown her this mark of distinction. The old comedian of the city
theatre approached them as Pantaloon; he had at last found out the two
influential ladies; he tripped up to them, made grotesque obeisances,
and began to amuse her mamma with his gossip. One of his first remarks
was, "It is said that young Hahn will go upon the stage; he is studying
his _role_ as lover with our prima-donna."

Laura turned with annoyance from the flat remark. Her last hope was the
time of unmasking; she impatiently awaited the moment. At last there
was a pause, and the masks were removed. She took her mother's arm to
go through the room to greet their acquaintances. It seemed a long time
before she got into the neighborhood of Fritz Hahn, and not once did he
look at her. Laura made a movement with her hand to touch him gently;
but she pressed her fingers firmly, and passed by fixing her eyes upon
him. Now at last he recognized her, as he ought to have done long
before. She saw the look of pleasure in his countenance, and her heart
became lighter. She stopped while he exchanged some civil sentences
with her mother, and she expected that he would acknowledge that she
had already greeted him, but he did not mention a word of the
occurrence. Had so many written in his hand that he could not bear in
mind one poor little bat? When he turned to her he only praised the
ball music. This was all the notice he thought her worthy of. His
conversation with Juliet had been the free interchange of mind, but to
her he only addressed a few indifferent sentences. Her countenance
assumed the gloomy Hummel look, as she answered, "You used to have
little sympathy for the jingling instrument to which the puppets
dance."

The Doctor looked embarrassed, but laughed, and asked her for the next
dance. This was bad tact. Laura answered bitterly, "When the grey bat
was so bold as to flutter about Romeo, he had no dance free for her;
now her eyes are blinded by the bright light." She bowed her head like
a queen, took her mother's arm, and left him behind.

What followed was still more aggravating. The Doctor danced once more
with the lady in the mantle. Laura observed how fascinatingly she
smiled on him, and he danced with no one else. Of her he took no
further notice, and she was glad when soon after Mr. Hummel came up to
them and said: "It was difficult to find you. When I inquired of the
people for the two ugliest disguises, you were pointed out to me. I
shall be glad if to-morrow morning you awake without headache. We have
had enough of pleasure today."

Laura was glad when the carriage arrived at home; she rushed up to her
room, hastily took her book out of the drawer, and wrote rapidly:

           "Cursed be my deed and cursed all sinful art;
              My own true happiness is now at stake
            A troup of enemies surrounds my heart,
              Which bleeding from so deadly wounds will break."

she wiped away the tears which rolled upon her paper.

The bright light of the following morning exercised its tranquilizing
influence on her fluttering thoughts. Over there Fritz Hahn was still
lying in his bed. The good youth had tired himself yesterday. Many
drops of water might still flow into the sea before friend Fritz would
determine to unite his fate with an actress of tragedy. She brought out
her supply of old ballads and selected one; it was a very jolly one:
the May-Bug's Marriage--in which the may-bug on the hedge asks in
marriage the young maiden fly. Many little birds occupy themselves
seriously about the wedding, but at last it is put an end to by some
disreputable conduct on the part of the bridegroom.

"Good," said Laura; "my May-Bug Fritz, before you marry the frivolous
fly Juliet, other birds shall have their say about it."

She folded up the song, and added to it a little note: "You guess
wrongly. The person who sends this to you never was Juliet." As she
closed the letter she said to herself, with more composure: "If he does
not now perceive that he was mistaken, one cannot think much of his
judgment."

The Doctor was sitting a little stupefied over his books, when his eye
fell upon the above letter. He cast a look upon the Marriage of the
May-Bug; he had never yet come across an old copy of it, and in rapidly
glancing over it he saw that many verses were quite different from our
current text. Then he took the note, and endeavored to interpret the
oracle. Now it was clear that the actress was the sender, for who else
could know that he had accosted her as Juliet, and that they had
conversed long about this _role_. But what could the words mean, "You
guess wrongly?" But even on this point his eyes were blinded; he had
maintained that the representation of passion could only be to a
certain extent attained by an actor, if he had never in his life
experienced a similar feeling. This the actress denied, and they had
endeavored to come to an agreement about it; her words, therefore,
clearly meant that she had impersonated Juliet without ever having
previously felt a great passion. This was a confession that showed
great confidence--nay, perhaps still more. The Doctor sat long looking
at the note; but he now felt pretty sure who his correspondent was, and
the discovery did not give him pleasure. For when he had reasoned the
matter out upon rational grounds, it had always been Laura's eyes that
beamed upon him from the paper, though undoubtedly quite another look
from that which she had favored him with yesterday. He laid the May-Bug
Marriage with the other songs, and again asked himself whether he ought
to continue the correspondence. At last he sealed in answer one of the
worthless trifles of his portfolio, and did not write anything in
addition.

Some days after, when the Professor and Ilse were walking through the
streets, they passed by the dwelling of the actress; both saw their
friend standing at the window of the heroine, and he nodded to them
from within.

"How has he made this acquaintance?" asked the Professor; "is not the
young lady considered very fast?"

"I fear so," answered Ilse, troubled.

Now Mrs. Knips (who dwelt opposite to the actress) came running in to
Madame Hummel one day with the linen still damp, and told her that on
the previous evening a great basket of champagne had been taken to the
actress's house, and that in the night the loud singing of a dissolute
company had been heard over the whole street, and that young Doctor
Hahn had been among them!

On Sunday the comedian had been invited to dinner at Mr. Hummel's, and
one of his first anecdotes was concerning a jovial party which had
taken place at the actress's. With the malice which is often to be
found in fellow-artists towards each other, he added, "She has found a
new admirer, the son of your neighbor over the way. Well! the father's
money will at least come to the support of art." Mr. Hummel opened his
eyes and shook his head, but only said, "So Fritz Hahn too has gone
among the actors and become dissipated: he is the last one that I
should have suspected of this."

Mrs. Hummel endeavored to bring to mind her recollections of the ball,
and found in them a sorrowful confirmation of this, but Laura, who had
been sitting very pale and silent, broke forth vehemently to the actor:

"I will not suffer you to speak of the Doctor in such a tone at our
table. We are well enough acquainted with him to know that he is in
conduct and principles a noble man. He is master of his own actions,
and if he likes the lady and visits her at times, a third person has no
right to say anything in the matter whatever. It is a malicious calumny
to say that he goes there with any dishonorable intentions, and spends
money that does not belong to him."

The comedian, through fright, got a crumb of bread in his wind-pipe,
and burst out in the most violent fit of coughing that had ever seized
him, but the mother, in excuse of their pleasant visitor, replied:

"You have sometimes felt yourself, that the conduct of the Doctor was
not quite the thing."

"If I have said anything of the kind in foolish ill temper," cried
Laura, "it was an injustice, and I am very sorry for it; I have only
the excuse that I never meant it ill-naturedly. But from others I will
hear no slanderous talk about our neighbor." She rose from table and
left the room. The actor vindicated himself to the mother, but Mr.
Hummel grasped his wine-glass and, peering after his daughter, said:

"On a gloomy day she is scarcely to be distinguished from me."

The Doctor was little troubled about his own misdeeds. He had paid a
visit to his partner after the ball, the occasion on which he had been
seen at the window. One of his school friends, now second tenor at the
theatre, had come and arranged with the actress to have a little picnic
on her approaching birthday, and Fritz had been invited to take part in
it. It was a merry gathering, and the Doctor had found much
entertainment among the light-winged birds of the stage, and had
rejoiced with the benevolence of a wise man at the good tact which was
visible amidst the easy style of their intercourse. There had also been
much intelligent conversation in the course of the evening, and he went
home with the impression that even for a person like himself it was
good to be for once associated with these lively artists. He had
endeavored that same evening, by a stratagem, to ascertain his unknown
correspondent. When they were singing songs, and with lively grace
reciting comic verses, he had produced the May-bug song and had begun
to sing it:

           "The May-bug sat on the hedge, brum, brum;
            The fly sat beneath him, hum, hum hum."

Some had joined in it; the lady in the mantle did not know the song,
however, but only a similar one from an old _role_; and when the bass
took up the melody from the Doctor, and in the following verses
portrayed each of the birds as they entered by gestures and comic
changes of the melody, the hostess laughed, and without any
embarrassment undertook to learn the song, so that the Doctor again
became very doubtful, and on returning home remained standing on the
threshold and looked significantly at the house of Mr. Hummel. If any
one had accurately investigated why, after this May-bug song, the
Doctor became noisy and gay like the others, he would perhaps have
discovered that the unembarrassed air of the actress had lifted a load
from his heart.

But this helped him little with respect to the "brum" and "hum" of the
neighbors. All Park Street had latterly accorded to their Fritz Hahn
the highest respect; his picture had been placed among the serious men
of learning in their albums, whom they daily contemplated and spoke of.
Now strange features had appeared in the well-known face, and the
street could not bear that one of their children should appear
otherwise than he had been wont to do. Therefore there was much
whispering and shaking of heads, and this came to the knowledge of Mr.
and Mrs. Hahn, and, finally, to the Doctor. He laughed, but he did not
feel quite at ease about it.

           "Tannhaeuser, noble knight and man,
              In Venus' wiles thou liest ensnared,
            While I, a wicked Pope Urban,
              To cause you shame and sorrow dared."

Thus did Laura lament in her room, but she concealed her heavy sorrow,
and did not speak a word concerning the danger of the Doctor, even to
Ilse; and when the latter once slightly alluded to the new intimacy of
their friend, Laura broke the thread of her embroidery, and said, while
the blood rushed to her heart:

"Why should not the Doctor visit there? He is a young man for whom it
is good to see different people; he stays too much in his room and with
his parents. If I had been a man like him, I should long ago have tied
up my bundle and gone out into the world, for our narrow field of
active life weakens the energies and dwarfs the mind."

At the tea-table one of the company present turned the conversation on
the actress, and shrugged his shoulders over her free manners. Laura
felt what must be the Doctor's embarrassment; there sat poor Fritz,
obliged to listen to the derogatory criticisms--his intimate
acquaintances were silent, and looked significantly at him; his
position was terrible, for every fool made use of the lady's
unprotected position to show himself a Cato.

"I wonder," she said, "that gentlemen should so severely criticise the
little freaks of an actress. A lady of that profession should be
treated with great consideration, for she is deprived of all the
protection and all the pleasure which we have in our families. I am
convinced that she is a worthy and sensitive girl."

The Doctor looked thankfully at her and confirmed her opinion. He did
not observe it, but it had happened as in his fairy-tale; Laura had
bent down to his feet and picked up the pocket-handkerchief.

But she had still more to bear. The month of March began his theatrical
pranks in the world; first from his grey clouds he had cast a veil of
snow over the landscape; icicles hung from the roofs and white crystals
from the trees, and the wild storm howled all around. Suddenly all was
transformed. A mild south wind blew, the buds of the trees swelled, and
the fresh green made its appearance in the meadow; the children ran
about in the woods and carried home large bunches of spring flowers,
and people, rejoicing in the change, passed in unceasing pilgrimage
through the Park Street out into the sunshine.

Even Mr. Hummel felt the presage of spring. He gave expression to this
annually by mixing the colors for his boat, and taking a pleasure walk
on a well-chosen afternoon with his wife and daughter to a distant
coffee-garden. This festive journey was but an indifferent pleasure for
Laura, for Mr. Hummel walked with sturdy step in front of the ladies;
he secretly rejoiced in the renewal of old nature, and only
occasionally favored his ladies with a remark over his shoulder when he
was annoyed at a change in the vegetation. But Laura knew that her
father thought much of this March pleasure, and this year, too, she
went with her mother behind him to a solitary village, where Mr. Hummel
smoked his pipe, fed the hens, scolded the waiter, and talked with the
landlord about the crops and gave the sun an opportunity of rejoicing
in the healthy appearance of his old friend, Mr. Hummel. Mr. Hummel,
who was usually by no means averse to society, loved now to be alone
with nature, and hated the place of resort of the citizens in the
country, where the aroma of new cakes and fritters destroyed the
perfume of nature.

When he entered the coffee-garden with his ladies, he saw with
dissatisfaction that other guests were already there. He threw an
indignant glance on the gay society which had taken possession of his
usual place, and noticed among them the young actress, as well as other
members of the theatre, and with them the son of his adversary. Then he
turned to his daughter and said, blinking his eyes:

"To-day you will be well satisfied; here you have, besides the
enjoyments of nature, those of art."

It was a terribly hard trial to which Laura's courage was subjected;
but she raised her head proudly, and passed with her parents to another
corner of the garden. There she placed herself with her back to the
strangers. Nevertheless, she learnt more of their proceedings than was
good for her composure. She heard the sounds of laughter, and the merry
hum of the May-bug party; the less she saw of them the more painful was
the noise, and every sound was audible in the deep stillness, and her
mother's ears and eyes also were intent on the other party. After a
time the loud conversation of the artists ceased, and she heard her
name spoken in low terms. Immediately afterwards the gravel crunched
behind her, and she felt that the Doctor was behind her.

He approached the table, greeted the father silently, made some
friendly remarks to the mother about the weather, and was just on the
point of turning to Laura with a forced composure that did not escape
her, when Mr. Hummel, who had till then silently borne the intrusion of
the enemy, took his pipe from his mouth, and began, with gentle voice:

"Is what I hear of you possible, Doctor?--that you wish to change your
mode of life?"

Laura plunged her parasol vehemently into the gravel.

"I know nothing of it," replied the Doctor, coolly.

"It is reported," continued Mr. Hummel, "that you intend to say
farewell to your books and become a professional actor. If this should
be the case, I beg of you to think kindly of my little business. I have
every kind of artistic head-gear: for lovers fine beaver, with galoon
for lackeys, and if ever you act the punchinello, a white felt hat. But
you would rather be called clown, perhaps. That is now the fashionable
_role_; buffoons are out of style; one shall address you as Sir Clown."

"I have no intention of going on the stage," replied the Doctor; "but
if ever the idea should occur to me, I would not come to you for the
artistic work of your manufactory, but for instruction in what you
consider good manners. I should then at least know what, in my
profession, was _not_ befitting men of breeding."

He bowed to the ladies, and went away.

"Always Humboldt," said Mr. Hummel, looking after him.

Laura did not move, but her dark eyebrows were knit so threateningly
that Mr. Hummel could not help perceiving it.

"I am quite of your opinion," he said, pleasantly, to his daughter. "It
is a great pity that he is spoilt by belonging to these straw-hat
people, but now there is no hope for him."

He then took a bit of cake and offered it to a little poodle that was
sitting on its hind legs, begging and moving its paws.

"Billy!" cried a lady's voice through the garden.

The dog Billy, however, did not attend, but continued to show his
devotion to Mr. Hummel, who, having a greater tenderness for dogs than
for men, was feeding him.

The actress came up hastily.

"I beg of you not to give the naughty animal any cake,--there are
almonds in it," said the actress, pushing the dog away.

"A pretty dog," replied Mr. Hummel, sitting down.

"If you only knew how clever he was," said the lady; "he knows all
kinds of tricks. Show the gentleman what you have learnt, Billy."

She held her parasol out: Billy sprang lightly over it, and bounded
into the lap of Mr. Hummel, where he wagged his tail and attempted to
lick the friendly gentleman's face.

"He wants to kiss you," said the actress. "You should be proud of that,
for he does not do it to everyone."

"It is not every one who would like it," replied Mr. Hummel, stroking
the little fellow.

"Do not be troublesome to the gentleman, Billy," said the lady,
reprovingly.

Mr. Hummel arose and presented the dog to her, which would not desist
from his attempts to kiss and lick the face of the worthy citizen.

"He is a simple-hearted creature," said Mr. Hummel, "and is the same
color as my dog Spitehahn."

The actress fondled the dog in her arms.

"The rogue is very much spoilt; he creeps into my muff when I go to the
theatre, and I am obliged to take him with me. I was lately frightened
to death on his account; for once, while I was lamenting as Clara among
the citizens, Billy had run out of the green-room and, standing between
the curtains, began to wag his tail and caper about on his hind legs."

"That must have been very pathetic," said Mrs. Hummel.

"I moved about more than usual," replied the actress, "and at every
turn in the scene I had to call out, 'Lie down, Billy.'"

"Excellent," nodded Mr. Hummel; "always presence of mind."

"To-day I am thankful to the naughty little creature, though,"
continued the actress, "for he has afforded me the opportunity of
making the acquaintance of my neighbors. Mr. Hummel, I believe?"

Mr. Hummel bowed awkwardly. The actress turned to the ladies with a
bow, and the latter answered her greeting silently.

There was much in the lady that pleased Mr. Hummel. She was pretty, had
a gay and cheerful countenance, and wore something on her bonnet with
which he was personally acquainted. He therefore moved a chair towards
her and said, with another bow:

"Will you not have the kindness to take a seat?"

The actress bowed in accepting it, and, turning to Laura, said:

"I rejoice to be able to approach you at last. You are no stranger to
me, and you have often given me great pleasure, and I am glad to be
able to-day to thank you for it."

"Where was it?" asked Laura, embarrassed.

"Where you would certainly never have thought of it," replied the
other. "I have keen eyes, and over the footlights I observe the face of
every spectator. You cannot imagine how painful that is to me
sometimes. As you are always in the same seat, it has often been a
great pleasure to me to rest my eyes on your features and observe their
interested expression; and more than once, without your knowing it, I
have acted for you alone."

"Ha!" thought Laura, "it is Venus." But she felt a chord had been
struck which gave out a pure tone. She told the actress how unwillingly
she missed any of the plays in which she acted, and that in their house
the first question, when they received the new bill of the play, was
whether the lady was going to act.

This gave the mother an opportunity of entering into the conversation.
The actress spoke warmly of the kindness with which she had everywhere
been received. "For the greatest charm of our art is the secret friends
that we gain by our acting--people whom otherwise one perhaps never
sees, whose names one does not know, yet who take an interest in our
life. Then, if by accident one becomes acquainted with these kindly
strangers, it is a rich compensation for all the sufferings of our
vocation, among which the intrusive homage of common persons is perhaps
the greatest."

It was clear she could not reckon the homage of the Doctor among these
sufferings.

While the ladies were thus talking together, and Mr. Hummel listened
with approbation, some gentlemen approached the table. Mrs. Hummel
politely greeted the second tenor, who had once sung for her at the
godmother's house, and the worthy father of the stage, who knew Mr.
Hummel at the club, began a conversation with him concerning the
building of a new theatre. On this subject Mr. Hummel had, as a
citizen, a very decided opinion, in which the worthy father quite
agreed.

In this way the two parties mingled together, and the table of Mr.
Hummel became a centre round which the children of Thalia thronged.
While the actress was talking with Mrs. Hummel in a very creditable and
domestic manner of the inconveniences of her dwelling, Laura glanced at
the Doctor. He was standing some steps from the party, leaning against
a tree, looking thoughtfully before him. Laura suddenly moved towards
him, and began speaking rapidly: "My father has offended you. I beg
your forgiveness."

The Doctor looked up. "It does not pain me," said he, kindly; "I know
his way."

"I have talked to her," continued Laura, with trembling voice; "she is
clever and amiable, and has an irresistible charm of manner."

"Who?" asked the Doctor; "the actress?"

"Do not attempt concealment with me," continued Laura; "that is
unnecessary between us; there is no one on earth who wishes for your
happiness more than I do. You need not trouble yourself about others
shaking their heads; if you are sure of the love of the lady, all the
rest is a secondary consideration."

The Doctor became more and more astonished. "But I do not wish to marry
the lady."

"Do not deny it, Fritz Hahn; that ill becomes your truthful nature,"
rejoined Laura passionately; "I see how well the lady suits you. Since
I have seen her, I feel convinced that she is capable of appreciating
all that is good and great. Do not hesitate, but venture courageously
to seek her heart. Yet I am so troubled about you, Fritz. Your feelings
are warm and your judgment sound, but you cling too firmly to that
which surrounds you. I tremble, therefore, lest you should make
yourself unhappy by not deciding at the right moment upon a course
which will appear strange to your family. I know you from my early
childhood, and I am sure that your danger always has been to forget
yourself for others. You might pass a self-sacrificing existence, which
I cannot bear to think of. For I desire that all happiness should be
your portion, as your upright heart deserves." Tears coursed down her
cheeks, as she looked lovingly upon him.

Every word that she spoke sounded to the Doctor like the trilling of a
lark and the chirrup of the cricket. He spoke softly to her: "I do not
love the lady; I have never thought of uniting her future with mine."

Laura drew back, and a bright color suffused her face.

"It is a passing acquaintance, nothing more either for her or me; her
life belongs to art, and can hardly adapt itself to quiet domestic
habits. If I could venture to seek a heart for myself, it would not be
hers, but that of another." He looked towards the table, from whence at
that moment there came a loud laugh, evidently of Mr. Hummel, and spoke
the last words so low that they scarcely reached Laura's ear, and he
looked sorrowfully down on the buds of the elderbush in which the young
blossoms still lay hidden.

Laura stood motionless, as if touched by the wand of a magician, but
the tears still continued to flow down her cheeks. She came very near
touching to her lips the cherry of her philopena legend.

Then the merry cockchafers hummed round her, the actress nodded
smilingly to her, and her father called her:--the fairy tale was at an
end. Laura heard the actress say triumphantly to the Doctor, "He
offered me a chair, he is no growling bear after all. And he was so
kind to Billy."

When Fritz returned home, he threw off his hat and overcoat, rushed to
his writing-table, and took up the little letters in the unknown hand.
"It is she," he cried, aloud, "fool that I was to doubt it for one
moment." He read all the letters again, and nodded at each. It was his
own high-minded, noble maiden who had before disguised herself, now she
had shown herself to him as she really was. He waited impatiently for
the hour when he should meet her at their friend's. She entered late,
greeted him quietly, and was more silent and gentle than usual. When
she turned to him she spoke seriously, as to a trusted friend. Her
quiet composure became her well. Now she showed herself to him as she
was, a refined mind full of true enthusiasm. Prudery and sportive moods
had only been the shell that, had concealed the sweet kernel. The
unassumed caution, too, with which she concealed her feelings among her
friends, delighted him. When the next ballad should come, then she
would speak to him as she felt, or she would give him permission to
write openly to her. The next morning the Doctor counted the minutes
till the arrival of the postman. He tore open the door and hastened to
meet the man. Fritz received a letter, he broke the cover impatiently,
there was not a line from his correspondent; he unfolded the old
printed sheet, and read the words of a coarse bacchanalian ditty:

           "On the spit with ox and pig,
            Clear the green for reel and jig,
            Wine and rhyme and wassail-shout,
            Pass the flowing bowl about!"

So the honest, simple-minded Doctor asked again: Is it she? or is it
possible that it is not?




                            _CHAPTER XXIV_.

                          AMONG THE STUDENTS.


Any one who would know the Professor at his best should see him sitting
surrounded by his students, the mature man amidst blossoming youth, the
teacher among his admiring scholars. For the greatest privilege of the
academical teacher is, that he not only exercises a personal influence
on the present, but ennobles the souls of men in later generations by
his knowledge. Out of the many who listen to lectures a chosen circle
attaches itself to the learned man, the tie of personal intercourse
connects the teacher and the scholar, lightly formed but lasting; for
what attracts one to the other, and often makes the stranger after a
few hours an intimate friend, is the pleasant consciousness that both
value and appreciate the same thing.

This bond, so charming and profitable for both parties, is the noble
poetry which learning grants to its votaries. Strangers and men of
later generations judge the value of a man only by his books, but
however valuable may be the products of a man's mind thus transmitted,
it gives but an imperfect picture of it to later times; far different
does the living source work in the souls of those who receive knowledge
from the lips and eyes of the teacher. They are taught, not only by the
substance of his instructions, but still more by his method of
investigating and expounding, and, most of all, by his character and
the original style of his discourse. For these warm the hearts of his
hearers, charm their minds, and inspire them with respect. Such an
impression of the human mind, which leaves its traces on many, is
often more important in forming the character of young men than the
subject-matter of the instruction they have received. The character of
the teacher works in the scholars; new life is infused into them, and
they imbibe not only his excellencies, but also, sometimes, his
peculiarities and weaknesses. In each hearer the characteristics of the
master assume a different aspect, yet in each the influence of his mind
is apparent, even in minute particulars. The lessons which Felix gave
to his wife were not the only ones given in his house. One evening of
every week belonged to his students. There came, first, a few who
wished to ask questions and obtain information about their work;
afterwards, a greater number assembled. Ilse's room was also opened,
and Gabriel brought tea and simple fare, and an hour passed in easy
conversation, till, at last, the most intimate withdrew into the study
of their teacher, and clustered around him in numbers almost too great
for the narrow room. Here, also, the conversation was varied; sometimes
a humorous account of what they had experienced, or discussions in
which the Professor knew how to make his young friends take an active
part, and, interspersed with these, rapid criticisms upon men and
books, pointed remark and quick retort, such as are natural to those
who can recognize long melodies by a few tones. At these receptions
Felix disclosed his inmost soul with an openness that he never showed
in the lecture-room. He spoke of himself and others without reserve,
and entered pleasantly on what he had most at heart.

Ilse was no stranger at these gatherings. Those who assisted in them,
whether serious men, old students, or young doctors, found pleasure in
the presence of the distinguished lady of the house, who, in her simple
way, took part in their intercourse. The year before she had shown her
intimacy with the Odyssey, when she summoned the gentlemen to the
enjoyment of a leg of wild boar, and expressed the benevolent wish that
they would not disdain to partake of the meal. After that she was
called Penelope in the circle, and she knew that this nickname spread
among the students beyond the walls of her house.

Ilse had her favorites among the young men. Of this number was a worthy
student, not the most distinguished, but one of the most industrious of
the Professor's scholars. He was a countryman of hers and had been the
first to show her that students had tender feelings in their breasts.
This student had, during the last year, worked successfully in filling
his intellectual vacuum with collegiate knowledge. His lyrics he had
almost given up; for when the Professor sent him back his poems, he had
felt remorse and humbly begged pardon. Since that, having obtained a
good scholarship through Felix, he took a less misanthropic view of
domestic affairs; he proved himself a faithful and attached companion,
and now bore the honorable title of Doctorandus, which, according to
our grammarians, signifies a man who is about to be a doctor; he had
also attained a certain degree of recognition among the students; he
filled a position of honor in the great Arminia corps, always wore
their colors on his cap, and was ranked among the privileged seniors of
the society who, on drinking evenings, were exempted from the heavier
obligations of conviviality, and filled up by serious conversation the
pauses in which the stormy youths took breath.

On one of these evenings the conversation took a learned turn even
before the party had retreated from Ilse's apartment to the study. An
interesting manuscript had been found in a distant library in South
Germany. There was much talk about the discovery and the editor, and
Felix recounted with satisfaction to some of his select circle all the
similar discoveries which had been made during the last twenty years.
Then our student, who had just received a cup of tea from Ilse, and was
stirring it with his spoon, said, in evident ignorance of the storm
that was lowering: "May there not be many things still undiscovered in
the neighborhood? In my town there is an old chest, which contains
books and papers from the monastery at Rossau. It is not impossible
that there may be something valuable there."

Thus spoke the student, stirring his spoon, like a boy who applies a
burning match to a bombshell.

The Professor started from his chair, and cast such a flaming glance at
the student that in fright he quickly set down his cup of tea in order
not to spill it "Where is the chest?" said the Professor.

"Where is it? I do not know," replied the student surprised. "I was
told of it, some years ago, by a countryman of mine, who was born in
the district of Rossau"--the student mentioned the name, and Ilse knew
the family--"but it must be in our county, for he lived there as tutor
in several places."

"Was he a philologist?" asked an older scholar, as eager as the
Professor.

"He was a theologian," replied our student. A murmur of regret passed
through the room.

"Then the account is still very uncertain," concluded the critic.

"Did the man see the chest himself?" asked the Professor.

"I am not certain of that, either," replied the student. "I did not
then know the importance that attached to the communication. But, I
think, he must have seen it himself, for I remember he said it was
thickly plated with iron."

"Unfortunate man! You must do your utmost to procure us information
about this chest," cried the Professor. He paced impatiently up and
down the room, the students making way for him respectfully. "Your
communication is of more importance than I can now tell you," began the
Professor, stopping before the student. "Endeavor, in the first place,
to recall what you have heard about it. Did your acquaintance ever see
the chest open?"

"When I come to think of it," replied the student, "I believe that he
saw some old monastic relics lying in it."

"Then it was no longer closed?" inquired the Professor. "And where is
your friend, now?"

"He went to America last year with a brewer's daughter. I do not know
where he now resides, but it may be ascertained from his relations."

Again a murmur of vexation passed through the room.

"Endeavor to discover the residence of the man; write to him, and ask
for accurate information," exclaimed the Professor; "you can do me no
greater service."

The student promised to do all in the power of man. When the party
broke up Gabriel communicated to the student a secret invitation to
dinner on the following day. Ilse knew that it would be agreeable to
Felix to have the company of one who had even an acquaintance who had
seen the chest that contained the books of Rossau, among which, it was
possible, the manuscript of Tacitus might lie, provided it was not
somewhere else.

She, however, did not hear with any satisfaction of the secret chest,
for Ilse was, alas! incredulous in the matter of the manuscript. She
had sometimes vexed her husband by her indifference on the subject,
and, after the unfortunate Struvelius episode, avoided every mention of
the lost treasure. She had, besides, special reasons for it. She knew
how much every thought and discussion concerning it excited Felix. He
always became agitated, and his eyes shone as in fever. It is true he
controlled himself after a few minutes, and laughed at his own fervor;
but these outbreaks of latent ardor were not agreeable to his wife, for
she saw by these sudden flashings that the thought of the manuscript
still fretted the soul of her dear husband, and suspected that in
secret he often dreamt of it, and entertained secret designs against
the walls of her father's house.

Our student had now aroused the storm. Later, the doctor was called in
and there was a long discussion and dispute. Ilse was glad that the
doctor did not attach much importance to the chest, and by sensible
suggestions brought the Professor at last to make humorous remarks upon
his own eagerness.

When, on the following day at dinner, the student produced the letter
he had written in proof of his zeal, the Professor treated the matter
with more composure. "It is an uncertain account," he said, "even if
the relator tells the truth; he may be in error concerning the
particulars, or even the name of the monastery." When, afterwards,
information came from the house of the student that the theologian had
settled somewhere in Wisconsin as an apothecary, and that the student's
letter had been sent to an uncertain address in a distant country, the
whirlpool which the mention of the chest had provoked had subsided to
peaceful ripples.

The greatest advantage consequent upon this episode came to our
student; for the Professor imparted the account to the Chamberlain, and
pointed out to him that in this chest there might be things of very
great value. The Chamberlain had several years before held the post of
castellan, and was well acquainted with all the relics of his
sovereign's castles, and was aware that there was nothing of that kind
to be found in any of them; but as the student appeared to him to be a
favorite of the family, he took kindly notice of the young man, and
offered to present him as a fellow-countryman to the Hereditary Prince.
This was done. The consequence of the introduction was that our student
was invited one evening on which the Prince received other academical
acquaintances.

It was an anxious evening for the student, and the Arminian had various
reasons to be mistrustful. For, this year, there had been violent
storms among the students. It was the quarrel between the corps of
Markomanns and the Society of Arminians that had raised the tempest.
The recent cause of the storm was curious and instructive to those who
watch the secret links of earthly events. The discord which had
sundered the professors who were the representatives of ancient
learning, the struggle between Werner and Struvelius, had not at the
time much excited the academic youth. But, shortly afterwards, a song
had come forth among the students, in which the adventure of Struvelius
was treated disrespectfully. This song was a weak production; it was in
the form of a ballad, and adorned with a refrain to this effect:

           "Struvelius, Struvelius,
            Come out here with your Fidibus,
            Who burns himself will have a fuss."

The author was never discovered. But when one considers that this song,
so far as could be perceived from its ludicrous style, was averse to
Struvelius and in honor of Werner, and further, that it first appeared
among the Arminians, and that among these children of Arminius was one
who had cherished lyrical tendencies in the past; that this one
belonged to Werner's circle, and that in this circle the parchment had
upon several occasions been contemptuously treated as a fidibus, one
cannot suppress the cautious supposition that our student had degraded
his departing muse by this miserable performance.

This frivolous song had become popular with the Arminians; its refrain
was heard in the streets sometimes in the quiet night; it was very
vexatious to the Professor, and not less so to Werner's tea party, but
it could not be put down by force. The song and its origin were matters
of indifference to the Markomanns and their associates, but they did
not sing it simply because it was modelled upon a drinking song of the
Arminians. About the time that Werner entered upon his rectorate, some
students of all parties were sitting together in a restaurant; a
Markomann attempted to light his pipe by the gas-flame, and a spark
burnt the ribbon of his corps-colors; whereupon some of the Arminians
mockingly sang the refrain. The Markomanns sprang up and commanded
silence. Numerous challenges were the consequence. But, unfortunately,
the matter did not rest there. A number of Arminians had drawn up in
front of the Markomann's club-house, and had openly sung the tune in an
insolent manner on the main street; it led to disagreeable conflicts
between the parties and the city police, and investigations and
punishments were the result. Werner himself had, in private conferences
with some of the leaders, done what he could to suppress the
unfortunate song, and he had succeeded in banishing it at least from
the streets. But the ill-will remained in their hearts. By various
unfortunate occurrences it became clear that there was more disunion
and discordant feeling among the students than usual.

The Arminian, as he hung up his cap in the Prince's ante-room beside
the smart ones of the great Markomann leaders, anxiously revolved all
this in his mind. The evening passed off more pleasantly than he had
expected. In the august chamber the Markomanns observed decorous
civility. The meeting indeed was of some importance; for this was just
the time when the students were talking about holding a great
_Commers_[3] to celebrate the anniversary of some university event.
But, as often happens in the greater affairs of our nation, the feast
was in danger of being disturbed by the quarrel between the clans. Now,
while the Arminian was drinking punch together with the Markomanns, the
Hereditary Prince expressed the desire to participate in the
commemorative _Commers_; and Beppo, the leader of the Markomanns,
explained to the Arminian his views as to how the quarrel might be
adjusted. The Arminian offered to convey this proposal to his corps.
When the Chamberlain hesitated as to the participation of the
Hereditary Prince in the _Commers_, the Arminian, exhilarated by punch
and the flow of conversation, assured him that his comrades would
appreciate the honor done to their festival by the presence of the
Hereditary Prince.

The efforts of our student were successful; the hatchet was buried, and
the academic youths prepared for a festival in common. A large hall,
richly ornamented with the colors of all the associations that took
part in the Commers, was filled with long tables. At the end stood the
presidents in festive attire, with their rapiers. On the chairs sat
many hundred students, arranged according to their respective corps and
clubs. Among the Markomanns were the Prince and his Chamberlain; and
the Prince on this occasion wore their colors in honor of the corps.
The full-toned melody of the songs, accompanied by stirring music,
resounded through the room; it was a goodly sight to behold so many
young men, the hope and strength of the rising generation, united in
festive song, according to the old customs of the university. Hitherto
the festival had passed without any disturbance. The Chamberlain,
remarking that cheeks were beginning to glow, and the songs becoming
wilder, so that the music was not rapid enough for the beating of the
academic pulse, advised the Prince to retire. The Prince, himself
excited by song and wine, immediately rose; before him walked all the
nobility of the Markomanns to clear the way through the surging
multitude. They were obliged to push through the crowd, who had risen
from their chairs and were moving about in confusion. But it chanced
that the Prince was cut off from his academical attendants and bumped
against an insolent Arminian, who, emboldened by wine and embittered by
the not very gentle touch of the advancing Prince, would not make way,
but barred the passage intentionally with his elbows, and coolly
proceeded to puff his pipe in the Prince's face. The Prince was
inconsiderate enough to push the Arminian roughly aside and cry, "You
are an impudent fellow;" whereupon the Arminian spoke the fatal word,
of which the consequence, according to academical custom, is either a
duel or loss of honor to the person insulted. In a moment he was
surrounded by the Markomanns. The same insulting word poured like hail
from all sides on the audacious offender; but he drew out his card-case
mockingly, and called out, "One after another; let the whole retinue
follow suit; like master like man." When the throng became greater, he
cried out to those behind him, "This way, Arminians," and began in loud
bass tones the battle-cry of his corps:

                 "Struvelius, Struvelius,
                  Come out here with your Fidibus."

The tumult spread throughout the hall; over chairs and tables sprang
the Arminians to the aid of their endangered champion; the words of
insult and challenges flew in volleys in every direction. In vain did
the presidents call them to their places; in vain did the music
interpose; the angry cries of the contending parties could be heard
above the shrill _fanfare_ of the trumpet. The presidents hastened
together, and, passing along in close array, separated the contending
parties. But the wild uproar was followed by violent discussions; the
associations stood apart from each other; separate groups jeered at one
another, and, according to the old custom of academic belligerents,
endeavored gradually to drive their opponents to use the word of
challenge. Some provoking expressions had already been used which were
forbidden by the social rules of the University; blades were glittering
in the air, and more than one hand clenched a wine bottle. The music
struck up the national hymn, but it was untimely, and from all sides
came the angry shout, "Stop it! stop it!" The frightened musicians were
silenced, and a fresh outbreak of the tremendous tumult seemed
inevitable, when an old leader of the Teutons, who knew his people
well, sprang up into the orchestra, seized a fiddle, seated himself in
a chair high up as director, and began the foolish tune, "_Ach, du
lieber Augustin, alles ist hin._" The music began in plaintive tones.
Every one looked up, and at once noticed the eminent gentleman scraping
strenuously on the fiddle; the mood of all was suddenly changed, and a
general laugh arose. The presidents struck their blades on the table so
violently that more than one broke, and commanded peace; the leaders of
all the associations joined together, and declared the Commers to be
concluded, and called upon the clubs and corps to return peacefully
home, as they intended to take the affair in hand. The students
crowded angrily out of the hall, and dispersed to their respective
head-quarters; but in every group the events of the evening were
discussed with vehement bitterness, and embassies passed rapidly from
one camp to another throughout the night. The Chamberlain had
extricated the Prince from the throng after the first encounter. The
latter was sitting in his room, pale and dismayed at the consequences
likely to ensue from the unfortunate incident. The Chamberlain also was
terrified, for the responsibility of this fracas would fall upon his
head. Besides this he felt real sympathy for the young Prince, who so
deeply felt the insult to his honor, and who, with a fixed and saddened
gaze, received no comfort from the assurance that his princely honor
could suffer no more injury from these plebeians than from the sparrows
on the tree.

After a sleepless night the Prince received the leaders of the
Markomanns, who came to announce the decision of their corps. They
stated that their senior officer, Beppo, had been chosen to represent
the Prince in all further dealings with the Arminian, and he, Beppo,
chivalrously begged him to concede to him this honor; he added that, in
the opinion of his association, the Arminian had no claim to the
privilege of receiving a challenge in consequence of that vile
insulting word, and if the Prince should refuse any further
participation in the matter, the Markomanns would take all the
consequences on themselves. But they could not conceal from him that
they alone held this view, nay, even some of their own corps had
objected. All things, therefore, considered, they thought the best
course would be for the Prince to make this concession--the greatness
of which they undoubtedly deeply felt--to the academical custom.

The Prince had not yet recovered his self-possession, so the
Chamberlain begged the gentlemen to allow his Highness some hours for
reflection.

Meanwhile our student, who had been restrained by the consideration of
his academical duties, and had kept aloof from any personal
implication, in great perplexity went to the Doctor with this news, as
in this affair he could not venture before the Rector. The Doctor
hastened to his friend, who had already had an account from the beadles
and the police.

"As regards the personal conflict of the Prince, I have as yet received
no notice, and it is perhaps desirable, both for him and the
University, that it should not be entered into. I shall be watchful and
endeavor to provide against further consequences; and I shall perform
the duties of my office in every direction in the strictest way; but do
your best to prevent my learning any details of this affair, except
what may give me just ground for taking official steps."

The Chamberlain was almost in a similar quandary as our student; he
also went full of anxiety to the Doctor, related the quarrel, and asked
what the Doctor considered was the duty of the Prince, and whether he
ought to allow himself to be represented in a duel.

The Doctor replied, with some reserve: "Duels are senseless and wrong!
If the Hereditary Prince is imbued with this view, and is willing to
take upon himself the consequences to his own life, and at some future
day to his government, I will be the last to oppose this martyrdom. But
if your young master is not free from the prejudices of his class, and
has been impressed with the idea that there is a certain honor for
cavaliers and officers, which is different from that of men of honor in
general, and which, in certain cases, makes a duel necessary, if your
Prince is going to decide the question upon these grounds, and in
future govern according to such views, in that case I will unreservedly
acknowledge that I cannot allow him the right to set himself in
opposition to the ideas of honor of our academical youths."

"Then you are of opinion," said the Chamberlain, "that the Prince must
consent to the offer of a representative?"

"I have neither the right nor the wish to offer an opinion," said the
Doctor. "I can only say that the idea of a representative does not
please me. It appears to me that the affair is simple,--either reason
or personal courage."

The Chamberlain rose quickly. "That is quite impossible; it would be an
unheard of deviation from custom, and would produce new and painful
complications for the Prince; it is also entirely contrary to my
convictions of what is allowable to a royal prince, and under no
considerations can the proposition be further entertained."

The Chamberlain went away not much pleased with the radical views of
the Doctor. On his return home he said to the Prince:

"The affair must be settled quickly before your father can learn of it.
Your father, considering the social standing of your opponent, would
positively prohibit any concession on your part; and yet I see that the
future intercourse of your Highness with the body of the students, and
even perhaps other personal relations, will be greatly endangered if
the public opinion here is not in some measure satisfied. If,
therefore, I may counsel your Highness, it will be to make a great
concession, and accept Herr von Halling as your representative."

The Prince looked down, depressed, and finally said: "That will perhaps
be best."

The great leader Beppo, one of the best swordsmen of the University,
was to fight for the Hereditary Prince. But now it appeared that the
Arminians were by no means satisfied with this idea of a
representative, and raised the impudent pretension that the Prince
should himself appear before them in fencing attire and cambric shirt.
The stout Ulf, for instance, the originator of the whole embroilment,
declared that he found the Markomann leader also on his list, and he
would not renounce the delightful prospect of having a pass with that
gentleman in his private capacity.

This could not be denied. Meanwhile a large council of seniors, which
the Markomanns had quickly called together, decided that a substitute
should be allowed to enter the lists for the Prince. On the other hand,
their cunning proposition that the Arminian should first enter the
lists against the other men of their corps, was declined. They wished
by this to relieve the Prince of the whole affair, as it might be
assumed that even the great strength of the Arminian would be exhausted
before half the names on his list were cancelled. Nothing, therefore,
remained but for the two combatants to fight together at two different
times, the Markomann, in the name of the Prince, first.

"We shall do our best to make the second meeting unnecessary," said the
Markomann significantly to the representative of the Arminian, on the
breaking-up of the conference.

Every precaution was taken to keep the fatal duel secret; only those
concerned in it knew the hour: even to their near associates another
day was spoken of; for the beadles were watchful, and the University
had been called upon by the highest authorities to avert further
consequences by all means in their power.

The day before the duel, the Prince invited the Markomanns to dinner,
and there was so much talk upon relevant matters that the Chamberlain
felt decidedly uncomfortable. Shortly before the breaking-up of the
party, the Prince was standing with Beppo in a recess of the window;
suddenly he seized the hand of the young man, held it fast, and his
frame was violently convulsed with suppressed sobbing. The valiant
youth looked at the Prince much moved.

"All will go well, your Highness," said he, consolingly.

"For you, but not for me," replied the Prince, and turned away.

As towards evening the Hereditary Prince walked restlessly through the
rooms, the Chamberlain, who also wished to be relieved from his
troubled thoughts, proposed that they should that evening pay a visit
to the Rector. This was the only place where he was sure to hear
nothing of the disagreeable history, and he was sharp-sighted enough to
guess that this visit would be particularly agreeable to the Prince.

Ilse knew everything. Our student friend, who had involuntarily played
the magpie, creating mischief between the parties, still haunted the
neighborhood; he ventured, on one of the student evenings, to remain
behind with Penelope when the others went into the Rector's room; he
related the whole quarrel, described the dangerous position of the
Prince, and begged her to say nothing of the occurrence to her husband.
When, therefore, the Prince entered, a forced restraint and uneasiness
was manifest in those present. The Chamberlain was more charming than
ever, and related agreeable Court stories, but without effect. The
Prince sat embarrassed in his place, next to Ilse; he felt the
seriousness of even her friendly words; he saw how sorrowfully her eyes
rested upon him, and when they met his he turned quickly away. At last
he began, with unsteady voice:

"You once showed me the portraits of famous men that you have; may I
ask you to let me see the volume again?"

Ilse glanced at him and rose. The Prince followed her, as before, into
the next room. She laid the volume before him; he looked over it
without interest, and at last began, in a low tone:

"All I wished was to be alone with you. I am helpless and very unhappy.
I have no person on earth who will give me disinterested advice as to
what I shall do. I have given offense to a student, and have been
bitterly insulted by him. And I am now compelled to allow another to
fight out the quarrel for me."

"My poor Prince!" cried Ilse.

"Do not speak to me of it, gracious lady, with the feelings with which
a woman would regard it, but speak, as if you were my friend in advice.
That I should burden you with my troubles makes me feel at this moment
contemptible to myself, and I fear I seem so also to you." He glanced
gloomily down.

Ilse spoke softly. "I can only say what is in my heart; if your
Highness has done an injustice, apologize for it; if you have been
insulted, forgive it."

The Prince shook his head.

"That would be of no use, it would only disgrace me afresh in my own
eyes, and those of all others. It was not on that point that I ask you.
Only one thing I wish to know; ought I to allow another to fight my
battle because I am a prince? All say that I must do it; but I have no
confidence in any, only in you."

The blood mantled in Ilse's face. "Your Highness lays a responsibility
upon me that frightens me."

"You once told me the truth," said the Prince, gloomily, "as no one on
earth has yet done, and every word you spoke was good and from your
heart. I therefore now pray you to give me your honest opinion."

"Then," said Ilse, looking at him eagerly, while the old Saxon blood
boiled in her veins, "if your Highness began the quarrel, you must end
it yourself like a man, and you must yourself take care that it is done
in an honorable way. Your Highness ought not to allow another to brave
your opponent and endanger himself on account of the wrong you have
done. To lead a stranger to wrong, to compel another to risk his life,
while you quietly look on, would be worst of all!"

The Prince replied, dejectedly:

"He is courageous, and superior to his adversary."

"And does your Highness think it right to take advantage of your
opponent by the powers of one who is stronger than yourself? Whether
your representative wins or loses, you will be more indebted to him
than you ought to be to a stranger; and through your whole life you
will be burdened with the thought that he has shown courage, while you
have not."

The Prince became pale and silent.

"I feel just as you do," he said, at last.

"Everything of this kind is dreadful," continued Ilse, wringing her
hands; "everywhere there seems to be ill-will and thoughts of bloody
revenge. But, if it is impossible for you to prevent a wrong, it is
your duty to take care that it does not become greater, and that its
consequences do not fall on the head of another, only on your own. My
heart tells me that you must yourself do, if not what is right, at all
events what is least wrong."

The Prince nodded his head, and again sat silent.

"I cannot speak of it to those about me," he began, at last, "least of
all to him," pointing to the Chamberlain. "If I am to prevent another
from fighting in my stead, it must be done immediately. Do you know any
one who can help me?"

"My husband's office forbids his doing anything for your Highness in
this affair. But the Doctor?"

The Prince shook his head.

"Our student," exclaimed Ilse; "he is truly devoted to your Highness:
he is a countryman of ours, and feels greatly troubled about this
matter."

The Prince reflected.

"Will you allow me to have the use of your servant for a few hours this
evenings when you no longer need him yourself?"

Ilse called Gabriel into the room, and said to him:

"Do what his Highness desires of you."

The Prince approached the window, and spoke in a low tone to the
servant.

"Leave everything to me, your Highness," said Gabriel, as he went back
to his tea-cups.

The Prince approached Ilse, who was standing motionless, staring at the
book.

"I have looked over the portraits," he said, with more composure than
he had shown during the whole evening, "and I have found what I was
looking for. I thank you."

Ilse rose, and returned with him to the company.

The guests had left, and Ilse was sitting alone in her room. What had
she done? Become the confidant of a man implicated in a bloody deed,
the secret adviser of a lawless action. She, a woman, was the
confederate of a strange man; she, the helpmate of one who should be
the guardian of the laws, had become the abettor of a crime. What dark
spirit had infatuated her when she confidentially held counsel with the
stranger in whispers on a subject which she could not venture to
confess to her husband? No!--he who had drawn her into this was not a
stranger. She had from her childhood heard of him with deep interest;
he was the future ruler of her country, and would be there master of
life and death. From the time she first knew him, so touching in his
joyless youth and in the weak helplessness of his position, she had
been tenderly solicitous about him; and from that day she had always
found in him an amiable and pure mind. She was now trembling with
anguish for him. She had driven him to his fate; she bore the guilt of
an action that was considered unseemly for one in his position. If from
her advice evil befell him--if the opponent of the poor, weak youth
should kill him,--how could she bear it on her conscience?

She sprang up, and wrung her hands. Her husband called her, and she
shuddered, for she felt herself guilty in his sight. Again she asked
herself: "What bad spirit has distracted me? Am I no longer what I was?
Ah me! I have not acted as becomes a Christian woman, nor as a careful
wife who opens the shrine of her soul to one alone. Yet," she
exclaimed, raising her head, proudly, "if he were again to stand before
me, and again ask whether he should act as a man or as a coward, I
would again and again say the same thing. May God forgive me!"

When Krueger entered the Prince's bedroom to undress him, the latter
laconically charged him with a commission that greatly astonished the
lackey. But as he saw himself thereby confirmed in his confidential
position, he promised obedience and silence. He extinguished the lamp,
and went to his post. An hour after, he introduced the student, who had
been brought by Gabriel through a back-door, into the bedroom of the
Prince. There a conversation took place in a low tone, the consequence
of which was that the student hastened from the house in great
excitement, and commissioned Gabriel, who was waiting, to order a cab
to be ready at an early hour in the morning near the corner of the next
street.

A serious company, the flower of the different corps and associations,
tried fellows of daring aspect, were assembled at early dawn in the
hall of a tavern some distance from the town--an impressive sight for
every student heart. On this day most of the sanguinary agreements of
the memorable evening were to be settled in their proper order. The
first matter in hand concerned the academic honor of the Hereditary
Prince. The combatants were drawn up, dressed in their fencing attire;
each one stood, with his seconds and umpires, in a corner of the room;
the physician--it was the old Teuton of the fiddle--had prepared his
apparatus in a corner, and looked with grim satisfaction on his
impending work, which promised him new and instructive cases. But the
Arminians were unappeasable: once more their seconds addressed
themselves to the referees, and complained that the Prince was not
there, at least, to acknowledge his representative by his presence.
They therefore demanded that the impending combat should not be
reckoned for him, but accounted as a personal struggle between the two
students, who had frequently come athwart each other in various
delicate relations. As the Markomanns had not clear consciences, having
equivocally contrived to evade the question, they now proposed that the
Prince should subsequently meet the seconds at some place to be agreed
upon, where the customary reconciliation should take place.

This was discussed with much bitterness, but briefly, as the hour
demanded. Suddenly the freshman, a young Arminian, who kept watch
outside, knocked twice at the door. All stood motionless. But the
seconds gathered the swords together and threw them into a dark closet,
while our student, who, as backer for his comrade, was binding silk
about wrist and arm, sprang quickly to the door and opened it. A slight
figure in a cloak and felt hat entered. It was the Hereditary Prince.
He removed his hat: his face looked paler than usual, but he spoke in a
composed manner:

"I have come to you in secret; I beg that the gentlemen present will
permit me to take upon myself the responsibility of giving satisfaction
and will show me due consideration if I prove unpractised in any of the
customary formalities; it is the first time that I try my skill."

There was a silence so profound that one could hear the slightest stir.
All present felt that this was a manly act. But Beppo, the Markomann,
stood confounded, and began:

"Your Highness's presence now removes the only obstacle to our
proceeding with the duel. I insist that the course determined upon be
not reversed," and in a lower voice he added, "I beseech your Highness,
not to do what is so plainly unnecessary; it will cast upon us all a
responsibility that we dare not assume."

The Prince answered firmly: "You have fulfilled your promise; I am as
grateful for the will as for the deed. But I am resolute." He took off
his coat, and said: "Put the bandages on."

The second of the Arminian turned towards the umpire, saying, "I beg to
inform our opponent that not a moment is to be lost; we are not here to
exchange civilities; if the Prince wishes to have satisfaction himself,
we are ready."

The Markomanns prepared the Prince, and one must acknowledge that the
brave fellows did it with as anxious solicitude as if they had in fact
been warriors of the race whose name they bore, and were preparing
their young king's son for deadly single combat.

The Prince stepped up to the mark; the weapon trembled in the hand of
his second, a scarred veteran, as he took his position beside him.
"Ready!"--"Go!" The blades whistled in the air. The Prince did not
behave badly; a long habit of cautious self-command stood him in good
stead; he avoided exposing himself dangerously; and his second drew
upon himself a sharp warning from the umpire for inconsiderately
exposing his own person within reach of the enemy's blade. The Arminian
was far superior in strength and skill, but he afterwards acknowledged
to his intimate friends that it had quite disconcerted him to see the
princely scion within reach of his broadsword. After the fourth pass,
blood streamed from Ulf's broad cheek on to his shirt. His second
demanded the continuation of the fight, but the umpire declared the
quarrel ended. As the Prince stood still in his place the sword fell
from his hand, and there was a slight tremulous motion in his fingers;
but he smiled, and there was a pleased expression on his face. In one
short quarter of an hour a boy had attained the self-reliance of a man.
Before the Prince turned to his antagonist he embraced the Markomann,
and said: "Now I can thank you from my heart." The umpire led him to
his opponent, who was standing ill-humoredly before the Doctor, but yet
could not suppress a smile that gave him some pain, and both shook
hands. Then the Arminians approached to greet the Prince, while the
umpire called out "Second event."

But the Prince, who had resumed his mantle, went to the director of the
duels, and began: "I cannot go away without making a great request. I
was, unfortunately, the cause of the painful occurrence that has
occasioned this discord among the students. I well know that I have no
right here to express any wish, but it would be a pleasant recollection
forever for me if I could bring about peace and reconciliation."

At this moment the Prince might have made any demand upon his
Markomanns, and even the Arminians were impressed by the extraordinary
event. A murmur of approbation passed through the room, and the umpire
exclaimed in a loud voice: "The Prince has spoken well." The gloomy
looks of some individuals were disregarded; the seconds and seniors
held a consultation upon the spot, and the result was that the
impending challenges were amicably settled, and a general
reconciliation brought about.

The Prince, surrounded by the Markomanns, left the house and jumped
into the carriage awaiting him. Krueger opened the bed-room door to him.

The Chamberlain had been much surprised this morning at the long repose
of his young master; but when he came to breakfast he found his Prince
sitting comfortably at the table.

After Krueger had gone away, the Prince began: "The duel has been
settled, Weidegg. I fought it out myself." The Chamberlain stood up,
horrified. "I tell you it because it could not long be kept a secret. I
hope that the quarrel among the students will be settled by it. Do not
say anything against it, nor be annoyed at the matter. I have done what
I considered to be right, or, at all events, what was least wrong, and
am happier than I have been for a long time."

The Markomanns had begged of all present to give their word that the
events of the morning should not be spoken of, and one may assume that
every one kept his promise. Nevertheless, the news flew quick as
lightning through the University and city, that the Prince himself had
composed the quarrel by his valiant and manly conduct. The Chamberlain
perceived from the indications of pleasure from the Markomanns, and the
friendly greetings which his young master received in the street, and
still more from the altered demeanor of the Prince himself, that the
secret duel had had a good result, and this reconciled him a little to
the vexatious occurrence.

When the Prince some time after visited the Rector's house, he was led
into the latter's study, and Werner greeted him, smiling. "I was
obliged to inform the government of what had lately taken place, and to
add, according to the unanimous sentiments of the students summoned to
appear before me, that your Highness had, by your interposition,
contributed essentially to the restoration of peace. It has become my
duty to express to you the warm acknowledgment of the academical
authorities. I venture to give expression to my own wish, that all that
your Highness has gone through on this occasion may ever leave an
agreeable and also profitable recollection."

As the Prince bowed to Ilse, he said, in a low voice: "All has gone off
well. I thank you." Ilse looked proudly at her young Prince. Yet she
had not recovered from the fearful anxiety of the previous day, and she
was more reserved with him than usual.




                             _CHAPTER XXV_.

                                 CHAOS.


Spring smiled cheerfully on the country; the flowering shrubs and the
beds in the garden combined their colors brilliantly; this year,
starlings actually sang in Mr. Hahn's cages, and rananculi and other
wild flowers in the meadow in front of Mr. Hummel's garden rejoiced in
the moist warmth. It was a pleasant time for our academical citizens;
the quarrels of the winter were settled, the beadles put on their
night-caps at ten o'clock, and the lectures of the Professors went on
smoothly and pleasantly.

The Rector also enjoyed the repose, and he needed it, for Ilse saw with
anxiety that his cheeks were thinner, and that in the evening a
lassitude came over him that formerly he had not known.

"He ought to rest from his work a few months," advised the physician;
"that will lend him new life and strength for years to come; every man
of studious habits requires such relaxation two or three times during
his life; traveling would be the best thing."

Felix laughed, but his wife kept this counsel faithfully in mind, and
endeavored, meanwhile, as often as possible, to draw her husband from
his books into the air. She put her arm within his and took him into
the wood and green meadows; she pointed out to him the butterflies that
fluttered over the wild flowers, and the flights of birds that enjoyed
themselves in the warm sun-light.

"Now is the time for that restlessness of which you once told me. Have
you not noticed it?"

"Yes," said the Professor, "and if you will go with me, we will, at
least in fancy, travel together into foreign parts."

"Will you take me with you?" exclaimed Ilse, delighted. "I am like the
woodchuck: I only know the hole from which my master brought me, and
the cover of the cage in which I am fed. If I could have my wish, I
should like to see snow-capped peaks rising high above the clouds, and
abysses of immeasurable depths. But from the mountains I would descend
to olive-trees and oranges. For years I have heard of the men who have
lived there, and have seen how your heart leaps for joy whenever you
speak of the blue ocean and of the grandeur of the old cities. I would
gladly see all this, and hear you talk and feel the pleasure which you
would have in revisiting the scenes so dear to you."

"Very well," said the Professor; "to the Alps and then to Naples; but
in passing I must work a few weeks at Florence upon Tacitus."

"Ah!" thought Ilse, "there is the manuscript again."

They were sitting under a large oak, one of the giants of the Middle
Ages, that towered above the new generation of trees in the forest, as
the cupola of St Peter's does above the towers and roofs of the Holy
City.

When they came out from the copse into the open space, they saw, amidst
the flowers in the meadow, the livery of a lackey, and then perceived
the Prince and his attendant, together with a proprietor from a
neighboring village. The gentleman approached and greeted them.

"We have a design upon some hours of your leisure," called out the
Chamberlain to the Professor, and the Prince began:

"I wish to invite some of the ladies and gentlemen of the University to
an entertainment in the open air, as I cannot have the pleasure of
receiving them at a house of my own. It will be a small party, and as
rural as possible; we thought of this spot, as your wife had often
extolled it. I would be grateful for your assistance and advice as to
the arrangements."

"If your Highness wishes to please the ladies, you should also invite
the children. If it is at the same time a children's party, your
Highness maybe assured that it will leave a pleasant impression."

This was agreed to. Dainty invitations were sent to the Rector and
Deans, and the Professors with whom the Prince was personally
acquainted, and their families, to an entertainment in the open air.
The idea was approved by great and small, and gave rise to pleasant
anticipations among the acquaintances of the Rector's wife.

Laura had received an invitation, and her pleasure was great. But when
in the evening it appeared that the Doctor was not invited, she was
quite put out.

"I do not mean to be his advocate," said she, to Ilse, "but he is
precisely in my position; and if I am asked on your account, he ought
to be for the sake of your husband. Their having neglected to do this
is want of tact, or something worse; and, as he is not asked, I am
determined not to go; for, let Fritz Hahn be what he will, he has not
deserved a slight from these people."

In vain did Ilse try to explain to her that the Doctor had not visited
the Prince, from whom the invitations came. Laura remained obstinate,
and replied:

"You are an eloquent defender of your Prince, and more acquainted
with the customs of great people than I had supposed. But when the
picnic-day comes I shall feign illness, you may rely on that. If my
friend over the way is not invited I shall not go. But do not tell the
Doctor, lest little Fritz should fancy I do it for love of him; it is
not friendship for him, but displeasure at the Court people."

One Sunday there drew up in the neighborhood of the great oak, first a
large van with Krueger and a cook, then the Prince's equipages bringing
the ladies and gentlemen, and an omnibus adorned with garlands and
wreaths brought the children of the different families. A tent had been
set up in the meadow, and a little apart, concealed in the copse, a
wooden hut was erected as a temporary kitchen; a band of music was
stationed in the wood and welcomed the parties as they arrived. The
Prince and his Chamberlain received their guests near the wood, and
conducted them to the centre of the picnic-grounds, where a prodigious
work of the highest confectionery art formed the lighthouse, in the
neighborhood of which they all dropped anchor. Soon there was a clatter
of cups, the unavoidable preparation for thorough German festivity. In
the beginning the company were solemn; there was something unusual in
the arrangement of the fete which occasioned reflection. But when
Raschke, raising the flaps of his coat, seated himself on the grass,
and the other gentlemen followed his example and lit the cigars which
were presented to them, the meadow assumed a bucolic appearance. Even
the Rector sat on the turf with his legs crossed in Turkish fashion;
near him the Consistorial Councillor on a chair; and somewhat further
off, on the trunk of a shattered tree, the still hostile Struvelius,
with his bristling hair and silent manner, like the sorrowful spirit of
an old willow. Apart from them, but enthroned on a high ant-hill, over
which he had spread his pocket-handkerchief, sat Master Knips; he held
his slouch hat respectfully under his arm, and rose whenever the Prince
approached. Meanwhile the latter exerted himself to entertain the
ladies, with whom he had been a favorite since the occurrence of last
winter, and to-day he completely gained the hearts of both mothers and
daughters. Ilse and he worked together with a mutual understanding:
Ilse, elevated by the thought that people were pleased with her Prince,
and he happy at heart that he had some work in common with the Rector's
wife.

Never yet had he felt on such an intimate footing with her as he did
to-day. He looked only at her, he thought only of her. Amid the buzz of
conversation, amid the sound of the music, he listened to every word
that fell from her lips. Whenever he approached her he felt a glow of
transport. In plucking a leaf from a tree, the lace of her sleeve
passed over his face, and the touch of the delicate texture brought the
color into his cheeks. Her hand rested a moment on his as she offered
him a ladybird, and the slight pressure made his heart beat fast.

"The ladybird knows your Highness's future," said Ilse. "You should ask
it: Ladybird, ladybird, shall I be happy long?--one year, two years?
and so forth, till it flies away."

The Prince began the sentence, but had not arrived at the first year
when it flew away.

"That does not apply to you," said Ilse, laughing, to console him. "The
little creature was angry at me yet."

"I had rather bear the misfortune myself," said the Prince, in a low
tone, "than that you should suffer it."

While Ilse, startled at the deep meaning of his words, turned to the
ladies, he stealthily picked up the kerchief that had fallen from her
shoulders, and, behind a tree, pressed it to his lips.

Still merrier did the young people become, when from the hut behind the
bushes two men stepped forth with red-coats and drums, and invited them
to try their skill at the popinjay. The Chamberlain took the
superintendence of the boys, and Ilse of the girls; foresters and
lackeys helped with the cross-bows; the arrows struck incessantly on
the body of the bird, for the hitting was made easy, and those who did
not win could admire the prizes, which were arranged on two tables.
Everything went on smoothly, as is fitting at Court _fetes_; the
lackeys moved incessantly among the company, with every imaginable
refreshment; the splints from the popinjays fell like hail, and the
Prince distributed the prizes to the children who thronged round him.
Bertha Raschke became queen of tournament, and a little son of the
Consistorial Councillor her consort. The children, carrying their
presents, followed the drummers with joyous shouts up to a long table,
where a supper was prepared for them. They were to sit down with the
king and queen in the middle. The foresters and lackeys served the
different courses. The Chamberlain could not have devised anything
better to please the parents; and the fathers walked behind the chairs
and enjoyed seeing the little ones drinking harmless wine out of the
crystal glasses, their rosy faces expressing delighted astonishment at
the beautiful china and silver dishes. They soon became merry; finally
the little Consistorial Councillor proposed the health of the Prince;
all the children cried "Hurrah!" the drummers drummed, the music struck
up, and the parents stood round thanking the giver of the feast. Ilse
brought a garland of wild flowers which the ladies had woven, and
begged permission of the Prince to put it upon him. He stood amidst the
happy party elevated by the innocent joy of all around him, and by the
respectful attachment which was visible on all countenances. He looked
at Ilse with silent thanks, and without apparent cause his eyes filled
with tears. Again the children screamed out "Hurrah!" and the drums
beat.

A horseman in strange livery galloped out of the wood; the Chamberlain,
in consternation, approached the Prince, and handed him a letter with a
black seal. The Prince hastened into the tent, and the Chamberlain
followed him.

The wild flowers had brought the young gentleman no good fortune. The
pleasure of the _fete_ was over; the company stood in groups about the
tent, uncertain and sympathizing. At last the Prince and the
Chamberlain came out. While the latter turned to the Rector and to
those who surrounded him. Ilse saw the Prince at her side with deep
sorrow depicted on his countenance.

"I beg of you to excuse me to the ladies, as I am obliged to depart
immediately: my sister's husband has died, after a short illness, and
my poor sister is very unhappy." In great agitation, he continued: "I
myself knew my brother-in-law only slightly, but he was very kind to my
sister, and she felt happier with him than she had ever been in her
life. She writes to me in despair, and the misfortune is for her quite
inexpressible. Under existing circumstances she cannot remain in her
present abode, and I foresee that she must return to us. It is our
bitter fate always to be tossed about, never to remain quiet. I know
that I shall meet with a similar misfortune. I feel myself happy
here,--to you I can confess this,--and I regret to say that this death
makes it very uncertain whether I shall ever return. I go to my sister
tomorrow for a few days. Pray think of me kindly."

He bowed and retired into the tent, and in a few minutes his carriage
was on its way back to the city.

Ilse hastened to her husband, who had been requested by the Chamberlain
to act for the Prince. It was immediately determined to break up the
party: the children were put into the carriages, and the rest returned
to the city in earnest conversation.

Meanwhile Laura feigned illness, and sat in her little sitting-room
rummaging about among the old ballads. After the meeting in the village
garden she had discovered with dismay that, in her anxiety about the
Doctor, she had much diminished her treasure: full a dozen of the best
were gone, and thus the tie by which she held the collector's heart
fast threatened to come to an end. She had, therefore, not sent
anything since the drinking-song. But to-day, when the Doctor had
experienced treatment that gave her more concern than it did him, she
sought for something to console him.

A heavy step on the staircase disturbed her in the work of selection.
She had hardly time to throw her treasures into the secret drawer
before Mr. Hummel was at the door. It was a rare visit, and Laura
received him with the foreboding that his coming portended serious
results. Mr. Hummel approached his daughter and looked at her closely,
as if she had been a new Paris invention.

"So you have a headache, and could not accept the invitation? I am not
accustomed to that in my daughter. I cannot prevent your mother from
allowing her feelings to affect her brains, at times; but I have a
right to demand that your head should, under all circumstances, remain
sound. Why did you not accept the invitation to the picnic?"

"It would have been an intolerable constraint upon me," said Laura.

"I understand," replied Mr. Hummel. "I am not much in favor of princes,
but not much against them either. I cannot discover that they have
greater heads than other people. I am therefore obliged to consider
them simply as ordinary customers who are not always number one,
neither do they always wear number one goods. Nevertheless, when a
prince invites you, with other distinguished persons, to a respectable
summer entertainment, and you refuse to go, I, as your father, ask you
for the reason; and, between you and me, it shall now be no question of
headache."

Laura perceived, from the expression of her father's countenance, that
he had some other idea in his head.

"If you wish to know the truth, I will make no secret of it. I am not
invited on my own account; for what do these people care about me? It
is only as the appendage of our lodgers."

"You knew that when the invitation came, and yet you jumped for joy."

"The idea only occurred to me afterwards when--"

"When you learnt that the Doctor over there was not invited," completed
Mr. Hummel. "Your mother is a very worthy woman, for whom I entertain
the highest respect, but it sometimes happens that one can screw a
secret out of her. When you thus ruminate over what neither your father
nor the world should know, you should confide it to no one, either in
our house or in any other."

"Very well," said Laura, with decision; "if you have discovered it,
hear it now from me. I am a plebeian just as much as Fritz Hahn is; he
has been in the society of those Court people more frequently than I;
their taking no notice of him made it clear to me that they considered
one who is his equal as a superfluous addition."

An expression of irony overspread the broad features of Mr. Hummel.

"So that fellow over there is your equal?" he began; "that is exactly
what I wished to disabuse your mind of. I should not approve of your
regulating your feelings according to that weather-cock over the way. I
do not choose that the idea should ever come into the head of Hahn
Junior to build an arch across the street, and to wander about in
slippers from one house to the other. The thought does not please
me. I will bring forward only one reason, which has nothing to do with
the old grudge. He is his father's son, and he has no real energy
of character. One who can endure to sit year after year in that
straw-nest, turning over the pages of books, would not, if I were a
girl, be the man for me. It is possible that he may be very learned,
and may know much about things that other men care little for; but I
have not yet heard that he has accomplished anything by it. Therefore,
if that should happen, which will not happen so long as the property
over there is a poultry-yard,--if I, Henry Hummel, should consent that
my only child should sit knitting stockings in front of the white Muse,
it would be a misfortune for my child herself. For you are my daughter.
You are just as self-willed as I am; and if you should get among those
white-livered people, you would disturb them lamentably, and be very
unhappy yourself. Therefore, I am of opinion that your headache was
silliness, and I wish never to hear again of like ailments. Good day,
Miss Hummel."

He strode out of the door, and as he heavily descended the stairs, he
hummed the tune:

           "Bloom, sweet violet, that I myself have reared."

Laura sat at her writing-table supporting her heavy head with both her
hands. This had been a trying scene. The speech of her stern father had
wounded her deeply. But in his depreciating observations on their
neighbor's son there was a certain truth, which had already crept like
a hateful spider over the bright leaves of her sympathy. He must go out
into the world. Her friends below were thinking of going into foreign
parts. Ah! she herself, a poor bird, fluttered her wings in vain, for
the fetters on her feet held her back. But he could free himself. She
would lose him from her neighborhood, perhaps lose him for ever; but
this ought not to hinder her from telling him the truth. She hastily
searched among the old sheets; she could find but one ballad, which
undoubtedly did not fit the Doctor, inasmuch as it expressed the
feelings of a dissolute wanderer. The song was inappropriate, but there
was none better. Our ancestors, when not occupied in highway exploits,
took little pleasure in travelling. The letter must do the work. She
wrote as follows:--

"The summer birds are flying, and man also yearns after the distant
lands of his dreams. Do not be angry with the sender of this, for
begging you to imbibe something of the spirit of this song. Your home
is too narrow for you. Your merits are not appreciated here as they
deserve. You are deprived in the quiet house of your parents of those
experiences which a man gains when he forms his life by his own
qualifications. I well know that your highest task will always be to
promote learning by your writings. That you may do everywhere. But do
not think it beneath you to influence younger minds by personal
intercourse with them, and to participate in the struggles of their
generation. Away, Doctor! the unknown bird sings to you the song of the
wanderer. With sorrow will your loss be felt by those you leave
behind."

About the same hour, Gabriel was sitting in his room brushing the last
specks of dust from his best livery which he had spread over a chair.
At his feet lay the red dog, licking his paws and giving utterance to
an occasional growl. Gabriel looked contemptuously at the dog.

"You are not handsomer, nor better than last winter. Your knavish
nature delights in nothing but eating, and flying at the legs of the
passers-by. I have never known a dog so much hated, or who deserved it
so well; for your only pleasure is to despise all that is respectable.
What is your favorite amusement? When it has rained and a ray of sun
attracts people to walk in the wood, you lurk on the steps; and when a
young girl appears clad in her light summer dress, then you leap like a
frog into the puddle that lies before her, and spatter her dress all
over, and I have to fetch a cab to take her home. What did the
strolling cigar-dealer do yesterday to provoke you. His chest was
standing on the bench in Mr. Hummel's garden, and the prospect of a
bargain was certain. The cigar-man went a few steps from his chest to
speak to an acquaintance, and you, miscreant, made a spring at the
bread and butter lying on the chest, and came with all fours on the
glass. It broke, and the splinters mixed With the cigars; you trampled
them altogether into a powder, and then returned to the house. You,
monster, caused your master to deal roughly with the trader when he
complained of you, and the man packed up his wares and went away from
our house with a curse on his lips. On what nocturnal excursion have
you been since then? No human eye has seen you."

He bent down towards the dog.

"So this time it has gone into your flesh. I am glad to see you can
injure yourself as well as others."

Gabriel examined the dog's paw and extracted a glass splinter. The dog
looked at him and whined.

"If I only knew," continued Gabriel, shaking his head, "what pleases
the dog in me. Is it the bones, or perhaps some roguish trait of mine
that amuses him? He hates the whole world, and even snarls at his
master; but he comes to visit me and behaves himself like a worthy
companion. And he is still more crazy about my master. I do not believe
that the Rector knows much of Spitehahn. But whenever this fiend sees
my Professor, he peeps at him slyly from under his shaggy eyebrows, and
does his best to wag his tuft of a tail. And when my master goes to the
University, he runs after him like a lamb behind its mother. How comes
it that this black soul attaches itself to the Professor? What does he
want with our learning? They do not believe in you anyhow, Spitehahn."

He looked round suspiciously and hastily donned his coat. Arrayed in
his Sunday attire he left the house. The Hahn family were not at home,
for Dorchen was looking out of the dressing-room window. She laughed
and nodded. Gabriel took courage, and stepped into the enemies' hall.
The door of the room opened. Dorchen stood on the threshold curtsying,
and Gabriel, holding the handle of the door, began, solemnly:

"It would be much more pleasant for me if I could have the pleasure of
accompanying you in your walk to-day."

Dorchen replied, twitching at her apron:

"I have got to stay here to mind the house, but that need not prevent
you from going."

"I should then take ho pleasure in it," replied Gabriel, bowing, "for I
should be always thinking of you, and I had much rather be with you
here than only think of you in the open air. If, therefore, you would
allow me to stay here a little while--?"

"Why, come in, of course, Gabriel."

"Only to the threshold," said Gabriel, advancing, still holding the
open door. "I only wanted to say that the number of which you lately
dreamt is not to be found at any of the offices. I have, therefore,
taken another, and have had it drawn by a little beggar lad, as that
brings good luck. I shall be so pleased if you will play this number
with me. It is quite a sum, for it is a whole eighth of a ticket."

"But that will be no good sign," said Dorchen, with pretty
embarrassment.

"Why not, Fraeulein? It was a real beggar-boy."

"No, I mean when two play together who love one another."

"Dear Dorchen!" cried Gabriel, approaching nearer and seizing her hand.

A hollow gurgle interrupted the conversation. Dorchen drew back from
him terrified.

"It was a ghost," she cried.

"That is impossible," said Gabriel, consolingly: "for, first, it is
day-time; secondly, it is in a new house; and, thirdly, spirits
generally do not make such a noise. It was something in the street."

"Your being here is a real comfort to me," exclaimed the timid Dorchen.
"It is fearful to be alone in a large house."

"To be together in a small house is particularly jolly," cried Gabriel,
boldly. "Ah, Dorchen! if we could venture to think of it."

Again a slight rumble was heard.

"There must be something here," cried Dorchen. "I am so alarmed!"

She sprang away from him to the middle of the room. Gabriel took a yard
measure, and looked under the furniture.

"So you are there, are you?" he cried, angrily, poking with the yard
measure under the sofa.

Spitehahn leaped forth with a bark on to the nearest chair, from the
chair on to the console, on which the clock stood; he knocked down the
clock, and dashed through the half-opened door.

It was the parlor clock and a wedding present. Mr. Hahn wound it up
every evening before he went to bed; it had two alabaster pillars with
gilded capitals; the rest was of American wood, and represented a
triumphal arch. Now the treasure lay in ruins, the pillars shattered,
the woad broken, and the dial split. In the opened works a single wheel
whirled with fearful rapidity, all the rest was motionless. Dorchen
stood dismayed before the fragments, and wrung her hands.

"The monster," groaned Gabriel, occupying himself in vain with the
shattered work of art, and endeavoring with no better result to comfort
the poor maiden, who trembled before the terrors of the ensuing hour.

"I had a foreboding," cried Mr. Hahn, on his return home, "that
something would happen to-day. I forgot yesterday, for the first time,
to wind up the clock. But now my patience is at an end; there will be
war to the knife between him over the way and me." He approached the
sobbing maid threateningly. "Bear witness to the truth," he cried out;
"the court will demand your testimony. Do not seek safety in hypocrisy
and lies. Was it the dog, or was it you?"

Dorchen dramatically related the whole transgression of Spitehahn; she
poked under the sofa, as if she could draw the dog out bodily; she
confessed, weepingly, to the open door, and explained Gabriel's
presence as owing to an inquiry he had made of her.

"Unfortunate one," cried the master of the house, "I see your
embarrassment: it was yourself; your conscience pricks you. How can you
show that the dog was under the sofa? On your peril, I demand a
tangible evidence."

"Here it is," cried Dorchen, still sobbing, and pointing in tragic
attitude with her hand to the ground.

There certainly was an indubitable proof under the sofa, although not
strictly tangible. The dog had left behind him as sure a confirmation
as if he had impressed his seal on the ground.

Now, Mrs. Hahn indignantly gave the orders which became a housewife
under such circumstances.

"Do not attempt it," cried Mr. Hahn; "away with towels and cloths; this
shall remain."

"But, Andreas," exclaimed his wife.

"This shall remain, I say; it must be acknowledged and certified to.
Bring Mr. Ruddy immediately, and his wife, and whatever witnesses you
can find on the street."

The witnesses came, and, standing round, examined the place of the evil
deed; but Mr. Hahn hastened to his writing-table, and wrote a strong
letter to Mr. Hummel, in which he related the misdeed, and
threateningly demanded compensation. This letter Mr. Ruddy carried off
to Mr. Hummel, with a board on which were laid the ruins of the clock.

Hummel read the letter carefully, and threw it on the table.

"I congratulate your master upon his new undertaking for the summer,"
he said, coldly. "Carry the debris back again; I have no answer for
such nonsense. Some people _will_ make fools of themselves."

The following day a judicial complaint again raised its Medusa's head
between the two houses. This time even Mrs. Hahn was deeply incensed;
and when she, shortly after, met Laura on the street, she turned her
good-humored face to the other side, to avoid greeting the daughter of
the enemy.

Laura received the Doctor's answer to her letter. In a pretty poem the
happiness of the parental house was extolled, and he spoke of his great
delight in his neighbor's charming daughter, whom the poet saw in the
garden among her flowers, whenever he looked over the high hedge. He
further added: "The advice which you express so sincerely in your lines
has found an echo in me. I know what is lacking in my life. My learning
makes it impossible for me to find recognition in wider circles, an
honor, which the friends of a learned man desire for him more eagerly
than he himself does; it also makes it difficult for me to adopt the
academical course to which I have now a call in foreign parts. But the
nature of my studies takes from me all hope that any outward results
can ever overcome the hindrances which oppose themselves to the secret
wishes of my soul."

"Poor Fritz!" said Laura; "and yet poorer me! Why must he give up all
hope because he studies Sanscrit? It is not courage that is wanting to
these learned men, as father says, but passion. Like the old gods about
whom you write, you have no human substance, and no blood in your
veins. A few sparks are occasionally kindled up in your life and one
hopes they may light up into a mighty flame; but immediately it is all
smothered and extinguished by prudent consideration." She rose
suddenly. "Ah! if one could but lay hold of Fritz by the hair and cast
him into the wildest tumult, through which he would have to fight his
way bloodily, defy my father, and hazard a great deal, in order to win
what he in his gentle way says he desires for himself! Away with this
quiet, learned atmosphere: it makes those who breathe it contemptible!
Their strongest excitement is a sorrowful shrug of the shoulders over
other mortals or themselves."

Thus did the passionate Laura chafe in her attic-room, and again was
her paper moistened by bitter tears, as she sought consolation in
heroic verses, and called upon the foreign gods of the Doctor to take
the field against the pranks of Spitehahn.

      Glorious Indra and all ye divinities shining; in heaven,
      That have so often conferred blessings on races of men,
      Haste in rescue to us, for great misfortune doth threaten.
      Ominous shadows of night darken our peaceable home,
      Banish the child from the father; while flat on the door-step
        outsprawling,
      Growleth with vengeful intent fiercely th' insidious cur.

The peace was disturbed not only for the neighbors of the Park street,
but also for the young Prince, at whose fete the trouble had begun.

The Prince was detained some weeks from the city. After his return, he
lived in the quiet retirement that the duties of mourning imposed upon
him. Lectures in his room were again resumed, but his place at Ilse's
tea-table remained empty.

On the day when the University prizes were distributed, the students
made a great torchlight procession to their Rector's house. The flaming
lights waved in the old streets; the fanfares resounded, in the midst
of which the lusty voices of the singing students might be heard;
gables and balconies were lighted in colored splendor; the marshals
swung their weapons gaily, and the torch-bearers scattered the sparks
among the thronging crowds of spectators. The procession turned into
the street towards the valley; it stopped before the house of Mr.
Hummel. Again there was music and singing; a deputation solemnly
crossed the threshold. Hummel looked proudly on the long stream of red
lights which flickered about and lighted up his house. The whole honor
was intended for his house alone, though he could not prevent the glare
and smoke from illuminating the enemies' roof, also.

Upstairs some of the rector's most intimate friends were assembled; he
received the leaders of the students in his room, and there were
speeches and replies. While those assembled were crowding nearer to
listen to the speech-making, the door of Ilse's room gently opened, and
the Prince entered. Ilse hastened to meet him, but he began, without
greeting:

"I have come to-day to bid you farewell. What I foresaw has happened. I
have received orders to return to my father. To-morrow I and my
attendant will take formal leave of the Rector and yourself, but I
wished first to see you for a moment; and, now that I stand before you,
I cannot express the feelings that prompted me to come. I thank you for
all your kindness. I beg of you not to forget me. It is you who have
made the city so dear to me. It is you who make it hard for me to go
away."

He spoke these words so softly that it seemed only as if a breath had
passed into Ilse's ear; and he did not await her answer, but left the
room as quickly as he came into it.

Outside, in the open place by the common, the students threw their
torches in a great heap; the red flame rose high in the air, and the
gray smoke encircled the tops of the trees; it rolled over the houses
and crept through the open windows, and stifled the breath. The flame
became lower, and a thin smoke ascended from the dying embers. It had
been a rapid, brilliant glow, a fleeting fire, now extinguished, and
only smoke and ashes remained. But Ilse was still standing by her
window, and looking sorrowfully out upon the empty place.




                            _CHAPTER XXVI_.

                               THE DRAMA.


"He was a tyrant," exclaimed Laura, "and she was right not to obey
him."

"He did his duty harshly, and she also," replied Ilse.

"He was a cross-grained, narrow-minded fellow, who was at last humbled;
but she was a noble heroine, who cast from her all that was most dear
on earth in order to fulfill her highest obligations," said Laura.

"He acted under the impulse of his nature, as she did according to
hers. Hers was the stronger character, and she went victoriously to
death. The burden of his deed crushed him during life," rejoined Ilse.

The characters which the ladies were discussing were Antigone and
Creon.

The Professor had one autumn evening laid the tragedies of Sophocles on
his wife's table. "It is time that you should learn to appreciate the
greatest poets of antiquity in their works." He read them aloud and
explained them. The lofty forms of the Attic stage hovered in the
peaceful atmosphere of the German home. Ilse heard around her curses
and heart-breaking lamentations, she saw a dark fatality impending over
men of the noblest feeling and iron will; she felt the storm of passion
raging in powerful souls, and heard, amidst the cry of revenge and
despair, the soft chords of soul-stirring pathos, sounding with
irresistible magic.

The time had indeed come when Ilse could comprehend and enter into the
feelings and fate of others than herself.

The bright rays of the midday sun do not always shine upon the paths of
man. Not with the eye alone does he seek his way amid the shadows of
night, but he hearkens, too, to the secret voices within his breast.
From the battle of clashing duties, from the irresistible impulse of
passion, it is not with most men a careful thought or a wise adage that
saves or ruins; it is the quick resolve which breaks forth from within
like an uncontrollable impulse of nature and which is yet produced by
the compulsion of their whole past lives--by all that man knows and
believes, by all that he has suffered and done. What forces us to the
good or the bad in the sombre hours of trial, people call character,
and the changing steps of the wayfarer through life as he seeks his way
amid difficulty and danger, the spectator at the play calls dramatic
movement.

He only who has wandered amid the flitting shadows of night, and has
seriously listened to the secret admonitions of his inmost soul, can
fully understand the spirit of others who, in a similar position, have
sought to extricate themselves from an intricate labyrinth, and have
found safety or met destruction.

Ilse, too, had experienced hours of fleeting terrors; she also had
trembled as to whether she had pursued the right path.

The seventh tragedy of the Greek poet had been read; the boldest
representation of bitter passion and bloody revenge. Ilse sat mute and
horrified at the outbreak of fearful hatred from the heart of Electra.
Then her husband, in order to recall her to less anxious thoughts,
began: "Now you have heard all that remains to us of the art and power
of a wonderful poetical mind, and you must tell me which of his
characters has most attracted you."

"If you mean that in which the power of his poetry has most impressed
me, it is always the newest form which has appeared to me the greatest,
and today it is the monstrous conception of Electra. But if you ask
which has pleased me most--"

"The gentle Ismene?" interrupted the Professor, laughing.

Ilse shook her head. "No, it is the valiant son of Achilles. At first
he was tempted to yield to the cunning counsel of his confederate, and
do violence to an unfortunate fellow-creature; but after a long
struggle his noble nature conquers: he sees that it will be wrong, and
he asserts his manhood by refusing."

The Professor closed the book, and looked with astonishment at his
wife.

"There is," continued Ilse, "in the greatest characters of your Greek
poet a stern rigidity that frightens me. Something is wanting in all to
make them like us; they do not doubt as we do, nor struggle; even when
they do right, their greatness consists in their immovable
determination to do something fearful, or rigid persistence in stemming
a terrible fate. But while we expect that the strong man shall act
powerfully, according to his nature, either for good or evil, he does
not gain our full human sympathy, unless we have the certainty that he
experiences an inward struggle such as we may ourselves feel."

"Such as we may ourselves feel?" asked the Professor, seriously, laying
aside the book. "How do you come by this experience? Have you, Ilse,
some secret from your husband?"

Ilse rose and looked at him with dismay.

But the Professor continued, cheerfully: "I will first tell you why I
ask, and what I would like to know from you. When I brought you from
your country-home you were, in spite of your deep German feeling, in
many respects just such as we like to picture to ourselves Nausicaa and
Penelope. You freely received impressions from the world around you;
you stood sure and strong in a firmly-bound sphere of right and duty;
with childlike trust you gathered from the moral habits of your circle,
and from Holy Scripture, your standard of judgment and conduct. Your
love for me, and contact with other souls, and the insight into a new
sphere of knowledge, awakened in your heart passionate vibrations;
uncertainty came, and then doubt; new thoughts struggled against old
impressions, the demands of your new life against the tenor of your
maiden years. You were for months more unhappy than I had any idea of.
But now, when I have been rejoicing in your cheerful repose of mind, I
find you have acquired a knowledge of human nature that astonishes me.
I have often lately seen, with secret pleasure, how warmly you have
sympathized with, and how mildly you have judged, the characters of the
drama. I had expected that their hard and monstrous fate would have
been repulsive to you, and that you would have felt rapid transitions
from tenderness to aversion. But you have sympathy with the dark forms
as well as with the bright, as if your soul had begun to anticipate
that in one's own life, good and evil, blessing and curse, might be
associated, and as if you had yourself experienced that man has not to
follow an outward moral law alone, however exalted its origin, but that
he may at some period be compelled to seek for some other law in the
depths of his own soul. But such an insight men can only attain when
they themselves experience danger and trouble. It is improbable that
this should have been the case with you, unless you have gone through
some experience to which I have been a stranger. I do not wish to urge
your confidence; I know what trust I can repose in you; but if you
think fit, I would gladly know what has given rise to this sensitive
feeling for the secret struggles of men who are hurried along by a
tragic fate."

Ilse seized him by the hand and drew him into her room. "It was on this
spot," she exclaimed, "a stranger asked me whether he should expose
himself to the danger of death for the sake of his honor, or whether he
should expose another in his place. I had given him a right to ask such
a question, for I had before spoken to him of his life with greater
frankness than was prudent for a careful woman. I stood and struggled
against the question that he put to me, but I could not refuse to
answer; and, Felix, to tell you the truth, I did not wish to do so. I
gave him counsel which might have brought him to a bloody end. I gave
him that advice secretly, and I became entangled in a fatal web from
which I could not extricate myself. I thought of you, but I did not
dare to tell you, as you must either have been unfaithful to the duties
of your office, or you must for ever have wounded the honorable
feelings of another. I questioned our holy teachings: they told me only
that my advice was sinful. I was unhappy, Felix, that I had come into
this position, but still more unhappy that neither you nor the
teachings of my faith could help me out of it. It was no merit of mine
that things turned out better than I feared they would. Since that I
have known, Felix, what struggles of conscience are; now you know the
only secret that I have ever had from you. If I did wrong, judge me
mildly, for by all that is sacred I could not have done otherwise."

"And the Prince?" asked her husband, softly.

"He is a good and gentle soul, an immature man, while I was your wife.
With him there was no doubt and no struggle."

"I know enough, you earnest, high-minded woman," said the Professor, "I
see that, as against your knowledge of life, I can now pack up my
books. For of what value is the teaching of books, however good they
may be, in comparison to that of life. A foolish student's duel, in
which you were the invisible adviser, has done more, perhaps to form
your mind, than my prudent words would have done in the course of
years. Be of good courage. Lady Ilse of Bielstein; whatever fate may
still await us, I know now that you are fitted for inward struggles,
and we need not be solicitous about dangers from without. For, however
much we human beings may be troubled and agitated here on earth, he who
has once learnt to know himself so well that he is able to read the
secret writing of other souls, is well protected against the
temptations of the world."

What the German scholar said as he now so warmly clasped his wife in
his arms was not amiss, only it is a pity that we have no certainty of
reading the secrets of other souls; and it is a pity that the greatest
knowledge of the secret writing in the souls of others cannot serve us
in warding off the storms of our own passions.





The Chamberlain, who now acted as marshal to the Hereditary Prince, was
holding a conference with his father upon the concerns of his office.
Among other things there was also the question of promoting Krueger, of
butter-machine fame, to higher honors and, what was of no less
importance, to the full salary due the valet of an Hereditary Prince.
Contrary to expectations the Sovereign was ready to agree to his
proposals, and the Chamberlain, pleased at the gracious humor of his
master, was about to take leave, when the Sovereign stopped him by the
kind remark, "Your sister Malwine, looks ill; does she dance too much?
You should take care of her delicate health; nothing would be more
injurious to such a constitution than an early marriage. I hope to see
her pleasant countenance at Court for a long time yet."

Now Fraeulein Malwine was secretly betrothed to one of the Sovereign's
officers; it was known at Court and in the city, but the betrothed were
poor, and the consent of the Sovereign was necessary for their union.
In order to obtain this it was advisable to await a favorable
opportunity. Therefore the Chamberlain was alarmed at his master's
words; he perceived a secret threat in them, and while he thanked him
for his gracious sympathy, his face betrayed his dismay.

After the Sovereign, by this short turn of the peg, had tuned the
strings of his instrument, he continued, with indifference: "If you
have a quarter of an hour to spare, I wish you to accompany me into the
cabinet of antiquities."

They passed through corridors and halls into a distant part of the
castle, where, on an upper floor, a large collection of old coins,
carved stones, and other minor relics of Greek and Roman times, were
arranged. Many generations of rulers had contributed to it, but the
greatest part had been brought by the Sovereign himself when returning
from his travels. He had, in former years, taken great interest in the
arrangement of these things, and spent large sums in purchasing others;
but gradually this fancy had passed off, and for years the feather
brush of the curator had only removed the dust for occasional strangers
who had happened accidentally to hear of this almost unknown
collection, and had honored it with a visit.

The Chamberlain, therefore accompanied his master with the feeling that
this unusual idea signified something; and he felt a gloomy
anticipation that what was impending boded no good. The Sovereign
returned with a nod the low obeisance of the dilapidated curator; he
passed in review the long rows of rooms, had some cases opened for him,
took in his hand the written catalogue, and examined carefully the gold
coins of Alexander the Great and his successors, and inspected a
collection of old glass vessels and vases, in which the artistic work
of the ancient glass-cutters was particularly striking. Then he asked
for the strangers' book, in which the names of the visitors were
recorded. After he had sent the man away with a commission, he began,
to his attendant: "The collection is less seen that it deserves; I have
long thought of having it made better known and more useful to men of
learning, by a better arrangement and a good catalogue. It has been one
of the little pleasures of my life; I have learnt much by it, and it
has at times banished annoyances from my mind. Do you know of any one
who would be fitted to undertake the management of a work so important
and exacting?"

The Chamberlain bethought himself, but no one occurred to him.

"I should prefer a stranger," continued the Sovereign. "That will give
rise to a passing and unembarrassed connection. He must of course be
learned and have good guarantees of character."

The Chamberlain named several connoiseurs from other capitals. The
Sovereign looked at him keenly, and shook his head. "Think it over," he
repeated; "perhaps some one will occur to you."

The examination continued. An antique vase interested the Sovereign by
reminding him of how he had obtained it. A Roman woman, of great beauty
and commanding figure, had suddenly confronted him and offered it to
him with such a distinguished manner, that he, as he laughingly
expressed it, was so surprised by the unusual demeanor of the woman,
and her sonorous voice, that he paid her more than she asked.

No one yet occurred to the Chamberlain.

On his way back to his apartments the Sovereign remained standing in
one of the spacious but lonely halls and asked the Chamberlain, "Has it
not occurred to you that Scarletti dresses badly?"

The Chamberlain dissented, for the actress mentioned was supposed to be
in favor.

"Yesterday evening she carried an immense bouquet. To which of our
young men is this ungraceful attention to be ascribed?"

Again the Chamberlain was astounded.

"As you are disposed to know nothing to-day," continued the Sovereign,
in a sharp tone, "I must tell you that I should be sorry to see the
Hereditary Prince having any intercourse whatever with the ladies of
the theatre. He is not old enough to carry on such connections with the
necessary reserve; and the vanity of these ladies will bring every
favor to public notice."

The Chamberlain affirmed, upon his honor, that he knew nothing of these
civilities of the Hereditary Prince, and that, even if the assumption
of his gracious master was well founded, it could only have been a
passing idea of the Prince that had occasioned this gift. "Your
Highness will be convinced that I would not lend a hand to anything of
this kind."

"But I do not choose that you should close your eyes to it," continued
the Sovereign, bitterly; "you stood in the box behind the Hereditary
Prince, and you must have seen the coquettish look of admiration which
she cast upon him. The present was probably sent by the new valet; let
him know that in my service one does not carry two faces under one
hood. But I require of you," he continued, more calmly, "that you
should redouble your vigilance. What occupies him now?"

"He attends regularly the small evening parties of the Princess."

"And in the day?" added the Sovereign, continuing the examination.

"As your Highness knows, he is fond of music; he plays duets with the
music-master."

"What does he read?"

The Chamberlain named some French books. "May I be allowed humbly
to make a proposal? It would, in every point of view, be useful
to his Highness if he had the pleasure of devising or arranging
something--perhaps the laying out of a park, or the management of a
farm. I venture to suggest that a similar occupation has been found
advantageous to young princes at other courts. Perhaps one of your
Highness's castles could be adapted for such a purpose."

"And the Hereditary Prince and Mr. von Weidegg would keep their own
court, and remain many months in the year far from ours, at their
villa," replied the Sovereign.

"I assure your Highness that I never thought of such a thing," answered
the Chamberlain, offended.

"I do not blame you," replied the Sovereign, with cutting courtesy.
"Consideration for my coffers forbids my assenting to your proposal;
but I shall think of it. It is a disappointment to me that the Prince
has not learned to take an interest in anything during his stay at the
University. Has he had no personal relations during that time that may
have given some zest to his life?"

"He took great pleasure in the circle of Professor Werner," replied the
good Chamberlain, hesitatingly.

"I hope he preserves a grateful recollection of his teacher."

"He speaks with great interest of him and his family," rejoined the
Chamberlain.

"It is well," concluded the Sovereign. "I will take into consideration
the question of agricultural occupation; and do not forget to think a
little concerning my collection."

This new demand could no longer be withstood by the Chamberlain; he was
silent for some minutes, inwardly struggling, while the Sovereign moved
on with his head turned towards him, like one who waits for something
decisive.

"I do not know that I can propose any one better for the purpose than
Professor Werner himself," said the Chamberlain, at last.

The Sovereign again stopped. "You consider him fitted for the work?"

"With respect to his scientific capabilities I naturally can form no
judgment," replied the Chamberlain, cautiously.

Irritated by this cowardly attempt to draw back, the Sovereign asked
with emphasis, "Would he undertake such a charge?"

"He has a very distinguished position at the University, and is happily
married; and he would, undoubtedly, not like to leave his present
position for any length of time."

"Perhaps that may be arranged," rejoined the Sovereign. "Werner, then,
is the man. At a short interview I accidentally had with him he made a
good impression on me. Do not forget to remind me this evening that the
archives at Bielstein are to be searched."

Thus did a father exert himself for the benefit of his son.

The Chamberlain reminded his lord that evening that there had been a
question of an investigation in the archives of Bielstein, and the
sovereign thanked him for it. The following morning orders were given
through the Council to the keepers of the records and members of other
branches of the Court and State administration, to seek out and send
all records of a certain age that had reference to the castle of
Bielstein and monastery of Rossau. This order occasioned a great
raising of dust, and five large leather sacks were filled with records
and old papers. The collection was sent to the Professor; and in a
letter the Sovereign expressed his thanks for the attentions which the
Professor had shown the Hereditary Prince. He added that, remembering a
former conversation, he sent for his inspection all that, in a cursory
search, could be found concerning a place in which he took an interest.

This letter gave cause for serious consideration to two inquiring
minds. When the dubious report of the student concerning an existing
chest had disturbed the peace of the house, the friends had again
turned their attention to the inventory of the deceased Bachhuber, and
had once more pondered over every word of it: "In a hollow and dry
place, LOCO CAVO ET SICCO." The word place, _locus_, occasioned much
thought; but they could come to no certainty about it. "Of the house of
Bielstein, domus Bielsteyn!"--here the expression house, _domus_, was
very remarkable. Did it mean that the manuscript lay concealed
in the dwelling house itself, or was the word house used in the
obsolete meaning of estate or property? The Doctor contended for the
dwelling-house, the Professor for the estate. Much depended upon this;
for if _domus_ signified estate, the manuscript might be concealed in
any part of the property. "I have deposited it all, _haec omnia
deposui_!" The word all, _omnia_, was very comforting; for it gave the
certainty that the deceased Bachhueber had not left the manuscript
behind. But the depositing was a matter of some doubt. Did the word
betoken that the manuscript was deposited only in Bielstein, and thus
given over and entrusted, so to speak, to the inhabitants?--or had the
writer chosen the expression because he wished to signify the interring
and blocking it up in some deep place? To us laymen in the Latin
tongue, it appears clear indeed that Bachhuber was very glad to have a
Latin vocabulary in which to signify the concealment of his treasure;
however, the feeling of the learned men was otherwise. Finally, the
friends agreed in taking the view, that, in spite of this account, the
walls of the house were worthy of future attention. The hollow places
which the Doctor had registered might be examined; the cupboard in the
wall in Ilse's bedroom appeared a place not to be despised. The
Professor, therefore, determined to obtain some certainty on that point
during the next vacation. The business of the Rector had only allowed a
short visit to the castle this time; but the Professor would be aided
by his position in the family, which opened Ilse's room and cupboard to
him.

It was a fine August day; the father was riding about in his fields,
and Ilse sitting with Clara in household consultation, when an uproar
was raised in the kitchen, and the housekeeper, quite beside herself,
rushed into the sitting-room, exclaiming: "There are ghosts around
again!" There was, in fact, a loud knocking in the house, and the maids
congregated in the hall. The noise came from the upper story; so Ilse
hastened upstairs, and, on opening the door to her room, found the
Professor, in his shirt sleeves, working in the cupboard with various
tools he had obtained from the carpenter. He received her, laughing,
and called out, to tranquilize her, that he was nailing the cupboard
boards tighter. This was right, but he had first broken through them.
The manuscript was not there, and nothing was to be seen but an empty
space and a few bits of mortar. There was, however, one inexplicable
thing, which might be a trace of the manuscript--a small bit of blue
cloth rag; how that had come into the wall was a riddle. On further
examination, it appeared that it was not colored with indigo;
therefore, probably, it had existed previous to the introduction of
that color into civilization. Whether a mouse, in her motherly care,
had deposited it there as an ornament to her bed, and at the same time
for food in a desperate case of necessity, could not be ascertained, as
at present these folk seem to have no traditions of the past, and the
individual had probably been eaten some centuries ago by an ancestor of
one of our cats.

This discovery might have given confidence to the friends, for there
were now two places where the treasure was not. But there is much that
is illogical in the nature of men. Even the Doctor inclined now to the
Professor's opinion, that the manuscript was perhaps not concealed in
the house; nay, that it might even be at a distance from the place.

Such was the state of the matter when the Sovereign's packet arrived.
The friends were occupied many hours with the trunks, and examined the
records carefully. They found much that would be valuable for the
history of the district, but nothing that led to the manuscript. At
last, the Professor raised from the bottom of one of the trunks a thick
bundle of reports, on sheets sewed together, which had been sent by the
officials of Bielstein to the Government. Among them was the writing of
a deputy-bailiff of the last century, in which he notified that he was
hastening, in those times of suspense and danger, commanded by high
authority, to convey to the royal country residence, Solitude, the
chestful of hunting implements and old books which had up to that time
been in his custody.

The writer of the letter had undoubtedly not foreseen what an
excitement his faded scroll would produce in a later generation.

"This is the student's chest," cried the Professor, the color rising to
his cheeks, while he held out the document to his friend.

"Remarkable!" said the Doctor. "It is impossible that this coincidence
can be accidental."

"The student's chest was no will o' the wisp," cried the Professor to
his wife, in her room; "here is the confirmation."

"Where is the chest?" inquired Ilse, skeptically.

"That is just what we do not know," replied the Professor, laughing.
"Here is a new scent, indistinct, and in a new direction; but it may
lead shortly to the vanished parchment." The friends hastened back
eagerly to the bundle of records. "Old books!" exclaimed the Doctor;
"the house was a hunting castle; a generation before this letter was
written, the estate came first into the possession of this princely
family; it is not probable that they themselves, in their short hunting
visits, should have collected books there."

"Old books!" exclaimed also the Professor; "it is possible that hunting
journals and accounts may be meant; but it is not impossible that the
chest may also contain some few things of the property of the
monastery. Ilse, where is the old castle belonging to your Sovereign
called Solitude?"

Ilse knew nothing of such a castle.

"It is a fortunate coincidence that the Sovereign himself may give us
an opportunity of obtaining more accurate information."

"Ah, you poor men!" said Ilse, through the door, pityingly. "Now you
are far worse than before; as long as the treasure was still supposed
to be in our house, my father at least could keep a good look out; but
now, it is in a chest far away in the wide world, and no one knows
anything even of the house to which it may have been carried."

The friends laughed again. "Your father's house is not on that account
less under suspicion," said her husband, consolingly.

The Professor sent back the contents of the chest to the Royal Council,
expressed in his letter his warm thanks to the Sovereign, and mentioned
that an uncertain trace made him very desirous of obtaining permission
to make personal investigations.

The letter had the desired result for both parties. The Sovereign had
the satisfaction, which is pleasing to earthly masters, of appearing to
confer a favor while he was seeking one.

The Professor was joyfully surprised when he received from the Council
in the name of the Sovereign a letter promising to promote his
investigations in every way, and making the following proposal: The
Sovereign wished his cabinet of antiquities to be examined by a
scientific authority, and there was no one to whom he would more
willingly trust this task than to the Professor. He knew well how
valuable to others was the work of so learned a man, but he hoped that
his collection might appear of sufficient importance to him to spend a
few weeks upon it.

At the same time the Chamberlain wrote, by desire of his gracious
master, that the Sovereign would be delighted if the Professor would
accept the hospitality of the Palace during the time of his stay. A
garden pavilion, which was a pleasant spring-residence, would be at his
disposition. The dwelling was large enough to receive his family also,
and he was commanded to suggest that there would be plenty of room if
the Professor would bring his wife and servants, as the Sovereign did
not wish that the learned man should be deprived of his domestic
comforts during his stay. The beginning of the spring would be the best
time for both parties; and the Chamberlain would be delighted to do the
honors of the capital to his countrywoman.

The Professor hastened with flying steps to his wife, and laid the
letter in her lap. "Here, read what endangers our journey into foreign
lands. It will engross the greatest part of our traveling time. But I
must accept the invitation; for any prospect, even the most distant, of
obtaining the manuscript compels me to stake much that a man will only
sacrifice for a great hope. Will you accompany me on this chase? You
see, the kind people have thought of everything."

"I a guest of our Sovereign!" exclaimed Ilse, reading the letter.
"Never should I have dreamt of such an honor. What will my father say
of it! It is a very honorable invitation for you," she continued,
seriously; "and you must at all events accept it. As for me, I think it
may be best for me to remain here."

"Why should we be separated for weeks?--it would be the first time."

"Send me to my father meanwhile."

"Does not that come to the same thing?" asked the Professor.

"What shall I do among these strangers?" continued Ilse, anxiously.

"Nonsense," replied the Professor. "Have you any reason to give?" and
he looked at her, discomposed.

"I cannot say that I have," replied Ilse.

"Then decide at once, and come. We should probably feel more free if we
could live as we liked; but I should not wish to reside for weeks at a
hotel in a foreign city; and, from another point of view, this
reception will save both parties the difficulty of offering and
refusing compensation. We shall remain there as long as is
indispensably necessary; then we shall go south, as far as we can. It
is, after all, only putting off the journey a few weeks."

When the Professor's letter of acceptance arrived, the Chamberlain
informed the Sovereign of it in presence of the Marshal: "See to it
that the pavilion is arranged as comfortably as possible. Dinner will
be served at the pavilion at whatever hour the Professor wishes."

"And what position does your Highness intend the strangers shall occupy
at Court?" inquired the Marshal.

"That is understood," said the Sovereign; "he has the privilege of a
stranger, and will occasionally be invited to small dinners."

"But the Professor's wife?" asked the Marshal.

"Ah!" said the Sovereign, "the wife. It is true, she comes with him."

"Then," continued the Marshal, "there is to be dinner for two at the
pavilion; apartments for two, and a room for a lackey without livery."

"That is enough," said the Sovereign; "for the rest, we shall see. If
the Professor's wife visits our ladies, I assume they will return the
civility. We will leave the rest to the Princess."

"What is the history of these strangers?" asked the Marshal of the
Chamberlain. "You know the people."

"As one knows people in a strange city," replied the Chamberlain.

"But you arranged their coming?"

"I only wrote according to the Sovereign's orders. The Professor is a
learned man of reputation, and a thorough gentleman."

"But what has his wife to do here."

The Chamberlain shrugged his shoulders. "He could not be got without
his wife," he replied, cautiously.

"Yet the Sovereign made a point of her coming."

"Did that strike you?" asked the Chamberlain. "I, for my part, did not
remark it. He made it appear as if it were a matter of indifference to
him; and, furthermore, she is a country-woman of his."

"You know that the Sovereign would be the last to infringe the rules of
the Court. There is no reason for anxiety."

"At all events, the Princess must maintain her position. I hear this
Professor's wife is considered a beauty?"

"I believe she is also a woman of high character," replied the
Chamberlain.

The Professor received the desired permission. Ilse made her
preparations for the journey with a solemn seriousness which struck all
around her. She was now to approach the presence of her Sovereign, whom
she had regarded from a distance with shy respect. It made her heart
heavy to think that the son had never spoken of his father, and that
she knew nothing of her illustrious master but his countenance and
manner. She asked herself, anxiously: "How will he treat Felix and me?"

Whilst Felix was collecting all the books and documents which were
indispensable for the journey, the Doctor was standing sorrowfully in
his friend's room. He was satisfied that the Professor could not
withdraw from the duty of seeking for the manuscript; and yet his
invitation to Court did not please him. The sudden breaking of their
tranquil life disturbed him, and he sometimes looked anxiously at Ilse.

Laura sat, the last evening, near Ilse, leaning on her shoulder,
weeping. "It appears to me," said the latter, "that something
portentous lies in my path, and I go in fear. But I leave you without
anxiety for your future, although you have sometimes made me uneasy,
you stubborn little puss; for I know there is one who will always be
your best adviser, even though you should seldom see each other."

"I lose him when I lose you," cried Laura, in tears. "All vanishes that
has been the happiness of my life. In the little garden which I have
secretly laid out for myself, the blossoms are torn up by the roots,
the bitter trial of deprivation has come to me also; and poor Fritz,
who already was practicing resignation, will now be quite lost in his
hermitage."

Even Gabriel, who was to accompany the travelers to the capital and
await their return home from abroad at the house of Ilse's father, was
excited during this period, and often disappeared into the house of Mr.
Hahn when it became dark. The last day he brought home from the market
a beautiful bird of uncommon appearance, with colored feathers, pasted
on a sheet, with the inscription: "Peacock from Madagascar." Gabriel
wrote, in addition, in clear, stiff characters: "Faithful unto death."
This he took in the evening to the enemy's house. A whispering might be
heard there, and a pocket-handkerchief be seen, which wiped the tears
from sorrowful eyes.

"No allusion is meant to the name of this family," said Gabriel,
holding the bird once more in the moonlight, the beams of which fell
through the staircase window upon two sorrowful faces; "but it occurred
to me as a remembrance. When you look at it think of me, and the words
I have written on it. We must part, but it is hard to do so." The
honest fellow pulled out his pocket-handkerchief.

Dorchen took it from him; she had forgotten her own, and wiped her eyes
with it.

"It is not for long," said Gabriel, consolingly, in spite of his own
sorrow. "Paste the bird on the cover of your trunk, and when you open
it and take out a good dress, think of me."

"Always," cried Dorchen, weeping. "I do not need that."

"When I return, Dorchen, we will talk further of what is to become of
us, and I hope all will go well. The handkerchief which has received
your tears shall be a remembrance for me."

"Leave it to me," said Dorchen, sobbing. "I must tell you I have bought
wool, and will embroider you a wallet. This you shall carry about you,
and when I write, put my letters in it."

Gabriel looked happy, in spite of his sorrow; and the moon glanced
jeeringly down on the kisses and vows which were exchanged.




                            _CHAPTER XXVII_.

                             THE SOVEREIGN.


The Hereditary Prince was walking with the Chamberlain in the gardens
which surrounded the royal castle on three sides. He looked
indifferently on the splendid coloring of the early flowers and the
fresh green of the trees; to-day he was more silent than usual; whilst
the birds piped to him from the branches, and the spring breeze wafted
fragrance from the tops of the trees, he played with his eye-glass.
"What bird is that singing?" he asked, at last, awakening from his
apathy.

The Chamberlain replied, "It is a thrush."

The Prince examined the bird with his glasses, and then asked,
carelessly, "What are those people ahead of us carrying?"

"Chairs for the pavilion," answered the Chamberlain; "it is being
arranged for Professor Werner. The house is seldom open now; formerly
his Highness, the Sovereign, used to live there occasionally."

"I do not remember ever having been in it for a very long time."

"Would your Highness like to see the rooms?"

"We can pass that way."

The Chamberlain turned towards the pavilion; the Marshal was standing
at the door; he had come to see that everything was in order. The
Hereditary Prince greeted him, cast a cursory glance at the house, and
was inclined to pass on. It was a small grey-stone structure, in old
fashioned style; there were shell-shaped arabesques round the doors and
windows, and little dropsical angels supported heavy garlands of stone
flowers with lines which appeared to have been cut out of elephant's
hide; the angels themselves looked as if they had just crept out of a
dirty swamp and been dried in the sun. The dark building stood amid the
fresh verdure like a large chest, in which all the withered flowers
that the garden had ever borne, and all the moss which the gardener had
ever scraped from the trees, seemed, to have been kept for later
generations.

"It is an uninviting looking place," said the Prince.

"It is the gloomy appearance that has always pleased his Sovereign
Highness so much," replied the Marshal. "Will not your Highness examine
the interior?"

The Prince passed slowly up the steps and through the apartments. The
musty smell of the long-closed rooms had not been removed by the
pastiles that had been burnt in them; logs were blazing in all the
fireplaces, but the warmth which they spread still struggled with the
damp air. The arrangement of the rooms was throughout orderly and
complete. There were heavy _portieres_, curtains with large tassels,
and fantastic furniture with much gilding, and white covers for the
preservation of the silk, mirrors with broad fantastic frames, round
the chimney-piece garlands carved in grey marble, and upon it wreathed
vases and little figures of painted porcelain. In the boudoir, on a
marble console, there was a large clock under a glass bell; a nude
gilded nymph poured water over the dial from her urn which was turned
to gilded ice. Everything was richly adorned; but the whole
arrangement, furniture, porcelain, and walls, looked as if no eye had
ever rested on them with pleasure, nor careful housewife rejoiced in
their possession. There were remarkable things from every part of the
world; first they had been placed in the large assembly-rooms which
were opened at Court fetes; then they had ceased to be in fashion, and
were moved into side-rooms. It was now their destiny to be handed down
from one generation to another, and counted once a year to see if they
were still there. Thus they passed a never-ending existence--preserved,
but not used; kept, but disregarded.

"It is damp and cold here," said the Prince, looking round upon the
walls, and again hastening into the open air.

"How do the arrangements please your Highness?" asked the Marshal.

"They will do very well," answered the Prince, "except the pictures."

"Some of them certainly are rather improper," acknowledged the Marshal.

"My father would be pleased if you could remove these. When is
Professor Werner expected?"

"This evening," replied the Chamberlain. "Perhaps your Highness would
wish to receive the guest after his arrival, or to pay him a visit
yourself."

"You may ask my father," replied the Prince.

When the Prince went with his companion up the staircase to his own
rooms in the castle, the Chamberlain began:

"The Professor's wife was very much pleased once with the flowers which
your Highness sent her. May I commission the Court gardener to put some
in her room?"

"Do what you think fitting," replied the Prince, coldly.

He entered his apartment, looked behind him to see if he were alone,
and went with rapid steps to the window; from thence he looked over the
level lawn and the blooming rows of trees to the pavilion. He gazed
long through the window, then took a book from the table and seated
himself in the corner of the sofa to read; but he laid the book on the
table again, paced hastily up and down, and looked at his watch.

The Court dinner was over. The ladies cast a half glance behind them to
see if the back-ground was clear for their retiring curtsies. The
gentlemen took their hats under their arms. The Marshal approached the
door, and held his gold-headed stick with graceful deportment--a sure
sign that the royal party was about to break up. The Princess, who was
still in mourning, stopped her brother.

"When do they come? I am so curious," she said, in a low tone.

"They are perhaps already there," answered he, looking down.

"I am going to the theatre to-day for the first time again," continued
the Princess. "Come into my box if you can."

The Prince nodded. Information came to the Marshal, which he conveyed
to the Prince's father. "Your teacher, Professor Werner, is come," said
he, aloud, to his son. "You will undoubtedly wish to pay your
compliments to him." He then bowed to the Court, and the young Princess
followed him out of the room.

The Chamberlain hastened to the pavilion. The Marshal followed
more quietly. A royal equipage had brought the travelers from the
nearest station. They passed rapidly by the trees in the park, the
pleasure-grounds, and the lighted windows of the royal castle. The
pavilion was no longer a shapeless building, as it appeared in the day,
under the glaring sun, to the indifferent eyes of the courtiers. The
moon lighted up the front, and shone with a glimmering halo on the
walls; it threw a silver glitter on the cheeks of the angels, and on
the solid broad leaves of their garlands, and brought out strongly on
the bright surface of the wall the shadows of the projecting cornices.
Wax-lights shone through the open door. Lackeys, in rich liveries, held
heavy candelabra. The steward of the house, a friendly looking
personage, in dress coat and knee-breeches, stood in the hall and
greeted the comers with polite words. Following the lackeys, Ilse
ascended the carpeted steps, on her husband's arm, and when the servant
threw back the _portiere_, and the row of rooms appeared shining with
wax-lights, she could hardly suppress an exclamation of astonishment.
The steward led them through the rooms, explained the disposal of them,
and Ilse perceived, with rapid glance, how stately and comfortable they
all were. She looked with admiration at the abundance of flowers which
were placed in the vases and bowls. She wondered whether her little
Prince had shown this tender attention, but was undeceived when the
official announced that the Chamberlain had sent them. A pretty maid
was introduced, who was to wait upon her exclusively. Gabriel stood in
the ante-room considering where he and his traps would be taken, in
order that the Professor's boots might, in the morning, be no dishonor
to the splendor of the house. At last one of the lackeys showed him his
room, and, like a good comrade, pointed out to him the lamps of a
tavern, which for his leisure hours would be particularly agreeable.

Ilse went through the rooms as if stupefied by their splendor, and
endeavored to open the window to let in some fresh air, for the strong
fragrance of the hyacinths threatened her with headache. Then came the
Chamberlain, behind him the Marshal, who was also an urbane gentleman
of very refined appearance; and both expressed their pleasure at seeing
the Professor and his wife. They offered their services on all
occasions, and pointed out from the windows the position of the
pavilion. Suddenly the lackey threw open the folding-doors, announcing
"His Highness, the Hereditary Prince."

The young gentleman walked slowly into the room. He bowed silently to
Ilse, and gave his hand to the Professor. "My father has commissioned
me to express to you his pleasure that you have fulfilled his wishes;"
and, turning to Ilse, he continued: "I trust that you will find the
dwelling comfortable enough not to regret having left your residence at
home."

Ilse looked with great pleasure at her Prince. He had, it appeared to
her, grown a little. His demeanor was still rather depressed; but he
had color in his cheeks, and it was clear that things were not amiss
with him. The little moustache was stronger and became him well.

She replied, "I scarcely venture to turn round. It is like a fairy
castle. One expects every moment that a spirit will spring from the
wall and inquire whether one wishes to go through the air, or that four
swans will stop at the window with a golden carriage. No chair is
necessary to ascend to it, for the windows come down to the ground. The
Park Street sends its greeting, and I give your Highness heartfelt
thanks for the present which the Chamberlain sent me for the last
Christmas-tree."

The Professor approached the Prince, mentioned to him the names of some
of his colleagues, who had sent to him their kindest remembrances, and
then begged him to express to his royal father his thanks for this
hospitable reception.

Everything seemed to curl in ornamental scrolls. The lamps shone from
the silver chandeliers, the hyacinths sent out sweet fragrance from
every vase, the closed curtains gave the room a comfortable appearance,
and on the frescoed ceiling a flying Cupid was represented holding a
bunch of red poppies over the heads of the guests.

"To-day we will leave you to rest, as you must be tired," said the
Prince, concluding the visit; and the Chamberlain promised to inform
the Professor at an early hour the next morning when the Sovereign
would receive him. Scarcely had the gentleman gone when a servant
announced that dinner was served in the next room.

"Why, it is evening," said Ilse, shyly.

"Never mind," replied the Professor, "you have taken the first step.
Show good courage." He gallantly offered her his arm. The man in smart
livery conducted them into the next room, and drew back the chairs of
the richly-adorned table. There was no end of courses. In spite of
Ilse's protest a superabundant dinner made its appearance, and she
said, at last, "I must resign myself to everything. There is no use in
struggling against these spirits. Whoever lives in a Prince's household
must be bold enough to go through all."

When the dinner at last was carried away, and Ilse had been freed from
her anxieties about Gabriel, she busily began arranging her things.
While she was unpacking she said to her husband, "This is a very
charming welcome, Felix, and I now have real confidence that all will
go well."

"Have you ever doubted it?" asked the Professor.

Ilse answered, "Up to this hour I have had a secret anxiety, I know not
why, but it has now vanished; for the people here all seem so friendly
and kindhearted."

As the Prince passed through the gardens back to the castle the two
cavaliers behind him conversed together.

"A charming woman," said the Marshal--"a beauty of the first order.
There is good blood there."

"She is in every respect a distinguished lady," replied the
Chamberlain, aloud.

"You have already told me that once," replied the Marshal. "I
congratulate you on this acquaintance from the University."

"How do you like the Professor?" asked the Chamberlain, turning the
conversation.

"He appears to be a clever man," replied the Marshal, with
indifference. "It is long since the pavilion has had such a beauty in
it."

The Prince turned round, and he saw by the light of the large
chandelier that the gentlemen exchanged looks with one another.

The Prince's carriage drove up. He entered it without saying a word to
his companions, and drove to the opera. There he entered the ante-room
of the royal box.

"How do the strangers like their abode at the pavilion?" asked the
Sovereign, kindly.

"They are content with everything," replied his son; "but the rooms are
damp, and would not be healthy for a prolonged stay."

"They were never considered so, as far as I recollect," replied the
father, coldly, "and I hope you will be convinced of it." Then, turning
to the Chamberlain, he said, "To-morrow, after breakfast, I wish to
speak to Mr. Werner."

The Hereditary Prince went into the box to his sister, and seated
himself silently at her side.

"Where are the places for the strangers?" asked the Princess.

"I do not know," replied her brother.

The Princess looked behind her inquiringly.

"The strangers' box is opposite," explained the Chamberlain; "but they
have enough to do to-day settling themselves."

"What is the matter with you, Benno?" asked the sister, after the first
act. "You cough."

"I have caught a little cold. It will pass."

After the theatre the Prince retired to his bedroom, and complained to
Krueger of a headache and sore throat. When he was alone, he opened the
window and looked across the pleasure-ground to the pavilion, the
lights of which glimmered like stars in the night. He listened. Perhaps
he might hear some sound from there. He found it warm, for he took off
his necktie, and long stood motionless at the window, till the cool
night air came into his room and the last light was extinguished. Then
he closed his window gently and went to bed.

This was not prudent, for the Prince, whose health was easily affected,
awoke the following morning with a severe cold. The doctor was hastily
called, and the Prince was obliged to keep his bed.

When the indisposition of the Hereditary Prince was announced to his
father, it put him in a bad humor. "Just now!" he exclaimed. "He has
every misfortune unhealthy people are heir to." When, afterwards, the
Professor was announced, the way in which he received the announcement
was so cold and constrained that the Chamberlain felt very anxious
about the reception of the Professor. The long habit, however, of
receiving graciously, and the dignified bearing of the Professor, had a
softening influence. After a few introductory words, the Sovereign
began a conversation about Italy; and it appeared that the Professor
was in correspondence with a distinguished literary Roman, who was one
of the Sovereign's most intimate acquaintances when he was last in
Italy. This gradually placed the Professor in quite a different light
to the Sovereign. He had sent for him as a mere useful tool, but he now
found he was a man who had claims to personal consideration, because he
was known to others whose position was respected by the Sovereign. The
Sovereign then asked how the matter of the lost manuscript stood, and
smiled at the eager zeal of the Professor, when he told him of the new
clue which he had found in the records.

"It would be well for you to prepare a memorial of the whole state of
the affair, which will assist my memory, and add to it what help you
wish from me or my officials."

The Professor was very grateful.

"I will not deny myself the pleasure of taking you to the museum,"
continued the Sovereign. "I shall thus see what a learned man, who is a
thorough connoisseur, thinks of the quiet amusement of an amateur
collector."

The doors flew open, the learned man entered the spacious rooms with
the Sovereign. "We will first go rapidly through the rooms that you may
obtain a general view of their contents and arrangements," said the
Sovereign. While the Professor looked at the abundance of beautiful and
instructive remains of antiquity, many of which were quite new to him,
the Sovereign gave some account of them; but soon left it to the
learned man to search out for himself objects of interest, and it was
now his turn to give explanations. Here there was an inscription, which
no one probably had copied; there a specimen of pottery, with very
interesting figures on it; then a statuette, a remarkable variation of
a celebrated antique piece of sculpture; here the unknown coin of a
famous Roman family, with their coat of arms; and there a long row of
amulets, with hieroglyphics.

It was a great pleasure to the Sovereign to find out the importance of
apparently insignificant objects, and every moment to receive new
information concerning their value and names, but the Professor had the
tact to avoid long explanations. He looked with quite a youthful
interest on the collection. It happened just at a time when he was not
occupied with great works, he brought with him a lively susceptibility
for impressions, and at every step he felt how charming were the new
views which he obtained; for there was much here that invited a closer
examination. He inspired the Sovereign with something of the enjoyment
he felt himself. There was no end of his questions, and the answers of
the Professor. The Sovereign was delighted to tell how he had obtained
many of the objects, and the Professor, by relating similar stories of
discoveries, led him on to give further accounts. Thus some hours
passed without the Sovereign experiencing any weariness, and he was
much astonished when he was told that it was dinnertime. "Is that
possible?" he exclaimed. "You understand the most difficult of all
arts, that of making the time pass quickly, I expect you at dinner;
tomorrow you shall see the collection again, undisturbed by my remarks;
then you must favor me with a written report of what is desirable with
respect to the arrangement, so as to make the valuable objects
serviceable to science."

At dinner--there was no one present but some gentlemen whom the
Professor, by the advice of the Chamberlain, had visited in the
morning--the conversation was continued. The Sovereign related much
about Italy, and contrived in a cursory way to draw attention to the
personal relations of the Professor with his own acquaintances, in
order that his Court might know something about the man with whom he
was so much pleased. The conversation was easy and pleasant, and before
the Sovereign left the company, he turned again to the Professor, and
said, "I desire much that you should feel at home with us, and I hope
to pass more than one day as agreeably as I have done this."

To the Professor also it had been a refreshing day, and in going away,
he said, in great spirits, to the High Steward: "His Sovereign Highness
understands very well how to say kind things."

The High Steward bowed his white head civilly, and replied, "That is
the vocation of princes."

"Certainly," continued the Professor; "but so warm an interest in the
details of a remote province of scientific inquiry is more than I had
anticipated."

The High Steward made a courteous movement, which was to signify that
he could not contradict the assertion; he enveloped himself in an
old-fashioned little mantle, bowed silently to the gentlemen who were
similarly occupied, and entered his carriage.

In intelligence and education the Sovereign was superior to most of his
fellow princes. He had preserved much of the elasticity of his youth in
advanced age; his bodily condition was excellent, and he took great
care of his health; he was still capable, in case of necessity, of
exertions which would have been severe to a younger man. In his youth
he had devoted himself enthusiastically to the ebullitions of the then
fashionable poetry, and had indulged in higher and freer aspirations
than other men. He had at that time corresponded with learned men and
artists of repute, and he liked to tell of his intimacy with some man
of prominent mind. But his youth and manhood had fallen in a weak and
decrepit period of our development. In the years when a foreign
conqueror had treated the German princes as the greater part of them
well deserved, he also as a youth had bowed to the foreigner, and
abandoned the sinking vessel at the right time to save his title to his
country. Since then he had ruled over a pitiful race of men, for he had
entered upon his government at a time of great national exhaustion; he
had found little that he was compelled to respect or fear, seldom any
men firm enough to maintain their rights against him, and no public
opinion that was strong enough to oppose his encroachment by a
unanimous determination. His country was governed by officials, the
official places were continually increased, and concerning every lost
key of a village church there was accumulated a bundle of legal
documents; he allowed these prolix forms of proceedings which benumbed
the life of the people to remain unaltered, and only took care that the
officials, whenever his personal interest came into play, should be
pliant servants, who would procure him money, and withdraw from
publicity any past wrong dealings of their Sovereign.

When he came into contact with his people, he was affable and
good-humored, made it easy for petitioners to approach him, listened
kindly and sympathetically to all complaints, and threw the blame on
the officials. He was not unpopular; sometimes the discontented
grumbled at the high taxes, and over the costly expenditure of their
master; and, here and there, an anecdote of his private life reached
the public; but the new spirit of the times, which was beginning to
stir also in his country, struggled only weakly in helpless assaults
against his system of government. And although as a ruler he showed no
inclination to remedy existing evils, yet, to those at a distance, he
appeared personally to be a humane, good-hearted man. He had a kindly
acknowledgment and a gracious word for every one; he knew much of the
private relations of his subjects, and occasionally showed his personal
sympathy for individuals; he loved children, for he would sometimes
stop in the streets to notice pretty boys and girls, and inquire after
their parents; he gave a fete to the school children of his capital
every year, appeared at it himself, and took pleasure in their games.

His Court was in many respects a model of order and pleasing display.
By all who surrounded him he was considered a distinguished man; and
contrived--which is most difficult for a prince--that those who daily
associated with him should always have a feeling of his superiority. He
had never been a military man, and he did not refrain from sarcastic
remarks on the warlike propensities of other princes. His Court long
remained free from the military influence that prevailed in neighboring
capitals. Gradually, indeed, he made some concessions to the fashion,
and his aides-de-camp became important members of the royal household;
but he was not on a comfortable footing with the officers of his
household, and, in spite of his quiet manner, was always feared by
these gentlemen. There were hours when it appeared that his reserved
character was not only accompanied by severity, but by something quite
anomalous, in addition: at such moments, cynical jests or brusque and
irritative remarks fell from his lips, and he lost all consideration
for the claims of those about him. But the young noblemen and
aides-de-camp bore the secret thorn of their position without being
subjected to the loud criticism which is often expressed by the
courtiers of ruling princes, for the Sovereign understood how to treat
them with respect before strangers. He held strictly to etiquette, even
on their behalf, and cleverly took care of their interests in the
presentation of favors--orders and decorations--which foreign princes
visiting his Court were bound to bestow; he never called upon them for
anything contrary to the dignity of their office, and knew how to
maintain his own and that of his Court in intercourse with strangers.

His wife had died early, and the inhabitants of the capital always
preserved a grateful recollection of that pale and delicate lady. It
was said that the marriage had not been a happy one; yet the sorrow of
the Sovereign was strong and lasting. He always spoke with great
tenderness of the departed, and every year, on the anniversary of her
death, fastened a garland in her mausoleum.

He had two children. The eldest, the Princess, had returned to Court
after the death of her husband; and the Sovereign, in the eyes of the
Court and the people, treated her with especial regard. He had opened
his whole heart to the Court chaplain about her. "I should like to see
her married again; she has a right to look forward to a brilliant
life,--her heart is warm, her nature energetic; and from my experience,
I consider a long state of widowhood a bad thing for the Princess. But
I fear she will resist. I have perhaps, always been a weak father to
this child. You know, venerable sir, how dear she has been to me."

Thereupon the pious gentleman, with folded hands, exclaimed: "I know
it, and I know how warmly the heart of her Serene Highness is attached
to her father." The people also remarked that the Sovereign was a good
father. On every birthday a great Court fete was arranged for the
daughter; and when the Sovereign once happened to be travelling at this
time, he appeared suddenly, contrary to all expectation, on the evening
of the birthday, in his travelling dress, at the Princess's opera-box,
kissed her on the forehead before all the people, and said that he had
hastened his return in order to wish her joy upon her _fete_ day.
Besides this, he neglected no opportunity of showing her the little
attentions which in every father gave an impression of amiable
gallantry, and which in every ruling Sovereign are doubly appreciated.
Before every ball he sent his daughter a nosegay, and every time had it
brought by the head gardener into the castle to inspect it himself. He
was glad when distinguished travellers caused their arrival to be
announced to the Princess, and always observed accurately whether she
was well entertained during their reception. But, in spite of the great
trouble the father took to give a good appearance to his relations with
the Princess, it was thought that he had a secret dislike for her. It
may be possible for a prince to be incomprehensible to those who are in
daily intercourse with him in certain important concerns, but it is
almost impossible to deceive them constantly.

The relations of the father to his son were very different. The latter,
a sickly, shy boy, had been deprived of self-confidence by the way in
which his father had watched over his education. The boy had not the
capacity to assert himself; it was still a difficult task for him to
overcome his shyness in his intercourse with strangers. When the list
of persons invited was handed to him, and he considered what he was to
say to individuals, apt questions seldom occurred to him, and what he
did bring out was so awkwardly done that it was very evident that he
had been coached. Even to the persons of the Court the young Prince was
silent and indifferent; the ladies and gentlemen were therefore
inclined to assume that he was a little weak-minded. His father treated
him with contempt, and his tone towards his son sometimes sounded short
and harsh, as if it were not worth his while to conceal his disdain for
him.

In this respect, however, injustice was done to the father. A reigning
sovereign is easily led to consider his son as a young rival. The son
will be his successor, and will, in the next generation, expose his
father before all the world, upset all his arrangements, and be
reconciled to all who have been discontented and his opponents. When he
has become sovereign, it is impossible that he should not discover
something under the former Government that has been wrong, and
everything will be brought before him in which his father has failed
and done evil. This would have been reason enough for the Sovereign to
treat his son with coldness and reserve. Now he was nobody, a powerless
slave who was indebted to his father for every penny he had; but some
day he would be everything. But his son was in his eyes insignificant;
he moved in the prescribed track as if possessed of no will of his own;
he had never defied him, was content with everything, and had yielded
silently and respectfully to every command; it was not to be supposed
that he could really govern himself, still less would he put his father
in the shade. Thus by degrees was added to the father's quiet feeling
of contempt, one of almost compassionate kindness. The timid
submissiveness of the Prince was very satisfactory to his father; it
was very agreeable to him to provide, as he was well able, a support
for the weak reed which was to carry on the future of his family. To
him he showed himself as he was: what he did for him was done with the
feeling that he was benefiting another, not himself.

But just now, when he had been taking pains to procure a pleasure for
the Hereditary Prince, the latter fell ill!





Ilse went with Gabriel through the rooms, trying to arrange them to
please herself; she moved the tables about, examined the curtains, and
looked doubtfully at the porcelain vases.

"I am surprised," said Gabriel, "that amongst this beautiful furniture
one thing should be wanting, a cuckoo-clock. That would be very
suitable: it gives life, when it opens its door, and makes profound
obeisances as they do at Court. For they are very polite here, however
deceitful they may be at heart. I have no confidence in the lackey; he
asks me too many questions. How would it be taken if we got rid of him?
I could manage to do the housekeeping alone, with the maid. No cooking
can be done here, for there is no kitchen; every drop of warm water
must be brought from the cellar over there where the white jackets work
like so many ghosts."

"There is no use worrying about it," said Ilse, decisively; "we must
accustom ourselves to the regulations, pride must put up with much; we
have no secrets, and I know you will be cautious."

"The gardener has placed a table and chairs, with flowers about it, in
front of the house," said Gabriel. "Shall I take your work down; the
sun appears warm?"

Ilse went in front of the house; near the door was a space bordered
with plants in pots, a cosy spot in the warm midday sun: one looked
from under the green arbor over the paths and smooth turf, up to the
walls of the castle. Ilse sat down in a rustic chair, holding her
embroidery in her hands, but looking up at the large stone palace, that
rose with its towers and newly built extensions, some hundred steps
from her. There dwelt the great ones of the earth, near to whom she had
been so suddenly brought. She counted the rows of windows, and thought
that there must be more than a hundred rooms and halls, all grandly and
splendidly furnished, and she wondered how many people it must require
to fill such a building that it might not look empty and desolate.
Approaching steps disturbed her thoughts. A middle-aged gentleman was
advancing up the gravel walk: he drew near: it was the Sovereign. Ilse
rose, alarmed. He came up to her slowly. "Madame Werner?" he asked,
touching his hat. Ilse curtsied low; her heart beat; she was unprepared
for this meeting with him whom she had been accustomed from her
earliest youth to consider the greatest man on earth. Though she had
once seen him, it was but for a moment. Her thoughts, ever since the
years when she had adorned him with the crown and sceptre of a mock
king at cards, had attached themselves to him with shy respect. Often
when she had looked at the Hereditary Prince, she had endeavored to
form some conception of what his father must be like; what she had
heard of him had not helped to diminish her fears.

The Sovereign looked with delight on the beautiful woman before him,
who received his flattering greeting with silent embarrassment. "You
are no stranger to me," he began, "and you have reason to be satisfied
with the years that have passed since my walk over your father's farm.
You may now try our mode of life. We also take pleasure in the spring,
and I see the sun casts friendly rays on the spot which you have
selected."

He seated himself on one of the rustic chairs, pointing at the same
time to another. "Do not let me interrupt your work. I am taking a
walk, and beg to be allowed to rest myself for a moment here."

"The work is in idle hands," answered Ilse, "I was looking at the
castle, and thinking how large the household must be that requires so
much room."

"It is an old building," remarked the Sovereign. "Many centuries have
contributed to increase it, and yet, in the opinion of the officers of
my household, it is not large enough. One easily increases one's
requirements. But then, again, one rejoices in withdrawing into a
smaller abode. I myself once lived in this pavilion, alone, with only a
few necessary servants. Such solitude does one good."

"That I can imagine," replied Ilse, sympathizingly. "But to such as we
are it is something new to see so grand a style of life. The castle and
its grounds with the blooming trees, are like large precious stones set
in gold. It gives me heartfelt pleasure to have so near a view of your
Highness's home; it helps to give one an idea of the mode of life of
our gracious Sovereign."

"Then you still consider yourself a child of our country," said the
Sovereign, smiling.

"That is natural," answered Ilse. "From my childhood I have heard of
your Highness as our ruler; whenever I looked in the newspaper I saw
your Highness's name; everywhere I have seen your Highness's pictures;
and, since I have been old enough to go to church, I have prayed for
your Highness's happiness and health. This is a bond of union; it is,
indeed, only on one side, for your Highness cannot care about us all,
but we think and care much about our ruler."

"And speak of him sometimes with dissatisfaction," replied the
Sovereign, good-humoredly.

"Just as it happens, gracious Prince," replied Ilse, honestly. "One
does not always speak well of one's neighbors; but, in serious matters
and in trouble, a good heart shows itself. So it is with the Sovereign,
each one forms his own idea of him according to circumstances, trusts
in him, or is angry with him, and ends by thinking that he and his
prince belong to one another."

"It were to be wished that so good a feeling might be shown by every
subject," rejoined the Sovereign; "but fidelity is wavering, and
personal attachment disappears."

"Many know too little of their Sovereign," said Ilse, apologizing. "How
can they care for him when they see so little of him? For seeing does
much: we at Rossau have seldom the honor of setting eyes on our
prince."

"The feeling of that country has been described to me as
unsatisfactory."

"We are situated in a distant corner, but we have a heart. Your
Highness will scarcely remember the maidens at Rossau, who received you
seventeen years ago at the triumphal arch. There were twenty; the
little town could not produce any more. They all wore the national
colors on their bodices and petticoats; they, of course, had to buy the
dresses themselves. One of the maidens was miserably poor, but she was
pretty, and did not like to be left behind, so she worked the whole
week during the greater part of the night, in order to procure money
for her dress. In her last illness, for she died young, she asked to be
buried in this dress, as that day had been one of greatest honor and
pleasure to her. But your Highness was hardly able to stop there; you
drove quickly through the triumphal arch, and, perhaps, did not even
see the maidens."

Whilst Ilse was speaking, she was secretly strewing bread crumbs beside
her. The Prince observed her hand, and she excused herself.

"The finches call to their gracious Sovereign, 'Give, give!' The little
ones are very tame here."

"They are probably fed by the servants," said the Prince.

"To love animals is the custom of our country!" exclaimed Ilse; "and
tame birds suit well with a royal castle, for all here should feel
joyful confidence."

The Sovereign's glove fell to the ground, and as the loyal Ilse quickly
bent down to pick it up, the Sovereign's eye rested for a moment upon
her head and form. He rose slowly. "I hope, Madame, that you will be of
the number of those joyful ones who place confidence in the possessor
of this spot. As master of the house, I have made inquiry after the
health of my new lodger. I wish that you may feel here some portion of
the pleasure that you know how to impart to others."

He civilly acknowledged Ilse's respectful curtsy, and returned to the
castle.

There the Chamberlain waited to report to him concerning the health of
the Hereditary Prince.

"His Highness is unfortunately still obliged to keep to his bed."

"He must take care of himself," replied the Sovereign, graciously, "and
not leave his room too soon."




                           _CHAPTER XXVIII_.

                            IN THE PAVILION.


The splendid iris colors wherewith Ilse had at first adorned her new
abode gradually faded. As, instead of the steward and lackeys by whom
she was received, there was now only a single servant, in a dark coat,
to assist Gabriel, so everything else that surrounded Ilse appeared now
in the modest colors of common earthly life. This was natural, and Ilse
herself said so to her husband. But there was one thing she did not
like: she was separated from her husband more than in the city. The
morning and a portion of the afternoon he worked in the museum, and
devoted many hours also to his own object among the archives and
records of the Marshal's office, whose private offices were willingly
opened to him. When he returned home he had sometimes to dress in haste
for the Court dinner, and Ilse dined alone. However attentive the
servant might be in bringing up the numerous dishes, the lonely meal
was uninviting and sad to her. But a great many evenings were spent in
a new entertainment: a Court carriage used to stop at the pavilion, and
convey her and her husband to the theatre. When for the first time she
entered the private boxes near the stage, she rejoiced in the
comfortable position, which allowed her to give her attention to the
performance undisturbed by the public. When she leant back in her box
she saw nothing of the spectators, except the Sovereign's seat
opposite. The theatre was very grand, much richer in decorations and
costumes than she had seen in the city, and there were some good
singers at the opera. Absorbed in the performance, she did not remark
with what curiosity she was regarded by the public, and that the
Sovereign's opera glass was often directed towards her. She soon found
that the theatre was the best amusement of the capital, and her husband
took care that she should not miss this recreation, although he,
perhaps, would have preferred remaining with his books, or examining a
bundle of records from the archives. Between the acts, Ilse looked with
curiosity down upon the people, who were all strangers to her, and said
to Felix: "This is the only occasion upon which I have ladies near me."

During the day she felt her solitude. Her father had a mercantile
friend in the city to whom she made a point of going the first day, but
in the family of the little merchant she found no one to suit her.
According to the advice of the Chamberlain, she went round with Felix
to pay visits to the Court ladies. In most of the houses no one was at
home, and she had to leave cards. Rarely were these visits returned;
and it always happened that on her return home from the city, or from a
walk in the gardens of the castle, she found the cards of some lady.
This was annoying to her, for she wished to try how she could get on
with the ladies. Some of the gentlemen of the Court, indeed, used to
present themselves to her in the morning,--the Chamberlain and the
Grand Marshal,--but the visits even of the Chamberlain became shorter;
he looked depressed, and spoke of little but the continued
indisposition of the Hereditary Prince.

Ilse was very anxious to know the Princess. The second day after her
arrival the Chamberlain announced that her Highness would see the
Professor and Madame Werner at a certain hour. Ilse stood with her
husband amidst the silk and gilding of the royal room; the door flew
open, and a young lady in half mourning swept in. Ilse recognized at
once that she was the sister of the Hereditary Prince: a delicate
refined face, the same eyes, only more lively and brilliant, and an
enchanting smile played round the delicate mouth. The Princess bowed
her small head gravely, said a few civil words to her, and then turned
to Felix, with whom she immediately entered into lively conversation.
Ilse observed with admiration the ease of her manner, and the tact with
which she could say kind things; she soon discovered what an active
mind lay concealed within that lovely form, and that her husband's
answers were instantly followed by intelligent remarks on the part of
the prude lady. At the close of the visit the Princess turned again to
Ilse, and said how much her brother lamented that his illness deprived
him of the pleasure of seeing her. The words and tone were very kind,
but there was a pride and princely dignity in the manner which hurt
Ilse. When the Professor on their return spoke with warmth of the
charming lady, and exclaimed, "That is an uncommonly bright mind! Like
her outward appearance, her inward spirit has a fairy grace about it!"
she was silent; she felt that her husband was right, but she also felt
that the Princess had excluded her from the footing of intimacy which
she had accorded to her Felix.

Being in this state of mind, she was surprised and pleased at one mark
of attention which was shown her. Since her interview with the
Sovereign the head gardener brought her every morning, at the same
hour, a vase of the most beautiful flowers, with the compliments of his
Highness. This was not all: a few days after the Sovereign came again,
when Ilse was sitting, as before, in front of the door. He asked
whether it was not advisable, on account of the slight breeze that had
sprung up, to enter the house; she took him into the room; he sat down
there, and asked, as if accidentally, whether she was well entertained,
and had found any acquaintances in the city. He took so much interest
in her that Ilse said to her husband, when he returned home, "How
mistaken are the opinions that one forms about strangers! When I came
here I thought the Sovereign was a thoroughly reserved man, but I find
him very friendly, and he seems quite a good family man too; but with
such a large household it may frequently be necessary to be strict."

The Sovereign's short visit was repeated. The next time he found the
Professor with his wife. On this occasion he was more serious than
before.

"How were you satisfied with the Hereditary Prince?" he asked the
Professor.

"Those who instructed him praised his industry; among the students he
gained popularity, and there was general regret at parting from him."

The Sovereign remarked the word popularity.

"How did the Prince contrive to gain this?"

"He showed an upright character and decided will, and one felt
confidence in him."

The Sovereign gave a searching look at the Professor, and perceived
from his calm manner that this was not empty civility.

"The attachment of the students showed itself on the departure of the
young Prince by a festive serenade," interposed Ilse.

"I know," replied the Sovereign. "I assumed that Weidegg by his
endeavors contrived to have this done."

"It was of their own free will, and showed their warm feeling," added
the Professor.

The Sovereign remained silent.

"He won the hearts of the ladies also," continued Ilse, "and we
lamented his Highness's absence from our tea-parties."

The Sovereign still continued silent; at last he began, in a bitter
tone:

"What you tell me surprises me. Considering you as the Prince's
instructor, I may speak more openly to you than to my household. The
Prince has a weak character, and I have no confidence in his future."

"He gave us the impression of having, under all this shy reserve, the
qualities for the formation of a firm and noble character," replied the
Professor, respectfully.

Ilse thought that this was the moment to introduce something
advantageous to the Prince.

"May I venture to tell your Highness, which my husband entirely
approves of, that the Prince wishes far more knowledge concerning
agricultural industry? As I am myself from the country, your Highness
will forgive me if I should say that this is the best school for our
dear young Prince."

"On the estate of your father?" asked the Sovereign shortly.

"Anywhere," replied Ilse, innocently.

"I have never heard him express any such wish," concluded the
Sovereign, rising. "In any case I am grateful to you for the interest
you take in his future."

He took leave with an air of reserve, and returned to his daily
business.

The day was a difficult one for all who had to do with him. He rode out
with his aide-de-camp into a rough, woody country, where his soldiers
after a night-march were practising field service. Generally he cared
little about the details of man[oe]uvres, but on this occasion he
harassed his aides-de-camp and soldiers by sudden changes of
disposition. When the soldiers at last returned home exhausted, he went
to inspect a distant stud and a plantation, and wandered about four
hours on rough hill roads. No one could do anything to suit him--blame
and bitter remarks alone fell from his lips. In the evening there was a
Court concert; the aide-de-camp, tired to death, stood in the hall,
counting the minutes till his retirement. Then the Sovereign on
withdrawing, called him to his study; there he seated himself in an
arm-chair near the fire-place and gazed at the fire, occasionally put
on a log, and held the silver handle of the fire-tongs in his hand,
striking it at intervals on the iron bars of the grate. Meanwhile the
aide-de-camp stood some steps behind him, one hour, two hours, till he
was ready to faint. It was not till the middle of the night that the
Sovereign rose and said, "You must be tired; I will not detain you
longer." He spoke this mildly, but his eyes glittered with an
unpleasant gleam, and the aide-de-camp acknowledged later to his
intimate friends that he should not forget that look as long as he
lived.

"The Sovereign has visited the pavilion for the third time!" said the
Chamberlain, to the Hereditary Prince, who was sitting in his room with
his throat tied up. The Prince looked down on the book which was lying
before him.

"Do the guests seem to like their residence here?"

"I cannot say that of the Professor's wife: I fear she is placed in a
difficult position here. The marked distinction which his Highness
shows her, and certain old recollections which attach to the
pavilion----"

The Prince rose, and looked so indignantly at the Chamberlain that he
became mute.

"The Sovereign was very ungracious to-day," he continued, in a
depressed tone. "When I reported to him concerning your Highness's
health, I met with a reception which was not encouraging."

The Hereditary Prince approached the window.

"The air is mild, Weidegg; I shall endeavor to go out to-morrow."

The Chamberlain was very uncertain how this decision of the Hereditary
Prince would be received: he departed in silence.

When the Prince was alone, he tore the shawl from his shoulders and
threw it on one side.

"Fool that I was! I wished to preserve her from gossip, and have
exposed her to worse. I myself sit here in seclusion, and my father
visits her in my stead. It was a cowardly device. If I cannot avert
what is impending for this poor creature, I will play my part in the
game that is beginning."

When the Prince on the following morning went to his father, the latter
began, with calm coldness:

"I hear from strangers that you have the desire to obtain some
knowledge of agriculture. The wish is sensible. I shall consider how
you can find an opportunity to obtain this knowledge somewhere in the
country. It will also be advantageous to your health, and will agree
with your inclination for a quite poetic life."

"I shall do what my honored father bids me," replied the Hereditary
Prince, and left the room.

The Sovereign looked after him, and murmured:

"Not a word to be got out of him but cowardly submission; always the
same submissive compliance. Not an eyelash moved when I ordered him to
do what was unwelcome. Is it possible that this pliant boy is a master
of dissimulation, and is deceiving me and all of us?"

If Ilse in spite of the distinction with which the Prince treated her,
had a foreboding of the dark shadow which hung over the pavilion, far
different was the tone of mind of her husband; he lived in the midst of
the interesting investigations to which the museum gave rise, and the
poetry of his earnest mind worked busily, and cast a brilliant lustre
over his sojourn in the capital. He was a hunter who trod with light
step over his hunting ground, breathing the pure mountain air, whilst
around him the rays of the sun gilded the mossy ground and heather. The
time had now come when that of which he had dreamt for years was within
reach of his hand. It is true the new track of the manuscript remained
indistinct. The fate of that chest which had been mentioned in the old
letter could not be ascertained. In the Prince's library, and in a
collection of books in the city, there were found neither manuscripts
nor other books which could be ranked among the possessions of the
monastery of Rossau. He had renewed his acquaintance with the
head-forester, but the latter could think of no place where old hunting
implements were kept. He went through old catalogues of the Marshal's
office, and nowhere could the chest be discovered. But it was more
strange still that the name of a royal castle Solitude was quite
unknown in the capital. The castle, like one in an old legend, had
vanished. But, strange as this circumstance was, yet the account of the
student had won for this old letter of the official an importance which
gave the searcher hopes of a good result. For only a few years ago some
one, who knew little of the value of such a narrative, had seen the
Rossau chest. It was no longer a deceptive image from a distant past;
on any day a lucky accident might lead him to it. But when the
Professor gazed on the slate roof of the royal castle, and ascended the
grand steps, he had always a joyful presentiment that he was now near
his treasure. With the help of the Castellan he had already examined
the whole ground-floor of the castle; he had climbed up under the beams
of the old roof like a marten, and had opened the old garrets, the keys
of which had not turned for a generation. He had found nothing. But
there were other houses belonging to the Sovereign in the town and
neighborhood, and he was quite decided to examine one after the other
secretly.

In this time of restless agitation, when his fancy was always opening
new prospects, intercourse with agreeable persons was very refreshing.
He himself, in this state of excitement, proved a good companion, and
observed with cheerful interest the proceedings of those about him. The
Sovereign showed him great distinction, and the young noblemen were
very attentive; he took his place among them with dignity and without
pretension.

The Chamberlain informed the Professor how much the Princess had been
pleased with him, and Felix rejoiced when one forenoon she and her
lady-in-waiting visited the museum, and begged for his guidance. When
the Princess was going away, thanking him, she begged he would mention
to her some books from which she could herself learn a little about
that portion of the life of antiquity, the ruins connected with which
he had shown her; she told him also of an ancient vase which she
possessed, and asked him to come and see it.

The learned man was now standing with the Princess before the vase. He
explained to her the subject of the pictures, and told her something
about the old Greek pottery. The Princess led him into another room,
and showed him some valuable sketches. "I wish you to see all I possess
of objects of art." While he was examining these, she began, suddenly:
"You have now learnt to know us a little, and how do you like us?"

"I have met with great kindness," replied the Professor, "which is
agreeable to one's self-esteem; it gives me pleasure to observe a life
so different from that of my circle and people, who are differently
bred."

"In what do you find us differently bred?" asked the Princess,
pressingly.

"The habit of acting your part fittingly at every moment, and
maintaining your position among others, give persons an easy
confidence, which always has a pleasant effect."

"That would be an advantage which we share with every tolerable actor,"
replied the Princess.

"At all events, it is an advantage always to play the same role."

"You think, therefore, it is no longer art if we become adepts in it,
and act our part well," rejoined the Princess, smiling; "but in that
also there is danger; we are from childhood so much accustomed to
behave suitably, that it endangers our sincerity; we observe the
effects of our words, and we soon think more of the good effect than of
the purport of what is said. I myself, while talking with you, remark
with pleasure how much I please you, yet I am nothing more than a poor
princess. But if our aptness in presentation pleases you, in like
manner we are attracted by a character that is calm and confident
without attending to outward appearances; and perhaps a deficiency in
the forms of society and the plain speaking of a powerful mind are
interesting to us, if they do not wound our feelings, for on this
point, we are sensitive. Whoever would wish to leave a pleasant
impression, would do well to treat our pretensions with consideration.
I do not wish you to treat me so," she said, interrupting herself, "but
I am solicitous on your account. Yesterday I heard you flatly
contradicting my father. I beg of you to have regard for our weakness,
for I hope that you are still to remain long with us."

The Professor bowed. "If I opposed his views more warmly than was
necessary, it is because I lie under a temptation which is dangerous to
men of my calling. Disputation is the weakness of men of learning."

"Good, we will reckon up our qualities one against the other. But you
are in the happy position of always attacking things boldly; we, on the
contrary, must be cautiously on the defensive. The great importance of
external appearances is instilled into us from youth, and cannot be
dispensed with. With you there is probably seldom any strife about
precedence, and I fear it is quite immaterial to you what place you
take in our degrees of rank; but these things are great events to us,
not only to our Court, but still more to ourselves. Many of us are for
days unhappy, because we have not taken our proper place, at dinner.
Many visits are discontinued on that account, old alliances are broken
off, and there is frequent quarrelling behind the scenes. When we
occasionally meet with clever people of your stamp, we ourselves laugh
over these weaknesses, but few are free from them. I have already
fought for my place at dinner, and made a great fuss about it," she
added, with good-humored frankness.

"No one can entirely free himself from the ideas of his circle,"
replied the Professor, courteously. "A century ago there was the same
tormenting eagerness about rank and social precedence among the
citizens. With us it has become different since our life has been
pervaded with a strong intellectual element. In the future, even at
Court, people will laugh at these things as antiquated frippery."

The Princess raised her little finger threateningly. "Mr. Werner, that
was spoken again as the learned man: it was not polite. For, though we
move entirely in the track of fashion and of Court manners, we do not
remain behind those from whom we are socially separated."

"Perhaps it is because you separate yourselves," said the Professor.
"The warmest pulse of our nation has always been in the middle class;
from them education and new ideas have gradually spread to the princes
and the people. Even the peculiarities and weaknesses of the
civilization of a period rise to the throne generally half a century
after the educated middle class of the nation have suffered from them,
and are only just appreciated there when they are already giving way
among the people to some new tendency of the time. Therefore, it is
often difficult for the Sovereign and his people to understand each
other."

"Oh, how right you are!" exclaimed the Princess, drawing nearer to him.
"It is the fate of princes, the misfortune of us all, that the most
valuable culture of our time seldom exercises a good influence upon us.
There is a want of fresh air in the atmosphere in which we live, we are
all weak and sickly. All who approach near us must accommodate
themselves to our prejudices, and we accustom ourselves to regard men
according to the rules which we have devised for them ourselves. Have
you ever before been brought into contact with any of our great
rulers?"

"No," replied the Professor.

"Have you never sent what you have written to any of them?"

"I have had no occasion to do so," replied the Professor.

"Then you are unacquainted with the scale of favors that are shown to
you learned gentlemen. Now, I must repay you for the delightful
instruction you have given me about ancient vases, by giving you some
instruction in return. Sit down opposite to me. You are now my pupil."
The Princess leaned back in her chair, and assumed a serious
expression. "We assume that you are pious and good, and look up
respectfully to the handle of the Imperial globe that we hold in our
hand. Your first presentation comes,--a handsome book; the title-page
is opened: 'Upon antique vases.' Hm--who is the man? One informs
oneself a little about the fellow, and it is well if your name is
already to be found in print. Thereupon follows an answer of
acknowledgment from the Council, short variations according to formula
No. 1. Your second presentation makes its appearance: a beautiful
binding, an agreeable impression, therefore a warmer acknowledgment in
courteous expressions, according to formula No. 2. A third
presentation: again a large volume, the gilt edges are unimpeachable;
the Council take the book up and weigh it. If the author is a lesser
light, he enters the class of gold breastpins; if he is worthy of a
higher consideration, from a well-known name, and what is more
effective with us, from a title, he reaches the sphere of orders. There
are different classes of orders which are distributed among strangers,
accurately according to their titles. But he who is persistent, and
does not tire of showing fresh marks of respect, hops gradually, like
the green frog, at intervals of years, to the highest rank."

"My kindest thanks for the instruction," replied the Professor. "I must
be allowed in this case to take the Council under my protection. For
what could the illustrious gentlemen do when they are overrun with such
a multitude of indifferent presents?"

"It was a fair example," said the Princess, "of how beautifully we have
arranged, in all directions, the steps to our favor. For the rest, we
are, with respect to what we accord to people, not only civil, but
economical. He who has no colored ribbons to give, finds himself
greatly inconvenienced. But," continued she, in a changed tone, "in the
same way our principal efforts in every undertaking are made with an
eye to vain show and empty forms; and as hundreds are so weak and
abject that they are attracted in this way, we think we can thus attach
millions to us."

"Many small advantages may be obtained in this manner," replied the
Professor; "but there is an error in your reasoning; he who tries to
attach men to him by their weakness, vanity, and pride, does not gain
the best part of their life. In quiet times this attraction is
unnecessary, and in times of danger it has only the strength of a rope
of sand."

The Princess nodded her head.

"We know that right well," she said, confidingly; "and we do not feel
comfortable and secure, in spite of the profuse distribution of honors.
What I tell you would sound like high treason to my illustrious
relatives, only because I express it, not because I think it. Do not
consider me the black sheep of the flock, there are wiser people than I
who in secret form the same judgment; but we cannot find our way out of
the barrier, and we cling to it, although we know that the support is
weak. For as the humming-bird gazes on the serpent, so do we view the
prospect that the present age opens before us, with a shudder and
helpless expectation." She rose. "But I am a woman, and have no right
to speak with you upon these important subjects. When I feel uneasy I
use the right of women--to complain--which I have done abundantly to
you. For I have it at heart to please you, Mr. Werner. I wish you to
consider me as a woman who deserves something better than complaisant
words and polite nothings. Allow me often the pleasure of rectifying my
judgment by yours."

She put out her hand to the learned man with hearty confidence. Werner
bowed low, and left the room. The Princess looked after him with a
pleased expression.

The Professor went fresh from the conversation to the pavilion, and
told his wife all that had passed.

"I did net consider it possible," he exclaimed, "to find a woman of
this rank with so liberal and high-minded an understanding of her
position. What was most charming was her animated, and unaffected
manner--a charm that made itself felt at every moment, both in voice
and movement. I am enchanted with the little lady. I will immediately
prepare the book that she wished for."

He seated himself at the table, marked out passages, and wrote remarks
on small strips of paper, which he laid within.

Ilse was sitting by the window, looking at her husband in astonishment.
It was no wonder that the Princess pleased him. Ilse herself had with
the quick intuition of a woman perceived her power of attraction. Here
was a soul that, amidst the constraint of her Court, longed for
intercourse with a man of liberal culture; here was a powerful mind
that rose above the prejudices of rank,--clever, light of fancy, and
quick of comprehension. Now this woman had found a man to whom she
could look up, and with her little hands she cast her fetters about
him.

The room was becoming dark. Felix was still sitting writing and making
notes. The rays of the evening sun shone upon his head, but the dark
shadow of the unfamiliar room hovered over Ilse. She rose from her
chair behind her husband.

"He is good to me," she said to herself; "he loves me, as one always
does the person whom one has taken into confidence. He is not like
other men; he will not allow a stranger to take away my rights; he is
innocent as a child, and does not perceive the danger that threatens
him and me. Take care, Ilse, not to awake the night-wanderer. I, fool!
What right have I to complain if another should benefit by his rich
mind? Have I not enough for myself in the treasure of his life? No,"
she exclaimed, and threw her arms round her husband's neck; "you belong
to me, and I will have you entirely."

The Professor raised his head, and his look of astonishment brought
Ilse to her senses.

"Forgive me," she said, feebly; "I was thinking."

"What is the matter. Ilse?" he asked, kindly; "your cheeks are hot. Are
you ill?"

"It will pass over; have patience with me."

The Professor left his book, and occupied himself anxiously about his
wife.

"Open the window," she said softly. "The air of the close room feels
heavy to me."

He was so tenderly concerned about her that she again looked cheerfully
at him.

"It was a foolish weakness, Felix; it has passed away."




                            _CHAPTER XXIX_.

                            TWO NEW GUESTS.


The Professor was standing with the Chamberlain and the Sovereign in
the study. The latter held in his hand the memorial that Werner had
prepared respecting the new catalogue of the museum.

"Only now can I form an estimate concerning the extent of the catalogue
which you consider necessary. I am ready to agree to your proposals, if
you will bind yourself to undertake the superintendence of the new
arrangement and of the catalogue. If you cannot do us this service,
everything must remain as before, for only the great confidence which I
have in you, and the wish to keep you here, will induce me to make the
necessary sacrifice. You see I make the undertaking dependent upon the
degree of inclination which you yourself have for this work."

The Professor replied that his presence might be desirable for the
introductory arrangements, and that he was ready to spend some weeks
upon it. Afterwards, it would be sufficient if from time to time he
examined the progress of the work.

"With this I shall be content for the present," said the Sovereign,
after a pause; "our contract is, then, concluded. But I see that it
will be necessary to get some one who will carry out the details under
your guidance. Will the Curator be able to it?"

The Professor thought not.

"And could you propose any one?"

The Professor thought over the old members of his circle.

But the proper man at once occurred to the Chamberlain.

"Would not Magister Knips do for this work?"

"Just the man," said the Professor; "industry, knowledge, everything
about him, makes him peculiarly adapted for it. I believe that he may
be had at once. I can answer for his trustworthiness with respect to
the care of objects of value. But I cannot take this responsibility
upon me without disclosing to your Highness that once in his life, from
want of caution, he was implicated in a disagreeable affair, that
lessened the confidence, not only of myself, but of many of his
acquaintances."

The Professor then related, with forbearance towards all concerned, the
history of the forged parchment sheet of Tacitus.

The Sovereign listened with interest, and pondered.

"With respect to the safety of the collection, the old catalogue will
allow of constant control. You consider the Magister innocent of this
deception?"

"I do consider him so," replied the learned man.

"Then I request you to write him."

Some days afterwards Magister Knips entered the capital. He carried his
travelling-bag and hat-box to an unpretending inn, at once clad himself
in the dress which he had always spoken of to his mother as his livery,
and sought the Professor at the Pavilion. Gabriel saw the figure in the
distance passing through the blooming shrubs, his head on his shoulder
and his hat in his hand; for Knips considered it proper to uncover his
head in the sacred precincts of the castle, and entered like a walking
bow into the distinguished horizon. The Professor could not conceal a
smile when he saw the Magister in courtly attire, polished and
fragrant, standing before him, with two low obeisances.

"It was the Chamberlain who proposed you for this occupation, and I did
not object to it. For on the supposition that you will be suitably
remunerated, an opportunity for work is afforded which may perhaps
raise you for good above your insignificant occupation, and which, if
dutifully carried out, will entitle you not only to our warmest thanks,
but to those of the whole learned world. Your conduct here may
therefore be decisive for the rest of your life. Remember, also, every
hour, Mr. Magister, that you have to show conscientiousness and
fidelity, not only to learning, but also with respect to the property
of the prince who has called you to this post of confidence."

"When I read the letter of the right honorable and most highly
respected Professor," answered Knips, "I did not doubt that his kind
intentions were to give me the opportunity of assuming a new character
in life. Therefore, upon entering the portals of an unknown career, I
entreat with deep emotion, above all, for the continuation of your good
opinion, which I trust to be able to deserve by faithful obedience."

"Very well then," concluded the Professor; "announce yourself to the
Chamberlain."

The day following Knips was sitting before a row of antique lamps, with
brown Holland sleeves to preserve his dress coat, his pen behind his
ear, surrounded by the books of the castle library; he opened them,
compared, wrote, and was as active in his work as if he had all his
life been a clerk in a bric-a-brac establishment of ancient Rome.

The Chamberlain announced before dinner, with satisfaction, to the
Hereditary Prince, "Magister Knips has come;" and the Prince repeated
to his sister, "The wise Knips is here."

"Ah, the Magister!" said the father, with equal good humor.

The same week the Sovereign was taken by the Chamberlain into the
museum, in order that Knips might fall under his notice. The Sovereign
looked with curiosity upon the lowly bent man, who perspired with
fright, and who now quite resembled a mouse which is prevented by a
powerful fascination from disappearing into its hole. The Sovereign
discovered immediately what he called a subaltern nature; and the pale
flat face, retreating chin, and dolorous aspect, appeared to amuse him.
In passing, he remarked the rampart of books from which Knips had
emerged.

"You have made yourself quickly at home; I hope that you will find all
the books that are indispensable to your work."

"I have ventured," said Knips in a high and rasping voice, "to borrow
from your Highness's library much that I needed. My wants are moderate,
and what I lacked, I have managed, through the assistance of honored
patrons, to obtain from the university library of my native city."

The Sovereign answered with a short nod, and proceeded. Magister Knips
remained standing in an attitude of deferent respect till the Sovereign
had left the room, when he returned to his chair, and, without turning
to the right or left, resumed his writing. Whenever the Sovereign
entered or left the room he started up and sank down again, as if
turned into an automaton by his great respect.

"Are you satisfied with him?" asked the Sovereign, of the Professor.

"Beyond expectation," answered the latter.

The Chamberlain, pleased by his recommendation, reminded his master
that Knips was also an excellent painter of coats of arms, and
possessed remarkable knowledge of the customs and regulations of the
old Court festivals.

When the Sovereign left the gallery he cast a dignified glance over the
bent head of the little man; but Knips might well be pleased with the
results of this presentation, for he was pronounced very respectful,
and regarded useful for further projects.

He had soon an opportunity of showing his usefulness in an
extraordinary case. The arrangements of the Court were in every respect
exemplary, and not least when the Sovereign wished to show some mark of
attention. A confidential councillor kept a list of the birthdays on
which the Sovereign was bound to make a present, and also of the
popular festivals where it was necessary for him to present a silver
cup or some other testimony of his royal sympathy. On this list was
noted down the fixed value of the present; and as the time approached
the councillor sent the necessary information to the Chamberlain, whose
business it was to choose a suitable present. On the birthday of any
member of the princely family the Chamberlain only made suggestions;
the Sovereign himself decided what was to be given.

Now the birthday of the Princess was approaching. The
gentleman-in-waiting, therefore, made a visit to her lady-in-waiting,
in order to discover secretly what the Princess would like. In this not
uncommon way many things were proposed; the Chamberlain of his own idea
added modern trifles, among them copies of colored initial letters,
which just then were painted in albums and letter-sheets, for he knew
that the Princess had wished for things of the kind. The Sovereign
glanced over the list, and at last stopped at the initial letters.

"These Parisian manufactures will hardly please the Princess. Could she
not have painted letters copied from old parchments by a draughtsman?
Did you not extol Magister Knips to me? He could prepare very pretty
little designs."

The Chamberlain expressed deferent surprise at his Highness's idea, and
sought the Magister. Knips promised to paint all the letters of the
alphabet in the old characters, and the Chamberlain meanwhile looked
after the cover. When the work of the Magister was laid before the
Sovereign he was indeed surprised.

"These are like the beautiful old rubrics," he exclaimed; "how do they
come here?"

Every letter was so painted on the old parchment that at cursory glance
it could not be discovered whether the work was old or new.

"This shows wonderful talent; take care that the man is compensated
according to the value of his service."

Knips lapsed into a state of respectful transport when the Chamberlain
demonstrated to him the satisfaction of the Sovereign in shining coins.
But it did not end there. For shortly afterwards the Sovereign visited
the museum at the time when Knips was working. The Sovereign stopped
again in front of the Magister, and said:

"I was delighted with your pictures. You possess a rare aptitude: both
eyes and judgment might be deceived by the counterfeit of antiquity."

"Your most gracious Highness must pardon me if, on account of shortness
of time, the imitation was imperfect," replied the bowing Knips.

"I am quite satisfied with it," rejoined the Sovereign, examining
sharply the countenance and bearing of the little man. He began to
vouchsafe a feeling of interest for the Magister. "You must have
formerly had opportunities of exercising this art in a remunerative
way."

"It has been reserved for your Highness to render my little dexterity
valuable to me," replied Knips; "hitherto I have only practised such
imitations for my own pleasure, or here and there to please others."

The Sovereign laughed, and went away with a gracious nod. Magister
Knips was judged to be very useful.





The Princess was sitting at her writing-table; the pen in her little
hand flew over the paper; sometimes she looked into a book, which had a
learned appearance, and copied passages which were designated by marks.
Steps in the ante-room disturbed her work; the Hereditary Prince
entered, with an officer in foreign uniform.

"Sit down, children!" exclaimed the Princess. "Put aside your sabre,
Victor, and come to me. You have become a handsome fellow: one can see
that you have taken your place among strangers."

"I am breaking my way through," replied Victor, shrugging his
shoulders, and laying his sabre cautiously near, that he might reach it
with his hand.

"Be tranquil," said the Princess, consolingly; "we are now safe; he is
busy."

"If he said so, we must not depend upon it," replied Victor. "You have
become serious, Siddy. Even the room is changed--books, nothing but
books." He opened one at the title-page. "'Archaeology of Art.' Tell
me, what are you doing with this trash?"

"I am breaking my way through," repeated Siddy, shrugging her
shoulders.

"Siddy patronizes learning," explained the Hereditary Prince. "We now
have literary tea-parties, she has pieces read and roles assigned. Take
care, you will have to join it."

"I only read villains' parts," replied Victor; "or, at the most valets'
roles."

"The inferior parts are always my share," said the Hereditary Prince.
"The best that falls to my lot is a good-natured father, who ends by
giving his blessing."

"He has talent for nothing but open-hearted goodness; he protests if he
has more than four verses to recite, and even with that there are
pauses during which he fidgets with his lorgnette."

"His proper vocation would be that of pastor," said Victor, mockingly.
"He would favor his congregation with short sermons, and set them a
virtuous example."

"If he were only better than you, there would be no merit in it,
Victor. You have the reputation of playing such naughty tricks that we
are not allowed even to know them?"

"All calumny!" cried Victor, "I am harshly judged in my regiment
because of my strict principles."

"Then Heaven preserve us from an invasion of your comrades. I am glad
that you mean to pass your leave of absence in our parts; but I am
surprised at it. You are free: the whole world is open to you."

"Yes, free as a jackdaw that is thrown out of its nest," replied
Victor; "but there are times when it occurs to one that a garrison has
not all the charms of home."

"And that you seek with us?" asked the Princess. "Poor cousin! But
meanwhile you have been campaigning. I congratulate you. We hear that
you behaved gallantly."

"I had a good horse," said Victor, laughing.

"You have also visited all our relations?"

"I have penetrated the mysteries of three Courts," replied Victor.
"First, at my cousin's, the innocent shepherd's Court,--a charming
rural life! The Grand Marshal carries embroidery in his pocket, at
which he works among the ladies. The lady-in-waiting comes with her
spaniel to dinner, and has him fed in the kitchen. Twice every week
people are invited from the city to tea and pastry. When the family are
alone at their tea they play for hazel-nuts. I believe that they are
gathered in the autumn by the whole Court. Then I went to the Court of
my great-uncle, with the six-foot grenadiers. I was the smallest of the
society. One day all were in the costume of generals, the day after all
were Nimrods, in hunting-coats and gaiters. One day it was drilling,
and the next hunting. Powder is the greatest article of consumption at
Court there. Even the ballet-dancers, they say, wear uniforms under
their gauze. Lastly, there was the great Court of Aunt Louisa. All with
white heads and powder. Any one with the hair of youth endeavoured to
rid of it as quickly as possible. In the evening virtuous family
conversation, and if any talked scandal, they would on the following
morning receive an order from the Princess to contribute to some
benevolent institution. The Princess Minna asked me whether I attended
church regularly, and when I told her that at all events I played
regularly at whist with our chaplain, I was held in great contempt. She
danced the first country dance with her brother and only the second
with me. The evening society was accurately arranged according to the
respective dignities of the guests. There was the hall of the Privy
Councillors, of the Chamberlains, and of the small folk of the Court;
and, besides that, a lower place for an unavoidable class of citizens,
in which bankers and artists wait to be noticed by their Highnesses."

"These formalities make us ridiculous to the whole world," exclaimed
the Hereditary Prince.

The Princess and Victor laughed at this sudden ebullition.

"Since when has Benno become a Red?" asked Victor.

"It is the first time I have heard him speak in this way," said the
Princess.

"A prince should only invite gentlemen into his society; but whoever is
there should be considered as the equal of the rest," continued the
Hereditary Prince.

Again the others laughed.

"We thank you for the wise remark, Professor Bonbon," cried Siddy.

"It was in this room that we dressed you up as an owl, Bonbon; and you
sat here groaning under Siddy's mantle when the Sovereign surprised
us."

"And where you received punishment," replied Benno, "because you had so
disfigured a poor fellow like me."

"Fix him up again!" cried Siddy.

"Victor took a colored silk handkerchief, formed two points by knots
for ear-tufts, and covered the head of the Hereditary Prince, who
quietly submitted. His serious face, with his dark eyebrows, looked
strangely from under the covering.

"The feather-coat is wanting," exclaimed Siddy; "we must imagine it. I
am the quail, and Victor the cock. I know the melody that we used to
improvise as children."

She flew to the pianoforte and ran over the notes. The Hereditary
Prince twisted the theatre-bill, which he pulled out of his pocket,
into a cornet, and cried into it, "Tu-whit, tu-whoo, Mrs. Quail, I eat
you."

The quail sang: "Pik werwit old tu-wooh, that you will not do." And the
cock crows, "Cock-a-doodle-doo, dearest quail, I love you."

"That has never been true, Victor," said the Princess, in the midst of
the game.

"Who knows?" rejoined he; "cock-a-doodle-doo."

The concert was in full flow. Victor sprang about, clapped his hands
and crowed; the Hereditary Prince on his chair screeched unweariedly
like an owl; Siddy moved her head in time, sang her pik-wer-wit,
calling out occasionally, "You are very funny little boys." A slight
knocking was heard; they quickly left off their play; the sabre was
restored to its belt; and the quail became in a moment the
distinguished lady.

"His Grace your father begs to inform your Highness that he will wait
upon you," announced the page.

"I knew that he would disturb us," cried Victor, in a rage.

"Away with you, children," cried Princess Sidonie. "I must repeat once
more, cousin, that I rejoice to have you with us again. We three will
hold together. Benno is brave, and my only comfort. Avoid conversing
with me whenever the Sovereign is present. I will not take it amiss if
you do not notice me at all. The spy who is placed about me is now my
maid of honor, Lossau. Every word that you speak in her presence is
reported; you know the gentlemen, they have not become more pleasant."

"There is Benno's Chamberlain," asked Victor; "the Sovereign was
talking to him a long time to-day."

"He is good-humored, but weak," remarked the Hereditary Prince; "and
devoted to his place. There is no dependence on him."

"Try to behave well, Victor," continued the Princess; "be a good
Chinese, and wear your pigtail according to rule, and deport yourself
exactly according to the privileges of the tuft that you wear on your
cap. Now, away with you down the private staircase."

Princess Sidonie hastened to the door of the reception-room to meet the
Sovereign. The Sovereign passed through the rooms to her study. He cast
a glance at the open book:

"Who has made these marks?"

"Mr. Werner noted the most important passages for me," replied the
Princess.

"I am glad that you make use of this opportunity to obtain instruction
from so distinguished a man. Apart from the pedantic manner which
attaches to his profession, he is a remarkable man. I wish, on account
of his disinterested activity, to make his position as agreeable as
possible, and I beg that you will do your best towards accomplishing
it."

The Princess bowed silently, closing her hand convulsively.

"As it is impossible to bring him and his wife into closer relations
with the Court, I wish you would invite them to one of your little
tea-parties."

"You must pardon me, my most worthy father, if I do not see how this
can be. My evening parties have hitherto consisted only of my ladies
and the principal members of the Court."

"Then you must alter that," said the Sovereign, coldly; "you are not
prevented from introducing into it one or other of our officials, with
their wives."

"Pardon me, my father; as this has never yet happened, every one would
remark that the change has only been occasioned through the strangers.
It would occasion much ill-natured remark if an accidental visit were
to upset what has been the acknowledged rule up to the present day."

"The consideration of foolish gossip shall not prevent you," replied
the Sovereign, angrily.

"My gracious father must take a favorable view of the considerations
which hinder my doing anything of the kind. It would not become me, a
woman, to dispense with the habits and customs which my lord and father
has considered binding upon himself. You have deigned to permit the
attendance of Mr. Werner at your small dinners, and I could, without
giving any uncommon offence, receive him at my tea-table. His wife, on
the other hand, has never been brought into relations with the Court
through your own sanction. It would ill become the daughter to venture
what the father himself has not done."

"This reason is a poor disguise for ill-nature," replied the Sovereign.
"Nothing hinders you from leaving out the whole Court."

"I can have no evening society, however small, without inviting the
ladies of the Court," replied the Princess, pertinaciously; "and I
cannot ask them to take part in a mixed society."

"I will take care that Miss von Lossau shall appear," replied the
Sovereign, in a bitter tone. "I insist upon your conforming to my
wishes."

"Forgive me, gracious father," replied the Princess, in great
excitement, "if I do not obey you in this case."

"Do you dare to defy me?" cried the Sovereign, with a sudden outbreak
of anger, approaching the Princess.

The Princess turned pale, and stepped behind a chair as if for
protection.

"I am the only lady of our house," she exclaimed; "and I have in this
high position to pay regard to considerations from which, neither as
the lord of this Court, nor as my own father, you can release me. If
your Highness chooses to make new Court regulations, I will willingly
conform to them; but what your Highness requires of me now is not a new
regulation, but an irregularity which is humiliating for me and for us
all."

"Impertinent, insolent fool!" cried the Sovereign, no longer master of
himself. "Do you think you have outgrown my control because I once let
you out of my hands? I have brought you here in order to hold you fast.
You are in my power; no slave is more so. Within these walls no power
prevails but mine, and if you do not bend to it, I will break your
stubborn spirit."

He approached her threateningly. The Princess drew back to the wall of
her room.

"I know I am your prisoner," she cried out, with flashing eyes. "I knew
when I returned here that I was entering my prison. I knew that no cry
of anguish could penetrate these walls, and that a slave would find
more protection among men than the child of a prince from her father.
But in this room I have a supporter, to whom I often look imploringly;
and if your Highness deprives me of the help of all the living, I call
upon the dead for protection against you."

She pulled the cord of a curtain, and the life-sized picture of a lady
became visible, in whose soft countenance there was a touching
expression of sorrow. The Princess pointed to the picture and looked
fixedly at the Sovereign.

"Will your Highness venture to insult your daughter before the eyes of
her mother?"

The Sovereign drew back, and gave vent to a hoarse murmur, turned away,
and motioned with his hand.

"Cover the picture," he said, in a feeble voice. "Do not excite
yourself and me unnecessarily," he began, in a changed tone. "If you do
not choose to fulfill my wishes, I will not insist upon it." He took
his hat from the table, and continued, in a softer tone: "You are
beloved by the citizens; the weather is as warm as summer, and promises
to last. I will, on your birthday, arrange to have a morning concert
for the officials and the citizens in the park. I will send you a list
of invitations through the Lord High Steward. In the evening we shall
have a gala-supper and visit the opera."

The Sovereign left the room without looking at his daughter. The
Princess followed him to the anteroom, where the attendants were
standing. At the door she made a low curtsy. The Sovereign gave a
friendly sign with his hand. The Princess then flew back into her room,
threw herself down before the picture, and wrung her hands.





The Princes were walking in the park, and the promenaders bowed and
looked after them. The Hereditary Prince took off his hat with the
dignity of a man; Victor touched his hussar cap lightly, and nodded
sometimes familiarly to a pretty face.

"All old acquaintances," he began; "it is a pleasure, indeed, to be
home again."

"You always were a favorite of the people," said the Hereditary Prince.

"I have amused and provoked them," replied Victor laughing. "I feel
like Hercules with his mother earth, and am ready for any mischief.
Benno, do not look so dejected; I cannot stand it."

"If you had, like me, to walk always at the same hour you would look so
too," replied Benno, stopping before an empty water-tank, in which four
little bears were sitting, looking at the public, who were throwing
bread to them. The Hereditary Prince took a piece of bread from the
keeper, who approached him hat in hand, and threw it mechanically to
the bears. "And if you had by high command to show yourself every day
as the friend of the people, and feed these stupid bears, you would
also weary of them."

"Pooh!" exclaimed Victor, "it only depends upon yourself to make these
louts amusing."

He sprang with one jump into the walled place among the animals, laid
hold of the first bear as a sheep is carried to be shorn, threw it upon
the second, and the third upon the fourth; a horrible growling and
clawing began among the bears; they fought violently together, and the
bystanders shouted with pleasure.

"Your hand, comrade," called out the Prince, to one of the spectators,
who were watching him and giving vent to loud expressions of
approbation. "Help me out."

The person called upon was our friend Gabriel, who held out both hands.

"Here, your Excellence, quick, that they don't catch your uniform."

Victor sprang lightly up, giving his supporter a slap on the shoulder.

"Thanks, comrade; if you ever get into a fix, I will lend you a hand
too."

The people cried "Bravo!" with much laughter.

"You must force life into the place," said Victor. "If your father does
not drive me away, I shall in a week make it as lively at your Court as
I have done here in the bear-pit."

"I, meanwhile, have suffered for it," replied Benno, with vexation;
"one man said to another, 'What a pity that that fellow has not as much
courage!' of course meaning me."

"Never mind: you are the wise one. In the eyes of thoughtful people,
your virtues shine bright when placed in contrast with mine. Now let me
into your confidence. What lady of the theatre do you favor with your
attentions, that I may not be in the way? I do not wish to interfere
with you."

"Nothing of this kind is permitted me," replied Benno.

"Not permitted?" asked Victor, astonished; "what kind of tyranny is
this? Has it become the fashion here to be virtuous? Then impart to me,
at least, what other lady, from political reasons, may only be admired
by me in the distance?"

"I believe that you have free choice," replied Prince Benno, depressed.

"What a blessing for me that I am not Hereditary Prince! But what has
occasioned the Sovereign to invite me here so graciously?"

"We do not know; Siddy also was surprised."

"And I, fool, thought she had a hand in the game."

"If she had attempted anything of the kind, you would assuredly have
had no invitation."

"That he does not like me is evident. I had a cool reception."

"Perhaps he wishes to have you married."

"To whom?" asked Victor, quickly.

"He has caused you to visit amongst our relations," replied the
Hereditary Prince, cautiously.

"He? By no means. I was passed on from one to another, and everywhere
treated like a nice boy. The whole was clearly concerted."

"Perhaps one of our great matchmakers was at the bottom of it," said
the Hereditary Prince.

"Not in my case, depend upon it. I am ill looked upon by the conclave
of mothers of our country, who have in charge the feelings of our
princely families. They would not stir a finger for me."

"If my father has not done it, or none of our relations, the Lord High
Steward must have done it."

"Bless you for this supposition," exclaimed Victor. "If he wishes to
have me here then all is right."

"Have you spoken to him?"

"I have been with him; he talked to me about the campaign, and spoke in
his usual friendly way, but nothing more."

"Then it was he, you may depend upon it."

"But why?" asked Victor. "What can I do here?"

"That you must not ask me; he favors me with little of his confidence."

"Why do you turn away from the pavilion at every bend in the path?"
asked Victor. "Have you placed steel traps there? By Jove, what a
glorious face! Look, you dissembler! So, you are become virtuous?"

The Hereditary Prince colored with indignation.

"The lady up there deserves the most considerate treatment," he said,
moodily.

"Then that is the beautiful stranger," cried Victor; "she is reading.
If she would only turn a look this way, that one might see more than
her profile. We will go there: you shall introduce me."

"Under no circumstances," replied the Hereditary Prince; "least of all
now."

Victor looked at him in astonishment.

"You refuse to present me to this lady? I do not need it," and he let
go his arm.

"You are mad!" cried the Hereditary Prince, holding him back.

"I was never more in my senses," rejoined Victor.

He hastened up to a tree, the low branches of which nearly reached to
the window, and with the agility of a cat he climbed up to the top.
Ilse looked up and perceived the Hereditary Prince, and an officer
climbing up a tree. She withdrew from the window. Victor broke off a
switch, and touched one of the panes. A bell rang, a window was opened,
and Gabriel looked out.

"Always in the air, your Excellence?" he cried out; "what are your
Excellence's commands?"

"Tender my respectful compliments to your mistress, and request her to
favor me with a moment's interview upon urgent business."

Ilse appeared, with her usual serious countenance, at the window, the
servant behind her. The young gentleman held on fast by one hand, and
raised the other to his cap.

"I beg your pardon. Madam, for choosing this unnatural way of
presenting myself to you, but my cousin down there has sent me up here
against my will."

"If you fall, Sir, you may take with you the full conviction that it
was unnecessary to climb the tree: the door of the house is always
open."

Ilse retreated, and Victor bowed again.

"The lady is quite of my opinion," he cried out, reprovingly, to the
Hereditary Prince, "that you have done very wrong in keeping me from
the door."

"There is no way of getting out of this scrape but by going in at once,
and apologizing," replied the Hereditary Prince.

"That is exactly what I wish," cried Victor. "One must always let
people know what they want."

The Princes entered the house together, and Ilse received them with a
silent curtsy.

"This is the gentleman," began the Hereditary Prince, "of whom, Mrs.
Werner, I have often spoken to you. As a boy he was always called, by
those who knew his character, Master Madcap."

"Your Highness should not have acted so," returned Ilse, sorrowfully;
"I am a stranger here, and more exposed to misrepresentation than
others." She then turned to the Hereditary Prince. "It is the first
time that I have seen your Highness since your recovery."

"I am in danger of being again banished from your presence," replied
the Hereditary Prince, "and it has been your wish."

Ilse looked at him surprised.

"You have imparted to my father the purport of a conversation that I
once had with you," continued the Hereditary Prince, in a tone of
vexation. "You have thus caused my father to determine that I shall be
removed from here into the country."

"I would not on any account that your Highness should believe me
capable of betraying a confidence. If the harmless words I spoke to
your father were contrary to your wishes, I can only say, in excuse,
that they proceeded from the warmest interest in your Highness."

The Hereditary Prince bowed silently.

"This terzetto is composed of only dissonances," exclaimed Victor. "We
are all three vexed at each other,--I most of all, for my disobliging
cousin has exposed me to the danger of entirely losing your favor,
without having first had the opportunity of winning it. Yet I beg
permission at some future time to introduce myself in a better light
than amongst the foliage of the tree."

The Princes took leave. When they were clear of the house, Victor said:

"I would like to get a little straight in this matter of the
Professor's wife. I perceive now that it is in no case advisable for me
to lay my homage openly at her feet. Do not be angry with me, Benno,--I
will spoil no man's game; if you can make use of me, I am at your
service."

The Hereditary Prince remained standing, and looked so sorrowfully at
his cousin that even he became serious.

"If you would do me a service for which I should thank you as long as I
live, help me to procure the departure of those that dwell in that
house, from this country as quickly as possible. It will bring them no
good fortune to remain near us."

"Say it right out: they will believe you sooner than me."

"What reason shall I give?" asked the Hereditary Prince. "There is only
one, and I am the last who should venture to express it."

"The lady looks as if she could take care of herself," said Victor,
consolingly. "I am more anxious about you. I see you are in danger of
being for once of the same mind as your father. Will you not at least
venture to raise objections to his sending you away?"

"By what right?" asked the Hereditary Prince; "he is my father, Victor,
and my sovereign. I am the first of his subjects, and it becomes me to
be the most obedient. So long as he does not command me to do anything
which is against my conscience, I am in duty bound to obey him at once.
That is the rule of conduct that I have laid down for myself from my
own convictions."

"But let us suppose," rejoined Victor, "that a father wishes to remove
his son in order to devise mischief against another, in whom his son
takes an interest?"

"I still think that the son must go," replied the Hereditary Prince,
"however hard it may be for him; for it does not become him to foster
suspicions of his father in his soul."

"More son than Prince!" cried Victor; "and there is an end of it,
virtuous Benno. Ah, Bergau, where are you going?"

The Marshall, whom he accosted, replied, hastily, "To the Pavilion, my
Prince."

"Have you heard any details," asked Victor, mysteriously, "concerning
the scare they have had at the castle of my great-uncle? It was about a
woman, or rather an apparition, which, in reality, was a spirit that
entered as a spectre, with a great row; it began as a thundering noise
and ended like a funeral march; it made the doors shake, and the
chandeliers jingle like a peal of bells. Have you heard nothing of it?"

"Nothing. What apparition? When--and how?"

"I do not quite know," replied Victor; "but if you hear anything of it,
I beg you to let me know."

This the Marshal promised to do, and hastened away.

The Marshal was blameless in his service; he inspected all the accounts
conscientiously, took care to have good wine in the cellar, and
discharged the ceremonial details of his office well. Besides this, he
was a worthy nobleman, but without any great abilities. He was,
therefore, a valuable champion of Court; for he contended, with all the
energy of a fanatic, for the venerated customs of his household against
the irregular pretensions of foreign guests, and was sometimes made use
of by the Sovereign as a battering-ram to assault a wall which another
would have gone cautiously round. He now came to Ilse, ill-pleased at
heart with the commission which he had been commanded to carry out
dexterously. He found the Professor's wife in an unfavorable mood. The
boldness of Victor, and the secret reproach conveyed in the words of
the Hereditary Prince, had made her discontented with herself, and
suspicious of the uncertain position in which she was placed. The
Marshal long stirred the bowl from which he had to pour; he turned the
conversation to Ilse's home and her father, whom he had once met at a
cattle-show.

"It is a fine estate, I hear, and has a very high reputation."

Ilse, taking pleasure in this praise of what was dear to her, entered
unsuspiciously into the conversation, and told him of the neighboring
farms and their owners.

At last the Marshal began:

"Your father is worthy of every distinction; pardon me, therefore, if I
put one question: Has your father ever had the wish to be ennobled?"

"No," replied Ilse, staring at the Marshal with astonishment; "why
should he have such a wish?"

"I refrain from all observations upon the favorable effect which such
an elevation would have upon the career of your brothers and sisters;
that is obvious. One can easily conceive that modesty and pride may
hinder a man from seeking these advantages. But I am convinced that his
Highness the Sovereign, even for his own interest, would be glad to
confer such a favor; for the position of your father, with respect to
my gracious master, would thereby become much more satisfactory."

"It is very satisfactory as it is," said Ilse.

"Considering the personal relations into which you have entered with
our Court, I may venture to speak openly to you," continued the
Marshal, with more confidence. "It would be very desirable for his
princely Highness, and for us all, if, on the occasions of his
Highness's accidental presence in your country, he could find a house
in which he might receive hospitality."

Ilse interrupted him in great astonishment. "I beg of you, Mr. Von
Bergau, to explain yourself more clearly, for I do not understand this
matter at all. The Sovereign has already honored our house several
times with his presence."

The Marshal shrugged his shoulders. "In cases of necessity, the
friendly offer of your father has been accepted, but it has always been
for a short time, and that incidentally; for even if your father, in
his official position, was not at all unfitted for this honor, yet
there was no lady who could do the honors of the house."

"I performed the duties of that position as well as I could."

The Marshal bowed. "There was much discussion as to how the breakfast
should be arranged without affronting the ladies of the house, and it
was very welcome when your father entirely refrained from requiring the
participation of his ladies. Allow me also to add, that a rise in your
father's position would be desirable for yourself. For your husband, as
a learned man of distinguished merit, is in the position of obtaining,
on expressing a wish, a rank and position which would establish him as
a member of the Court. And if this proposal should be carried into
effect, it would give you, under certain limitations, an entrance there
also. It would give the Sovereign and Princess an opportunity of
receiving you at the castle, and invitations to great Court balls and
concerts would be possible."

Ilse rose. "Enough, my lord, I understand you. I know what my father
will do when you offer him that of which you speak; he will laugh and
reject the offer, and will say, if our citizen's home is not good
enough for our Sovereign to enter, we must resign the honor. But I
cannot reject it with the composure which I expect of my father; and I
must tell you, my lord, that if I had had any idea that I, as a lady,
was not entitled to enter this society, I would never have set foot
here."

Ilse, with difficulty, controlled the indignation which worked within
her. The Marshal was confounded, and endeavoured to pass it off
equivocally; but Ilse could not be dealt with; she continued standing,
and so compelled him to depart.

The Professor found his wife in a dark room brooding over what had
passed. "Will you have a patent of nobility?" she exclaimed, springing
up; "it will be prepared for you at once, and for my father also, in
order that we may all have the advantages of becoming fit society for
the castle without their feeling it a humiliation. It is unsatisfactory
to them only to see us occasionally. I know now why I dine alone, and
why the Sovereign would not enter our sitting-room at Bielstein. We
must have a new name, that we may obtain the education and the manners
which will make us worthy of going to Court. And not only us, but
perhaps our children. Can you hear this without coloring with shame at
our being here? They feed us like strange beasts, which they have
procured out of curiosity and will again cast us out of the pen."

"Why, Ilse!" cried Felix, in astonishment, "you are expending more
pathos than is necessary. What do the prejudices of these men signify
to us? Has not the Sovereign done everything to make our residence here
agreeable, according to what we are accustomed? If the people here are
obliged by the customs in which they have been brought up, and by the
regulations of their circle, to limit their intercourse with us to
certain definite forms, what does that signify? Do we wish to become
their confidants, and to live with them as we do with our friends at
home? They have not deserved such an unfolding of our souls. When we
came here we entered into a simple business relation, and we undertook
also the obligation of adapting ourselves to their rules of life."

"And we are free to leave here as soon as these rules no longer please
us?"

"Just so," answered the Professor; "as soon as we have sufficient
grounds for considering them unbearable. I think that is not the case.
They require nothing of us that is degrading: they show us the most
assiduous attention: what does it signify if we do not take part in
their daily intercourse, which we have no right or reason to desire?"

"Do not let us deceive ourselves," exclaimed Ilse. "If in our city any
one was to say to you, you may only look at my shoes, but not raise
your eyes to my face; you may only go out with me into the open air,
but not come into my house; I can eat with you standing, but not sit
down at your table, as my dignity forbids me to do so,--what would you,
who live so proudly in your circle, reply to such a fool?"

"I would endeavour to learn the reason of his
narrow-mindedness,--perhaps pity him--perhaps turn away from him."

"Then do so here," cried Ilse. "For we are invited guests to whom the
people of the house close their doors."

"I repeat to you that we are not guests who are invited to associate
with the people here. I have been called upon for work, and I have
accepted this call, because I look for such great advantage in it to my
branch of learning that I would bear far worse things than the
disagreeable customs of the Court. I dare not set at stake these
important interests by an opposition to social pretensions which do not
please me. It is just because I have no particular respect for these
rules that they do not disturb me."

"But it grieves and makes one angry that people, in whose life one
takes an interest, cling to such miserable antiquated triflings," said
Ilse still bitterly.

"So that is it?" asked Felix. "We are anxious about the souls of the
grandees? There is something to be said on that point. There is an old
curse on every privilege which falls to the lot of most who share in
it. This may be the case with court privileges. The life of our princes
lies confined within the boundaries of a small circle; the views and
prejudices of those around them, whom they are not free to choose,
hedge them in from the first day of their life until the last. That
they are not stronger and freer arises for the most part from the
confined atmosphere in which they are kept by etiquette. It is a
misfortune, not only for themselves, but for us, that our princes look
upon the society that is not noble with the eyes of a deputy
chamberlain or a courtier. This evil one feels painfully when one comes
into contact with them. I think, undoubtedly, that the struggle which
is going on in different parts of our fatherland will not come to a
good conclusion, until the dangers are removed which arise from the
effect of the old Court regulations on the training of our princes.
But it appears to me they are already broken through in many places,
and the time may come when all this nonsense will be the subject of
good-humored satire. For this etiquette of Court is, after all, only
the remains of a past age, like the constitutions of our guilds, and
other ancient customs. So far you are right. But those who indulge in
personal irritation, as you do now, expose themselves to the suspicion
that they are only angry because they themselves desire entrance into
the prohibited circles."

Ilse looked silently down.

"When you and I," continued the Professor, "come accidentally into
personal contact with such modes of thinking, there is only one thing
that befits us--cool contempt and indifference. We wish, for the sake
of our princes, to remove the impediments which limit their intercourse
with their people; but we have no wish or impulse to put ourselves in
the place of those who apparently direct the rulers of our country.
For, between ourselves, we, who pass our lives in strenuous mental
labor, would in general be bad companions for princes. We are deficient
in the graceful forms and tact, and the easy complaisance of society.
The stronger minds would hurt, by their independence, and the weaker
would become contemptible by abject subservience. Freedom of choice is
all that we wish for our rulers. One feeling we may preserve without
arrogance--all who separate themselves from our circle lose more than
we do."

Ilse approached him, and laid her hand in his.

"Therefore, Lady Ilse," continued her husband, cheerfully, "be
contented for these few weeks. If it should happen to you in reality to
be an invited guest of the Court, then you may enter into negotiations
concerning your pretensions; and if in such a case you have to take
exceptions, do it with a smile."

"Do you speak so from the calm confidence of your soul," asked Ilse,
looking searchingly at her husband, "or because you have it much at
heart to remain here?"

"I have my manuscript much at heart," replied the Professor; "for the
rest, the loss of peace is a greater deprivation to me than to you. You
have from your youth, and especially this last year, taken a warm
interest in the inmates of this princely castle. You have at times felt
yourself much interested in them, and it is on that account that you
are more wounded than needful."

Ilse nodded her head assentingly.

"Bear with it. Ilse," continued her husband, encouragingly; "remember
that you are free, and may any day leave it. But it would be more
agreeable to me if you did not leave me alone."

"Would that be more agreeable to you?" asked Ilse, softly.

"You little fool!" exclaimed the Professor. "Today we will give up the
theatre, and have our evening reading. I have brought with me what will
drive away all vexations."

He brought the lamp to the table, opened a little book, and began:

"It happened, one Whitsuntide, that Nobel, the King of all the Beasts,
held a Court," and so on.

Ilse sat with her work in her hand by her husband; the light of the
lamp fell on his countenance, which she examined searchingly, in order
to read therein whether he still felt towards her as before; till at
last the iniquities of the fox brought a smile to her lips, and she
took the book from him, and read on quietly and comfortably, as at
home.

"How is the Lady Bergau?" asked the Princess, of her attendant, the
little Gotlinde Thurn.

"Very ill, your Highness. She has been much disturbed by the sudden
departure of her husband, and her confinement is expected every hour."

"Bergau gone away?" asked the Princess, in astonishment.

"The Sovereign has commissioned him to purchase some porcelain
curiosities in a distant city."

The Princess looked significantly at her confidant.

"Forgive me, your Highness, if I venture to say," continued the
lady-in-waiting, "that we are all indignant. Bergau, it is said, had a
scene yesterday with the strange lady at the Pavilion; and this morning
early the Sovereign expressed himself, in giving his orders, in a way
that made any objection out of the question."

"What has happened at the Pavilion?" asked the Princess.

"That is not known," replied the angry lady; "but, from some
expressions of Bergau, one may conclude that the stranger has raised
pretensions, demanded an introduction at Court, and threatened to leave
in the event of a refusal. The arrogance of the woman is unbearable. We
all beg that your Highness will be gracious enough to maintain our
rights."

"Good Linda, I am a dangerous ally for you," replied the Princess,
sorrowfully.

The birthday of the Princess was kept both by the Court and city. Many
people wore gala dresses; numbers pressed with their congratulations
into the ante-chamber of the princely daughter. The Princess received
in full dress on this day. She appeared for the first time out of
mourning, and looked lovelier than ever. In a side room, the door of
which was open, stood the tables, which were covered with presents.
Much were the splendid dresses which the Sovereign had ordered for his
daughter admired by the ladies; and scarcely less so the beautiful
miniature work of the Magister by the connoisseurs.

About three o'clock the concert began in the gardens of the castle.
Gentlemen and ladies of the nobility, the officials, and citizens,
entered the space marked out for them. The numerous attendants of the
Princess greeted the ladies of the company and arranged them in a large
circle, behind which were the gentlemen, forming a dark setting; on one
side the families of the Court, on the other those of the city. The
guests accommodated themselves easily to the compulsory mathematical
line; it was only on the city side that there was any irregularity. The
new city councillor Gottlieb, a distinguished butcher, pushed in from
behind his wife and daughter, and placed himself squarely in the front
row; and it required the positive directions of the lady-in-waiting to
make him retreat to his place.

"I pay the taxes," said Gottlieb, stubbornly, to those about him; but
even from his neighbors he was the object of a disapproving smile.

When Ilse entered this society of strangers with her husband, she felt
alarm at the cold, inquisitive looks directed at her from all sides.
The Chamberlain conducted her to the first lady-in-waiting. The
Baroness bowed in cool acknowledgment, and pointed to the place where
she was to be stationed--at the end of the Court side, opposite the
entrance. The royal party, preceded by the Marshals, made their
appearance punctually; the Princess, radiant and smiling, on the arm of
the Sovereign; the young Princes behind. The ladies' dresses rustled
like a forest of trees, as they bent in deferential salutation; behind
them the heads of the assembled gentlemen dropped with solemn movement.
The Princess executed a circular bow--a consummate piece of Court
_technique_--and proceeded to walk about the line. The sun shone with
summer warmth, and all rejoiced in the beautiful day and in the
happiness of the child whose birthday was now celebrated. The Princess
looked enchantingly lovely, and showed, by her noble appearance and
gracious manners, how well fitted she was to do the honors of a Court.
The ladies-in-waiting preceded her, beckoning to individuals to come
forward, and mentioning the names of those who were strangers to the
Princess. She had a kind word for every one, or a nod and sweet smile,
which made all feel that they were the object of her attention. The
Sovereign, to-day, appeared among his citizens with the self-possession
of a family father.

"A large number of old friends and acquaintances," he remarked, to the
head Burgomaster. "I knew that this would be quite after my daughter's
own heart. It is the first time since her severe trial that she has had
the opportunity to meet again so many that have taken a friendly
interest in her life."

But none of the ladies there looked with such eager attention on the
circle of the Princess as Ilse. She forgot her anger at the prejudices
of class, and the annoyances attendant on her solitary position among
these strangers, and looked unceasingly at the young Princess. Like all
present, she felt the charm of her gracious manner. This facility of
giving pleasure to others in a few minutes by merely a look or word,
was quite new to her. She looked back anxiously at Felix, who was
watching the graceful movements of the Princess with pleasure. She came
near, and Ilse heard her questions and answers to the fortunate ones
with whom she was more familiar. Ilse saw that the Princess cast a
fleeting glance at her, and that her expression became more serious.
The Princess had lingered with a lady who stood in front of Ilse,
inquiring with interest after the health of her sick mother; she now
passed slowly by Ilse, bowing her head almost imperceptibly, and said,
in a low voice, "I hear you intend to leave us."

The unexpected question, and coldness of the tone and look, aroused the
pride of the Professor's wife, and, under the flash of her large eyes,
the Princess also became more erect, and they exchanged a mutual glance
of hostility, as Ilse answered:

"Your Highness will pardon me! I shall remain with my husband."

The Princess looked at the Professor: again a pleasant smile passed
over her face, and she continued her progress. Ilse also turned quickly
toward her husband, but he was looking about innocently, and, pleased
with the world, he had not observed the little scene.

The Sovereign, however, had; for he stepped right across the space to
Ilse, and began:

"Among old acquaintances we also greet our new ones. Not that this
expression is applicable in your case to me and the Hereditary Prince;
for we owe thanks to you for the hospitality of your home; and we
rejoice to show you to-day the circle in which we live. I lament that
your father is not among us. I cherish the greatest respect for the
useful activity of his life; and I know how to value all his services
to agriculture. He has obtained a prize at the Agricultural Exhibition;
pray convey my congratulations to him. I hope his example will be
followed throughout the country."

The Sovereign well understood how to make up for the neglect of his
Court to Ilse. A Professor's wife has many objections to Court usages
and high rank; but when well-deserved praise is accorded by princely
lips, before a distinguished assembly, to those she loves, it affords
her the greatest pleasure. After the annoying question of the daughter,
the striking attention of the father was a great satisfaction. Ilse
gave the Sovereign a look of deep thankfulness, and he now turned
kindly to her Felix, and remained long talking with him. When at last
he went on to others, the uncommon consideration he had shown the
strangers before the assembled company had the usual result; the
gentlemen of the Court now thronged round Ilse and the Professor, to
show attention also on their part. Ilse now looked about her with more
composure, and observed how slowly the Hereditary Prince passed along
the circle, singling out gentlemen and ladies according to a secret
systematic rule, and at the same time stopping occasionally and moving
his eye-glass, as if he were taking something into consideration.
Prince Victor, on the other hand, pursued a thoroughly irregular
course, like a comet, whose points could only be determined by looking
out for the fairest faces. He had talked long with the daughter of the
city councillor, Gottlieb, and had made the young lady laugh so much
that she was alarmed at herself, colored, and held her handkerchief
before her mouth. He then suddenly approached Ilse.

"A horticuitural exhibition like this is exceedingly entertaining," he
began, carelessly, as if speaking to an old acquaintance. "Yet, after
all, there are many thorny cactuses to be handled."

"It must be very wearisome for the princely party, who have to speak to
so many," said Ilse.

"Do not imagine that," replied Victor. "It is pleasant to see so many
people before one, who dare not open their mouths unless told to;
princely blood will bear still greater fatigues for that enjoyment."

The company were set in motion. The Sovereign offering his arm to the
Princess, led her into a great, richly decorated tent. The guests
followed, and a host of lackeys offered refreshments. After that the
ladies seated themselves behind the royal family; the gentlemen
standing round. The concert began with a majestic flourish of the
kettledrums; and, after a short time, ended with a furious onslaught of
fiddles. The Princess now noticed some of the gentlemen, but with less
regularity than the ladies. Ilse was engaged in conversation with Miss
von Lossau, but the Princess walked to where Felix Werner was standing
and asked eager questions. The Professor became animated, and
explained; the Princess asked more, laughed, and answered. The
officious Lord High Steward glanced at the clock. It was high time for
the ladies of the Court to dress for dinner, but the Sovereign nodded
to him, looked contentedly at the Princess, and, in the best of humor
said to his son: "To-day she reigns; we will willingly wait."

"My dear Highness forgets us all, she is so engrossed with the
stranger," whispered Miss von Thurn, to Prince Victor.

"Calm your faithful heart, Dame Gotlinde," said Victor. "Our Lady
Bradamante has not used her conquering weapons for a whole year. She
would try her powers to-day even upon a cabbage-head."

The following morning the Princess sat among her ladies, and they
talked, as usual, of the previous day, admired the Princess, condemned
a little those who were absent, and expressed astonishment at the
toilet and manner of several city ladies.

"But your Highness did not speak to the wife of the City Treasurer."
exclaimed Gotlinde Thurn; "the poor woman took it as a slight, and
cried after the concert."

"Where was she standing?" asked the Princess.

"Near the stranger," answered Gotlinde.

"Ah, it was on that account," said the Princess. "What is she like?"

"A round little woman, with brown eyes and red cheeks. My brother
lodges in her house; that is how I know her. She makes admirable
tarts."

"Make up for it to her, Linda," said the Princess; "say something kind
to her for me."

"May I tell her that your Highness has heard of her excellent
cherry-brandy, and would be glad to have a few bottles of it? That
would make her more than happy."

The Princess nodded.

"The daughter of the City Councillor Gottlieb," said the Baroness
Hallstein, "has become quite a belle."

"Prince Victor forgot everybody in his attentions to her," exclaimed
Miss Lossau, with vexation.

"You may congratulate yourself, dear Betty," replied the Princess,
sharply, "if you are forgotten by my cousin. The attentions of the
Prince are generally a source of alarm for the ladies who are favored
with them."

"But we are all grateful to you," exclaimed Baroness Hallstein, a lady
of spirit and character, "for having supported the Court in opposition
to the lady from the Pavilion. Your cool remark gave general pleasure."

"Do you think so, Wally?" said the Princess, thoughtfully. "The woman
is proud, and was defiant. But I had wounded her first, and on a day
when I had the advantage."




                             _CHAPTER XXX_.

                               VEXATIONS.


The year began well in every respect. Woodcock and snipe had betaken
themselves to their homes before the sportsmen had donned their boots,
and the March-daffodils had really bloomed in March. The moon, between
its first and last quarter, smiled every evening with wry, distorted
mouth. At Court the Princess had turned her mind to search after lost
manuscripts with the Professor, and in the city an uncommon inclination
to quaff the punch of the fragrant woodruff-plant was perceptible among
the citizens and tempted them to daring undertakings. Even quiet heads
were infected by the intoxication of the season; straw and paper ruled
supreme. All the world wore not only hats but also caps of straw; all
the world occupied themselves with speculations and new investments.
The house of Hahn was in the ascendant. The orders were so numerous
that they could not be executed. In all the corners of the house sat
girls, sewing straw plaits together; the smell of the brimstone in the
street and neighboring gardens was insupportable. In the evenings Mr.
Hummel sat on his upturned boat, like Napoleon at St. Helena, a
vanquished man. With angry contempt he regarded the tumult of humanity.
Repeatedly did his acquaintances call upon him to launch into the great
activity of the time, to become a member of some stock-company, to
found a bank, dig for coal, or smelt iron. He rejected all these
proposals. When he went into his idle workshops, where he was only
occupied in a struggle with moths, his book-keeper ventured to make a
remark as to the possible future fashions in Parisian hats; he laughed
demoniacally and replied:

"I cannot indulge in any speculation as to the covering that people
will require when these wild projects cease; but if you wish to know
what will be the next fashion, I will inform you. People will wear
pitch-caps. I wonder that you are still at your desk. Why do you not do
like others of your colleagues, who spend their time in wine-shops?"

"Mr. Hummel, my means do not allow of that," replied the depressed man.

"Your means!" cried Hummel; "who asks after that now? Lucifer-matches
are as good as ready money. The street-porters discount bills and give
one another their likenesses. Why do you not live like the book-keeper
Knips over there? When I bought an orange for my wife of the Italian, I
saw him sitting in the back room with a bottle of iced champagne. Why
should you not put yourself on ice in this hot weather? These are
nothing but ruinous, hare-brained projects; it is a Sodom and Gomorrah;
the straw fire burns, but it will come to a frightful end."

Mr. Hummel closed his office and walked in the twilight into the park,
where he wandered up and down on the frontiers of his territory like a
spirit. He was awakened from his meditations by the wild barking of his
brindle favorite, who rushed up to a bench in a shady part of the park,
and savagely seized the boots and trousers of a man sitting there.
Hummel approached nearer; a small man and a young woman hastily
separated. Hummel was sufficiently man of the world not to let himself
be seen, and he hastened back to his garden and continued his walk in
wild strides.

"I knew it; I always said so; I have given a warning all along. Poor
devil!"

Then he walked angrily towards the great beech-tree on his own premises
and forgot the supper hour, so that his wife had to call him twice from
the garden. When he was sitting at table also he looked as dark as a
thunder-cloud, and expressed such a deep contempt for human nature that
the ladies soon became silent. Laura made another effort to lead the
conversation to the wife of the Burgomaster, who had shown great
respect for Hummel whenever she passed by, but he broke out with the
terrible words:

"She is no better than the rest of womankind."

"That is enough, Hummel," exclaimed his wife; "this conduct is very
unpleasant, and I must beg of you not to indulge so far in your
ill-temper as to let it deprive you of a proper judgment of the worth
of women. I can forgive much, but never an insult to the nobleness of
human nature."

"Away with you and your noble human nature," replied Hummel, rising
from the table, and pushing back his chair; he then rushed vehemently
into the next room, where, in the dusk, he continued pacing angrily to
and fro, for he was much disturbed about Gabriel. Certainly the social
position of this man was not exalted; he was not a relation, not a
householder, not even a citizen. Accordingly, Mr. Hummel revolved in
his mind whether an interference in the secret feelings of this man
became him. He did not come to a decision without a struggle, but he
could not silence the voice which sounded in the corner of his heart in
favor of Gabriel.

Meanwhile, the ladies were sitting at their disturbed repast. Laura
looked down gloomily; such scenes were not new to her, and they became
more painful. The mother was in great consternation at this anger
against the world of femininity, and sank beneath the waves of stormy
thoughts. At last she came to the conviction that Hummel was jealous.
That was very ludicrous, and there certainly was no cause for such a
feeling, but the vagaries of men were incalculable. The comic actor had
come the day before at her invitation, and he had been very
entertaining; he had enjoyed the wine and dinner, and on taking leave
had kissed her hand with a true theatrical expression. Was it possible
that this expression had produced the mischief? Mrs. Hummel began to
pace up and down, looking in the mirror in passing by, and determined,
like a valiant housewife, to hold forth to her husband this very
evening on his folly.

"Go up stairs Laura," she said, softly, to her daughter, "I wish to
speak to your father alone."

Laura silently took the candle and carried it to her private table. She
placed herself at the window and looked toward the neighbor's house,
where the Doctor's lamp still glimmered through the curtains. She wrung
her hands, and exclaimed:

"Away, away from here; that is the only way to save myself and him."

Meanwhile, Mrs. Hummel had the supper removed, and, mustering courage
for the impending encounter, at last entered the room in which Mr.
Hummel was still blustering about.

"Henry," she began solemnly, "are you yet in a state of mind to
consider calmly the circumstances which have robbed you of all
composure?"

"No," cried Hummel, throwing a boot at the door.

"I know the cause of your anger," continued Mrs. Hummel, looking
modestly down. "No explanation is necessary for that. It is possible
that he may sometimes have ventured more than was necessary in looks
and small remarks; but he is amiable and full of talent, and we must
make allowances for his vocation."

"He is a miserable fop," cried Mr. Hummel, hurling his second boot from
him.

"That is not true," cried Mrs. Hummel, warmly. "But if it were,
Henry--even if you could judge him utterly unworthy,--do not forget
that pride and a feeling of duty dwell in the heart of your wife, and
that your suspicion is an insult to these protecting genii."

"She is a coquettish, silly flirt," replied Hummel, dragging his
slippers from under his bed.

Mrs. Hummel started back horrified.

"Your wife has not deserved this treatment. You tread under foot what
should be holy to you. Come to your senses, I conjure you; your
jealousy approaches to madness."

"I jealous of such a person!" cried Hummel, contemptuously, vehemently
knocking the ashes from his pipe. "Then I must indeed be out of my
mind. Leave me in peace with all this nonsense."

Mrs. Hummel seized her pocket-handkerchief and began to sob:

"He has so often amused me; he tells anecdotes as I never heard any one
in my life; but if he excites you, so that you lose your reason and
insult your wife by calling her names, I have made many sacrifices
during our wedded life, and he also must fall on the altar of domestic
peace. Accept it, he shall never again be invited."

"Who is he?" asked Hummel.

"Who but the comedian?"

"Who is she?"

"Mrs. Hummel gave him a look which showed indubitably that she herself
was the lady.

"Is it possible," exclaimed Hummel in astonishment, "that is how the
land lies? Why do you want to slaughter your theatrical buffoon on the
altar of domestic peace? Rather put something slaughtered before him;
that would be more agreeable to his cultivated palate. Be composed,
Philippine. You are often unintelligible in your speeches, and you make
too much ado; you spin your theatrical webs in your head, and you have
your humors and confused ideas in general; but for the rest, you are my
worthy wife, of whom no evil shall be thought either by myself or
others. Now do not thwart me, for I have determined to write him a
letter."

While Mrs. Hummel, stupefied, seated herself on the sofa, and
considered whether she should be mortified or tranquilized by her
husband's praise, and whether she had been under a foolish delusion, or
that her Henry's madness had taken the new form of _bonhomie_, Mr.
Hummel wrote as follows:--

"My Dear Gabriel,--Yesterday, on the 17th of this month, at 7.45 in the
evening, I saw, on bench No. 4, on the common, Dorothy from over the
way sitting with Knips junior. This is for warning and further
consideration. I am ready to act according to your orders. Straw,
Gabriel!--Your affectionate
                                                H. Hummel."

By the same post a letter flew from Laura to Ilse in the Pavilion. The
faithful soul wrote sorrowfully. The little quarrels of the house and
the neighborhood vexed her more than was necessary. Of the Doctor she
saw little, and what was the bitterest grief for her, she had given
away the last song; she had nothing more to send to the Doctor, and
wished to continue the correspondence without inclosures. Ilse was
greatly surprised by one sentence, the sense of which was not very
clear to her: "I have obtained permission from Miss Jeannette to give
lessons in her institution. I will no longer be a useless bread-eater.
Since I have lost your society all is cold and desolate about me. My
only comfort is, that I at least am prepared to fly into foreign parts,
and there collect the grains which I need for the prolongation of my
life."

"Where is my husband?" asked Ilse, of her maid.

"The Professor has gone to her Highness, the Princess."

"Call Gabriel."

"He has received bad news, and is sitting in his room."

Immediately afterwards Gabriel entered, with a distressed countenance.

"What has happened?" asked Ilse, alarmed.

"It is my own affair only," replied Gabriel, with quivering voice; "it
is no good news that this letter has brought to me."

He took out of his pocket Hummel's crumpled letter, and turning away,
leaned his head against the window-sill.

"Poor Gabriel!" exclaimed Ilse. "But there may still be some
explanation to justify the girl."

"I thank you for your confidence in her, Mrs. Werner," replied Gabriel,
solemnly, "but this letter informs me of my misfortune. He who has
written to me is true as gold. But I knew all, before I had received
it. She did not answer my last letter; she has not sent me the
pocket-book; and yesterday evening, when I went out and was thinking of
her, a lark flew towards me and sang a song that made me certain of
it."

"That is folly, Gabriel, You ought not to let your judgment be
influenced because a bird accidentally occasioned you sorrowful
thoughts."

"It was evident, Mrs. Werner," replied Gabriel, sorrowfully. "Just as
the lark flew up and I was thinking of Dorothy, the words which I heard
as a child and which I have not heard since, occurred to me. It is no
superstition, and I can repeat the sentence to you:

           'Lark, dear lark, high o'er the smoke,
            What new thing have you to tell me?'

This thought came to me, and then I heard, as distinctly as if some one
was whispering the answer in my ear:

           'Two lovers sat near a hazel-bush,
            The third was crying and moaning;
            The two pass the threshold of Hymen's house,
            The third sits alone and mourns a spouse.'"

Gabriel took out his pocket-handkerchief.

"That was a certain foreboding that Dorothy had been false to me."

"Gabriel, I fear she was always fickle-minded," exclaimed Ilse.

"She has a heart like a bird," said Gabriel, apologetically. "She is
not a serious person, and it is her nature to be friendly with all.
That I knew; but her gaiety, light-heartedness, and pleasant jesting
made her dear to me. It was a misfortune for me and her that I was
obliged to leave her just when she began to favor me and discourage
others who were showing her attention. For I know that the book-keeper
had long had his eyes upon her, and had prospects which would enable
him to marry her, and that was a better provision than I could give
her."

"Something must be done about this," said Ilse. "Do you want to go back
to the city to ascertain how matters stand? My husband will immediately
give you permission. Perhaps it is not so bad after all."

"For me it is as bad as it can be, Mrs. Werner. If you will have the
kindness to look after Dorothy, to see that she is not made unhappy, I
will thank you from my heart. I shall never see her again. If one loves
any one, one should not leave them alone when they are in temptation."

Ilse endeavored to comfort him, but Gabriel's words went to her heart.

"The third sits alone," she repeated, in a tone of sorrow.

Ilse was again alone in the hall, looking sadly at the strange walls.
All the sorrow that had ever moved a human soul in this room, jealousy
and wounded pride, feverish expectation and hopeless longing, mourning
over the destruction of happiness, and terror for the future, the cries
of anguish and the plaints of tormented conscience, all these now awoke
an indistinct and trembling echo in the heart of the woman.

"It is strange and gloomy here, and if I try to express in words what
distresses me, all power of expression fails me. I am no prisoner, and
yet the air that surrounds me is that of a dungeon. The Chamberlain has
not been near me for days, and the young Prince, who used to speak to
me as to a friend, comes seldom, and then but for a few minutes, and it
is worse than if he were not here. He is as depressed as I am, and
looks at me as if he felt the same nameless anguish. And his father?
when he comes to me he is so kind that one cannot but like him; but as
soon as he turns his back his features appear before my mind distorted.
It is not good to be near the great people of the world; they seem to
take a fancy to one and open their heart as to friends, and one
scarcely feels the elevation of mind occasioned by this, when
tormenting spirits seem suddenly to draw them back into their invisible
realm, and one is troubled and excited about them. Such a life is
destructive of peace.

"Felix says, one ought not to care about these frivolous people. How
can one avoid interest and anxiety about them when the welfare of their
souls is a blessing to all?

"Is it only this that gives you such restless thoughts. Ilse?" she
asked herself; "is it this, or is it pride, now wounded, and now again
flattered; or is it anguish about the loved one whom she wishes
secretly to tear from you?

"Why am I so fearful about you, my Felix? Why do I despair because he
has found a woman here of the same stamp of mind as his own? Am I not
so also? Have I too not unfolded in the light of his mind? I am no
longer the ignorant country-girl that he once brought from among the
herds. If I am deficient in the attractive charm of the distinguished
lady, what can she give him more than I? He is no boy, and he knows
that every hour I live for him. I despise you, miserable thoughts; how
have you found entrance into my soul? I am no prisoner within these
walls, and if I linger here where you have power over me, I remain on
his account. One should not forsake him whom one loves,--that word was
spoken for me also. My father's child shall not cry and mourn even
though her loved one should be sitting with the Princess by the
hazel-bush."





Gabriel was stealing along in a distant part of the pleasure-ground. He
suddenly felt a touch on his shoulder; Prince Victor was standing
behind him.

"Friend Gabriel?"

"At your Highness's commands."

"Where have you served?"

"With the Blue Hussars."

"Good," nodded the Prince; "we are in the same branch of the service. I
hear you are a trustworthy fellow. But what is the matter with you?" He
took out his purse. "We will share; take what you want."

Gabriel shook his head.

"Then the women are at fault," cried the Prince; "that is worse. Is she
proud?"

Gabriel dissented.

"Is she faithless?"

The poor fellow turned away.

"I am, alas! a bad intercessor with parents," said the Prince,
sympathizingly; "the race of fathers have little confidence in me. But
if it is only a question of appealing to a girl's conscience, then
depend upon me."

"I thank you for your good-will. Highness, but nothing can help me. I
will have to fight it out alone."

He turned away again.

"Bah! comrade, have you forgotten the soldiers' saying: 'Like all, love
one, grieve for none?' If your heart is heavy, you should not rove
about as you do. In lack of another companion put up for the time with
me."

"That is too much honor," said Gabriel, taking off his cap.

The Prince had during this conversation gradually led him into a
thicket; he seated himself on the root of an old tree, and motioned
Gabriel to the next trunk.

"We are in concealment here; you look out that way, I will watch this
road, that no one can surprise us. How do your lodgings please you?
Have you found pleasant acquaintances?"

"I think it prudent to trust no one here," answered Gabriel,
cautiously.

"But I do not belong here; there is no reason why you should not make
me an exception. You may assume that we belong to the same company,
that we are sitting by the same fire, and drinking from the same flask.
You are right: all is not so safe here as it looks. I do not like these
nocturnal disturbances in the castle. Have you heard of them?"

Gabriel assented.

"In such an old castle," continued the Prince, "there are many doors
that few know--perhaps also passages in the wall. Whether it is spirits
or something else, who knows? It glides about and sometimes comes
out when one least expects it; and just when one has put on one's
night-shirt a secret door is opened, or a plank in the floor rises, and
a cursed apparition floats up, removes what is on the table, and before
one can bethink oneself, disappears again."

"Who can allow such a thing, your Highness?" replied Gabriel,
valiantly.

"Who can be on his guard?" said the Prince, laughing; "it stretches out
its hand, and one becomes immovable; it holds a sponge before the nose
of the sleeper and he does not awake."

Gabriel listened attentively.

"People say that in the Pavilion all is not secure," continued the
Prince. "It would be as well for a trusty man to make an examination in
secret; and if an entrance should be found that is not regular it
should be fastened with a screw or a bolt. It is indeed uncertain
whether or not one may find such a thing, for such devil's work is
slyly managed."

He nodded significantly to Gabriel, who stared at him in great
astonishment.

"That is only a thought of mine," said the Prince; "but when a soldier
is in foreign quarters he looks after every security during the time
that his people sleep."

"I understand all," replied Gabriel, in a low voice.

"One must not cause others unnecessary alarm," continued the Prince;
"but in secret one may do one's duty like a brave man. I see you are
that." The Prince rose from his seat. "If you should at any time need
my help, or have anything to tell me which no one else should know, I
have a fellow with a great moustache, a good, quiet man; make his
acquaintance. For the rest, take care of yourselves here. There is a
lackey who idles about near you; if there are any errands to do he can
attend to them. It is a good thing for a family to have a trustworthy
man at hand in a strange house. Good day, comrade, I hope I have
changed the current of your thoughts."

He went away; Gabriel remained in deep thought. The bantering of the
Prince had roused the honest man from his sorrow; he busied himself now
about the house in the day-time, but in the evening, when his master
and mistress were at the theatre, he was to be seen sometimes with the
Prince's servant in confidential conversation on a garden bench.

The spirit of sad foreboding spread its grey veil over the walls of the
Pavilion, but in the Sovereign's castle meanwhile an invisible
hobgoblin of another kind was at work, disturbing great and small. The
stable was in consternation. The Prince's favorite saddle-horse was a
white Ivenacker. When in the morning the groom went to the horse, he
found it with a large black heart painted on its chest. He could not
wash out the scandalous mark, probably the evil spirit had in this
prank employed a dye intended for the hair of man. Connoisseurs
declared that only time could heal the injury. They could not help
making it known to the Sovereign who was violently angry, and set the
strictest investigations on foot. The night-watchers of the stable had
seen no one, no stranger's foot had entered the place; only the groom
of Prince Victor, a moustached foreigner, had, at the same time with
the other stable servants, cleaned the horse that he had lately
received as a present from a relative. The man was examined, he spoke
little German, was said by the other servants to be harmless and
simple, and nothing could be learnt from him. Finally, the stable-boy
who had kept watch was dismissed from service. He disappeared from the
capital, and would have been reduced to great misery if Prince Victor
had not provided for the poor wretch in his garrison.

There was a great uproar among the ballet-girls. In the new tragic
ballet, "The Water Sprite," the first dancer, Guiseppa Scarletti, had a
brilliant _role_, in which she was to wear green-silk trunks, with rich
silver trimmings. When she was to put on this part of the costume,
which was very important for the _role_, for the first representation,
her assistant was so awkward as to hand it to her wrong side foremost.
The lady expressed her displeasure strongly, the tire-woman turned it
round, and it was still wrong. Upon nearer inspection of this piece of
art, it was discovered, with dismay, that it presented two convex
surfaces like the shell of a bivalve. Mademoiselle Scarletti broke out
into a fury, and then into tears and finally hysterics; the manager and
the intendant were called; the _artiste_ declared that after this
disgrace and disturbance she could not dance. It was not until Prince
Victor, whom she highly esteemed, came into the dressing-room to
express his deep indignation, and the Sovereign desired her to be told
that the insult should be punished in the severest manner, that she
recovered sufficient courage to play the difficult _role_. Meanwhile
the fairylike rapidity of the theatrical tailor had remedied the injury
to her dress. She danced superbly, but with a sad expression that
became her well. The intendant was already rejoicing that the
misfortune had thus passed off, when suddenly, in the midst of the last
scene, when the whole depth of the stage was disclosed, the exchanged
trunks appeared under Bengal lights in the water nymph's grotto,
hanging peacefully upon two projecting points of a silver rock, as if a
water sprite had hung them up to dry. Upon this there was a
disturbance, and loud laughter among the audience, and the curtain had
to fall before the Bengal lights were extinguished. It all looked like
revenge, but again the culprit could not be discovered.

The hair of all the servants stood on end. They knew that in the bad
times of the princely house a black lady walked through the corridors
and rooms, which portended misfortune to it. The belief in this was
general; even the High Marshal shared in it; the black lady had
appeared to his grandfather, when, on a lonely night, he was awaiting
the return of his gracious master. One evening, after the Court had
withdrawn, the Marshal was walking, with the lackey carrying a light
before him, through the empty rooms to the wing in which Prince Victor
lodged, in order to smoke a cigar with him. Suddenly the lackey started
back and pointed, trembling, to a corner. There stood the black figure,
the head covered with a veil; she raised her hand threateningly, and
disappeared through a door in the tapestry. The light fell out of the
hand of the lackey, the Marshal groped in the dark to the anteroom of
the Prince, and sank down on the sofa there. When the Prince entered
from his dressing-room he found him in a state of the highest
consternation: even a glass of punch, which he himself poured out,
could not arouse him from his depression. The news that the black lady
had appeared flew throughout the castle; an uneasy foreboding of evil
occupied the Court. In the evening the lackeys ran hurriedly through
the corridor, and were frightened at the echo of their own steps, and
the Court ladies would not leave their rooms without escort. The
Sovereign also heard of it; his brow contracted gloomily, and at dinner
he looked contemptuously at the Marshal.

Even the Court ladies were not spared. Miss von Lossau, who lodged in a
wing of the palace over the rooms of the Princess, returned to her
apartment one night in the happiest frame of mind. Prince Victor had
paid her marked attentions. He had been very amusing, and had shown a
degree of feeling which he had never before evinced. Her maid undressed
her, and she laid herself to rest with sweet and pleasant thoughts. All
was quiet: she fell into her first sleep. The image of the Prince
danced before her; then she heard a slight noise; there was a
crackling; something moved slowly under her bed. She started; the
mysterious noise ceased. She was on the point of deluding herself into
the belief that it was a dream, when the noise was repeated under the
bed, and something came clattering out. She heard an alarming sound,
and saw by the faint light of the night-lamp that a ball was slowly
pushing itself behind the chair, and stopping in front of the bed. Half
unconscious from terror, she jumped out of bed, touched a strange
object with her naked foot, at once felt a sharp pain, and sank back
with a scream. She now raised a loud cry for help, till her maid rushed
in, and tremblingly lit the candle. The lady was still shrieking in a
corner, where the prickly spectre-ball still lingered in quiet
timidity, and gradually showed itself to be a great hedgehog, which was
sitting there, still dreamy from its winter sleep, with tears on its
nose. Miss Lossau became ill from fright. When the physician hastened
to her the next morning, he found the lackeys and maidservants
collected in close conclave before her door. On the door was pasted a
white placard, on which was to be read, in large characters, "Bettina
von Lossau, Princely Court Spy." Again there was the strictest
investigation, and again the culprit was not discovered.

But the spirit of torment that had quartered itself under the roof of
the castle did not confine its tricks to the Court and its household:
it ventured to disturb the Professor also in his learned work.

Ilse was sitting alone, looking absent-mindedly at the pictures of
Reynard the Fox, when the lackey threw open the door, announcing:

"His Highness, the Sovereign!"

The Sovereign glanced at the picture in the open book.

"So that is the view you take of our position. The satire of those
pages is bitter, but they contain imperishable truth."

Ilse closed the book, coloring.

"The ill-behaved beasts are rude egotists; it is otherwise among men."

"Do you think so?" asked the Sovereign. "Those who have had experience
with them will not judge so leniently. The two-legged animals that
pursue their aims at the courts of princes are, for the most part, as
reckless in their egotism, and as much inclined to profess their
attachment. It is not easy to restrain their pretensions."

"Amongst the bad there are surely some better, in whom good
preponderates?" rejoined Ilse.

The Sovereign inclined his head civilly.

"He who has to watch all keenly feels the narrow-mindedness of every
individual, for he must know where and how far he can place confidence.
Such an observation of various natures, which is always seeking to
separate the reality from the glitter, to sound the worth of different
characters, and to retain for the observer superior judgment, sharpens
the perception of the deficiencies of others. It is possible that we
may sometimes judge too severely, while you, with your warm feeling,
fall into the amiable weakness of viewing men in too favorable a
light."

"My lot, then, is happier," exclaimed Ilse, looking at the Sovereign,
with honest commiseration.

"It is sweeter and happier," said the latter with feeling, "to give
one's self up without restraint to one's feelings, to associate
innocently with a few whom one chooses freely, to avoid by slight
effort the ill-disposed, and to open one's heart gladly, and without
restraint, to those one loves. But he who is condemned to live in the
cold atmosphere of business, struggling against countless interests
which clash together, can only carry on this existence by surrounding
his daily life with regulations which will at least preserve him from
overwhelming burdens and annoyances, and compel the foxes and wolves to
bend their stubborn heads. Such rules of Court and government are no
perfect work; there will often be complaints against them. You,
perhaps, may have had occasion to remark that the customs and etiquette
of a Court are not without harshness; yet they are necessary, for it
makes it easy to us to withdraw and keep within ourselves, and maintain
a certain isolation, which helps us to preserve our inward freedom."

Ilse looked conscious.

"But believe me," continued the Sovereign, "we still are human beings;
we would gladly give ourselves up to the impulse of the moment, and
live without restraint with those whom we esteem. We must often
sacrifice ourselves, and we experience moments when such sacrifices are
very severe."

"But within the princely family itself these considerations do not
apply," exclaimed Ilse. "The mutual intercourse of father and children,
brothers and sisters,--these holy relations can never be disturbed."

A cloud came over the countenance of the Sovereign.

"Even they suffer in their exposed position. We do not live together;
we see each other less alone, generally under the observation of
others. Each has his special circle of interest, is influenced by those
about him, who perhaps diminish his confidence in his nearest
relations. You know my son; he has all the qualifications of a good,
open-hearted man, but you will have observed how suspicious and
reserved he has become."

Ilse forgot all caution, and again felt a little proud of being a
confidante.

"Forgive me," she explained; "I have never found that. He is only
bashful, and sometimes a little awkward."

The Sovereign smiled.

"You lately expressed an opinion with reference to what would be
advantageous for his future. That he should for a time become
acquainted with the management of a large family estate; it would
undoubtedly be good for him to learn the work of a country gentleman by
experience. Besides this, he is not happy at Court."

Ilse nodded.

"Have you also remarked that?" asked the Sovereign.

"I will give good advice for my Prince," thought Ilse, "even if it is
not quite agreeable to him. May I venture to say," she said aloud,
"that this is the best time of all. For he must learn, your Highness,
the spring tilling, which is in full operation, so there must be no
delay."

The Sovereign was much pleased with this zeal.

"It will not be easy to find a place," he said.

"Perhaps your Highness has an estate in the neighborhood where there is
a small manor-house."

"Then he could come often to the city," replied the Sovereign sharply.

"That would not do," continued Ilse, eagerly. "He must first thoroughly
know the work of the people, and for that be constantly in the fields."

"I could not find a better adviser," said the Sovereign, in excellent
humor. "There is nothing in the vicinity that will answer; I have
thought, however, of your father's estate."

Ilse started with surprise.

"But our mode of life is not adapted for the accommodation of a
prince," she replied with reserve. "No, gracious Sovereign, the
domestic arrangements of our family would not be suitable to the
pretensions of the young man. I say nothing of other considerations
which formerly never occurred to me, and which have first come home to
me here. Therefore, if I may speak what I feel, I am of opinion that
this, for many reasons, will not answer."

"It was only a thought," replied the Sovereign, good-humoredly. "The
object may perhaps be attained without encroaching upon your father. It
has been my wish," he continued, with chivalrous politeness, "to give
you and your father a public proof of my esteem. I have special reasons
for it." He looked significantly at Ilse, and she thought of the
birthday of the Princess.

"I know the reason," she said softly.

The Sovereign drew his chair near.

"Your father has a large family?" he asked. "I have a vague
recollection of having seen several rosy-cheeked boys about."

"They were my brothers," said Ilse, laughing; "they are handsome little
fellows, gracious Sovereign, if I, as a sister, may praise them; they
are at present somewhat uncouth, but good and clever. My Franz wrote to
me only yesterday to beg me to greet your Highness for him. The little
urchin thinks it is the right thing. Now, as I have the opportunity, I
will show you the letter as he has written it; it is a stupid, childish
message, but it comes from a good heart."

She felt in her pocket and brought forth a letter written in fair
characters.

"See, your Highness, how well the child writes. But I must not show you
the letter, for your Highness would find in it a confirmation of your
opinion, that men have always selfish wishes in the background when
they think of their princes. The poor boy also has his wish."

"Then let us have it," said the Sovereign.

Ilse showed him the letter; the Sovereign graciously took hold of the
letter, and in doing so, his hand rested on hers.

"He is so barefaced as to ask your highness for an india-rubber ball.
The ball is already bought."

She jumped up and brought a gigantic colored ball.

"This I shall send to him to-day, and I shall write to him that it is
not seemly to beg of so great a personage. He is nine years old, but
still very childish--your highness must forgive him."

Enchanted by this frank open-heartedness, the Sovereign said:

"Write to him, at the same time, that I wish to tell him he must
endeavor to preserve through the dangerous paths of life the pure
feeling and loyal spirit of his eldest sister. I also feel how great is
the blessing of your character to all who have the happiness of
breathing your atmosphere. In a course of life which is filled with
harrowing impressions, in which hatred and suspicion take more from the
peace of the soul than hours of repose can restore to it, I have still
retained my susceptibility for the innocent freshness of a mind like
yours. You give me genuine pleasure."

Again he laid his hand gently on hers; Ilse looked down confused at the
praise of her dear Sovereign.

A hasty step approached; the Sovereign rose, and the Professor entered.
He bowed to the Sovereign, and looked surprised at his wife.

"You are not ill?" he exclaimed. "Pardon, gracious Sir, I came in great
anxiety about my wife. A strange boy rang the bell at the Museum, and
brought a message that I must go immediately to see my wife, as she was
ill; fortunately it was a mistake."

"I am thankful for the error," replied the Sovereign, "as it gives me
the opportunity of saying to you what I was intending to mention to
Madame Werner; orders have been given at the stable that a carriage
shall be ready for you at any hour that you wish to take a journey in
the neighborhood to pursue your mysterious investigations."

He took leave graciously.





The Sovereign opened the window of his study; the air was sultry, the
sun had been shining long upon the earth; now it had vanished, heavy
clouds rolled themselves, like great shapeless porpoises, over the city
and castle. The Sovereign fetched a deep breath, but the heavy, sultry
air forced the smoke from the chimneys of the castle down to his
window, enveloping his head like a great mist. He hastily opened the
door of the gallery which led to the reception-rooms, and walked out.
Against the walls hung a row of oil pictures, the portraits of
beautiful ladies whom he had once favored with his attentions. His look
strayed from one to the other; at the end of the row was an empty
place; he stopped before it, and his fancy painted a picture with
blonde hair, and a true-hearted, frank light in the eyes, more touching
than any of the other faces.

"So late," he said, to himself. "It is the last place and the strongest
feeling. They are fools who tell us that years make us indifferent. If
I had come across her at the other end," he glanced back along the
gallery, "at the beginning of my life, when I yet looked longingly at
the roses on the cheeks of maidens and was touched by the song of
hedge-sparrows, would such a woman then have preserved in me what I
have lost forever? Useless thoughts of the past! I must in the present
keep firm hold of what has come within the reach of my hand. She is
indifferent about the weak youth; but she feels herself uneasy here,
and if she tries to escape me I have no power to keep her back. I
remain alone; daily the same wearisome faces, whose thoughts one knows
before they are spoken, whose wishes one knows before they open their
mouths, and whom one sees to be prepared with feigned feelings.
Whatever wit or will they have works secretly against me; what I
receive from them is only the artificial glitter of life. It is sad to
be a master before whom living souls turn into machines, and year after
year to open the lid and examine the works. I myself have made them,"
he said, jeeringly, "but I am weary of my work."

"I know that the doubt arises often in my mind," the Sovereign
murmured, "whether my unhappy skill has made them lies of human nature,
or whether I myself am an automaton, which when wound up nods and
repeats the same gracious words without thought. I know there are hours
when I am ashamed of myself, when I strut about the stage as a clown or
a bully; I see the wires that move my joints; I feel a desire to place
my own head in the vice in order to improve what is faulty in it, and I
see a large chest open into which I am thrown when my _role_ is played
out."

"Oh," he groaned, from the depths of his heart. "I know that I am a
reality, if not by day, yet at night. None of those about me are
tormented in lonely hours as I am; their temples do not beat with fever
heat when they lie down after their day's work.

"What pleasure have I amidst these dull tapestry-rooms, or among the
old pictures of Mother Nature? Laughing without amusement, angry about
trifles,--everything cold, indifferent, and soulless!

"It is only in rare moments, when I have been with her, that I feel
like another man; then the warm blood courses through my veins. When in
her honest simplicity she talks of all that she loves and takes
pleasure in, a woman with a child's heart, then I become young again
like her. She talked to me of her brother 'curly-head.' I see the boy
before me, a lively lad, with his sister's eyes. I see the little
simpleton eating his bread and butter, and it moves me as if I were
reading a touching story. I long to catch up the boy in my arms as if
he belonged to me.

"She herself is true and upright; it is a pure mind, and beneath her
calm gentleness strong passion lies concealed. What a passion she fell
into when my messenger offered her the patent of nobility! She is a
woman to live with whom is worth some trouble, and to gain whom a man
would do much.

"But what can I do? What I can give her will be of little value to her;
what I take from her--how will she make up her mind to that?" He looked
timidly at the empty place on the wall. "Another picture was to have
hung there," he exclaimed; "why is it not there? Why does the
remembrance of one long gone lie on my brain like a stone, the pressure
of which I feel every day when mingling among men, and every night when
I rest my weary head upon my hands? That woman slept many years ago in
the same room where now the stranger reposes; she did not awake, as it
would have been right for her to have done; when she did awake and came
to consciousness, a spring broke in her weak mind, and she remained a
soulless body."

A feverish shudder passed through him; he shook himself and rushed out
of the gallery, looked shyly behind him, and closed the door.

"The violence of passion is extinguished," he continued, after a time;
"with years one becomes more cautious. I will hold her fast, whatever
may be the result; it is no longer the burning glow of youth, it is the
heart of a ripened man that I offer to her. With firm patience will I
await what time prepares for me; slowly will this fruit ripen in the
warm sun. I shall persevere, but I will hold her fast. Her husband is
becoming suspicious about her; it was an awkward excuse that he
invented; he also is struggling out of my hand. I must keep her, and
only childish means can be used for these childlike hearts."

The bell rang, the servant entered, and received an order.

Magister Knips appeared before the Sovereign; his cheeks were flushed,
and vehement excitement worked in his features.

"Have you read the memorial which Professor Werner has written
concerning the manuscript?" asked the Sovereign, carelessly. "What is
your opinion of it?"

"It is a prodigious, astounding account, Most Gracious Prince and
Sovereign. I may well say that I feel this discovery in all my limbs.
If the manuscript should be found, the fame attending the discovery
will be imperishable; it would be discussed in the preface of every
edition in which the question of the manuscript occurred, to the end of
the world; it would raise the learned man to whose lot this greatest
earthly good fortune should fall, high above his fellow mortals. Your
exalted Highness also, according to Act 22, Sec. 127, of the law of the
country, would undoubtedly have the first right to the discovered
treasure, and his Highness would be hailed among all people as the
protector of a new era of knowledge concerning the Romans."

The Sovereign listened with satisfaction to the enthusiasm of the
Magister, who in his excitement forgot his humble bearing, and
pathetically stretched out his arm in the direction in which he saw the
radiant crown hovering above the head of the Sovereign.

"All this would occur if one found the treasure," said the Sovereign;
"but it is not yet found."

Knips collapsed.

"Undoubtedly it is presumptuous to think that such a happiness could
fall to the lot of any human being, yet it would be a sin to doubt its
possibility."

"Professor Werner seems to attach much value to the discovery,"
rejoined the Sovereign, indifferently.

"He could not be a man of sterling judgment who did not feel the
importance of this gain as much as does your Highness's most humble
servant and slave."

The Sovereign interrupted the speaker.

"Mr. Von Weidegg has proposed to you to remain in my service. Have you
agreed to do so?"

"With the feelings of a rescued man," exclaimed Knips, "who ventures to
lay at your Highness's feet thanks and blessing with unbounded
veneration."

"Have you already engaged yourself?"

"In the most binding way."

"Good," said the Sovereign, stopping the stream of the Magister's
respectful assurances by a motion of his hand. "It has been reported to
me, Magister that you have a special good fortune in finding such
rarities--good fortune," repeated the Sovereign, "or what comes to the
same thing, skill. Do you seriously believe that these indistinct
traces will lead to the lost treasure?"

"Who can now maintain that such a discovery is impossible?" cried the
Magister. "If I might be allowed, with the deepest respect, to express
my views, which burst forth from my heart like a cry of joy, it is, I
dare not say probable, but yet not improbable, that an accident might
lead to it. Yet if I may venture respectfully to express my experience,
which perhaps is only a superstition, if the manuscript be found, it
will not be found where one expects, but somewhere else. Hitherto
whenever in my humble existence I have had the good fortune of making a
discovery--I mention only the Italian Homer of 1848--it has always been
contrary to all anticipations; and what your most exalted Grace calls
my skill is--if I must explain the secret of my good fortune--really
nothing but the circumstance that I have generally sought where,
according to human probability, no treasure could be supposed to lie."

"The views which you entertain are certainly not solacing for an
impatient person," said the Sovereign, "for that may last a long time."

"Generations may pass away," replied Knips, "but the present and the
future will search until the manuscript be found."

"That is but poor comfort," said the Sovereign, laughing; "and I
confess, Magister, you disappoint by these words the lively expectation
which I cherished, that your dexterity and skill would soon obtain for
me the pleasure of seeing the book in the hands of the Professor--the
book itself, or at least some palpable proof of its existence. I am a
layman in all these things, and can form no judgment of the importance
which you attach to the discovery. To me at present it is only to play
off a joke, or--to repeat the words which you lately used with respect
to your miniatures--only for the sake of raillery."

The expression and manner of the Magister altered gradually, as if
under the spell of an enchanter; he shrank into himself, laid his head
on his shoulder, and looked with a terrified eagerness at the
Sovereign.

"In short, I wish that Mr. Werner should soon be put upon a certain
trace of the manuscript, if it is not possible to obtain the manuscript
itself."

Knips remained silent, staring at the speaker.

"I desire you," continued the Sovereign, emphatically, "to employ the
talent you have already shown for this object. Your help must, of
course, remain my secret, for I should like Mr. Werner to have the
pleasure of making the discovery himself."

"It must be a large manuscript," stammered out Knips.

"I fear," replied the Sovereign, carelessly, "it must long have been
torn to pieces. It is not impossible that some scattered leaves may
have been preserved somewhere."

The Magister stood thunderstruck.

"It is difficult to satisfy the Professor."

"So much the greater will be your merit and reward."

Knips remained silent, in a state of terror.

"Has your confidence vanished, Magister?" said the Sovereign,
ironically. "It is not the first time that you have succeeded in such a
discovery." He approached closer to the little man. "I know something
of former trials of your dexterity, and I have no doubt of the
comprehensiveness of your talent."

Knips started, but still he remained speechless.

"For the rest, I am contented with your activity," continued the
Sovereign, in a changed voice. "I do not doubt that you will in many
ways know how to make yourself useful to the officials of my Court, and
thereby consult your own future interest."

"What high honor!" said Knips, pitifully, drawing out his
pocket-handkerchief.

"As regards the lost manuscript," continued the Sovereign, "the stay of
Mr. Werner will, I fear, be only temporary. The task of pursuing the
investigations in our country would, in that event, fall upon you."

Knips raised his head, and a ray of pleasure passed over his troubled
face.

"If the manuscript is, in fact, as valuable as the learned gentlemen
seem to think, then in case, after the departure of the Professor,
there is still something to discover, you will have found with us an
occupation which is especially suited to you."

"This prospect is the highest and most honorable which my life can
attain to," replied Knips, more courageously.

"Good," said the Sovereign; "endeavor to deserve this claim, and try
first what your dexterity can do."

"I will take pains to serve your Highness," replied the Magister, his
eyes cast on the ground.

Knips left the private apartment. The little man, who now descended the
staircase, looked very different from the happy Magister who a few
minutes before had ascended it. His pale face was bent forward, and his
eyes wandered furtively over the faces of the servants, who watched him
inquisitively. He seized his hat mechanically, and he, the Magister,
put it on his head while still in the royal castle. He went out into
the court; the storm swept through the streets, whirled the dust round
him, and blew his coat-tails forward.

"He drives me on; how can I withstand him?" murmured Knips. "Shall I
return to my proof-sheets in that cold room? Shall I all my life depend
on the favor of professors, always in anxiety lest an accident should
betray to these learned men that I once overreached them and derided
them?

"But here I pass a pleasant life, and have opportunities of being the
cleverest among the ignorant and making myself indispensable to them! I
am so already; the Sovereign has shown himself to me as one comrade
does to another, and he can, if I do as he wishes, as little part from
me as the parchment from the writing on it."

He wiped the cold sweat from his brow.

"I myself will find the manuscript," he continued, more confidently.
"_Jacobi Knipsii sollertia inventum_. I know the great secret, and I
will search day by day where only a wood-louse can creep or a spider
hang its web. Then it will be for me to decide whether I shall take the
Professor as an assistant to edit it, or another. Perhaps I will take
him and he will be thankful to me. He will hardly find the treasure, he
is too dignified to listen and to spy out where the chests are
concealed."

The Magister hastened his steps; the wind whistled in sharp tones
behind him,--it tore from the trees the dry leaves of the last year,
and scattered them on the hat of the little man. The dust whirled more
rapidly round him; it covered the dark Court dress with a pale grey
coating, it pursued and enveloped him, so that the foliage of the trees
and the figures of men disappeared from his sight, and he hastened
onward wrapped in a cloud of dust and dead leaves. Again he raised his
pocket-handkerchief, sighed, and wiped the perspiration from his
temples.




                            _CHAPTER XXXI_.

                           HUMMEL'S TRIUMPH.


There was a lowering sultriness in nature, and also in the busy world
of men. The barometer fell suddenly; thunder and hail coursed over the
country; confidence was gone, stocks became worthless paper;
lamentation followed arrogance; water stood in the streets; and the
straw hats disappeared as if wafted away by the storm.

Whoever in these changing times might wish to observe Mr. Hummel in a
good-humored frame of mind must do so in the afternoon before three
o'clock, when he opened his garden door and seated himself near the
hedge. During this hour he gave audience to benevolent thoughts; he
listened to the striking of the city clock, and regulated his watch; he
read the daily paper, counted the regular promenaders, who daily walked
at the same hour to the wood and back again to the city, and he
accosted his acquaintances and received their greetings. These
acquaintances were for the most part householders, hard-headed men,
members of the city commissions, and councillors.

To-day he was sitting at the open door, looking proudly at the opposite
house, in which some secret commotion was perceptible; he examined the
passersby, and returned with dignity the bows and greetings of the
citizens. The first acquaintance was Mr. Wenzel, a gentleman of means,
and his sponsor, who for many years had taken a constitutional every
day, summer and winter, through the meadows to get into perspiration.
It was the one steady business of his life, and he talked of little
else.

"Good day, Hummel."

"Good day, Wenzel. Any success to-day?" asked Mr. Hummel.

"Pretty fair, only it took a long time," said Mr. Wenzel, "but I must
not stop. I only wanted to ask you how things are going with him over
the way?"

"Why that?" asked Hummel, annoyed.

"Do you not know that his book-keeper has disappeared?"

"What!" exclaimed Mr. Hummel.

"They say he has speculated on the stock exchange, and escaped to
America. But I must be off; good day."

Mr. Wenzel hastily departed.

Mr. Hummel remained in a state of great astonishment. He heard the
voice of the city-councillor calling out:

"Good day, Mr. Hummel--a warm day--90 degrees in the shade. Have you
heard?" he said, pointing with his stick to the neighboring house.

"Nothing," cried Hummel; "one lives in this place like in a prison.
Whether it is fire, pestilence, or the arrival of high personages, it
is only by pure accident one hears of it. What is all this about the
absconding book-keeper?"

"It appears that your neighbor placed too much confidence in the man,
and he has secretly used the name of his employer in some mad
speculations, and fled last night. They say it is to the amount of
forty thousand."

"Then Hahn is ruined," said Hummel, "irredeemably. I am not surprised
at it; the fellow has always been impractical."

"Perhaps things are not so bad," said the councillor, as he left him.

Mr. Hummel remained alone with his thoughts. "Naturally." He said to
himself, "It was inevitable. In everything, high-flown--houses,
windows, and garden fancies--never any rest; the man is gone out like a
candle."

He forgot the passers-by, and moved backwards and forwards on his main
walk, looking sometimes with curiosity at the hostile house. "Out like
a candle," he repeated, with the satisfaction of a tragic actor who
endeavors to give the most terrific expression to the telling words of
his _role_. He had vexed himself half a century about that man; before
his disposition to corpulency had begun, he had despised this man's
ways and business. This feeling had been his daily entertainment; it
was one of his daily necessities, like his boot-jack and his green
boat. Now the hour was come when fate paid off the man over the way for
having injured Mr. Hummel by his presence in life. Hummel looked at the
house and shrugged his shoulders; the man who had placed that deformed
structure before his eyes was now in danger of being driven out of it.
He looked at the temple and the muse; this toy of the poor devil would
soon be torn down by some stranger. Hummel went to the sitting-room;
there also he walked up and down, and told his wife of Mr. Hahn's
misfortune in short sentences. He observed, out of the corners of his
eyes, that Mrs. Philippine hastened, nervously, to the sofa, and
frequently clasped her hands; and that Laura rushed into the next room,
and could not refrain from bursting into tears; and he repeated, with
dreadful satisfaction, the terrible words: "He has gone out like a
candle."

He behaved in the same way at the factory; he paced slowly up and down
the warehouse, looked majestically on a heap of hareskins, took one of
the finest hats out of a bandbox, held it towards the window, gave it a
stroke with the brush, and muttered again: "It's all up with him."
To-day his book-keeper, for the first time in his life, was late at his
desk: he had heard of the misfortune on his way; he related it in an
excited manner to his principal, and finally maliciously repeated the
unfortunate words: "It's all up with him." Hummel gave him a piercing
look, and snorted so that the timid heart of the clerk sank within him.

"Do you wish also to become manager of my business like that runaway? I
thank you for this proof of your confidence. I have no use for such
bandit-like proceedings; I am my own manager, sir, and I object to
every kind of secret dealing behind my back."

"But, Mr. Hummel, I have carried on no secret dealings."

"The devil thank you for that," roared out Hummel, in his fiercest
bass. "There is no more confidence on earth: nothing is firm; the
holiest relations are unscrupulously violated; one can no longer trust
one's friends; now even one's enemies make off. At night you lie down
to sleep quietly as a German, and in the morning you wake up as a
Frenchman; and if you sigh for your German coffee, your hostess brings
a dish of Parisian spinach to your bed. I should be glad to learn of
you on what spot of this earth we are now settled."

"In Valley Row, Mr. Hummel."

"There the last remains of our good genius spoke out. Look through the
window. What stands there?" pointing to the neighboring house.

"Park Street, Mr. Hummel."

"Indeed?" asked Hummel, ironically. "Since primeval times, since your
ancestors sat on the trees here nibbling beechmast, this place has been
called Valley Row. In this valley I laid the foundations of my house,
and enclosed in the wall an inscription for later excavators: 'Henry
Hummel, No. 1.' Now the machinations of yonder extinguished straw-man
have upset this truth. In spite of my protest in court, we have become
transformed into park denizens by a police ordinance. Scarcely has this
happened, when that man's book-keeper transforms himself into an
American. Do you believe that Knips, junior, this salamander, would
have ventured on this misdeed if his own principal had not set him the
example? There you have the consequences of everlasting changes and
improvements. For twenty years we have gone on together, but I believe
now you are capable of throwing up your place and entering into another
business. Bah, sir! you ought to be ashamed of your century."

It was a sorrowful day for the Hahn family. The master of the house had
gone to his office in the city at the usual hour in the morning, and
had awaited his book-keeper in vain. When at last he sent to the young
man's dwelling, the porter brought back word that the former had
departed, and left a letter on his table for Mr. Hahn. Hahn read the
letter, and sank down upon his desk with sudden terror. He had always
carried on his business like an honest tradesman. He had begun with
small means, and had become a well to do man by his own energy; but he
had confided his money matters more to his clever clerk than was
prudent. The young man had grown up under his eyes, and had gradually,
by his pliant, zealous service, won full confidence, and had shortly
before been granted the right of signing the name of the firm to
financial obligations. The new manager had succumbed to the temptations
of these turbulent times and had, unknown to his principal, ventured on
rash speculations. In the letter he made open confession. He had stolen
a small sum for his flight: but Mr. Hahn would on the following day
have to meet his losses to the amount of about twenty thousand thalers.
The thunder-bolt fell from a clear heaven into the peaceful life of
the merchant. Mr. Hahn sent for his son. The doctor hastened to the
police-office, to his solicitor, and to his business friends, and
returned again to the office to comfort his father, who sat as if
paralyzed before his desk, hopelessly looking into the future.

Dinner-time came, when Mr. Hahn must impart his misfortune to his wife,
and there was lamentation within the house. Mrs. Hahn went distractedly
through the rooms, and Dorothy wrung her hands and cried. In the
afternoon the Doctor again hastened to his acquaintances and to
money-lenders; but during this week there was a panic, every one
mistrusted the other. Money was scarce, and the Doctor found nothing
but sympathy, and complaints of the fearful times. The flight of the
book-keeper made even confidential friends suspicious as to the extent
of the obligations of the firm. Even by a mortgage on the house, with
the greatest sacrifice, no sufficient sum could be obtained. The danger
was more threatening every hour, the anguish greater. Towards evening
the Doctor returned home to his parents after his last fruitless
expedition. To his father he had shown a cheerful countenance, and
comforted him bravely; but the thought was incessantly present to his
mind, that this misfortune would divide him utterly from his loved one.
Now he sat weary and alone in the dark sitting-room, and looked towards
the lighted windows of the neighboring houses.

He well knew that one friend would not fail his father in distress. But
the Professor was at a distance, and any help he could give would be
insufficient; at the best it would come too late. There were only a few
hours before the decisive moment. The intervening time, one of rest for
all others, was one of endless torture to his father, in which he
contemplated, with staring eyes and feverish pulse, a hundred-fold the
bitterness of the ensuing day, and the son was terrified at the effect
which the dreadful strain would have on the sensitive nature of his
father.

There was a slight rustle in the dark room--a light figure stood beside
the Doctor. Laura seized his hand and held it fast within hers. She
bent down to him, and looked in his sorrowful countenance. "I have felt
the anxiety of these hours. I can no longer bear solitude," she said,
gently. "Is there, no help?"

"I fear, none."

She stroked his curly hair with her hand.

"You have chosen it as your lot to despise what others so anxiously
desire. The light of the sun, which illumines your brow, should never
be darkened by earthly cares. Be proud, Fritz; you have never had cause
to be more so than at this hour, for such a misfortune cannot rob you
of anything that is worth a pang."

"My poor father!" cried Fritz.

"Yet your father is happy," continued Laura, "for he has brought up a
son to whom it is scarcely a sacrifice to be deprived of what appears
to other men the highest happiness. For whom had your dear parents
amassed money but for you? Now you may show them how free and great you
rise above these anxieties for perishable metal."

"If I feel the misfortune of this day to my own life," said the Doctor,
"it is only for the sake of another."

"If it could comfort you, my friend," exclaimed Laura, with an outburst
of feeling, "I will tell you today that I hold true to you, whatever
may happen."

"Dear Laura!" cried the Doctor.

Her voice sang softly in his ear like a bird:

"I am glad, Fritz, that you care for me."

Fritz laid his cheek tenderly on her hand.

"I will endeavor not to be unworthy of you," continued Laura. "I have
long tried in secret all that I, a poor maiden, can do, to free myself
from the trivial follies that trouble our life. I have considered fully
how one can keep house with very little, and I no longer spend money on
useless dress and such rubbish. I am anxious also to earn something. I
give lessons, Fritz, and people are satisfied with me. One requires
little to live upon, I have found that out. I have no greater pleasure
in my room than the thought of making myself independent. That is what
I have wished to express briefly to you to-day. One thing more, Fritz;
if I do not see you, I always think of and care about you."

Fritz stretched out his arms towards her, but she withdrew herself from
him, nodded to him once more at the door, then flew swiftly across the
street back to her attic room.

There she stood in the dark with beating heart; a pale ray of light
gleamed through the window and lighted up the shepherd pair on the
inkstand, so that they seemed to hover illuminated in the air. This day
Laura did not think of her secret diary, she looked towards the window
where her loved one sat, and again tears gushed from her eyes; but she
composed herself with quick decision, fetched a light and a jug of
water from the kitchen, collected her lace collars and cuffs and soaked
them in a basin--she could do all this herself too. It was another
little saving, it might sometime be of use to Fritz.

Mr. Hummel closed his office and continued to rove about. The door of
Laura's room opened, the daughter shrank within herself when she saw
her father cross the threshold solemnly, like a messenger of Fate.
Hummel moved towards his daughter and looked sharply at her weeping
eyes.

"On account of him over the way, I suppose." Laura hid her face in her
hands, again her sorrow overpowered her.

"There you have your little bells," he grumbled in a low tone. "There
you have your pocket-handkerchiefs and your Indians. It is all over
with the people there." He slapped her on the shoulder with his
large hand. "Be quiet. We are not responsible for his ruin; your
pocket-handkerchiefs prove nothing."

It became dark; Hummel walked up and down the street between the two
houses, looking at the hostile dwelling from the park side, where it
was less accessible to him, and his broad face assumed a triumphant
smile. At last he discovered an acquaintance who was hastening out of
it, and followed him.

"What is the state of the case?" he asked, seizing the arm of the
other. "Can he save himself?"

His business friend shrugged his shoulders.

"It cannot remain a secret," he said, and explained the situation and
danger of the adversary.

"Will he be able to procure money to meet it?"

The other again shrugged his shoulders.

"Hardly to-morrow. Money is not to be had at any price. The man is of
course worth more; the business is good, and the house unencumbered."

"The house is not worth twenty thousand," interposed Hummel.

"No matter; in a sound state of the money market he would bear the blow
without danger, now I fear the worst."

"I have said it, he has gone out like a candle," muttered Hummel, and
abruptly turned his steps towards his house.

In the Doctor's room father and son were sitting over letters and
accounts, the light of the lamp shone on the gilded titles of the books
against the wall, and the portfolios containing the treasures
industriously collected by the Doctor from all corners of the world,
and bound up and placed here in grand array--now they were again to be
dispersed. The son was endeavoring to inspire his despairing father
with courage.

"If the misfortune cannot be prevented which has come upon us like a
hurricane, we must bear it like men: you can save your honor. The
greatest sorrow that I feel is that I can now be of so little use to
you, and that the advice of every man of business is of more value than
the help of your own son."

The father laid his head on the table, powerless and stupefied.

The door opened, and from the dark hall a strange form entered the room
with heavy steps. The Doctor sprang up and stared at the hard features
of a well-known face. Mr. Hahn uttered a shriek and rose hastily from
the sofa to leave the room.

"Mr. Hummel!" exclaimed the Doctor, alarmed.

"Of course," replied Hummel; "it is I, who else should it be?" He laid
a packet on the table. "Here are twenty thousand thalers in certified
City Bonds, and here is a receipt for you both to sign. To-morrow you
shall give a mortgage for it upon your house: the papers must be repaid
in kind, for I do not mean to lose by it, exchange is too bad now. The
mortgage shall run for ten years, in order that you may not think I
wish to take your house; you can pay me back when you please, the whole
at once, or by degrees. I know your business, no money can now be
obtained upon your straw; but in ten years the loss may be recovered. I
make only one condition, that no human being shall know of this loan,
least of all your wife, and my wife and daughter. For this I have good
reasons. Do not look at me as the cat looks at the king," he continued,
turning to the Doctor. "Set to work, count the bonds and note their
numbers. Make no speeches, I am not a man of sentiment, and figures of
rhetoric are no use to me. I think of my security also. The house is
scarcely worth twenty thousand thalers, but it satisfies me. If you
should wish to carry it off I should see it. You have taken care that
it should be near enough to my eyes. Now count, please, and sign the
receipt, Doctor," he said, authoritatively, pushing him down on his
chair.

"Mr. Hummel," began Hahn, somewhat indistinctly, for it was difficult
for him to speak in his emotion, "I shall never forget this hour to the
end of my life." He wished to go up to him and give him his hand, but
the tears streamed from his eyes and he was obliged to cover his face
with his pocket-handkerchief.

"Be seated," said Hummel, pushing him down on the sofa; "steadiness and
stoicism are always the main thing; they are better than Chinese toys.
I shall say nothing further to-day, and you must say nothing to me of
this occurrence. To-morrow everything will be made smooth before the
notary and the registrar, and interest must be punctually paid,
quarterly; for the rest, our relation to each other remains the same.
For, you see, we are not merely men, we are also business people. As a
man, I well know what are your good points, even when you complain of
me. But our houses and our business do not agree. We have been
opponents twenty years, felt against straw, with our hobbies and our
trellis-work fences. That may remain so; what is not harmonious need
not harmonise. When you call me bristles and felt, I will be coarse to
you, and I will consider you as a straw blockhead as often as I am
angry with you. But with all that, we may have, as now, private
business together; and if ever, which I hope will never happen, robbers
should plunder me, you will do for me as much as you can. This I know
and have always known, and therefore I am come to you to-day."

Hahn gave him a look of warm gratitude, and again raised his
pocket-handkerchief.

Hummel laid his hand heavily upon his head, as with a little child and
said, gently, "You are a visionary, Hahn. The doctor is ready now;
sign, and do not either of you take this misfortune too much to
heart. There," he continued, strewing sand over the paper carefully,
"to-morrow, about nine o'clock, I will send my solicitor to your
office. Stay where you are; the staircase is badly lighted, but I shall
find my way. Good night."

He entered the street, and looked contemptuously at the hostile walls.
"No mortgage?" he muttered. "H. Hummel, first and last, twenty
thousand;" At home he vouchsafed some comforting words to his ladies.
"I have heard that the people there will be able to pull through, so I
forbid further lamenting. If ever, in conformity with miserable
fashion, you should need a straw hat, you may take your money rather to
the Hahns than to others; I give my permission."

Some days after Fritz Hahn entered the small office of Mr. Hummel. The
latter motioned to his bookkeeper to withdraw, and began, coolly, from
his arm chair, "What do you bring me, Doctor?"

"My father feels it a duty to meet the great confidence that you have
shown him, by giving you an insight into the state of his business, and
begs you to assist him in his arrangements. He is of opinion, that
until this disastrous affair has passed over, he should do nothing
important without your assent."

Hummel laughed. "What! I am to give advice, and that too, in the
management of your business? You would put me in a position that is
preposterous, and one against which I protest."

The Doctor silently placed before him a statement of assets and
liabilities.

"You are a sharp customer," cried Hummel, "but for an old fox this trap
is not cunningly enough laid." With that he looked at the credit and
debit, and took a pencil in his hand. "Here I find among the assets
five hundred thalers for books that are to be sold. I did not know that
your father had this hobby also."

"They are my books, Mr. Hummel. I have of late years spent more money
upon these than was absolutely necessary for my work. I am determined
to sell what I can do without; a book-dealer has already offered to pay
this sum in two instalments."

"The sheriff is never allowed to levy on instruments of trade," said
Hummel, making a stroke through that entry in the ledger. "I believe,
indeed, that they are unreadable stuff, but the world has many dark
corners; and as you have a fancy to be an anomalous dick among your
fellows, you shall remain in your hole." He regarded the Doctor with an
ironical twinkle in his eye. "Have you nothing further to say? I do not
mean with reference to your father's business, I have nothing further
to do with that, but upon another subject, which you yourself seem to
carry on; from your movements of late you evidently wish to associate
yourself with my daughter Laura?"

The Doctor colored. "I should have chosen another day for the
declaration which you now demand of me. But it is my anxious wish to
come to an understanding with you concerning it. I have long
entertained a secret hope that time would lessen your aversion to me."

"Time?" interrupted Hummel; "that's absurd."

"Now by the noble assistance which you have extended to my father, I am
placed in a position towards you which is so painful to me that I must
beg of you not to refuse me your sympathy. With strenuous exertion and
fortunate circumstances it would now be years before I could acquire a
position to maintain a wife."

"Starving trade," interposed Mr. Hummel, in a grumbling tone.

"I love your daughter and I cannot sacrifice this feeling. But I have
lost the prospect of offering her a future which could in some measure
answer to what she is entitled to expect; and the helping hand which
you have extended to my father makes me so dependent on you that I must
avoid what would excite your displeasure. Therefore I see a desolate
future before me."

"Exactly as I prophesied," replied Mr. Hummel, "wretched and weak."

The Doctor drew back, but at the same time he laid his hand on his
neighbor's arm. "This manner of language will serve you no longer, Mr.
Hummel," said he smiling.

"Noble, but abject," repeated Hummel with satisfaction. "You should be
ashamed, sir; do you pretend to be a lover? You wish to know how to
please my daughter Laura, such an evasive, forlorn specimen as you?
Will you regulate your feelings according to my mortgage? If you are in
love, I expect that you should conduct yourself like a rampant lion,
jealous and fierce. Bah, sir! you are a beautiful Adonis to me, or
whatever else that fellow Nicodemus was called."

"Mr. Hummel, I ask for your daughter's hand," cried the Doctor.

"I refuse it you," cried Hummel. "You mistake my words. I do not think
of throwing my daughter into this bargain also. But you must not
misunderstand my refusal to give you my daughter; your duty is to
pursue her more fiercely than ever. You must attack me, and force
yourself into my house; in return for which I reserve to myself the
right to show you the way out. But I have always said it, you are
wanting in courage."

"Mr. Hummel," replied the Doctor, with dignity, "allow me to remark
that you should no longer be on the offensive with me."

"Why not?" asked Hummel.

The Doctor pointed to the papers.

"What has happened in this matter makes it difficult for me to use
strong language to you. It can be no pleasure to you to attack one who
cannot defend himself."

"These pretentions are really ridiculous," replied Hummel. "Because I
have given you my money must I cease to treat you as you deserve?
Because you, perhaps, are not disinclined to marry my daughter, am I to
stroke you with a velvet brush? Did one ever hear such nonsense?"

"You mistake," continued the Doctor, civilly, "if you think that I am
not in a position to answer what you say. I therefore do myself the
honor of remarking to you that your mockery is so wounding that even
the kindness you have shown loses its value."

"Have done with your kindness--it was only kindness from revenge."

"Then I will as honestly tell you," continued the Doctor, "that it was
a very bitter hour to me when you entered our house. I knew how
oppressive the obligation which you then conferred upon us would be for
the rest of my life. But I looked at my poor father, and the thought of
his misery closed my mouth. For my own part, I would rather have begged
my bread than taken your money."

"Go on," cried Hummel.

"What you have done for my father does not give you a right to
ill-treat me. This conversation strengthens me in the conviction that I
have had from the outset, that we must exert ourselves to the utmost to
repay you the money we have received, as soon as possible. You have
crossed out the item in which I credited my books, but I shall sell
them."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Hummel.

"I shall do it, however insignificant the sum may be in comparison with
our debt, because the tyranny which you wish to exercise over me
threatens to become insupportable. I at least will not be indebted to
you in this way."

"Yet you wish it in another way that suits you better."

"Yes," replied the Doctor. "As you have so contemptuously rejected the
greatest sacrifice I could make, I shall continue to woo your daughter,
even against your will. I shall endeavor to speak to her whenever I
can, and to make myself as acceptable to her as is possible in my
position. You yourself have shown me this way. You will therefore be
satisfied if I enter upon it, and if you are not, I shall pay no regard
to your displeasure."

"At last," cried Hummel, "it all comes to light I see now that you have
some fire in you; therefore we will talk quietly over this business.
You are not the husband whom I could have wished for my daughter. I
have kept you away from my house, but it has been of no use, for a
cursed sentiment has arisen between you; I therefore intend now to
carry on the affair differently. I shall not object to you coming to my
house sometimes. I depend upon your doing it with discretion. I will
ignore your presence, and my daughter shall have an opportunity of
seeing how you compare with the four walls. We will both await the
result."

"I do not agree to this proposal," replied the Doctor. "I do not expect
that you should give me your daughter's hand now, and I only accept the
entrance into your family on condition that you yourself will treat me
as becomes a guest in your house, and that you will perform the duties
of a friendly host. I cannot suffer that you should speak to me in the
way you have done in our conversation to-day. Any insult, either by
words or by neglect, I will not bear from you. I am not only desirous
to please your daughter, but also to be agreeable to yourself. For that
I demand opportunity. If you do not agree to this condition, I prefer
not to come at all."

"Humboldt, do not undertake too much at once," replied Mr. Hummel,
shaking his head, "for you see I esteem you, but I really do not like
you. Therefore I will consider how far I can make myself pleasant to
you; I assure you it will be hard work. Meanwhile, take these papers
with you. Your father has bought the lesson, that he should himself
look after his own money affairs. For the rest, matters are not in a
bad state, and he will be able to help himself out of it; you do not
need either me or another. Good morning, Doctor."

The doctor took the papers under his arm.

"I beg you to shake hands, Mr. Hummel."

"Not so hastily," replied Hummel.

"I am sorry for it," said the Doctor, smiling, "but I cannot be denied
to-day."

"Only from innate politeness," rejoined Hummel, "not from good will."

He held out his large hand to him.

"Keep your books," he cried out, to the departing visitor. "I can see
through that scheme, you will buy them again, and then I shall have to
pay for them anyhow."




                            _CHAPTER XXXII_.

                        A CHAPTER FROM TACITUS.


Tobias Bachhuber! when your sponsors concluded that you should be
called Tobias they did bad service to you and your descendants. For he
who bears that name is by fate subjected to experiences that do not
fall to the lot of more favorably named men. Who ever passed so
miserable a honey-moon as Tobias the younger, the poor son of the blind
man? For was he not obliged to fast, and to struggle with a murderous
spirit just at a time when a spiritual struggle would be highly
disagreeable to any mortal? Even you, blessed Bachhuber, have bitterly
experienced the misfortune of your name. Whether the fatal war with
Sweden may have arisen because the Swedes hankered after your
manuscript, will not be discussed here; it is to be hoped that new
historical investigations may yet bring this secret motive of action to
light. But it cannot be denied that you yourself suffered lamentably in
the war, and the curse of your name still clings to the treasure which
you concealed. All who have anything to do with it have their eyes
blinded, and an evil spirit destroys their hopes.

The Professor also was tormented with this blindness, and troubled by
the demon. He had found nothing. Many would have been weary and given
it up, but his eagerness only increased, for he did not, by any means,
search heedlessly; he knew very well that the discovery depended on a
long chain of accidents which were beyond all calculation. But he
wished to do all in his power; his task was to give assurance to the
learned of the world that the archives, collections, and inventories of
the Sovereign had been thoroughly examined. This certainty at least he
could obtain better than any one else, and he would thus do his duty
both to the Sovereign and to Learning. But his impatience became more
eager, and the cheerful excitement he felt at first increased to
uncomfortable agitation; constant disappointment disturbed his daily
frame of mind. He often sat lost in thought, nay, he was always
speaking of the treasure, and Ilse could not please him; her objections
and even her consolation wounded him, for he was very much vexed that
she did not partake of his zeal. He knew accurately what would be the
appearance of the manuscript--a large, thick quarto, very old
characters, perhaps of the sixth century, much faded, and many leaves
half destroyed, for he could not conceal from himself that the
mischievous spirit of the times, water and the rats, might have made
havoc with it.

One day the Professor entered the Princess's study with heightened
color.

"At last I can bring you a good report. In a small bundle of deeds in
the Marshal's office, which had hitherto unaccountably escaped me, I
have found a lost entry on a single sheet. The chests which the
official at Bielstein sent in the beginning of the last century to the
vanished castle are briefly designated as numbers one and two, with a
remark that they contained besides old cross-bows, arrows, &c.,
manuscripts of the monastery of Rossau. Thus, there were two chests
with manuscripts of the monastery in them."

The Princess looked with curiosity at the sheet which he laid before
her.

"It was high time that this account should come to light," continued
the Professor, gaily; "for I confess to your Highness that the phantom
pursued me day and night. This is a valuable confirmation that I am on
the right path."

"Yes," cried the Princess, "I am convinced we shall find the treasure.
If I could but help you a little. If it could be obtained by magic, I
would gladly put on my magic girdle and call upon Lady Hecate.
Unfortunately this mode of calling spirits to one's aid is out of date,
and it is difficult to learn the secret art by which learned gentlemen
unearth their treasures."

"I also am now little better than a wretched exorcist," answered the
Professor. "It would be a bad recommendation for me if your Highness
were to judge of my work by what I have achieved here in stirring up
the old dust. One is delighted and disappointed, like a child. It is
fortunate that fate does not often tease us book-writers with such
tricks; what we do for the benefit of others does not depend upon
accidental discoveries."

"I can form an idea of the seriousness of the work which I do not see,"
exclaimed the Princess. "Your kindness has opened at least an aperture
through which I can look into the workshop of creative minds. I can
understand that the labor of learned men must have an irresistible
attraction for those who belong to that silent community. I envy the
women whose happiness it is to live their whole lives within the sphere
of such occupations."

"We are bold conquerors at the writing-table," answered the Professor;
"but the incongruity between our inward freedom and outward
helplessness is often felt by the conqueror and those about him. They
who really pass their lives with us may easily fathom us, and can with
difficulty bear our one-sidedness. For, your Highness, learned men
themselves are like the books they write. In general we are badly
prepared for the whirl of business, and sometimes helpless in the
manifold activity of our time. We are true friends to men in those
hours in which they seek new strength for the struggle of life, but in
the struggle itself we are generally unskilful assistants."

"Are you thinking of yourself in speaking thus?" asked the Princess,
quickly.

"I had in my mind a picture of the combined traits of many of my
fellow-workers, but if your Highness inquires, about myself, I also am
in this respect a regular man of learning. For I have often had
opportunity of remarking how imperfect is my judgment on all questions
in which my learning or my moral feeling do not give me assurance."

"I do not like that, Mr. Werner," cried the Princess, leaning gravely
back in her arm-chair. "My fancy took its highest flight; I sat as
sovereign of the world, prepared to make my people happy, and I made
you my minister of state."

"Your confidence gives me pleasure," replied the Professor; "but if
your Highness should ever be in the position to seek for an assistant
in government, I could not accept this dignity with a good conscience
unless your Highness's subjects had all been passed through the
bookbinder's press, and wore little coats of pasteboard, and had on
their backs labels that told the contents of each."

The Princess laughed, but her eyes rested with deep feeling on the
honest countenance of the man. She rose and approached him.

"You are always true, open, and high-minded."

"Thanks for your judgment," replied the Professor, much pleased. "Even
your Highness treats me like a spirit that dwells in a book; you praise
me as openly as if I did not understand the words that you speak. I beg
permission to convey to your Highness my feelings also in a review."

"What I am like, I do not wish to hear from you," exclaimed the
Princess; "for you would, in spite of the harmlessness which you boast
of, end by reading me as plainly as if I had a morocco-covered back and
gilt edges. But I am serious when I praise you. Yes, Mr. Werner, since
you have been with us I have attained to a better understanding of the
value of life. You do not know what an advantage it is for me to have
intercourse with a mind which, undisturbed by the little trifles around
it, only serves its high goddess of Truth. The turmoil of daily life
bears hard upon us, and perplexes us; those by whom I am surrounded,
even the best of them, all think and care about themselves, and make
convenient compacts between their feeling of duty and their egotism.
But in you I perceive unselfishness and the incessant devotion of
yourself to the highest labor of man. There is something great and
lofty in this that overpowers me with admiration. I feel the worth of
such an existence, like a new light that penetrates my soul. Never have
I known any one about me so inspired with heaven in his breast. That is
my review of you, Professor Werner; it is, perhaps, not well written,
but it comes from my heart."

The eyes of the learned man shone as he looked at the enthusiastic
countenance of the princely child, but he was silent. There was a long
pause. The Princess turned away, and bent over her books. At last she
began, with gentle voice:

"You are going to your daily work, I will do so also. Before you leave
me, I beg of you to be my instructor: I have marked a place in the work
no art that you had the kindness to bring from the library, which I
could not quite understand."

The Professor took the open book from her hand, and laughed.

"This is the theory of quite a different art; it is not the right
book."

The Princess read, "How to make blanc-mange." She opened the title
page: "Common-sense cook-book of an old Nuremberg cook." She turned the
book round with astonishment; it was the same simple binding.

"How does this come here?" she exclaimed, with vexation, and rang for
her maid.

"No one has been here," said the latter, "except the Princes, a short
time ago."

"Ah!" exclaimed the Princess, depressed. "Then there is no hope. We are
now under the dominion of a mischievous spirit, and must wait till our
book returns. Farewell, Mr. Werner; if the mischievous spirit restores
me the book I shall call you back."

When the Professor had taken leave, the maid came back alarmed and
brought the lost Archaeology in a sad condition. The book was in the
cage of the monkey. Giocco had studied it industriously, and was
furious when the volume was taken away from him.

At the same hour the Chamberlain was standing before the Sovereign.

"Your friends from the University have domesticated themselves with us;
I take for granted that you have done your best to make our city
agreeable to them."

"Professor Werner appears well contented," replied the Chamberlain,
with reserve.

"Has your sister Malwine made the acquaintance of the Professor's
wife?"

"Unfortunately my sister has been obliged to nurse a sick aunt in the
country."

"That is a pity," replied the Sovereign; "she may have reason to regret
this accident. Some time ago you expressed your opinion that some
practical occupation would be beneficial to the Hereditary Prince; I
have considered the matter. It will be necessary to find the means of a
temporary residence in the district of Rossau. The old forester's lodge
will not be ill adapted to it. I have determined by additional building
to change the house into a habitable residence. The Hereditary Prince
must be on the spot to plan the building according to his wishes, and
you will accompany him. The architect has orders to draw the plans
according to the Prince's directions. I only wish to speak to him about
the proposed estimate. Meanwhile the Hereditary Prince will occupy the
rooms that are reserved for me in the forester's lodge. But as the
building will not take up his whole time, he may employ his leisure in
obtaining an insight into our agricultural methods, at the farm
of the adjoining proprietor. He should learn about field-work and
book-keeping. The year is already far advanced, which makes a speedy
departure advisable. I hope this arrangement will meet a wish that you
have long entertained. The beautiful country and the quiet wood will be
a refreshment to you after your winterwork."

The Chamberlain bowed dismayed before his master, who so graciously
pronounced his banishment from Court. He hastened to the Hereditary
Prince and related the bad tidings.

"It is exile!" he exclaimed, beside himself.

"Make your preparations speedily," replied the Hereditary Prince
quietly. "I am prepared to go at once."

The Hereditary Prince went to his father.

"I will do what you command, and make every effort to please you. If
you, as a father, consider this residence in a distant place useful, I
feel that you understand better than I what will be beneficial for my
future. But," he continued, with hesitation, "I cannot go from here
without making a request which I have much at heart."

"Speak, Benno," said the Sovereign, graciously.

"I beg of you to permit the Professor and his wife to depart as quickly
as possible from the neighborhood of the Court."

"Why so?" asked the Sovereign sharply.

"Their residence here is hurtful to Mrs. Werner. Her reputation is
endangered by the unusual position in which she is placed. I owe him
and her great gratitude; their happiness is a matter of concern to me,
and I am tormented by the thought that their stay in our parts
threatens to disturb the peace of their life."

"And why does your gratitude fear a disturbance of the happiness that
is so dear to you?" asked the Sovereign.

"It is said that the Pavillion is a fateful residence for an honorable
woman," replied the Hereditary Prince, decidedly.

"If what you call honor is endangered by her dwelling there, then that
virtue is easily lost," said the Sovereign, bitterly.

"It is not the dwelling alone," continued the Hereditary Prince; "the
ladies of the Court have been quite reserved in their conduct toward
her; she is ill spoken of: gossip and calumny are busy in fabricating a
false representation of her innocent life."

"I hear with astonishment," said the Sovereign, "the lively interest
you take in the stranger; yet, if I am rightly informed, you yourself
during this time have shown her little chivalrous attention."

"I have not done so," exclaimed the Hereditary Prince, "because I have
felt myself bound to avoid, at least so far as I was concerned, any
conduct that might injure her. I saw the jeering looks of our gentlemen
when she arrived; I heard their derogatory words about the new beauty
who was shut up in that house, and my heart beat with shame and anger.
Therefore I have painfully controlled myself; I have feigned
indifference before those about me, and I have been cold in my demeanor
towards her; but, my father, it has been a hard task to me, and I have
felt deep and bitter anxiety in the past few weeks; for the happiest
hours of my life at college were passed in her society."

The Sovereign had turned away; he now showed his son a smiling
countenance.

"So that was the reason of your reserve. I had forgotten that you had
reached the age of tender susceptibility and were inclined to expend
more emotion and sentiment on your relations to women than is good for
you. Yet I could envy you this. Unfortunately, life does not long
retain its sensitive feelings." He approached the Prince, and
continued, good-humoredly: "I do not deny, Benno, that in your interest
I regarded the arrival of our visitors differently. For a prince of
your nature there is perhaps nothing so fraught with culture as the
tender feeling for a woman who makes no demands on the external life of
her friend, and yet gives him all the charm of an intimate union of
soul. Love affairs with ladies of the Court or with assuming intrigants
would be dangerous for you; you must be on your guard that the woman to
whom you devote yourself will not trifle with you and selfishly make
use of you for her own ends. From all that I knew, your connection with
the lady in the Pavilion was just what would be advantageous for your
future life. From reasons of which I have full appreciation, you have
avoided accepting this idyllic relation. You yourself have not chosen
what I, with the best intentions, prepared for you; it seems to me,
therefore, that you have lost the right in this affair to express any
wishes whatever."

"Father," exclaimed the Hereditary Prince, horrified, and wringing his
hands, "your saying this to me is indeed unkind. I had a dark
foreboding that the invitation to them had some secret object in view.
I have struggled with this suspicion, and blamed myself for it; now I
am dismayed with the thought that I myself am the innocent cause of
this misfortune to these good people. Your words give me the right to
repeat my request: let them go as soon as possible, or you will make
your son miserable."

"I perceive an entirely new phase of your character," replied the
Sovereign; "and I am thankful to you for the insight that you have at
last accorded me into your silent nature. You are either a fantastical
dreamer, or you have a talent for diplomacy that I have never
attributed to you."

"I have never been other than candid to you," exclaimed the Hereditary
Prince.

"Shall the lady return to her home at Bielstein to be saved?" asked the
Sovereign mockingly.

"No," replied the Hereditary Prince, in a low tone.

"Your demand scarcely deserves an answer," continued the father. "The
strangers have been called here for a certain time. The husband is not
in my service. I am neither in a position to send them away, as they
have given me no reason for dissatisfaction, nor to keep them here
against their will."

"Forgive me, my father," exclaimed the Hereditary Prince. "You have
yourself, by the gracious attention which you daily show to the wife,
by your civil gifts and frequent visits, occasioned the Court to think
that you take a special personal interest in her."

"Is the Court so busy in reporting to you what I, through the
unbecoming conduct of others, have thought fit to do?" asked the
Sovereign.

"Little is reported to me of what those about us say, and be assured
that I do not lend a ready ear to their conjectures; but it is
inevitable that I sometimes must hear what occupies them all and makes
them all indignant. They venture to maintain even, that every one who
does not show her attention is in disgrace with you; and they think
that they show special firmness of character and respectability in
refusing to be civil to her. You, as well as she, are threatened with
calumny. Forgive me, my father, for being thus frank. You yourself have
by your favor brought the lady into this dangerous position, and
therefore it lies with you to deliver her from it."

"The Court always becomes virtuous when its master selects for
distinction a lady who does not belong to their circle; and you will
soon learn the value of such strict morals," replied the Sovereign. "It
must be a strong sentiment, Benno, which drives your timid nature to
the utmost limits of the freedom of speech that is allowable from a son
to a father."

The pale face of the Hereditary Prince colored.

"Yes, my father," he cried, "hear what to every other ear will remain a
secret; I love that lady with fervent and devoted heart. I would with
pleasure make the greatest sacrifice in my power for her. I have felt
the power that the beauty and innocence of a woman can exercise on a
man. More than once have I strengthened myself by contact with her pure
spirit. I was happy when near her, and unhappy when I could not look
into her eyes. For a whole year I have thought in secret of her, and in
this sorrowful feeling I have grown to be a man. That I have now
courage to speak thus to you, I owe to the influence which she has
exercised upon me. I know, my father, how unhappy such a passion makes
one; I know the misery of being for ever deprived of the woman one
loves. The thought of the peace of her pure soul alone has sustained me
in hours of bitterness. Now you know all. I have confided my secret to
you and I beg of you, my Sovereign and father, to receive this
confidence with indulgence. If you have hitherto cared for my welfare,
now is the time when you can show me the highest proof of our
sincerity. Honor the woman who is loved by your unhappy son."

The countenance of the Sovereign had changed while his son was
speaking, and the latter was terrified at its menacing expression.

"Seek, for your tale, the ear of some knight-errant who eagerly drinks
the water into which a tear of his lady-love has dropped."

"Yes, I seek your knightly help, my liege and Sovereign," cried the
Hereditary Prince, beside himself. "I conjure you, do not let me
implore you in vain. I call upon you, as the head of our illustrious
house, and as a member of the order whose device we both wear, to do a
service to me and for her. Do not refuse her your support in her
danger."

"We are not attending a mediaeval ceremony," replied the Sovereign,
coldly, "and your speech does not accord with the tone of practical
life. I have not desired your confidence--you have thrust it upon me in
too bold a manner. Do not wonder that your father is angry with your
presumptuous speech, and that your Sovereign dismisses you with
displeasure."

The Hereditary Prince turned pale and stepped back.

"The anger of my father and the displeasure of my Sovereign are
misfortunes which I feel deeply; but still more fearful to me is the
thought, that here at Court an injury is done to an innocent person--an
injury in which I must have a share. However heavily your anger may
fall upon me, yet I must tell you that you have exposed the lady to
misrepresentation, and as long as I stand before you I will repeat it,
and not desist from my request to remove her from here, for the sake of
her honor and ours."

"As your words flutter ceaselessly about the same empty phantom,"
replied the Sovereign, "it is time to put an end to this conversation.
You will depart at once, and leave it to time to enable me to forget,
if I ever can do so, what I have heard from you to-day. Till then you
may reflect in solitude on your folly, in wishing to play the part of
guardian to strangers who are quite in a position to take care of
themselves."

The Hereditary Prince bowed.

"Has my most Sovereign liege any commands for me?" he asked, with
trembling lips.

The Sovereign replied sullenly:

"It only remains to you how to excite the ill-will of the strangers
against your father."

"Your Highness knows that such conduct would not become me."

The Sovereign waved his hand, and his son departed with a silent bow.

Immediately upon quitting the apartment of the father, the Prince
ordered his carriage, and then hastened to his sister. The Princess
looked anxiously into his disturbed countenance.

"You are going away?" she exclaimed.

"Farewell!" he said, holding out his hand to her. "I am going into the
country to build a new castle for us in case we should wish to change
the scene of action."

"When do you return, Benno?"

The Hereditary Prince shrugged his shoulders.

"When the Sovereign commands. My task is now to become something of an
architect and farmer; this is a useful occupation. Farewell, Sidonie.
If chance should bring you together with Mrs. Werner, I would be
greatly indebted to you if you would not attend to the gossip of the
Court, but remember that she is a worthy lady, and that I owe her a
great debt of gratitude."

"Are you dissatisfied with me, my brother?" asked the Princess,
anxiously.

"Make reparation for it, Siddy, as best you can. Farewell!"

Prince Victor accompanied him to the carriage. The Hereditary Prince
clasped his hand, and looked significantly towards the Pavilion. Victor
nodded. "That's my opinion too," he said. "Before I go back to my
garrison I will visit you in the land of cat-tails. I expect to find
you as a brother hermit, with a long beard and a cap made of tree-bark.
Farewell, Knight Toggenburg, and learn there that the best philosophy
on earth is to consider every day as lost on which one cannot do some
foolish trick. If one does not do this business one's self, others will
take the trouble off one's hands. It is always more pleasant to be the
hammer than the anvil."





The Sovereign was gloomy and silent at dinner; only short remarks fell
from his lips, and sometimes a bitter jest, from which one remarked
that he was striving for composure; the Court understood that this
unpleasant mood was connected with the departure of the Hereditary
Prince, and every one took care not to irritate him. The Professor
alone was able to draw a smile from him, when he good-humoredly told
about the enchanted castle, Solitude. After dinner the Sovereign
conversed with one of his aides-de-camp as well as the Professor. The
latter turned to the High Steward; and although he usually avoided the
reserved politeness of the man, he on this occasion asked him some
indifferent questions. The High Steward answered civilly that the
Marshal, who was close by, could give him the best information, and he
changed his place. Immediately afterwards the Sovereign walked straight
through the company to the High Steward, and drew him into the recess
of the window, and began:

"You accompanied me on my first journey to Italy, and, if I am not
mistaken, partook a little of my fondness for antiquities. Our
collection is being newly arranged and a catalogue fully prepared."

The High Steward expressed his acknowledgment of this princely
liberality.

"Professor Werner is very active," continued the Sovereign; "it is
delightful to see how well he understands to arrange the specimens."

The High Steward remained silent.

"Your Excellency will remember how when in Italy we were much amused at
the enthusiasm of collectors who, luring strangers into their cabinets,
wildly gesticulated and rhapsodized over some illegible inscription.
Like most other men, our guest is also afflicted with a hobby. He
suspected that an old manuscript lay concealed in a house in our
principality; therefore he married the daughter of the proprietor; and
as, in spite of that, he did not find the treasure, he is now secretly
seeking this phantasm in the old garrets of the palace. Has he never
spoken to you of it?"

"I have as yet had no occasion to seek his confidence," replied the
High Steward.

"Then you have missed something," continued the Sovereign; "in his way
he speaks well and readily about it; it will amuse you to examine more
closely this species of folly. Come presently with him into my study."

The High Steward bowed; and on the breaking up of the party, informed
the Professor that the Sovereign wished to speak to him.

The gentlemen entered the Sovereign's apartment, in order to afford him
an hour of entertainment.

"I have told his Excellency," the Sovereign began, "that you have a
special object of interest which you pursue like a sportsman. How about
the manuscript?"

The Professor related his new discovery of the two chests.

"The next hunting-ground which I hope to try will be the garrets and
rooms in the summer castle of the Princess; if these yield me no booty,
I would hardly know of any place that has not been searched."

"I shall be delighted if you soon attain your object," said the
Sovereign, looking at the High Steward. "I assume that the discovery of
this manuscript will be of great importance for your own professional
career. Of course you will consent to publish the same."

"It would be the noblest task that could fall to my lot," replied the
Professor, "always supposing that your Highness would graciously
entrust the work to me."

"You shall undertake the work, and no other," replied the Sovereign,
laughing, "so far as I have the right to decide it. So the invisible
book will be really of great importance to learning?"

"The greatest importance. The contents of it will be of the highest
value to every scholar. I think it would also interest your Highness,"
said the Professor, innocently, "for the Roman Tacitus is in a certain
sense a Court historian; the main point of his narrative is the
characters of the Emperors who, in the first century of our era,
decided the fate of the old world. It is indeed, on the whole, a
sorrowful picture."

"Did he belong to the hostile party?" inquired the Sovereign.

"He is the great narrator of the peculiar deformity of character found
in the sovereigns of the ancient world; we have to thank him for a
series of psychological studies of a malady that then developed itself
on the throne."

"That is new to me," replied the Sovereign, fidgeting on his chair.

"Your Highness will, I am convinced, view the various forms of this
mental malady with the greatest sympathy, and will find in other
periods of the past--nay, even in the earlier civilization of our own
people--many remarkable parallel cases."

"Do you speak of a special malady that only befalls rulers?" asked the
Sovereign; "physicians will be grateful to you for this discovery."

"In fact," answered the Professor, eagerly, "the fearful importance of
this phenomenon is far too little estimated; no other has exercised
such an immeasurable influence on the fate of nations. The destruction
by pestilence and war is small in comparison with the fatal devastation
of nations which has been occasioned by this special misfortune of the
rulers. For this malady, which raged long after Tacitus among the Roman
emperors, is not an ailing that is confined to ancient Rome--it is
undoubtedly as old as the despotisms of the human race; even later it
has been the lot of numerous rulers in Christian states; it has
produced deformed and grotesque characters in every period; it has been
for thousands of years the worm enclosed in the brain, consuming the
marrow of the head, destroying the judgment and corroding the moral
feelings, until at last nothing remained but the hollow glitter of
life. Sometimes it became madness which could be proved by medical men,
but in numerous other cases the capacity for practical life did not
cease and the secret mischief was carefully concealed. There were
periods when only occasional firmly-established minds preserved their
full healthy vigor; and again other centuries when the heads that wore
a diadem inhaled a fresh atmosphere from the people. I am convinced
that he whose vocation it is to investigate accurately the conditions
of later times will, in the course of his studies, discover the same
malady under a milder form. My life lies far from these observations,
but the Roman state undoubtedly shows the strangest forms of the
malady; for there were the widest relations, and such a powerful
development of human nature both in virtue and vice as has seldom since
been found in history."

"It seems to be a particular pleasure to the learned gentlemen to bring
to light these sufferings of former rulers," said the Sovereign.

"They are certainly instructive for all times," continued the
Professor, confidently, "for by fearful example they impress upon one
the truth that the higher a man's position is, the greater is the
necessity of barriers to restrain the arbitrariness of his nature. Your
Highness's independent judgment and rich experience will enable you to
discern, more distinctly than any one in my sphere of life, that the
phenomena of this malady always show themselves where the ruling powers
have less to fear and to honor than other mortals. What preserves a man
in ordinary situations is that he feels himself at every moment of his
life under strict and incessant control; his friends, the law, and the
interest of others surround him on all sides, they demand imperiously
that he should conform his thoughts and will by rules which secure the
welfare of others. At all times the power of these fetters is less
effective on the ruler; he can easily cast off what confines him, an
ungracious movement of the hand frightens the monitor forever from his
side. From morning to evening he is surrounded by persons who
accommodate themselves to him; no friend reminds him of his duty, no
law punishes him. Hundreds of examples teach us that former rulers,
even amidst great outward success, suffered from inward ravages, where
they were not guarded by a strong public opinion, or incessantly
constrained by the powerful participation of the people in the state.
We cannot but think of the gigantic power of a general and conqueror
whose successes and victories brought devastation and excessive sin
into his own life; he became a fearful sham, a liar to himself and a
liar to the world before he was overthrown, and long before he died. To
investigate similar cases is, as I said, not my vocation."

"No," said the Sovereign, in a faint voice.

"The distant time," began the High Steward, "of which you speak, was a
sad epoch for the people as well as the rulers. If I am not mistaken a
feeling of decay was general, and the admired writers were of little
value; at least it appears to me that Apuleius and Lucan were frivolous
and deplorably vulgar men."

The Professor looked surprised at the courtier.

"In my youth such authors were much read," he continued. "I do not
blame the better ones of that period, when they turned away with
disgust at such doings, and withdrew into the most retired private
life, or into the Theban wilderness. Therefore when you speak of a
malady of the Roman emperors, I might retort that it was only the
result of the monstrous malady of the people; although I see quite well
that during this corruption individuals accomplished a great advance in
the human race, the freeing the people from the exclusiveness of
nationality to the unity of culture, and the new ideal which was
brought upon earth by Christianity."

"Undoubtedly the form of the state, and the style of culture which each
individual emperor found, were decisive for his life. Every one is, in
this sense, the child of his own time, and when it is a question of
judging the measure of his guilt, it is fitting to weigh cautiously
such considerations. But what I had the honor of pointing out to his
Highness as the special merit of Tacitus, is only the masterly way with
which he describes the peculiar symptoms and course of the Caesarean
insanity."

"They were all mad," interrupted the Sovereign, with a hoarse voice.

"Pardon, gracious Sir," rejoined the Professor, innocently. "Augustus
became a better man on the throne, and almost a century after the time
of Tacitus there were good and moderate rulers. But something of the
curse which unlimited power exercises on the soul may be discovered in
most of the Roman emperors. In the better ones it was like a malady
which seldom showed itself, but was restrained by good sense or a good
disposition. Many of them indeed were utterly corrupted, and in them
the malady developed in definite gradation, the law of which one can
easily understand."

"Then you also know how these people were at heart!" said the
Sovereign, looking shyly at the Professor.

The High Steward retreated towards a window.

"It is not difficult in general to follow the course of the malady,"
replied the Professor, engrossed with his subject. "The first accession
to power has an elevating tendency. The highest earthly vocation raises
even narrow-minded men like Claudius; depraved villians like Caligula,
Nero, and Domitian, showed a certain nobleness at first. There is an
eager desire to please, and strenuous exertion to establish themselves
by graciousness; a fear of influential persons or of the opposition of
the masses compels a certain moderation. But arbitrary power has made
men slaves, and the slavish feeling shows itself in an abject
veneration which puts the emperor on a pinnacle above other men; he is
treated as if specially favored by the gods, nay, as if his soul was an
emanation of godly power. Amid this adoration by all, and the security
of power, egotism soon increases. The accidental demands of an
unrestrained will become reckless, the soul gradually loses the power
of distinguishing between good and evil; his personal wishes appear to
the ruler henceforth as the necessity of the state, and every whim of
the moment must be satisfied. Distrust of all who are independent leads
to senseless suspicion; he who will not be pliant is set aside as an
enemy, and he who adapts himself with suppleness is sure to exercise a
mastery over his master. Family bonds are severed, the nearest
relations are watched as secret enemies, the deceptive show of hearty
confidence is maintained, but suddenly some evil deed breaks through
the veil that hypocrisy has drawn over a hollow existence."

The Sovereign slowly drew back his chair from the fire into the dark.

"The idea of the Roman state at last entirely vanishes from the soul,
only personal dependence is required; true devotion to the state
becomes a crime. This helplessness, and the cessation of the power of
judging of the worth--nay, even of the attachment of men--betoken an
advance of the malady by which all sense of accountability is impaired.
Now the elements of which the character is formed become more
contracted and onesided, the will more frivolous and paltry. A childish
weakness becomes perceptible; pleasure in miserable trifles and empty
jokes, together with knavish tricks which destroy without aim; it
becomes enjoyment not only to torment and see the torments of others,
but also an irresistible pleasure to drag all that is venerated down to
a common level. It is very remarkable how, in consequence of this decay
of thought, an unquiet and destructive sensuality takes the place of
all. Its dark power becomes overmastering, and instead of the honorable
old age which gives dignity even to the weak, we are disgusted by the
repugnant picture of decrepit debauchees, like Tiberius and Claudius.
The last powers of life are destroyed by shameless and refined
profligacy."

"That is very remarkable," repeated the Sovereign, mechanically.

The Professor concluded: "Thus are accomplished the four gradations of
ruin; first, gigantic egotism; then suspicion and hypocrisy; then
childish senselessness; and, lastly, repugnant excesses."

The Sovereign rose slowly from his chair; he tottered, and the High
Steward drew near to him terrified, but he supported himself with his
hand on the arm of the chair, and, turning languidly to the Professor
without looking at him, said, slowly:

"I thank the gentleman for a pleasant hour."

One could perceive the effort which it cost him to bring out the words.

In going out the Professor asked in a low tone of the High Steward:

"I fear I have wearied the Sovereign by this long discussion?"

The High Steward looked with astonishment at the frank countenance of
the scholar:

"I do not doubt that the Sovereign will very soon show you that he has
listened with attention."

When they were on the stairs they heard a hoarse, discordant sound in
the distance; the old gentleman shuddered, and leaned against the wall.

The Professor listened; all was still.

"It was like the cry of a wild beast."

"The sound came from the street," replied the High Steward.




                           _CHAPTER XXXIII_.

                CAESAREAN INSANITY IN THE HUMMEL FAMILY.


Mr. Hahn was walking by the side of his garden fence, his soul filled
with gratitude; but as this was prevented from escaping through the
usual outlet of friendly speech, it compelled him to take refuge in
those chambers of his mind in which he kept the plans for the
beautifying of his garden. His noble-hearted opponent was about to
celebrate his birthday; this Mr. Hahn discovered in a roundabout way.
On this day he might perhaps be able to show him some secret token of
esteem. The greatest treasures in Mr. Hahn's garden were his standards
and bush roses of every size and color,--splendid flowers which bloomed
almost the whole year, and were much admired by the passers-by. They
were all in pots, his delight was to move them about in the garden
himself, and arrange them ornamentally in different groups. These roses
he determined to dedicate as a quiet mark of homage to Mr. Hummel. He
had long lamented a desolate space in the middle of his enemy's garden;
it had lain bare the whole summer as a place of repose for the brindle
dog or a roving cat. When Mr. Hummel should enter his garden on his
birthday he should find the round bed changed into a blooming circle of
roses.

This thought occasioned Mr. Hahn happy hours, and raised him a little
from the depth of his sorrows. He carried the roses into a concealed
corner, arranged them in rank and file according to their size and
color, and wrote their numbers with chalk on the pots. The park-keeper,
whose house stood at the extreme limit of the city by the river, had a
little boat; this Mr. Hahn borrowed secretly for a few hours in the
night. Before the early dawn of morning, on the birthday of his enemy,
he slipped out of the house, rowed the pots in the boat to the small
steps which led from the water-side into the garden of Mr. Hummel; he
glided with his loved roses to the circular bed, arranged them
noiselessly according to their numbers, planted each separately, and
changed the desert spot into a blooming parterre of roses. When the
sparrows in the gutters twittered out their first querulous abuse, he
had smoothed down the earth in the bed with a small rake. He cast a
look of pleasure on his work, and another on the still dusky outline of
the house, within which Mr. Hummel still slept, unprepared for the
surprise of the morning, and then glided with his spade and empty pots
into his boat, rowed himself up to the house of the park-keeper, and
concealed himself and his garden utensils on his own ground before the
first rays of the rising sun painted his chimney with roseate colors.

Mr. Hummel entered his sitting-room at the usual hour, received with
good-humor the congratulations of his ladies, looked graciously at the
birthday cake which wife Philippine had placed with his coffee, and at
the travelling-bag which Laura had embroidered for him, took his
newspaper in his hand, and prepared himself by participation in the
political concerns of men in general, for the business of his own life.
All this passed off well; in his factory and in his office he received
congratulations like a lamb; he stroked the snarling dog, and wrote
business letters full of respect to his customers. When towards the
middle of the day he returned to his ladies, and the Doctor entered his
room to offer his congratulations, a dark cloud gathered on the sunny
countenance of the master of the house, and lightning flashed from
under his ambrosial eyebrows.

"What, Saul among the prophets! Are you come to fetch a lost ass back
to your father's house? We cannot accommodate you. Or are you going to
deliver a lecture upon the language of the orang-outang in the land of
the cocoas?

"My lectures have not caused you any trouble so far," replied the
Doctor. "I have not come in order that your hospitable politeness
should take the trouble to entertain those present by the outpouring of
your good humor. I have already expressed to you my wish never to be
the object of it."

"Then defend yourself if you can," cried Hummel.

"I am only prevented," replied the Doctor, "by consideration for those
present from giving you in your own house the answer which you seem to
wish."

"I should be sorry if you were placed at any disadvantage in my house,"
replied Hummel. "I propose to you, therefore, to put yourself on an
equal footing with me, by remaining in your own house and putting your
head out of the window. I will do the same; we can then sing out to one
another across the street, like two canary birds."

"But as I am here now," said the Doctor, with a bow, "I claim to be
allowed to eat this piece of birthday cake in peace among friendly
faces."

"Then I beg of you to resign the sight of my face without overpowering
sorrow," replied Hummel.

He opened the door into the garden, and went down the steps
discontentedly. While still at a distance he saw the young group of
roses smiling innocently in the light of the sun. He walked round the
spot, shook his head, and invited his ladies into the garden.

"Which of you got this idea?" he asked.

The ladies showed such lively surprise that he was convinced of their
innocence. He called to the old storekeeper and the book-keeper. All
showed entire ignorance. The countenance of Mr. Hummel became gloomy.

"What does this mean? Some one has slipped in here while we were
asleep. Night garden-work is not to my taste. Who has ventured to enter
my property without permission? Who has brought in these products of
nature?"

He went restlessly along the side of the water: behind him followed
Spitehahn. The dog crept down the steps to the water, smelt at a bit of
brown wood which lay on the last step, came up again, turned towards
the house of Mr. Hahn, and set up his back like a cat, mockingly, and
made a snarling noise. It meant as clearly as if he had spoken the
friendly words, "I wish you a pleasant meal."

"Right," cried Hummel; "the intruder has left the handle of the rudder
behind. The brown handle belongs to the boat of the park-keeper. Take
it over to him, Klaus. I demand an answer; who has ventured to bring
his boat alongside here?"

The storekeeper hastened away with the piece of wood, and brought back
the answer with an embarrassed air:

"Mr. Hahn had borrowed the boat in the night."

"If there are forebodings," cried Hummel, angrily, "this was one. This
nocturnal prowling of your father I forbid under all circumstances," he
continued, to the Doctor.

"I know nothing of it," rejoined the Doctor. "If my father has done
this, I beg of you, even if you do not value the roses, to be pleased
with the good intention."

"I protest against every rose that may be strewed on my path," cried
Hummel. "First we had poisoned dumplings, with evil intentions; and now
rose leaves, with good ones. Your father should think of something else
than such jokes. The ground and soil are mine, and I intend to prevent
roosters from scratching here."

He charged wildly into the roses, seized hold of stems and branches,
tore them out of the ground, and threw them into a confused heap.

The Doctor turned gloomily away, but Laura hastened to her father and
looked angrily into his hard face.

"What you have rooted up," she exclaimed, "I will replace with my own
hands."

She ran to a corner of the garden, brought some pots, knelt down on the
ground, and pressed the stems with the little balls of earth into them
as eagerly as her father had rooted them up.

"I will take care of them," she called out, to the Doctor; "tell your
dear father that not all in our house undervalue his friendship."

"Do what you cannot help," replied Mr. Hummel, more quietly. "Klaus,
why do you stand there on your hind legs staring like a tortoise? Why
do you not help Miss Hummel in her garden-work. Then carry the whole
birthday-present back again to the youthful flower-grower. My
compliments, and he must in the darkness have mistaken the gardens."

He turned his back upon the company, and went with heavy steps to his
office. Laura knelt on the ground and worked at the ill-used roses with
heightened color and gloomy determination. The Doctor helped silently.
He had seen his father behind the hedge, and knew how deeply the poor
man would feel this latest outburst on the part of his adversary. Laura
did not desist till she had put all the flowers as well as possible
into the pots; then she plunged her hands into the stream, and her
tears mixed with the water. She led the Doctor back to the room; there
she wrung her hands, quite beside herself.

"Life is horrible; our happiness is destroyed in this miserable
quarrel. Only one thing can save you and me. You are a man, and must
find out what can deliver us from this misery."

She rushed out of the room; the mother beckoned eagerly to the Doctor
to remain behind, when he was on the point of following.

"She is beside herself," cried Fritz. "What do her words mean? What
does she desire of me?"

The mother seated herself on the sofa, embarrassed and full of anxiety,
cleared her throat, and twisted at her sleeves.

"I must confide something to you, Doctor," she began, hesitatingly,
"which will be very painful to us both; but I know not what to do, and
all the representations that I make to my unhappy child are in vain.
Not to conceal anything from you,--it is a strange freak,--and I should
have thought such a thing impossible."

She stopped and concealed her face in her pocket-handkerchief. Fritz
looked anxiously at the disturbed face of Mrs. Hummel. A secret of
Laura's that he had for weeks foreboded was now to fall destructively
on his hopes.

"I will confess all to you, dear Doctor," continued the mother, with
many sighs. "Laura esteems you beyond measure, and the thought of
becoming your wife--I must say it in confidence--is not strange or
disagreeable to her. But she has a fearful idea in her head, and I am
ashamed to express it."

"Speak out," said the Doctor, in despair.

"Laura wishes you to elope with her."

Fritz was dazed.

"It is scarcely for a mother to express this wish to you, but I do not
know how to do otherwise."

"But where to?" cried the Doctor, quite aghast.

"That is the most painful part of all, as you yourself must
acknowledge. What put the idea into her head, whether poetry, or
reading about the great world in the newspapers, I know not. But to her
frame of mind, which is always excited and tragic, I can oppose no
resistance. I am afraid to impart it to my husband. I conjure you to do
what you can to calm my child. Her feelings are wounded, and I can no
longer resist the inward struggle for this young heart."

"I beg permission," replied the Doctor, "to speak immediately with
Laura on the subject."

Without waiting for the mother's answer, he hastened up the stairs to
Laura's room. He knocked, but receiving no answer, opened the door.
Laura was sitting by her writing-table, sobbing violently.

"Dear, sweet Laura," exclaimed the Doctor, "I have been speaking with
your mother; let me know all."

Laura started.

"Every warm feeling is rejected with scorn, every hour that I see you
is embittered by the hostility of my father. The heart of the poorest
maiden palpitates when she hears the voice of the man she loves: but I
must ask, is that the happiness of love? When I do not see you I am in
anxiety about you, and when you come to us I feel tormented, and listen
with terror to every word of my father. I see you joyless and cast
down. Fritz, your love for me, makes you unhappy."

"Patience, Laura," said the Doctor; "let us persevere. My confidence in
your father's heart is greater than yours. He will gradually reconcile
himself to me."

"Yes, after he has broken both our hearts; even great love is crushed
by constant opposition. I cannot, amidst the wrangling of our hostile
families, become your wife; the narrow street and the old hatred are
destructive to me. I have often sat here lamenting that I was not a man
who could boldly battle for his own happiness. Listen to a secret,
Fritz," she said, approaching him, again wringing her hands; "here I am
becoming haughty, malicious, and wicked."

"I have observed nothing of that kind," replied Fritz, astonished.

"I conceal it from you," exclaimed Laura; "but I struggle daily with
bad thoughts, and I am indifferent to the love of my parents. When my
father pats my head, the devil cries within me he had better let it
alone. When my mother admonishes me to have patience, her talk secretly
irritates me, because she uses finer words than are necessary. I hate
the dog, so that I often beat him without cause. The conversation at
the Sunday dinner, the stories of the old actor, and the eternal little
tittle-tattle of the street appear insupportable to me. I feel that I
am an odious creature, and I have frequently in this place wept over
and hated myself. These bad fits are ever recurring and become more
overpowering. I shall never be better here: where we live under a
curse, like two spoiled children. We sink, Fritz, in these
surroundings! Even the loving care of parents ceases to make one
happy--the anxiety that one should not wet one's feet, that one should
wear woolen stockings, and have cakes and sugar plums on a Sunday--is
one to go through all this every year of one's life?"

She hastily opened her journal, and held out to him a bundle of poems
and letters.

"Here are your letters; through these I have learnt to love you, for
here is what I revere in you. Thus would I always have you be. When,
therefore, I think of what you have to go through between our houses
and to bear from my father, and when I observe that you wear a double
shawl under every rough blast, I become anxious and worried about you;
and I see you before me as a pampered book-worm, and myself as a little
stout woman with a large cap and an insignificant face, sitting before
the coffee cups, talking over the daily passers by, and this thought
oppresses my heart."

Fritz recognized his letters. He had long felt certain that Laura was
his secret confidant, but when he now looked at the loved one who held
up to him the secret correspondence, he no longer thought of the
caprice which had occasioned him so much grief; he thought only of the
true-heartedness and of the poetry of this tender connexion.

"Dear, dear Laura," he exclaimed, embracing her; "it seems as if two
souls with which my heart had intercourse had become one, but you now
divide me and yourself into human beings of daily life, and into higher
natures. What has destroyed your cheerful confidence?"

"Our difficulties, Fritz, and the sorrow of seeing you without
pleasure, and hearing your voice without being elevated by it; you are
with me, and yet further off from me than in those days when I did not
see you at all, or only in the society of friends."

She released herself from his embrace.

"Do you love me? and are you the man who has written these? If so,
venture to withdraw me from this captivity. Begin a new life with me. I
will work with you and be self-denying; you shall see of what I am
capable; I will think day and night of how I can earn our maintenance,
that you may be undisturbed by petty cares in your learned work. Be
brisk and bold, cast off your eternal caution, venture for once to do
what others may look at askance."

"If I were to do it," answered Fritz, seriously, "the risk would be
small for me. For you the consequences may be such as you do not think
of. How can you imagine that a rash determination can be good for you
if it throws fresh discord into your soul, and burdens your whole life
with a feeling of guilt towards others?"

"If I take upon myself to do what is wrong," exclaimed Laura, gloomily,
"I do it not for myself alone. I feel but too well that it is wrong,
but I venture it for our love. Never will my father voluntarily lay my
hand in yours. He knows that I am devoted to you, and is not so hard as
to wish my unhappiness, but he cannot overcome his disinclination. One
day he is compelled to acknowledge that you are the man to whom I ought
to belong, the next the bitter feeling of how hateful it is to him
again returns. If you venture to defy him you will do what is really
agreeable to him; show a strong will, and, though he may be angry, he
will easily be appeased by your courage. He loves me," she said in a
low tone, "but he is fearfully hard to others."

"Is he always so?" asked the Doctor. "It is clear the daughter does not
know the full worth of her father. I should at this moment be doing
both him and you an injustice if I were to conceal from you what he
wishes to keep secret. Listen, then: when my poor father was sitting by
me in despair, your father entered our house and gave us in the most
magnanimous way the means of averting the threatened blow. Do you not
know that his sulkiness and quarrelsomeness are frequently only the
expression of a rough humor?"

Laura watched his mouth as if she wished to devour every word that fell
from his lips.

"Did my father do this?" she exclaimed, startled to the utmost,
raising her arms towards heaven, and throwing herself down upon her
writing-table.

Fritz wished to raise her.

"Leave me," she entreated, passionately, "it will pass off. I am happy.
Leave me alone now, beloved one."

The Doctor closed the door gently, and went down to the mother, who
still sat on the sofa overwhelmed with anxiety, revolving in her mind,
with motherly alarm, all the exciting scenes of an elopement.

"I beg of you," he said, "not to worry Laura now by remonstrances. She
will regain her calmness. Trust to her noble heart."

With these wise words the Doctor endeavored to comfort himself.
Meanwhile Laura lay supported against the chair, and thought over her
injustice to her father. For years she had borne the sorrow which is
bitterest to the heart of a child, and now the pressure was taken from
her soul. At last she arose, drew out her diary, tore out one page
after another, crumpled up the leaves and threw them into the fire--a
small sacrifice. She watched it till the last sparks flickered in the
dark ashes, then she closed the stove and hastened out of the room.

Mr. Hummel was sitting in his warehouse before a battalion of new hats
with broad brims and round crowns, which were placed for review before
his field-marshal's eye, and he spoke reprovingly to his bookkeeper:

"They are like mere barbers' basins; man is losing his dignity. At all
events, we shall make profit by these coverings: no one notices the
cats'-hairs of which they are made; but they rob the head of the German
citizen of the last breath of fresh air that he has hitherto secretly
carried about with him in his high hat. In my youth one recognized a
citizen by three points: on his body he wore a coat of blue cloth, on
his head a black hat, and in his pocket a great house-key, with the
ring of which, in case of assault by night, he could twist the noses of
assassins. Now he goes off in a gray jacket to drink his beer, opens
the door of the house with a small corkscrew, and the last high hat
will probably be bought up as a rarity for art collections. You may
immediately put aside part of our manufacture for antiquarians."

This pleasant grumbling was interrupted by Laura, who entered eagerly,
seized her father's hand with an imploring look, and drew him from his
warehouse into his small office. Mr. Hummel submitted to be thus led,
as patiently as Lot when the angel led him from the burning cities of
the valley. When she was alone with her father she threw her arms about
his neck, kissed and stroked his cheek, and for a long time could bring
out nothing but "My good, noble father." Mr. Hummel was well pleased
with this stormy fashion of endearment for a time.

"Now I have had enough of this caressing. What do you want? This
introduction is too grand for a new parasol or a concert ticket."

"Father," cried Laura, "I know all that you have done for our neighbor.
I beg your forgiveness; I, unfortunate one, have misunderstood your
heart, and have many times inwardly resented your harshness."

She kissed his hands, tears falling from her eyes.

"Has that dough-face over the way been blabbing?" asked Mr. Hummel.

"He was obliged to tell me, and it was a happy moment for me. Now I
will acknowledge all to you with shame and repentance. Forgive me."

She sank down before him.

"Father, I have long been sick at heart. I have thought you pitiless.
Your eternal grumbling and enmity to our neighbor have made me very
unhappy, and my life here has often been miserable."

Mr. Hummel sat erect and serious, but a little dismayed at the
confession of his child, and he had an indistinct impression that he
had carried his rough opposition too far.

"That is enough," he said; "this is all excitement and imagination. If
I have been vexed through all these years, it has not done me any harm,
nor the people over the way either. It is an unreasonable sorrow that
now excites your lamentations."

"Have consideration for me," entreated Laura. "An irresistible longing
to go forth from this narrow street, has entered my soul. Father, I
would like to take a leap into the world."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Hummel. "I also should like to take a leap into it,
if I only knew where this jolly world could be found."

"Father, you have often told me how light was your heart when you
wandered forth as a boy from your native town, and that from these
wanderings you became a man."

"That is true," replied Hummel. "It was a fine morning, and I had eight
pence in my pocket. I was as lively as a dog with wings."

"Father, I also should like to rove about."

"You?" asked Hummel. "I have laid aside my knapsack; there are only a
few hairs remaining on it, but you may tie your boots over it; then one
cannot see it."

"Good father, I also want to go out and seek my way among strangers,
and look out for what will please me. I will try my powers, and fight
my may with my own hands."

"You must put on breeches," said Hummel; "you cannot otherwise go alone
in your wanderings.'

"I will take some one with me," answered Laura, softly.

"Our maid Susan? She can carry a lantern for you. The paths in this
world are sometimes muddy."

"No, father; I mean the Doctor."

She whispered to him:

"I want the Doctor to elope with me."

"Ah, you little spider!" cried Hummel, amazed. "The Doctor elope with
you! If you were to elope with him, there would be more sense in it."

"That's just what I want to do," replied Laura.

"Mutually, then!" said Hummel. "Listen: the matter becomes serious.
Leave off embracing me, keep your hands away, and make a face beseeming
a citizen's daughter and not an actress."

He pushed her down on the window-seat.

"Now speak to the point. So you intend to carry off the Doctor? I ask
you, with what means? For your pocket-money will not reach far, and he
over the way has not much to spare for such Sunday pleasures? I ask
you, will you first marry him? If so, the elopement would be very
suspicious, for I have never yet heard of a woman carrying off her
husband by force. If you do not marry him, there is something which you
must learn from your mother, and which is called modesty. Out with it!"

"I wish to have him for a husband," said Laura, softly.

"Ah, that is it, is it? and was your Doctor ready to take charge of you
before marriage, and to run away with you?"

"No; he spoke as you do, and reminded me that I ought not to give you
pain."

"He is occasionally humane," replied Hummel; "I am indeed indebted to
him for his good intentions. Finally, I ask you, where will you carry
him off to?"

"To Bielstein, father. There is the church in which Ilse was married."

"I understand," said Hummel, "ours are too large; and what afterwards?
Do you mean to work as a day-laborer on the estate?"

"Father, if we could but travel," said Laura, imploringly.

"Why not," replied Mr. Hummel, ironically; "to America, perhaps, as
colleagues of Knips junior? You are as mad as a March hare. The
legitimate and only daughter of Mr. Hummel will run away from her
father and mother, from a comfortable house and flourishing business,
with her neighbor's only son, who is in his way also legitimate, to a
fools' paradise. I never could have thought that this hour would
arrive."

He paced up and down.

"Now hear your father. If you had been a boy I would have had you well
thrashed; but you are a girl, and your mother has formed you according
to her principles. Now I perceive with regret that we have allowed you
to have your own way too much, and that you may be unhappy for your
whole life. You have got the Doctor into your head, and you might as
well have fixed upon a tragic hero or a prince, and it shocks me to
think of it."

"But I have not thought of such," replied Laura, dejectedly; "for I am
my father's daughter."

Hummel laid hold of the plaits of her hair and examined them
critically:

"Obstinacy; but the mixture is not throughout the same; there is
something of higher womanliness with it; fancifulness, and whimsical
ideas. That is the misfortune; here a powerful stroke of the brush is
necessary."

These words he repeated several times, and sat down thoughtfully on his
chair.

"So you wish for my consent to this little elopement. I give it you
upon one condition. The affair shall remain between us two; you shall
do nothing without my consent, and even your mother must not know that
you have spoken to me of it. You shall take a drive into the world, but
in my way. For the rest, I thank you for this present that you have
made me on my birthday. You are a pretty violet for me to have brought
up! Has one ever heard of such a plant taking itself by the head and
tearing itself out of the ground?"

Laura embraced him again, and wept.

"Do not set your pump again in motion," cried Mr. Hummel, untouched,
"that cannot help either of us. A happy journey, Miss Hummel."

Laura, however, did not go, but remained clinging to his neck. The
father kissed her on the forehead.

"Away with you; I must consider with what brush I shall stroke you
smooth."

Laura left the room. Mr. Hummel sat alone for a long time by his desk,
holding his head with both hands. At last he began to whistle in a low
tone the old Dessauer--a sign to the book-keeper, who was entering,
that soft feelings had the upper hand with him.

"Go across to the Doctor, and beg him to take the trouble of coming
over to me immediately."

The Doctor entered the office. Mr. Hummel rummaged in his desk and
brought out a little paper.

"Here, I return you the present that you once made me."

The Doctor opened it, and two little gloves lay within.

"You may give these gloves to my daughter on the day on which you are
married to her, and you can tell her they come from her father, from
whom she has run away."

He turned away, approached the window, and thrummed on the pane.

"I have already told you before, Mr. Hummel, that I will not take back
these gloves. Least of all will I do it for this purpose. If the happy
day is ever to come to me when I can take Laura to my home, it will
only be when you put your daughter's hand in mine. I beg you, dear Mr.
Hummel, to keep these gloves until that day."

"Much obliged," replied Hummel; "you are a miserable Don Juan. I am in
duty bound," he continued, in his usual tone, "to communicate to you
what is of fitting importance to you. My daughter Laura wishes to elope
with you."

"What now disturbs Laura," answered the Doctor, "and has given her
these wild thoughts, is no secret to you. She feels herself oppressed
by the unpleasant relations which subsist between us. I hope this
excitement will pass away."

"May I be allowed to ask the modest question, whether it is your
intention to agree to her plan?"

"I will not do it," rejoined the Doctor.

"Why not?" asked Hummel, coldly. "I for my part, have no objection to
it."

"That is one reason the more for me not to act inconsiderately by you,
nor to be treated in a like manner."

"I can bequeath my money to the hospital."

"To this remark I have only one answer," replied the Doctor. "You
yourself do not believe that this consideration influences my actions."

"Unfortunately not," replied Hummel; "you are both unpractical people.
So you hope that I will at last give you my blessing without an
elopement?"

"Yes, I do hope it," exclaimed the Doctor. "However you may wish to
appear to me, I trust that the goodness of your heart will be greater
than your aversion."

"Do not count upon my indulgence. Doctor. I do not believe that I shall
ever prepare a marriage-feast for you. My child gives herself with
confidence into your hands; take her."

"No, Mr. Hummel," replied the Doctor, "I shall not do it."

"Has my daughter sunk so much in value because she is ready to become
your wife?" asked Mr. Hummel, bitterly, and with a rough voice. "The
poor girl has acquired some notions among her learned acquaintances,
which do not suit the simple life of her father."

"That is unjust towards us all, and also towards our absent friends,"
said the Doctor, indignantly. "What now distracts Laura is only a petty
enthusiasm; there is still in her some of the childish poetry of her
early girlhood. He who loves her may have perfect confidence in her
pure soul. Only in one respect must he maintain a firm judgment in
dealing with her; he must here and there exercise a mild criticism. But
I should be unworthy of the love of her pure heart if I should agree to
a hasty proceeding, which would at a later period occasion her pain.
Laura shall not do what is unbecoming to her."

"So that is Hindoo," replied Mr. Hummel; "there is a spark of sound
common sense in your Botocudens and Brahmins. Do your learned books
also find an excuse for a daughter not feeling happy in the house of
her parents?"

"That is your fault alone, Mr. Hummel," replied the Doctor.

"Oho!" said Mr. Hummel; "so that's it."

"Forgive me my plain speaking," continued the Doctor. "It is the
fashion of Laura's father to play the tyrant a little in his family, in
spite of all his love for them. Laura has from her childhood been
accustomed to view your strange nature with fear; therefore she does
not form the impartial conception of your character, nor feel the
pleasure in your mischievous humors that those not so intimately
acquainted enjoy. If you had seen Laura's transport when I made known
to her what you had done for my father, you would never doubt her
heart. Now she is overcome with anguish about our future. But you may
be assured, if Laura were to give in to her fancy and separate herself
from her parents' house, she would soon feel gnawing repentance and
longing for her parents. Therefore, the man for whom she would now make
this sacrifice acts not only honorably, but also prudently, in
resisting it."

Mr. Hummel looked fiercely at the Doctor.

"There is the old bear tied to a stake, the young puppies pull at his
fur, and the cocks crow over his head. Take warning by my fate; under
all circumstances avoid having female offspring." He put his hand upon
the gloves, packed them up again, smoothed the paper, and shut them in
his writing-desk. "Thus shall I lock up again my unnatural child; for
the rest I remain your devoted servant. So your old Hindoos tell you
that I am a droll screech-owl, and a jolly _bonvivant_ to strangers. Is
that your opinion of my natural propensities?"

"You are not quite so innocent," replied the Doctor, with a bow. "To me
you have been always particularly rude."

"There is no one I would rather wrangle with than with you,"
acknowledged Mr. Hummel.

The Doctor bowed, and said:

"When you play with other men as with cats, they only bear such
treatment because they perceive good intentions under your
cross-grained exterior. I can say this to you, because I am one of the
few men to whom you have shown real dislike; and, as you are also
obstinate, I know very well that I shall still have to have many a tilt
with you, and I am not at all sure how it will end between us. That,
however, does not prevent my acknowledging the bitter amiability of
your nature."

"I object to any further enlightenment as to my real character,"
exclaimed Mr. Hummel. "You have a disagreeable way of viewing your
fellow-men microscopically. I protest against your painting me like a
flea in the shadow on the wall. As concerns your proceedings as my
daughter's lover, I am content with them. You do not choose to take my
child in the way in which she is to be had; I thank you for your
scruples. In this matter we are entirely of the same opinion, and you
therefore shall not have her at all."

The Doctor wished to interrupt him, but Hummel waved his hand.

"All further talk is useless; you renounce my daughter, but you
preserve the esteem of her father, and you have moreover the feeling of
acting for the best for Laura. As you feel such great uprightness, you
may console yourself with it. You will devote yourself to celibacy, and
I should envy you, if it were not for the consideration of Madame
Hummel."

"This will not avail, Mr. Hummel," replied the Doctor; "I have not the
least intention of renouncing Laura's hand."

"I understand," replied Mr. Hummel; "you wish to besiege my daughter
still, from across the street. This quiet pleasure I can, unfortunately
no longer allow, for I am certainly of opinion that Laura must at some
time leave my house; and as you have chosen the good opinion of the
father rather than the daughter, we will confer on this point in mutual
understanding. You are mistaken if you think that my daughter Laura
will give up her fancies upon wise admonition. Have you not sometimes
appealed to my conscience? It was all that could be expected,
considering your age; but it has been of no avail with me. It will be
the same with this obstinate child. Therefore I am, as a father, of
opinion that we must give in to a certain degree to the folly of my
child. Consider how far you can go to please us. She wishes to join the
Professor's wife. She shall not go to this capital where my lodger has
no home, but she has frequently been invited to Bielstein."

The Doctor answered:

"I have urgent reasons for going to my friend during the next few
days. I will gladly make a detour by Bielstein, if you will allow
me to accompany Laura on this journey, I shall make no secret of its
purpose,--and least of all to my parents."

"This elopement is so shabby that, were I a girl, I should be ashamed
of taking part in it. But one must not expect too much of you. I will
not be at home when this departure takes place: you see, that is
natural. I have already made my plans concerning my child's future. I
give her over to you for the journey with confidence."

"Mr. Hummel," exclaimed the Doctor, disquieted, "I ask for still
greater confidence. How have you decided concerning Laura's future?"

"As you have determined to show me such respect, I beg you will be
content with the confidential intimation, that I have no intention of
making you any such communication. You preserve my esteem, and I my
daughter. My compact is concluded."

"But the compact is not quite satisfactory to me, Mr. Hummel," answered
the Doctor.

"Hold your tongue. If in consequence of this agreement you resume your
theatrical career, I should advise you never to act the _role_ of
lover. The audiences will run out of all the doors. Do I treat people
like cats?--So I treated your father and his flowers this morning. You
can give him an intimation of that. My wife has plucked to-day a few
roosters for my birthday; if roasting these namesakes of yours does not
excite painful feelings in you, it will give me pleasure to see you at
dinner. You will not be under the embarrassment of having to talk only
to my daughter, for the family clown is invited: he will keep up the
conversation--you may be silent. Good morning, Doctor."

The Doctor again stretched out his hand to him. Mr. Hummel shook it,
grumbling all the while. When he was again alone in his office the
melody of the old Dessauer again sounded in the narrow room, now brisk
and hearty. Then, soon after, Mr. Hummel broke forth with the second of
the two airs--"the Dear Violet"--to which he had recourse when in an
unconstrained humor. At last he mixed up the drumming of the Dessauer
with "the Dear Violet" in an artistic medley. The book-keeper, who knew
that this _pot pourri_ betokened a state of the highest spring warmth,
popped his face, smiling respectfully, into the office.

"You may come to dinner to-day," said Mr. Hummel, graciously.




                            _CHAPTER XXXIV_.

                           OLD ACQUAINTANCES.


Since the conversation upon the Roman emperors, the Sovereign had
withdrawn for a few days from his Court. He was ill. His nervous
prostration, as the physicians declared, was the usual consequence of a
cold. Only a few privileged persons--among them Master Knips--had
access to him during this time, and they had no cause to rejoice in
their confidential position, for it was difficult to deal with the
princely invalid.

To-day the Sovereign was sitting in his study; before him stood an old
official, with a weazen face, reporting the daily occurrences of the
capital, opinions which were expressed in public places concerning the
Sovereign and his illustrious house, small scandalous family anecdotes,
also observations that had been made in the palace to which the
Princess had gone within the last few days, and the persons she had
seen there. Prince Victor paid daily visits to the Baroness Hallstein,
and passed the evening with the officers of his former regiment; he had
returned unexpectedly that morning.

"How do things go on in the Pavilion?" asked the Sovereign.

"According to the account of the lackey, there have been no visitors
from the city, nor any letters; everything as usual in the afternoon.
When the strangers were sitting in front of the door, the lady had
spoken of a journey to Switzerland, but her husband replied that there
could be no thought of it until he had finished his business. Then
there had been an uncomfortable silence. In the evening both attended
the theatre."

The Sovereign nodded, and dismissed the official. As he sat alone, he
pushed his chair against the wall, and listened to the sound of a small
bell which, from the further end of the room, was scarcely audible; he
hastily opened the door of a niche in the wall, and took out the
letters which a confidential secretary had sent up through a tube from
the lower story. There were various handwritings: he passed quickly
through the contents. At last he held a bundle of children's letters in
his hand. Again he laughed. "So the great ball has burst already." His
countenance became serious. "A genuine peasant, he has no sense for the
honor of having the top-boots of a prince among his fields." He took
another letter. "The Hereditary Prince to his sister. It is the first
letter of the pious John Patmos, saying nothing, as if it had been
written for me. That may possibly be so. The contents are scanty and
cold. He expresses the wish that his sister also may pass a pleasant
time in the country. We wish the same," he continued, with good humor;
"she may pluck flowers and talk with scholars about the virtues of
Roman ladies. This wish shall be fulfilled by all parties." He laid the
letters back in the niche, and pressed a spring in the floor with his
foot; there was a slight rustling in the wall, and the packet glided
down.

The Sovereign raised himself from his chair and walked about the room.

"My thoughts hover restlessly about this man. I have received him with
complaisance; I have even treated his insane hopes with the greatest
consideration, and yet this unpractical dreamer mocks at me. Why did he
make this insidious attack on me? He did it with the malicious
penetration of a diseased person, who knows better than a sound one
what is deficient in another. His prating was half vague reflection and
half the silly cunning of a fool who also carries about him a worm in
his brain. It does not matter: we know one another, as the Augur knew
his colleagues. Between us a family hatred burns, such as can only
exist between relations--an enduring, thorough hatred, which conceals
itself beneath smiles and polite bows. Trick for trick, my Roman
cousin. You seek a manuscript which lies concealed with me, but I
something else, which you would withhold from me."

He sank back in his chair, and looked timidly towards the door; then
put his hand into a pile of books, and drew out a translation of
Tacitus. He tapped the book with his finger.

"He who wrote this was also diseased. He spied incessantly into the
souls of his masters; their pictures so filled his fancy, that the
Roman people and the millions of other men appeared unimportant to him:
he suspected every step of his rulers, yet neither he nor his
generation could do without them. He gazed at them as on suns, the
eclipse of which he investigated, and which reflected their light on
him, the little planet. He began to doubt the wisdom of the order of
things; and that to every human mind is the beginning of the end. But
he had wit enough to see that his masters became diseased through the
miserable meanness of those like himself, and his best policy was that
of the old High Steward, to bear all with a silent obeisance."

He opened the leaves.

"Only one, whom he has included in his book," he began again, "was a
man, whom it moves one to read about. This was the gloomy majesty of
Tiberius: he knew the rabble, and despised them, till the miserable
slaves at last placed him among the madmen. Do you know, Professor
Tacitus, why the great Emperor became a weak fool? No one knows it--no
one on earth but me, and those like me. He went mad because he could
not cease to be a man of feeling. He despised many and hated many, and
yet he could not do without the childish feeling of loving and
trusting. A common youth, who had once shown him personal devotion,
caught hold of this fancy of his earthly life, and dragged the
powerful mind down with him into the dirt. A miserable weakness of
heart converted the stern politician of Imperial Rome into a fool.
The weak feelings that rise up in lonely hours are the undoing of
us all; indestructible is this longing for a pure heart and a true
spirit--undying the seeking after the ideal condition of man, which is
described by the poet and believed in by the pedant." He sighed deeply;
his head sank on the table between his hands.

There was a slight sound at the door. The Sovereign started. The
servant announced--"The Grand Marshal von Bergau." The Grand Marshal
entered.

"The Princess inquired at what hour your Highness will take leave of
her."

"Take leave?" asked the Sovereign, reflecting. "Why?"

"Your Highness has been pleased to order that the Princess shall this
morning go to her summer castle for a few days."

"It is true," replied the Sovereign. "I am well today, dear Bergau, and
will breakfast with the Princess. Will it be agreeable to you to
accompany her?" he asked, kindly.

"I am very grateful to my gracious master for this favor," replied the
Grand Marshal, honestly.

"What lady has the Princess chosen as her attendant?"

"As your Highness has given her the choice, she has decided upon Lady
Gottlinde."

"I agree to that," said the Sovereign graciously. "The good Lady
Gottlinde may be invited to breakfast, and you yourself may come also,
that I may see you all once more about me before the journey. I have
one more thing to say. Mr. Werner will follow you; he wishes to examine
the rooms and chests of the castle for his scientific purposes. Render
him assistance in every way, and show him the greatest attention. I
have also a confidential commission for you."

The Grand Marshal made a piteous face, which plainly indicated a
protest.

"I wish to win for us this distinguished man," continued the Sovereign.
"Sound him as to what place or distinction would be acceptable to him.
I wish you to observe that I am most anxious to keep him."

The Grand Marshal, much discomposed, answered:

"I assure your Highness, with the greatest respect, that I know how to
value your confidence, yet this commission fills me with consternation;
for it exposes me to the danger of exciting the displeasure of my
gracious master. I have had opportunities of remarking that one cannot
count upon gratitude from these people."

"You must not offer him anything; only endeavor to make him express
some wish," replied the Sovereign dryly.

"But if this wish should exceed the bounds of moderation?" asked the
Marshal hesitatingly.

"Take care not to object to it; leave it to me to decide whether I
consider it immoderate. Send me a report immediately."

The Sovereign gave the signal of dismissal; watched sharply his bow and
departure, and looked after the departing gentleman and gravely shook
his head.

"He is not old, and yet the curse has overtaken him; he becomes
grotesque. Here is another riddle of human nature for you learned
gentlemen: the person who has every hour to control his countenance and
manner, to whom the most rigid tact and correct forms are necessary in
his daily intercourse, should, just when he becomes older, lose this
best acquisition of his life, and become troublesome by his weak
chattering and unrestrained egotism. You know how to answer. Emperor
Tiberius, why your service, clever man, gradually made your servants
caricatures of your own character? Now they have revenged themselves on
you; it is all right. There is a desperate rationality in the links of
the world. O misery, misery, that we should both have so little cause
to rejoice at it!"

He groaned, and again buried his head in his hands.





Shortly after Ilse received the latest letters from home.

"How can the four-leaved clover be lost out of a well closed letter?"
she asked her husband. "Luise, on her birthday, found some clover
leaves and sent them in her former letter, to bring you good luck. The
child is just at the age in which such nonsense gives pleasure. The
dried clover was not in her letter, and as she is careless, I scolded
her for it in my answer. To-day she assures me that she put them into
the envelope the last thing."

"It may have fallen out when you opened the letter," said the Professor
consolingly.

"My father is not contented with us," continued Ilse, discomposed; "he
does not like it that the Prince has come into the vicinity; he fears
distraction in the farm and gossip. Yet why should people gossip? Clara
is still half a child, and the prince does not live upon our estate.
There is a dark cloud over everything," she said; "the light of the
dear sun has ceased to shine. Nothing but disturbances, the Sovereign
ill, and our Hereditary Prince vanishes as if swept away by a storm.
How could he go away without bidding us good-bye? I cannot set my mind
to rest as to that; for we have not deserved it of him, nor of his
courtly Chamberlain. I fear he does not go into the country willingly;
and he is angry with me, Felix, because I said something about it. No
good will come of it, and it makes me heavy at heart."

"If this trouble leaves you any thought for the affairs of other
people," began the Professor, gaily, "you must allow me a small share.
I think I have found the hidden castle which I have so long sought. I
see from this chronicle that in the last century the country seat to
which the Princess is going was surrounded by a forest. I hear that in
this remote place much old household rubbish is preserved. I feel like
a child on the eve of its birthday. I have made known my wishes to
fate, and when I think of the hour when the present shall come to me, I
feel the same heart-beating expectation which scares away sleep from
the boy. It is childish, Ilse," he continued, holding out his hand to
his wife, "I know it is; but have patience with me; I have long wearied
you with my dreams, but now it will come to an end. The hope indeed
will not come to an end, but this is the last place I have any reason
to search for it."

"But if it should again happen that you do not find the book?" asked
Ilse, sorrowfully, holding his hand.

A gloomy expression came over the Professor's face; he turned around
abruptly, and said, harshly:

"Then I shall seek further. If Fritz had but come!"

"Was he to come?" asked Ilse, with surprise.

"I have requested him to do so," replied her husband. "He answered that
his father's business and his relations with Laura prevented him. To
him also it appears that a crisis is impending; he has suspicions with
respect to the specification that I found here, which I consider
unfounded."

"Oh, that he were with us!" said Ilse; "I long for a friendly face,
like one who has for many days been traveling through a desert
wilderness."

The Professor pointed towards the window.

"This wilderness looks tolerably humanized, and a visitor, such as you
desire, seems already coming up to the house."

Ilse heard the rumble of wheels coming along the gravel of the castle
road. A carriage stopped before the Pavilion, and the country coachman
cracked his whip. The servants hastened to the door; Gabriel opened the
carriage door; a little lady descended, gave a parcel to the lackey and
a bandbox to Gabriel, and called out to the coachman to inquire about
putting up the horses. She hastily ascended the steps, and, as she did
so, gazed on the paintings and carved scrolls.

"This is a great pleasure, Mrs. Rollmaus," exclaimed Ilse, delighted,
meeting her at the door.

The Professor hastened to the stranger and offered her his arm.

"My dear Ilse," cried the little lady; "revered and highly honored
Professor, here I am. As Rollmaus has been charged with the
superintendence of an estate in the neighborhood, in trust for a
nephew, and as he has had to travel into this country to put things in
order, and will stop only a short time, I thought I would take the
pleasure of paying you a visit. Your father, brothers, and sisters wish
to be remembered to you. Clara is growing up the very image of you."

"Come in, come in," said Ilse; "you yourself are the best greeting from
home."

Mrs. Rollmaus stopped at the door.

"Only a moment," she said, pointing to the bandbox.

"You come to old friends."

"You must allow me however, that I may not disgrace this princely
house."

Mrs. Rollmaus was taken into an adjoining room, the bandbox opened,
and, after the best cap was put on, as well as white collar and cuffs,
the learned lady floated into the sitting-room with Ilse.

"Magnificent," she exclaimed, looking with admiration at the ceiling,
where the god of love held out to her his bunches of poppies. "One can
see at once by the cross-bow that it is a Cupid; one frequently sees
them on gingerbread figures, where they stand between two burning
hearts. Dear Professor, the pleasure of meeting again, and in such
surroundings, is truly very great. I have long looked forward with
pleasure to this hour, when I could express to you my thanks for the
last book you sent me, in which I have gotten as far as the
Reformation. Rollmaus would gladly have come with me, but he has
business to attend to in the distillery on account of the old boiler,
which must be removed."

During this speech the eye of Mrs. Rollmaus wandered inquisitively into
every corner of the room.

"Who would have thought, dear Ilse, that you and the Professor would
have come into friendly relations with our princely personages? I must
confess to you that I have already looked about me in driving here for
the princely court-yard, which, however, probably lies on the other
side, as I see only gardens here."

"There are no offices at the castle," explained Ilse, "only the stable
and the large kitchen have remained."

"They say there are six cooks," rejoined Mrs. Rollmaus, "who are all
great head-cooks; although I do not know for what other part of the
human body they could be cooking. But the originalities of a Court are
very great,--amongst which are the silver-cleaners, who, I verily
believe, do not do their duty; at least, the small coin in our country
is very dirty, and a great scouring day would be necessary for them.
They say that the young Prince has now gone to the Chief Forester's
lodge. Our Chief Forester is fully occupied; he grumbles over this royal
quartering, and has ordered himself a new uniform."

She became serious and thoughtful, and there ensued an awkward pause,
during which she rubbed her nose, looked at Ilse good-humoredly, and
pressed her hand.

"There appears to be a storm coming," she continued, in a low tone,
"and the country gentlemen complain that the spring grub has eaten the
rapeseed. Here, indeed, it seems like a paradise, although I hope that
no wild beasts rove about here, and it is not the season to pluck the
apples from the trees with pleasure. Something seems to have turned up
in the capital which is very remarkable; for as I came to the estate
with Rollmaus, the Inspector told me of a fortune-teller who prophesied
wonderful things of the people of this city. Do you know anything
certain about her?"

"We have few acquaintances," answered Ilse; "we only get news from the
papers."

"I should be glad to hear something about that person, for I have
latterly begun the study of phrenology; and I hear, dear Professor,
that these investigations are much combated. I do not myself feel sure
about them. I have examined the head of Rollmaus, and am surprised to
see how much the bump of destruction is developed behind his ear,
though he is annoyed at every cup-handle the maid servants break.
Nevertheless, dear Professor, I find the powers of thought shown upon
your brow. The bumps are very large, by which I do not mean to say that
they are unbecoming to you. But to return to the fortune-teller. She
told the Inspector that he was married, and had two children, and that
his wife was dead, and that he wished to take another, who would add
two more. This is all correct, for he is again courting. Now, I ask
you, how could this person know it?"

"Perhaps she knows the Inspector?" replied the Professor, rummaging
among his papers. "I advise you not to confide in her art, and I do not
recommend to you the study of phrenology. But now let us know how long
you can remain with us. I am obliged to go to the Museum, and hope to
find you on my return."

"I can remain a few hours," said Mrs. Rollmaus. "I have three miles to
go, but the roads here are better than with us. Although now our
highway is being built, and the road commissioners already go along it
to the town of Rossau. Only think, dear Ilse, the stone bridge between
your estate and the town is already pulled down, but they have put up a
temporary one in its stead. For a few hours, then, I beg of you to be
satisfied with my company."

The Professor went away; the ladies talked confidentially over the
family at home, during which Mrs. Rollmaus could not entirely give up
her scientific investigations; for, in the middle of the conversation,
she put her fingers on Ilse's temples, and begged permission to feel
the crown of her head; whereupon she said, with much delight, "There is
much sincerity there, as I should have supposed." She then looked
significantly at Ilse. She was loquacious and flippant, but she showed
a degree of restraint which Ilse attributed to the strangeness of the
place.

After Mrs. Rollmaus had admired the dwelling, criticized the pictures,
and felt the texture of the furniture coverings, Ilse pointed to the
sun, which was breaking through the clouds, and proposed that they
should walk out into the park. Mrs. Rollmaus assented with pleasure,
and Ilse had much to do to answer the questions of the excitable lady.
Then they came to a part of the grounds which served as a promenade at
this hour for the ladies and people of the city. "What a surprise,"
exclaimed Mrs. Rollmaus, suddenly seizing Ilse's arm, "the princely
livery." At a turn in the path, the hat of a lackey became visible; the
Princess, accompanied by Lady Gottlinde and Prince Victor, came
directly towards them. Amidst the respectful greetings of the
promenaders, the princely party approached. Ilse stepped aside, and
curtsied. The Princess stopped. "We were on the point of calling on
you," she began, kindly; "my brother was obliged to leave suddenly; he
will have told your father how sorry he was that he could not take any
messages from you to your family." She gave a passing look at Mrs.
Rollmaus, who was supporting herself with both her hands on her
umbrella, bending her head forward, not to lose a syllable that fell
from the lips of the princely lady. Ilse mentioned her name.

"A kind friend from the neighborhood of Rossau, who is spending a few
days near here."

Mrs. Rollmaus ducked down very low, and, almost unconscious from
terror, said: "It is only three miles from here, in Toadville;
although, if I may, by your Highness's permission, be graciously
allowed to say so, there are no more toads there than in any other
respectable place."

"You are taking a walk," said the Princess, to Ilse, "will you
accompany me a little way?" She beckoned Ilse to her side, placing
herself between her and the lady in waiting. Prince Victor remained
behind with Mrs. Rollmaus.

"So toads are not pastured on your estate?" began the Prince.

"No, my gracious ----," replied Mrs. Rollmaus, embarrassed, supporting
herself on her umbrella. "I do not really know what is the right title
to address you with."

"Prince Victor," replied the young gentleman, carelessly.

"I beg your pardon; but this honorable name does not satisfy me. May I
beg to know the other title, similar to what, in the case of pastors,
would be expressed by Very Reverend? For to offend princely persons
would not be pleasant, and I am not conversant with these forms of
address."

"High and honorable lady, you may call me Highness; thus we shall both
have our rights."

"It shall be as you command," exclaimed Mrs. Rollmaus, delighted.

"You have long known the Professor's wife?"

"From her childhood," explained Mrs. Rollmaus; "I was a friend of her
deceased mother, and I can truly say that I have shared both happiness
and sorrow with our dear Ilse. Prince Victor, it is impossible for your
Highness to know her true heart as well as we do. Latterly, through her
learned acquaintances, she has come into another atmosphere; but long
before her betrothal it was clear to me that it would be a match."

"Good," said the Prince. "How long do you remain in the neighborhood?"

"Only until the end of the week; for Rollmaus prefers the country to
the city, which is not to be wondered at; he has not the inclination
for intellectual pursuits by which I am inspired. For this there is
more opportunity in the city, although one, even in the country, can
make one's observations on heads and other natural objects."

"The weather is changeable; is your carriage closed?" interrupted the
Prince.

"It is a britscka, with a leather top to it," replied Mrs. Rollmaus. "I
must honestly avow to you that it has been quite an unexpected pleasure
to me that this visit has afforded the opportunity of seeing your
Highness, for I have heard very much of you."

"I should be very grateful to you," replied the Prince, "if you would
kindly tell me what you have heard. I have hitherto believed that my
reputation was not by any means so bad as it might be."

"No one, however noble he may be, can escape calumny," exclaimed Mrs.
Rollmaus, eagerly; "they talk of tricks. I fear your Highness will take
it amiss if I mention this gossip."

"Tell me something of it," replied the Prince, "whatever it may be."

"They maintain that your Highness is convivial and lives quite
boisterously, and other things which it would be unpleasant for me to
repeat."

"Go on," said the Prince, cheerfully.

"That your Highness makes fools of other people."

"That is grievous," replied the Prince. "Is your coachman a courageous
man?"

"He is somewhat surly even with Rollmaus, who indulges him much."

"Believe me Mrs. Rollmaus," continued the Prince, "it is a sorrowful
business to be a prince. Disquiet from morning to evening. Every one
will have something, and no one brings anything except bills. Thus all
gaiety is sacrificed, one becomes sad, and slinks about through the
bushes. My favorite recreation is a little quiet conversation in the
evening with my old nurse and instructress, the widowed Cliquot, and to
play a little 'patience.' Then one counts the good works that one has
done during the day, sighs that they are so few, and looks for one's
boot-jack. We are the victims of our position. If there is anything I
envy the Professor's wife, it is her servant Gabriel, a trustworthy
man, whom I recommend to your favorable attention."

"I know him," replied Mrs. Rollmaus; "I must acknowledge that the
autobiography which you have given me agrees with all that I have
discovered from the structure of your Highness's head, so far as your
hat does not deprive one of the sight of it, which indeed is very much
the case."

"I would be thankful to my cranium," muttered the Prince, "if it would
lead everyone to believe my words as easily as you do."

"As long as I live, it will be a pleasure as well as a souvenir to me,"
continued. Mrs. Rollmaus, with an ambulatory curtsy, "to have been
brought by accident to this intimate intercourse with your Highness,
the remembrance of which I will, if I may be allowed to say so, recall
to myself by your Highness's picture, which I hope may be had in the
shops. I shall place myself before it when I am in the singular number,
as now my son Karl does with his grammar, and think of past hours."

Prince Victor gave Mrs. Rollmaus a look of friendly benevolence.

"I will never allow you to buy my portrait. I beg permission to send
you a copy as a remembrance. It is, unfortunately, not so true as I
could wish. The painter has made me too large, and I am not quite
content with the costume: it looks like a clergyman's gown. Meanwhile I
beg you kindly to imagine it without this superfluity. Has the Chief
Inspector Rollmaus good horses? Does he raise them himself?

"Always, your Highness, he is famed for it among the neighbors."

The Prince turned with fresh interest towards the little lady.

"Perhaps one could transact some business with him. I am looking out
for some strong saddle-horses. What kind of a man is he to deal with?"
he asked, frankly.

"He is a very sharp tradesman," replied Mrs. Rollmaus, hesitatingly,
and looking at the Prince with secret pity. "He is considered by his
acquaintances as an expert in horses, and--and, if I may say so--is
rather knowing."

The Prince pursed up his lips, bringing out a sound almost like a
suppressed whistle.

"Then he is very unlike the highly honored lady, and I shall hardly be
able to do business with him. Would it not give the Professor's wife
pleasure to visit you for a few days in the village of toads?"

"It would be the greatest pleasure to us," exclaimed Mrs. Rollmaus,
"but the house is empty, and is not furnished, and we must manage as
best we can, and the victuals, too, as a rule, are cold."

"Only in case of extreme necessity, I mean."

Meanwhile Ilse was walking by the side of the Princess through the
groups of citizens making their obeisances, but her heart was not so
light as that of Mrs. Rollmaus. The Princess spoke kindly to her, but
upon indifferent subjects, and she turned frequently to the other side
to her lady. It was clearly not her wish to enter into more
conversation with Ilse than was absolutely necessary. Ilse saw clearly
that it was a show of favor before the world; she felt the intention of
it, and asked herself secretly why it was necessary, and her pride
revolted at this graciousness, which did not come from the heart. The
Princess kept Ilse for some time in the most crowded part of the
promenade.

"I leave the palace to-day," said the Princess, "and go for a few days
or weeks into the country. Perhaps I shall have the pleasure of seeing
you there."

At parting Prince Victor took off his hat politely, but only said: "The
air is becoming sultry."

Ilse brooded over this little incident as she returned with her
companion to the Pavilion. She answered the animated questions of Mrs.
Rollmaus absent-mindedly, and only gave a half-look at the promenaders,
many of whom now took off their hats to her.

Gabriel had prepared some coffee in honor of Mrs. Rollmaus, and had set
the table in front of the door. There the ladies sat down. Mrs.
Rollmaus looked enchanted at the blooming azaleas, praised the cake of
the palace, and still more the princely personages, and chatted away in
her best humor, whilst Ilse looked seriously down.

"I have seen some of the princely personages, and I should now like to
see the fortune-teller. It is remarkable, dear Ilse, that my valuable
connection with the Professor always brings in question the power of
soothsaying. It is really not from inconsiderate curiosity that I wish
to question this person. It is no object to me to learn about my
future. I know sufficiently how this will all be. For to a certain
extent we live under natural conditions; first the children come, then
they grow up, one becomes older, and if one does not die too young, one
lives a little longer. That has never been inscrutable to me, and I do
not know what a person could now discover for me. It would, therefore,
be some misfortune that would come to pass, and I do not wish to have
that prophesied. I wish it only for the sake of instruction, to find
out whether such a person knows more than we others. For in our days
there are doubts about the powers of soothsaying, and I myself have
never had a presentiment, except once, when I had the toothache, and
dreamt that I smoked a pipe, which took place and had a nauseous
effect; but this cannot be called wonderful."

"Perhaps the fortune-teller knows more than others," replied Ilse,
absently, "because she has somehow made herself acquainted with their
history."

"I have thought of something," cried Mrs. Rollmaus; "I would ask her
about the silver soup-ladle, which, in an inexplicable way, disappeared
from our kitchen."

"What will the lady give me if I tell her?" asked a hollow voice.

Mrs. Rollmaus started. At the corner of the house stood a large woman
behind the flower-pots; from her shoulders hung a ragged cloak, her
head was covered with a dark handkerchief, from under which two
flashing eyes were fixed upon the ladies. Mrs. Rollmaus seized Ilse's
arm, and cried out, terrified: "There is the fortune-teller herself,
dear Ilse. I beg your advice; shall I ask her?"

The woman stepped cautiously from behind the plants, placed herself in
front of Ilse, and raised her handkerchief. Ilse rose and looked
annoyed on the sharp features of the withered face.

"The gipsy!" she exclaimed, stepping back.

"A tinkering woman!" exclaimed Mrs. Rollmaus, displeased; "the secret
knowledge of such as she is, is connected with poultry-stealing, and
worse things. First they steal and conceal, and then tell where the
stolen property is."

The stranger paid no attention to the attack of Mrs. Rollmaus.

"You have hunted my people like the foxes in the wood; the frost has
killed them; your watchmen have imprisoned them, and those that still
live lie within walls, clinking their chains; I rove alone through the
country. Do not think of what was done by the men that night, think
only of what I predicted. Has it not come to pass? You look on the
stone house opposite, and you see how slowly he comes along the
gravel-path, to the room in which the naked boy hangs on the ceiling."

Ilse's countenance changed.

"I do not understand what you mean. Only one thing I see, that you are
no stranger here."

"Many years have my feet glided through the snow," continued the gipsy,
"since I passed through the doors of these black creatures."

She pointed to the angels holding tulip wreaths.

"Now disease has come upon me."

She stretched out her hand:

"Give to the sick woman of the high road, who once went on the same
path that you are now treading."

The color rose in Ilse's cheeks, she gazed fixedly on the beggar woman,
and shook her head.

"It is not money that I want from you," continued the gipsy. "Entreat
the spirit of this house for me, if he should appear to you. I am
weary, and seek rest for my head. Tell him that the strange woman on
whom he hung this token," she pointed to her neck, "begs for his help."

Ilse stood motionless; her cheeks glowed and her eyes flashed angrily
on the woman.

"What will you give to find your silver again?" asked the beggar, in an
altered tone, turning to Mrs. Rollmaus.

"So you are the fortune-teller?" said Mrs. Rollmaus, angrily, "and not
a penny will I give you. Any one who examined your head would find a
fine organism there. I have often heard such gibberish. Away with you
before the police come. One of your people prophesied to my head-maid
that she would marry a landed proprietor, and I was obliged to dismiss
her, though she had been very useful. She began to attack even Rollmaus
himself, although he only laughed at her. Go, we will have nothing to
do with you."

"Think of my request," cried the stranger to Ilse. "I shall return."

The gipsy turned away and disappeared behind the house.

"They are scamps," said Mrs. Rollmaus, deeply irritated. "Believe
nothing of what they say to you. This one talks worse nonsense than the
others. I really believe, dear Ilse, you take to heart what this beggar
woman has said."

"She knows this house, she knew well what she says," said Ilse,
faintly.

"Naturally," exclaimed Mrs. Rollmaus; "they rove about and peep through
all the crevices, they have a good memory for other people's business,
but do not remember their own thievish tricks. I have a great suspicion
of her as regards my soup-ladle. If this is the famous fortune-teller I
am so disgusted as not to care to make any further inquiries. Ah! and
you also, I see."

"I know the woman," replied Ilse; "she belongs to the band who stole
our children, and wounded the arm of my Felix. Now her uncanny figure
comes before me like a spirit, and her dark words excite horror in me.
She threatens to return, and terror seizes me lest this woman should
once more come upon me unawares. I must away from here."

Ilse hastened into the house, Mrs. Rollmaus followed her, and said,
kindly:

"If she comes again, she shall be sent away. The best way of dealing
with these prognosticators is to imprison them with bread and water."

Ilse stood in the sitting-room looking timidly about her.

"He who hung the cross upon her was the master of this castle; and when
she spoke those wild words to me at the gate of the farm yard, she did
not mean my Felix."

"She meant eight shillings, and nothing more," said Mrs. Rollmaus,
consolingly.

"How dare she compare my life with hers? How does she know whether the
lord of this house attends to my words?"

Mrs. Rollmaus endeavored in vain to tranquilize her, by sensible
observations upon the worthlessness of these female vagabonds. Ilse
looked down, with her hands folded, and the consolatory speeches of her
worthy friend were spoken in vain.

Strange voices were heard in the house; Gabriel opened the door, and
announced the Intendant. The old man entered the room officiously and
begged to be excused for the interruption.

"My most gracious master has commanded me to inquire whether a
strolling woman has been begging here. She has slipped into the castle,
obtained access to the Princess, and frightened her, just when her
Highness was departing for the country. His Highness wishes to warn you
against the stranger--she is a dangerous person."

"She was here," replied Ilse, "and talked wildly; she showed that she
knew the house."

The Intendant looked disturbed, as he continued:

"A long time ago, her Highness, the deceased Princess, took compassion
on a gipsy girl whose mother had died on the high road. She had the
creature instructed, and, as she was amusing, and seemed to promise
well, she was at last taken into the castle and employed in small
services; but she has badly repaid this generous treatment. At a time
of heavy affliction in the castle, this person fell back into the
habits of her childhood; she took to stealing, and disappeared. To-day,
one of the servants recognized the maiden in this strange woman. His
Highness, the gracious Prince, who is ailing, was informed of this by
his valet and was much excited by it. Search is being made through all
the streets and roads for the stranger."

The old man took leave. Ilse looked gloomily after him; but she said
with more composure to Mrs. Rollmaus:

"This accounts for the language of the stroller, which sounded
different to that of begging people in general, and it accounts for her
wish to receive the pardon of the Prince."

But now Mrs. Rollmaus in her turn became depressed and sad.

"Ah, dear Ilse! if the witch has really lived here among these
distinguished people, she may know many things that have happened in
this house; for people do not speak well of it, and they say that in
former times princely mistresses lived here. The house is not to blame,
nor are we; it is only because the Hereditary Prince has gone to your
father, and you knew him at the University, that people shake their
heads at it; it is idle gossip."

"What gossip?" exclaimed Ilse, in a hoarse voice, seizing the hand of
Mrs. Rollmaus.

"They say that you are the cause of the Hereditary Prince coming into
our country. We should all rejoice if you were to visit your father
before you journey, as was intended; but I really believe, as long as
the Prince is there, it would be better for you to remain here, or
anywhere else. It is only for the sake of prudence," she continued,
soothingly, "and you must not take it to heart."

Ilse stood silent and motionless; Mrs. Rollmaus continuing her
comforting words, but Ilse scarcely seemed conscious of them.

It is not safe, Ilse, to teach young princes to use agricultural
machines, and to fight duels; the tuition fee will be paid you doubly,
and in new coin, as is the custom of the courts.

There was a long and uneasy silence in the room. Ilse looked wildly
about; then she took a cane chair, and placed herself opposite to Mrs.
Rollmaus, and her fingers flew over her work. "Do not let us talk any
more of such calumnies," she said. "What is your son Karl doing? are
you satisfied with his progress? and how does he get on with the
pianoforte? It would be a good thing for him to understand something
about music."

Mrs. Rollmaus recovered her spirits talking over the dances that her
son Karl played; she chattered on, and Ilse listened silently, counting
over the stitches in her colored wool-work.

The Professor returned, and shortly after the carriage drove up. Mrs.
Rollmaus disappeared into the next room to pack up her cap in the
band-box, and then took an eloquent leave of her dear friend, the
Professor. Her last words to Ilse were:

"It may be long before we meet again; preserve your friendship for me
even though I am far from you."

"What is the meaning of these solemn words of parting our neighbor has
spoken?" asked the Professor, astonished.

"They mean that we are in a house, to be within the walls of which
fills an honest woman with horror and dread," answered Ilse, with
flashing eyes; "and they mean that I wish to go away from here, and
that it is time for you to take away your wife from unwholesome
surroundings."

She told him breathlessly what Mrs. Rollmaus had related, and what the
beggar-woman had suggested.

"I am ensnared, Felix," she exclaimed, "by my own fault, I am sorry to
say. God knows that in my conduct towards the young Prince I had no
thought of bringing your wife into disrepute, but I have been
imprudent, and I am suffering for it horribly, horribly! Now I
understand the forebodings which have tormented me for weeks past. If
you love me take me away quickly from here, the ground burns beneath my
feet."

A sharp pang seized the Professor as he saw his wife struggling with
agony, bitter enough to stun the strongest soul of woman, and to crush
the noblest powers for years.

"It is as repugnant and humiliating to me as to you to look openly upon
wickedness. I am ready to do all that I can to deliver you from this
trouble. Let us calmly consider how this can be done. You cannot, in
such a state of passionate feeling, decide what would be good for you,
for your judgment is not unbiased enough to choose your own course. To
what old house that a tenant rents or a landlord opens, do not painful
recollections attach? Even he who lives a simple life in a strange
neighborhood, cannot escape the attacks of idle gossip. Turn away your
thoughts from that common woman. It would not become either you or me
to depart like fugitives on her account. What have we done, Ilse, to
lose our self-respect? There is only one wise method of dealing with
the evil work of foolish and perverse accidents, to go forward firmly
and to care little for it. Then the dissonance will pass away and
perish of itself in the noise of daily life. Those who allow themselves
to be disturbed by it, increase it by their own sorrow. Suppose that we
were suddenly to leave this house, you would carry away with you the
feeling of having left like one who had been conquered, and you would
be incessantly pursued by the consciousness of a discordant murmur
behind us which would not be silenced."

"You speak coldly and wisely," exclaimed Ilse, deeply incensed; "in
spite of what you say, though, you little feel the injury your wife
suffers."

"If you now had the self-possession for which I always admired you, you
would not allow such unjust complaints to pass your lips," replied her
husband, gloomily. "You must know that if I saw you in danger, I would
this very hour take you away. Must I now waste words with you to tell
you that. But even against the gossip of the weak, this residence is
the best defense, for the Prince is away and you remain behind with
your husband."

"I know the cause of this indifference," murmured Ilse.

"You know what binds me here," exclaimed the Professor, "and if you
were to me what you ought to be, the sharer of my hopes, and if you had
the same feeling for the value of the treasure which I seek, you would,
like me, feel that I should not needlessly turn away. Bear with this
residence, dear Ilse, however irksome it may appear to you," he
continued encouragingly, "the longest period is past. I am invited to
pursue my quest in the country-chateau of the Princess; there I
anticipate that I shall find what will set us free."

"Do not go," exclaimed Ilse, approaching him; "do not leave me in this
dreadful insecurity, in a terror that makes me shudder at myself and
every strange sound that I hear in these rooms."

"Terror," exclaimed the Professor, displeased, "terror of spirits.
Rarely is life among strangers so easy and comfortable as this
residence is to us; there may be discord everywhere, and it is our own
fault if we allow it to master us."

"Do not go," cried Ilse again. "Yes, there are spirits that pursue me,
they hang day and night above my head. Do not go, Felix," she
exclaimed, raising her hand; "it is not the manuscript alone that
allures you, but the woman who awaits you there. This I have known ever
since the first day we came to this town. I see how the magic of her
superficial soul ensnares you. I have until to-day struggled against
this fear, from the confidence I had in my loved husband. If you go
now, Felix, when I would like to cling to you, when I seek every moment
for comfort from your voice, I shall begin to doubt you and to have the
fearful thought that my trouble is indifferent to you, because you have
become cold to me."

"What are you thinking of, Ilse?" cried the scholar, horrified; "is it
my wife that speaks thus? when have I ever concealed my feelings from
you? and can you not read in my soul as in an open book? Then, was it
this that lay so heavy on your mind? Just what I should not have
considered possible," he said, frankly and sorrowfully.

"No, no," cried Ilse, beside herself; "I am unjust, I know it; do not
attend to my words. I trust you; I cling to you. Oh! Felix, I should be
driven to despair if this support breaks under me."

She threw her arms around his neck, and sobbed. Her husband embraced
her, and tears came into his eyes at the grief of his wife.

"Remain with me, my Felix," continued Ilse, weeping. "Do not leave me
alone just now. I have still a childish, simple heart. Have patience
with me. I have been ill at ease here; I do not know why. I cling to
you, and I tremble lest you should be alienated from me. I know that
you are mine, and I struggle with the fearful foreboding that I shall
lose you here. When you go out of the house, it seems to me as if I
must take an eternal farewell, and when you return, I look doubtfully
at you, as if you had changed towards me in a few hours. I am unhappy,
Felix, and unhappiness makes one distrustful. I have become weak and
faint-hearted, and I am afraid of telling you, because I fear that you
will on that account have less respect for me. Remain here, my beloved;
do not go to the Princess--at least, not to-morrow."

"If not to-morrow," he said, cheerfully, "then the next day, or some
other day. I cannot forego this short journey. To give it up would be a
wrong that we must not take upon ourselves. The longer I delay. Ilse,
the longer you will be kept within these walls. Even from your point of
view, is it not prudent to do quickly what would make us free?"

Ilse released herself from his embrace.

"You speak sensibly at a moment when I had hoped for a far different
tone from your heart," she said quietly. "I know, Felix, that you do
not wish to give me pain, and I hope that you are true in what you now
say, and conceal nothing from me. But I feel in the depths of my heart
a long-accustomed pang that has often come over me in sorrowful days
since I have known you. You think differently from what I do, and you
feel differently in many things. The individual and his sufferings
signify little to you in comparison to the great thoughts that you
carry about with you. You stand on a height, in a clear atmosphere, and
have no sympathy with the anguish and trouble in the valley at your
feet. Clear is the air, but cold, and a chill seizes me, when I see
it."

"It is the nature of a man," said the Professor, more deeply moved by
the restrained grief of his wife than by her loud complaints.

"No," answered Ilse, gazing fixedly before her, "it is only the nature
of a scholar."

In the night, when the scholar had been long sleeping, his wife rose by
his side and gazed, in the subdued light, on the countenance of her
loved husband. She got up, and held the night-lamp so that the yellow
light fell on his peaceful countenance, and large tears dropped from
her eyes on his head. Then she placed herself before him, wringing her
hands, and striving to restrain the weeping and convulsions which shook
her body.




                            _CHAPTER XXXV_.

                        IN THE PRINCESS'S TOWER.


When the Princess, at the urgent desire of her father, had returned to
her home, the illustrious family whose name she now bore made it a
condition, not only that she should pass some months of the year at the
residence of her deceased husband, but that she should have a special
establishment arranged for her in her father's capital. A compact to
this effect was concluded, the object of which was undoubtedly to
secure to the young Princess a certain degree of independence. In order
to fulfil the agreement in appearance, a princely castle in the country
was assigned to the Princess for a dwelling, as there was no suitable
building in the capital. The castle was half a day's journey from the
city, at the foot of a woody hill, surrounded by fields and villages--a
pleasant summer residence. The Princess had already spent some of the
months of her mourning there.

It was a warm day on which the Professor set off to go to the castle.
The air had not yet become cool after the storm of the night. There
were fleeting shadows and bright sunshine on the sky and earth; the
thick clouds sometimes cast a grey covering over the straight road
along which the learned man passed; but then again it lay before him
like a golden path, leading to the longed-for goal.

Thus did dazzling light and dark shadows flit through the soul of our
scholar. "The manuscript will be found; it is concealed from us," he
said to himself, and his brow became clouded. "If it should not be
found, many will read with astonishment how deceptive appearances were,
how near the possibility. Many will with regret resign the hope which
the words of the monk had inspired, yet none will feel this regret so
much as I shall. A thought which has for years occupied my fancy, and
directed my eyes to one object, has gained the mastery over me. The
free mind of man plays with the thousand impressions of ancient and
modern times: he restrains their power by the balance of his reason and
strength of his will. But with me a small image of the faded characters
of an old book has penetrated so deeply into my soul that the hope of
obtaining it makes the blood course through my veins, and the fear of
losing it paralyzes my energies. I know that my eagerness is too great;
it has hardened me against the childish anguish of my wife, and I
myself have not become stronger since I have trodden the uncertain path
of the poacher. Every one should be on his guard lest his dreams should
diminish the sovereignty of his mind. Even the dreams of the best
hours, when a soul innocently devotes itself to a great feeling, may
turn a man away from the straight path of duty, that lies nearest to
him."

A golden light broke over his countenance. "But if it is found! It is
only a small portion of our knowledge of ancient times that lies
concealed in it. And yet it is just this discovery that would pour a
flood of light upon a landscape hovering in twilight, and several
decades of ancient life would become visible to our eyes with as
distinct an outline as if they lay in a nearer past. The discovery
would solve a hundred doubts, and excite a thousand new ones. Every
later generation would rejoice in the great gain, and would seek, with
revived energy, for new disclosures. Even for her, who at the castle
shares so warm-heartedly in my anxieties, I wish the pleasure of this
discovery. To her also it would be forever a great remembrance, that
she had taken a kindly interest in the first labors of the searcher."

Higher rose the mountains and more brilliant became the coloring of
their masses. The line of hills in the foreground stood forth from the
misty distance; blue glimpses of the valley were visible through the
openings of the dark wood. The carriage rolled through a well-preserved
forest; a thick growth of firs and pines shut out the prospect for a
time; when the road led again into the open country, through grassy
meadows and groups of trees, the castle lay straight before the eyes of
the scholar. A massive, old-fashioned tower crowned with pinnacles rose
out of a low wood; the afternoon sun shone above, its rays forming long
streaks in the vaporous atmosphere. The brown walls stood out in the
lonely landscape, like the last pillar of a gigantic ruined castle;
only by the fresh-looking stone mullions of the well-fitted windows did
one perceive that it was a habitable abode. Adjoining the tower rose
the small chateau, with steeply-sloped roof and pointed windows; in its
moderate dimensions it formed a strange contrast to its massive
companion; but in spite of the disproportion of the parts the whole
formed a stately relic of the middle ages. One could well see that its
walls had afforded shelter and defense to many generations.

The tendrils of the wild vine twined up to the roof of the house and
round the windows of the tower, which rose in seven stories, supported
by strong buttresses. Thyme and grass grew above in the crevices of the
crumbling stone, but the grass which a few days ago had covered the
ground had been pulled up and the court and doors festively adorned for
the new occupants. Banks of flowers and plants in pots were placed
around in profusion. There was only one corner in which the hasty work
had not been finished, and the remains of mossy green on the ground,
and a swarm of blackbirds that fluttered round the tower, showed that
the building had stood uninhabited in a lonely country.

The Professor sprang from the carriage, the Marshal greeted him from
the balustrade, and led him into the unpretentious guest-chamber.
Shortly after he conducted him through a vaulted passage of the castle
to the tower. The Princess, who had just returned from a walk, was
standing, with her summer hat in her hand, at the entrance of the
tower.

"Welcome to my Solitude," she said; "happy be the hour in which this
old mansion opens its doors to you. Here you stand at the entrance of
my realm. I have made myself at home in almost every part of the tower;
it is our female fortress. When these solid oak doors are closed we
ladies can found an Amazonian kingdom, and without danger fire
fir-cones upon the whole male world, for this is the fruit that
flourishes best here. Come, Mr. Werner, I will take you to the place
where your thoughts linger more willingly than with children of the
present."

A winding stone staircase connected the stories of the tower, each of
which contained rooms and closets; the highest was a loft. The Princess
pointed mysteriously to the staircase.

"Yonder at the top, below the rafters," said the Princess to the
Professor, "the whole space is crammed with old household furniture. I
could not restrain my curiosity, so yesterday I just peeped into the
room; the things lie heaped up in wild confusion; we shall have much
work."

The Professor examined with pleasure the well-preserved stone-work of
the arched doors and the artistic work of the old-time lock-smith.
Little had been done in modern times to make the walls look respectable
or to repair damage; but any one who took interest in the chisel and
carving tools of the old builders, might perceive everywhere with
pleasure that the tower could easily be changed into a masterpiece of
ancient style.

The servant opened the door into the Princess's rooms. These also were
simply arranged. The broken painted glass of the small window had been
repaired with panes coarsely painted; only fragments of the old
pictures still adhered to the lead.

"There is still much to be done here," explained the Princess; "and we
shall gradually have everything arranged within the next few years."

The clatter of the Castellan's keys were heard in the anteroom, and the
Professor turned towards the door.

"One moment's patience," cried the Princess, and she flew into an
adjoining room. She returned in a grey cloak with a hood, which
enveloped her in its folds, only the delicate face, the large beaming
eyes, and smiling mouth being visible.

"It is only in this gnome costume that I venture to approach the dusty
spirits of the lumber-room."

They ascended to the highest story. While the Castellan was picking out
the key from the bunch, the Professor eagerly examined the door, and
remarked, "More beautiful mouldings by your old lock-smith."

"I have hopes," said the Princess.

"Everything looks that way," replied the learned man.

The heavy door creaked on its hinges, and a large room presented itself
to the eyes of the searchers. A bright light shone through the narrow
openings in the wall upon the mysterious apartment; atoms of dust were
seen whirling about in the straight, shafts of air, while before and
beyond all was confusion wrapt in semidarkness. Old furniture was piled
up in hopeless confusion; gigantic wardrobes with broken doors, heavy
tables with balls for feet, chairs with straight backs and leather
cushions, from which the horsehair bristled out; together with
fragments of old weapons, halberds, corroded greaves, and rusty
helmets. Indistinct and vague, the forms appeared among each other:
legs of chairs, flat pieces of wood with inlaid work, and heaps of old
iron lying all around. It was a chaos of frippery, the artistic
products of many centuries. Their hand touched the table at which a
contemporary of Luther had sat; their foot pushed against a chest which
had been broken open by Croats and Swede; or against the white
lacquered chair, with moth-eaten velvet cushions, on which a court lady
had once sat, in a hoop dress, with powdered hair. Now all lay together
in desolate heaps, the cast-off husks of former generations, half
destroyed and quite forgotten; empty chrysales, from which the
butterflies had flown. All were covered with a grey shroud of dust--the
last ashes of vanished life. What once had form and body, now, crushed
into powder, whirled about in the air; clouds of dust opposed the
entrance of those who came to disturb its possession; it hung to the
hair and clothes of the living intruders, and glided slowly through the
open door to the rooms, where varied colors and brilliant ornament
surrounded the inmates, in order there to carry on the endless struggle
of the past with the present--the quiet struggle that is daily renewed
in great and small things which makes new things old, and finally
dissolves the old in order that it may help to nourish the germ of
youthful life.

The Professor glanced like a hawk amidst the legs of tables and chairs
in the dusky background.

"Some things have lately been removed from here," he said; "there has
been some sweeping among the furniture in the front."

"I yesterday endeavored to clean a little," said the Castellan,
"because your Highness expressed a wish to enter here; but we have not
gone far."

"Have you ever formerly examined the furniture in this room?" asked the
Professor.

"No," replied the man. "I was only placed here last year by his
Highness the Sovereign."

"Is there any catalogue of the things?" said the Professor.

The man said there was not.

"Do you know if there are chests or trunks here?"

"I think I have observed something of the kind," replied the Castellan.

"Fetch the workmen to move the things," ordered the Princess. "To-day
every part of this attic shall be examined."

The Castellan hastened down. The Professor endeavored again to peep
among the piled-up masses, but the glaring light from above dazzled his
eyes. He looked at the princely child; she was standing in a costume of
bright color at the door, like the fairy of the castle, who has
ascended into the dwelling of the grey-bearded spirits of the house in
order to accept their homage.

"It will be a long work, and your Highness will not like the dragging
about of the dusty furniture."

"I will remain with you," exclaimed the Princess; "however contemptibly
small may be my share in the discovery, I will not give it up."

Both were silent. The scholar moved about impatiently among the chairs.
Moths fluttered in the clouds of dusty and a brown martin flew out from
the nest which it had built in a corner of the window. All was still;
there was no sound but a slight regular tapping, like a pendulum
striking the hour, in the desolate room.

"That is the death-watch," whispered the Princess.

"The wood-worm is doing its work in the service of nature, it dissolves
what is decayed, into its elements."

The sound ceased, but after a time began to tick again, then a second;
they tapped and gnawed incessantly, down, down, and further down! Over
the heads of the searchers the jackdaws were croaking, and further off
the song of the nightingale sounded softly upon the labor of those who
were unearthing the past.

The workmen came; they brought one article after another to the front
of the room. Thicker rose the discoloring dust; the Princess took
refuge in the anteroom, but the Professor did not leave his post. He
worked hard himself, raising and arranging things in the front row. He
went back for a moment to the door to take breath, the Princess
received him laughing.

"You have undergone a complete transformation. You look as if you had
been awaiting resurrection in this room, and I do not think I look much
better."

"I see a chest," said the Professor, and hastened back. Another
confused medley of chairs' legs and backs were lifted away, and the
workmen laid hold of a little chest which stood in the dark. "Set it
down," ordered the Castellan, who quickly passed a large brush over it.
It was carried to the light and appeared to be a trunk of pine wood
with an arched top; the oil color of the paint had disappeared in many
places. There were iron clamps at the corners, and a rusty key that
held fast the staple of the lock, but hung loosely in the wood. On the
cover of the chest, which was dusty and worn, a black '2' was visible.
The Professor had the chest put at the feet of the Princess. He pointed
to the cipher.

"This is probably one of the chests that the official of Rossau sent to
the castle Solitude," he said, with assumed composure, but his voice
trembled.

The Princess knelt down and endeavored to raise the cover, the lock
broke away from the wood, and the chest opened.

Above lay a thick book, bound in parchment. Quickly the Professor
pounced upon it, like a lion on his prey, but he laid it down again
immediately. It was an old missal, written on parchment, the cover
damaged and torn, the layers of parchment hung loosely in the book. He
put his hand again in the chest, a torn hunting net filled the
remaining space; beside that some damaged cross-bows, a bundle of
arrows, and small iron-work. He raised himself, his cheeks were pale,
his eyes glowed.

"This is No. 2, where is No. 1," he exclaimed. He hurried back into the
room, the Princess followed. "Forward, men," he cried out, "fetch the
other trunk."

The men continued their work.

"There is something here," said one of the workmen; the Professor
hastened to the spot, raised and drew it out, it was only an empty
chest.

The work went on. The Marshal also had been brought here by curiosity;
he eagerly viewed the old furniture, and caused those pieces to be
placed together, which, according to his idea, might be mended and used
in the castle. The staircase was filled with household goods, and one
of the servants' rooms was opened that the old things might be
deposited in it. An hour had passed, the room became more empty, the
sun was sinking, its rays reflected the image of the opening in the
wall on the opposite side; the other chest was not to be found.

"Remove everything," said the Professor, "even to the last piece of
wood."

A heap of old lances, broken glasses and pottery were fetched out of
the corner, also broken legs of tables, split pieces of veneered wood,
and in the corner a great pewter tankard:--the space was clear. On the
floor lay gnawed pieces on which the death-watch had already done its
work.

The Professor entered the door again.

"This room is cleared," he said, with forced composure, to the
Castellan. "Open the next room."

"I do not believe that you will find anything in it," replied the weary
man. "You will only find old shelves and stoves there that formerly
stood in the castle."

"Let us go in," said the Professor.

The Castellan opened the door hesitatingly; a second room, still larger
and less inviting, came to view; sooty earthen pans, bricks, and slabs
of slate, lay mountain-high at the entrance, and over these were wooden
tools that probably had been used in the last repairs of the castle.

"I am glad to see this," said the Marshal; "such a load on the upper
story is wrong. This lumber must be taken out of the tower."

The Professor had ascended a hill of slate slabs, and was seeking in
the darkness for another trunk, but the chaos was too great.

"I will have it cleared out immediately," said the Marshal,
consolingly, "but it may take a long time; we shall hardly get through
to-day."

The Professor looked imploringly at the Princess.

"Get more people," she commanded.

"Even with that it will soon be dark," replied the Marshal, prudently.
"We shall see how far we can get. At all events the Professor may
betimes to-morrow find the entrance prepared."

"Meanwhile let us shake the dust from our clothes," said the Princess,
"and come into my library; it lies just under us, you can there
overlook the work of the people who are clearing away. The chest shall
be conveyed into my library. I will take it with me, and shall expect
you."

Two men carried No. 2 into the library, and the Professor went
unwilling to his room to dress.

The Princess walked about the room where the old chest had been placed,
awaiting the return of the scholar. With a heavy heart she looked
forward to meeting him; she concealed in her soul a wish and a
commission. The Sovereign had taken leave of her this time with more
kindness than he had done for years; before her departure, he had led
her into a side room and spoken to her about Werner.

"You know that one cannot leave too much to honest Bergau; I should be
glad if you will also do your best to keep the learned man with us. I
have got accustomed to him in this short time and would unwillingly
miss his enlivening society. But I do not think of myself alone. I am
becoming old, and such a man would be of the greatest value to your
brother for his whole life--a man in full vigor, who is always
collected and calm in the midst of our distracting doings: I therefore
wish this intimacy to be preserved and increased for you both: for you
also, Sidonie. I have seen with especial satisfaction how
enthusiastically you enter into the studies of our learned men. Your
mind will not be sufficiently interested with the twittering of the
well-mannered birds who surround us; some assistance from a talented
person will open to you a nobler conception of the world. Endeavor to
gain this man: every kind of burdensome duty shall be spared to him;
what now makes his position uncertain shall be removed as soon as he is
installed with us. I do not insist upon your speaking to him, I only
wish it; and I wish you to believe that in this also I am thinking of
your future."

Without doubt this was the case.

The Princess had listened to the words of her father with the quiet
criticism that was customary between such near relations. But the words
of the Sovereign on this occasion met with such an echo in her soul,
that she expressed her willingness to speak to Mr. Werner.

"If you undertake this," the Sovereign said, in conclusion, "you must
not do it by halves. Employ all the mild influence that you can
exercise over him, obtain his square word and promise for whatever he
is inclined to accede to."

The Princess now thought over these words with disquietude. Ah! she
would gladly have conveyed to the heart of this much valued man the
wishes of her own, but she felt annoyed and perplexed that her secret
feelings should be made subservient to the will of another.

The Professor entered the library of the Princess; he gave a glance at
the casts and books which were lying about, just unpacked and
unarranged, and began:

"When one's hopes have been so much raised, it is difficult to bear
suspense. One cannot help laughing over the mocking accident which
brings us in contact with a monk whose work is of no value, and
withholds from us that of the other which is of immeasurable
importance."

The Princess pointed with her hand to the door: outside were heard the
steps of people carrying something.

"Only have a little patience; if there is nothing more to-day there may
be to-morrow."

"To-morrow!" exclaimed the Professor; "a whole night lies between.
Meanwhile the worm gnaws incessantly, and all the powers of destruction
are at work. Numberless are the possibilities that separate us from our
hope: that acquisition alone is certain which we have in our hands."

He examined the chest.

"It is much smaller than I imagined. By what accident did the missal
lie in it? It is not even certain whence it came, and it is still very
doubtful what may lie concealed in the other chest."

The Princess raised the top.

"Let us meanwhile pay attention to the little we have found."

She took up the parchment volume, and put it in the hands of the
learned man. Some leaves slipped out; the Professor caught hold of
them; his eyes contracted, he jumped up and hastened to the window.

"These leaves do not belong to it," he said, reading them. At last he
exclaimed: "A piece of the manuscript is found."

He held out the leaves to the Princess; his hand trembled, and the
agitation of his countenance was such that he was obliged to turn away.
He hastened to the table and searched the missal, opening it leaf by
leaf, from beginning to end. The Princess held the leaves in her hand
in eager expectation, and approached him. As he looked up he saw two
large eyes fixed on him with tender sympathy. Again he seized the two
leaves, "What I have here, he cried, is both valuable and discouraging;
one could almost weep that it is not more; it is a fragment out of the
sixth book of the annals of Tacitus, that we already possess in another
manuscript. These are two leaves of a parchment volume, but between
them many are lost. The writing is well preserved--better than I should
have expected. It is written by a German, in the characters of the
twelfth century."

"He looked quickly over the contents in the light of the setting sun.
The Princess glanced over his shoulder curiously at the thick letters
of the monk's hand.

"It is correct," he proceeded, more calmly, "the discovery is of the
greatest interest. It will be instructive to compare this manuscript
with the only one extant." He looked at it again. "If it is a copy," he
murmured, "perhaps both indicate a common source. Thus the manuscript
that we are seeking must be torn; these leaves have fallen out, and
perhaps during the packing up have been shoved into a wrong book. There
is much still that is mysterious; but the main fact appears to me
certain, that we have here a remnant of the manuscript of Rossau, and
this discovery ought to be a guarantee that the remainder is at hand.
But how much of it?" he continued, gloomily, "and in what condition
will it be?"

He again listened anxiously to the steps of the men who were clearing
away in the loft. He rushed out of the room up the stairs, but returned
in a few minutes.

"The work goes on slowly," he said; "as yet there is nothing to be
seen."

"I do not know whether to wish that it should go on quickly," exclaimed
the Princess, cheerfully; but her eyes gave the lie to her smiling
mouth. "You must know that I am very selfish in helping you to find the
manuscript. As long as you are searching you belong to us. When you
have obtained the treasure, you will withdraw yourself into your
invisible world, and the retrospect alone will remain to us. I have a
mind to close the remaining rooms of the house, and only to open one to
you each year, until you have become quite at home with us."

"That would be cruel not to me alone," replied the Professor.

The Princess stepped up to him. "I do not speak mere empty words," she
said, in a changed tone. "My father wishes you to make your home with
us. Bergau is commissioned to enter into business arrangements, but
they are not of the nature to determine your decision. Yet when I
express the same wish, that you should remain with us, I do it from my
own heart."

"This demand upon me is very unexpected," answered the learned man,
with astonishment. "My custom is to weigh such proposals calmly, and
from different points of view. I therefore beg your Highness not to
require an answer."

"I cannot let you off," exclaimed the Princess. "I should like to gain
you in my own way. You shall choose your office and occupation here as
freely as is compatible with our different relations: you shall have
every kind of distinction, and every wish that it is in the power of
the Sovereign to satisfy shall be fulfilled."

"I am a teacher in the University," replied the Professor. "I teach
with pleasure, and not without success. My whole nature and the course
of my education fit me for this vocation. The rights and duties which
enclose my life have a firm hold on me. I have pupils, and I am
engrossed with the work in which I wish them to partake."

"You will never find pupils that will be more truly devoted, or cling
more warmly to you, than my brother and myself."

"I am not a tutor who can for any length of time oversee the duties of
a prince; I am accustomed to the rigid method of the professor, and to
quiet labor among my books."

"This last part of your occupation, at least, will not be lost to the
world by your remaining here. This is just the place where you would
find leisure, perhaps more than among your students."

"This new life would bring me new duties," replied the Professor,
"which I should feel called upon to fulfill. It would occasion me also
distractions to which I am not accustomed. You invite a man whom you
regard as firm. True, in his own circle of life, that character he
possesses; but you have no surety that in another sphere of life he
will continue to be so. Do not believe that under changed circumstances
I shall retain the repose and calmness of effort that the mind of a
worker needs; and my dissatisfaction at inner disturbances would
certainly make itself felt upon those about me. But even if I could
hope for all regarding my home and my private relations that would make
life satisfactory to me, I must still take into consideration where I
can personally be most useful; and I am not at present convinced that
this would be the case here."

The Princess looked down sadly. The steps of the men who were to free
the manuscript from the piles of rubbish still continued to sound
above.

"Yet," continued the Professor, "if we were to be fortunate enough to
find the manuscript, many days, perhaps many years of my life would be
taken up by a new task, which would be so great that I might find my
University occupations a burden. Then I should have a right to ask
myself, in what surroundings I should best be able to advance this
work. In this case, I should also have a right to leave the University
for a long time. But if I do not find it, it will be painful to me to
part from here, for my soul will long hover restlessly about this
place."

"I will not let you off so easily," cried the Princess. "I hear only
the words, duty and manuscript. Is the liking that we show to you,
then, of no value to you? Forget, now, that I am a woman, and consider
me as a warm-hearted boy, who looks up to you devotedly, and is not
quite unworthy of your interest."

The Professor looked at the student who stood before him and did not
wish to be considered a woman. The Princess had never looked so
attractive. He gazed on the blushing cheeks, on the eyes which were
fastened so expressively on his countenance, and on the rosy lips which
trembled with inward emotion. "My pupils generally look different from
that," he said, softly, "and they are accustomed to criticize their
teacher more stringently."

"Be content for once," said the Princess, "with finding pure admiration
in a susceptible soul. I have before said how much I value your
acquaintance. I am no empress who governs a kingdom, and do not wish to
employ your powers in my interest. But I should consider it the highest
happiness to be in intimate relations with your mind, to listen to the
noble words you utter. I feel a longing to look upon life with the
clear eyes of a man. You have easily, as if in play, solved riddles
that have tormented me, and answered questions with which I have
struggled for years. Mr. Werner, you have taken a kind interest in me;
if you go from here, I shall find myself alone in those pursuits with
which I should most prefer being occupied. If I were a man I should
seek you as my teacher; but I am fettered here, and, I beckon you to
me."

The learned man listened, entranced, to the soft voice that spoke so
persuasively.

"I do not beg for myself alone," continued the Princess, "my brother
also needs a friend. It will be his task to take charge of the welfare
of many. What you could do for his mind would be for the benefit of
others. When I look away from the present, and dream of the future of
our princely house and of this country, I feel proud that we, brother
and sister, have a presage of what will be demanded in our time from
princes, and I feel an ambition that we should both, before all others,
show ourselves worthy of this high calling. I hope to see a new life
developed in my home, and my brother and myself surrounded by the best
minds of our nation. Thus we should live sensibly and earnestly
together, as our times require; it should be no pleasure-loving Court
after the old style, but a hearty intercourse between the Sovereign and
the mind of the nation. That will make us freer and better in
ourselves, and will be an advantage to the whole people; it will also
be a bright remembrance for future times. When I think of such a
future, then, Mr. Werner, I see you as the dear companion of our life,
and the thought makes me proud and happy."

The sun was setting, and its last rays fell glowing upon the Princess
and the head of the scholar. Sweetly sounded the song of the
nightingale among the elder-bushes; the Professor stood silent opposite
the beautiful woman who painted life to him in such rosy colors; his
heart beat and his strength failed him. He saw before him two eloquent
eyes, and the sound of the entreating words, "Remain with us," rang
with entrancing magic once more in his ear.

Something rustled near the Princess; the leaves of the manuscript which
she had taken fell to the ground. The Professor bent down to pick them
up, and as he raised himself again began, in a feeble tone:

"Your Highness takes a bright look into the future; my eye is
accustomed only to read single lines in the history of past ages. Here
lies my first task; my dreams hover about these leaves. I am only a man
of the study, and I should become less were I to endeavor to become
more. I know that I deprive myself of much, and in this hour, when a
vision of a brilliant life shines before me so invitingly, I feel this
more deeply than ever. But my greatest happiness must be, from within
quiet walls, to impress upon the souls of others what will there
blossom and bear fruit. My greatest reward must also be that in hours
of triumph, when filled with the consciousness of power, some pupil of
mine will give a fleeting thought to the far-distant teacher, who has
been but one among the thousands that have formed him, but one among
the many sowers in the limitless fields of science."

Thus spoke the scholar. But while speaking, with a severe struggle for
composure, what was true and honorable, he did not think only of the
truth, nor only of the treasure which he was seeking, but of the
greater one which he had left in order to pursue his quest with the
beautiful fairy of the tower. He heard the beseeching words, "Do not
go, Felix," and they were a timely warning. "When I return to her, will
she be contented with me?" thought the innocent man. He was spared the
necessity of asking the question.

The rolling of a carriage was heard below, and the steps of the servant
who was coming to announce an arrival.

"Is your will so inflexible, your intention so firm!" exclaimed the
Princess, passionately. "But I am also obstinate; I shall continue my
entreaties. War between us two, Mr. Werner! Farewell, till evening."

She hastened down the steps. The evening light disappeared behind dark
clouds; the mist hovered over the meadows and hung on the tops of the
trees; and the daws flew croaking round the walls of the tower. The
door of the room above creaked on its hinges, and the Castellan rattled
his keys, while the scholar looked lovingly at the leaves which he held
in his hand.




                            _CHAPTER XXXVI_.

                             ILSE'S FLIGHT.


Ilse was awakened by her husband's parting kiss; she sat at her
bed-side and listened to the sound of the rolling wheels.

"This has been a fearful night," she said; "after tears and anguish
there came bad dreams. I was hanging over a precipice; from the depth
below, concealed by fogy arose the noise of a waterfall. Felix standing
above, held me by a handkerchief; his strength was giving way; I felt
that, but I had no anxiety about it in my dream. I wished that Felix
would let me go, and not sink with me. Pass away in peace, my dream, to
thy portals of ivory; thou wast a good dream, and I have no cause to be
ashamed of thee.

"He is on his journey, and I am alone. No, my Felix, you are with me,
even when I do not hear your voice. Yesterday I was angry with you; I
am sorry for it. I bear you within me, just as you have taught me, that
the soul of man passes into and rests in others. That part of Felix
which I preserve within me I will keep honorably, and quietly cherish
in this hateful house."

She opened the curtains.

"It will be a gloomy day again; the finches are already sitting at the
window, crying for the dilatory woman who has slept beyond the
breakfast hour of her little ones. Outside all is in bloom, and the
large leaves of the Schubart-plant blow about joyously in the moist
air. But this rain will be more than my father likes; the seed will
suffer. The good God cannot please us all at the same time; we are
indeed covetous.

"At home they gossip about me; my neighbor did not say the worst that
she knew. I have not been used to this. When I became the wife of my
Felix I thought myself raised above all the meanness of the world, but
I now feel its sting in my soul."

She passed her hand over her eyes.

"No tears to-day?" she cried springing up. "When my thoughts course
wildly through my brain I will prove to myself that I have something of
the scholar's character in me, and will calmly look into my own heart
and quiet its beatings by prudent reflection. When he first came to our
house, and the noble spirit of his conversation aroused me, his image
pursued me into my room. I took a book, but I did not know what I read;
I took up my accounts, but I could not put two and two together; I
observed that all was confusion within me. Yet it was wrong to think
thus about a man who was still a stranger to me. Then in my anguish I
went into the nursery, tidied all my brother's and sister's things, and
saw whether the boy's clothes needed mending. I was then a regular home
body. Ah, I am so still; I hope it will help me now. I will put all my
things together for I feel as if I should take a journey to-day, and
that it will be well to have all prepared."

She opened the closet, drew out her trunk, and packed it.

"But where to?" she asked herself. "Far away? How long it is since I
had wings like a swallow, and could gaily fly with my thoughts into
foreign parts! And now the wings of the poor little swallow are broken.
I sit alone on my branch; I would gladly conceal myself in the leaves,
and I dread the fluttering and the chattering of my neighbors."

She supported her weary head with her hands.

"Where should I go to?" she sighed; "not to my father; nor could I now
look with pleasure on mountains and old monuments. How can one have a
heart for the forms of nature and the achievements of past nations when
one's own life is racked and disturbed?

"My Felix said that one should always consider oneself the child of the
whole human race, and be elevated by the high thought that millions of
the dead and living are united to us in an indissoluble unity. But who
of those who were and are about me will relieve my tormented soul of
the pangs that constantly trouble me? Who will deliver me from
dissatisfaction with myself and from fear about the future? Ah me! It
may be a teaching to inspire man in hours of exaltation, when calmly
contemplating all about him, but for him who is writhing in torment and
affliction, the teaching is too high, too high!"

She took from the shelf her little Bible, which had been given her by
the good Pastor on her departure from her father's house, and drew it
out of its cover. "I have long neglected to read you, dear book, for
when I open your pages I feel as if I had two lives; the old Ilse
revives who once trusted in your words; and then again I see myself,
like my husband, criticizing many passages, and asking myself whether
what I find in you is according to my reason. I have lost my childish
faith, and what I have gained instead gives me no certainty. When I
fold my hands in prayer, as I did when I was a child, I know that I
dare pray for nothing but strength to overcome, by my own exertion,
what now casts down my spirit."

The gardener entered the room, as he did every morning, with a basket
of flowers which the lord of the castle sent her. Ilse rose and pointed
to the table.

"Set it down," she said, coldly, without touching the basket.

She had, at other times, frequently expressed to the man her pleasure
in the beautiful flowers he had cultivated. It had always given him
pain that the illustrious personages of the castle never noticed his
rare plants, and he had been so pleased with the warm interest taken by
the strange lady that he brought the flowers every morning himself, and
pointed out to her the new favorites of the conservatory; he had cut
for her the best he had.

"The others do not notice them," he would say; "and she remembers the
Latin names too."

He now placed the basket of flowers down with a feeling of
mortification.

"There are some new specimens of the calceolaria," he began,
reproachfully; "they are of my own raising: you will not see others of
this kind."

Ilse felt the disappointment of the gardener. She approached the table,
and said:

"They are indeed very beautiful; but flowers, dear sir, require a light
heart, and that I have not now. I have ill repaid your kindness to-day;
but you must not be angry with me."

"If you would only look at the grey-spotted ones," exclaimed the
gardener, with the enthusiasm of an artist; "these are my pride, and
are not to be had anywhere else in the world."

Ilse admired them.

"I had taken great pains for many years," continued the gardener. "I
had done all I could to obtain good seed, but only common ones came;
after I had almost lost courage, the new kinds blossomed all in one
year. It was not my art," he added, honestly: "it is a secret of
nature; she has given me good fortune, and relieved me from my cares
all at once."

"But you took pains and did your best," answered Ilse; "when one does
thus, one may trust to the good spirit of life."

The gardener went away appeased; Ilse looked at the flowers.

"Even he who sent you has become to me an object of dread. Yet he was
the only one here who showed me uniform kindness and treated me with
respect. Felix is right: there is no reason for us to be disturbed on
his account. Who knows whether he is much to blame for the disagreeable
reports about this house. I must not be unjust towards him; but when I
look at his flowers, it seems as if an adder lay within them, for I do
not know whether his soul is pure or impure. I do not understand his
ways, and that makes me uncertain and fearful."

She pushed the basket away, and turned from it.

The maid who waited upon her came into the room, with a troubled
countenance, and begged permission to go away for the day, as her
mother was very ill in a neighboring village. Ilse asked kindly about
the woman, and gave the girl the desired permission, with good wishes
and advice. The maid went slowly out of the room; Ilse looked
sorrowfully after her.

"Her heart, too, is heavy. It is well that Felix is not at home, for I
can now be alone with my sorrow. It will be a quiet day, and this will
be welcome after yesterday's storm."

Again there was a knocking at the door; the Castellan brought the
letters that the postman had given him for the Pavilion. There were
letters from her brothers and sisters who kept up a regular
correspondence with their distant Ilse. A ray of joy passed over her
serious face.

"This is a pleasant morning greeting," she said. "I will to-day answer
my little band in detail. Who knows whether I may have time for it next
week."

She hastened to the writing-table, read, laughed, and wrote. Her
uneasiness had passed away; she chatted like a lively child in the
language and thoughts of the nursery. Hours flew in this occupation.
Gabriel brought up and carried away the dinner. When in the afternoon
he found her still bending over the letters, he lingered by her and
hesitated whether he should speak to her; but as Ilse was so deeply
engrossed in her work, he nodded and closed the door.

Finally, Ilse wrote to her father. Again her thoughts became sad,
anguish rose from the depth of her heart, and lay like a burning weight
on her bosom. She left her writing-table, and paced hastily about the
room. When she came to the window, she saw the lord of the castle
coming slowly along the gravel path towards the Pavilion.

Ilse stepped back quickly. She was not unaccustomed to the short visits
of the Sovereign; but to-day she felt fearful, the blood rushed to her
heart, she pressed her hands over her bosom, and struggled for
composure.

The door flew open.

"I come to inquire," began his Highness, "how you bear your solitude.
My house also has become empty, my children are gone from me, and it is
lonely in the great building."

"I have employed my leisure in intercourse with distant friends,"
answered Ilse.

She would not on this occasion mention the children to the Sovereign.

"Are the little ones who play about in your home amongst these
friends?" he asked laughing. "Have the children again expressed their
wishes to you?"

He took a chair and invited Ilse to be seated. His demeanor made her
more composed; his manner was that of a discreet and well-intentioned
person.

"Yes, your Highness," replied Ilse; "but this time my younger sister,
Luise, was the most active correspondent."

"Does she promise to become like you?" asked the Sovereign, kindly.

"She is now twelve years old," replied Ilse, with reserve; "she is
sentimental upon every subject and every blade of grass excites her
fancy. It appears as if she were to be the poetess of the play-room. I
do not know how these fantastical ideas have come into our family. In
her letter she tells me a long story, as if it had happened to herself,
and yet it is only a tale which she has read somewhere. For since I
have left my home, more story-books have reached it than were there in
my youth."

"Probably it is only childish vanity," said the Sovereign, kindly,
"that leads her to substitute an invention for truth."

"That is it exactly," answered Ilse, more cheerfully. "She pretends
that she lost her way in the wood, and that when she was sitting
sorrowfully among the toad-stools, the little animals whom she was in
the habit of feeding in our court-yard,--the white mouse in the cage,
the cats, and the shepherd's dog,--placed themselves about her and ran
before her till she found her way out of the wood. The cat together
with the mouse, your Highness; that was silly! This story she related
boldly as if it were the truth, and expected me to think it touching.
That was too much--but I have given her my opinion of it."

The Sovereign laughed, laughed from his heart. It was a rare sound that
echoed through the walls of the dark room, and the god of love above
looked down with surprise on the joyous man.

"May I ask how you criticized this poetic state of mind?" asked the
Sovereign. "There is a poetical idea in the tale, that the kindness
shown to others will always be repaid when required. But it is
unfortunately only an poetic idea; gratitude is seldom met with in real
life."

"One ought not, in life, to trust solely to the help of others,"
replied Ilse, firmly; "and one ought not to show kindness to others in
order that it may be repaid. There is indeed a strange pleasure felt
when some chord which one has struck brings back its echo to one's
heart; but one should not trust to it. A child that has lost its way
should make good use of its five senses in order to find its way home
by itself. But, certainly, one ought not to put forth poetical ideas as
if they were real incidents. I was obliged to scold her; for, your
Highness, girls in these days must have right ideas taught them, or
they will soon lose themselves in dreams."

The Sovereign laughed again.

Where are the wise and good animals, Lady Ilse, that will give _you_
friendly counsel in your time of need?

"You are too strict," continued the Sovereign. "The witch fancy
deceives the judgment of even us grown-up people; one is fearful
without reason, and one hopes and trusts without justification. The
person who could ever command a true, impartial judgment of his own
position, would have a freedom that would make life hardly endurable."

"Fancy confuses us," answered Ilse, looking round, "but it warns us
also."

"What is warmth of feeling, and devotion to others?" continued the
Sovereign, sorrowfully. "Nothing but subtle self-deceit. If I now am
flattered by the joyful feeling that I have succeeded in sharing the
wealth of your heart, that too is only a deception; but it is a dream
which I carefully cherish, for it does me good. With a happiness which
I have long been deprived of, I listen to the honest tones of your
voice, and the thought is painful to me that I shall ever be without
the sweet enjoyment they afford. It is of greater value to me than you
imagine."

"Your Highness speaks to me as to a true friend," replied Ilse, drawing
herself up; "and when I take to heart the kindly tone in which you now
express your sympathy, I have to believe your honesty and sincere
intentions. But this same fancy, which you blame and praise, disturbs
also the confidence which I would gladly have in your Highness. I will
no longer be silent about it, for it pains me after such kind words, to
foster any unfounded feeling against you." She rose hastily. "It
disturbs my peace of mind to feel that I dwell in a house which the
feet of other women avoid."

The Sovereign looked astonished at the woman who, with such firmness,
controlled her inward excitement.

"The fortune-teller," he murmured.

"Your Highness knows well what fancy does," continued Ilse,
sorrowfully. "It has tormented my soul, and made it difficult for me in
this place to believe in the esteem of which your Highness assures me."

"What have they been telling you?" asked the Sovereign, in a sharp
tone.

"What your Highness ought not to desire to hear from my lips," replied
Ilse, proudly. "It is possible that the master of a Court considers
such things with indifference. I say that to myself. But it is a
misfortune to me to have been here: it is a stain on a spotless robe,
and I fix my eyes wildly upon it; I wash it away with my hand, and yet
it always lies before me, for it is a shadow that falls from without."

The Sovereign looked gloomily before him.

"I shall not use the subterfuges that you put into the mouth of a
master of a Court, for I feel at this moment, deeply and passionately
like you, that an injury has been done your honor. I have only one
excuse," he continued, with passion: "you came here as stranger to us,
and I little thought what a treasure lay concealed near me. Since that,
in our slight intercourse, you have awakened in me a feeling to which I
yield irresistibly. It is seldom permitted me by fate to say
undisguisedly what I feel. I disdain to use the impassioned language of
a youth, for I do not wish to disquiet you. But do not think that I
feel less strongly towards you because I know how to conceal my
emotion."

Ilse stood in the middle of the room, and a burning color rose to her
cheeks.

"I beg your Highness not to say another word, for it is not right that
I should listen to you."

The Sovereign laughed bitterly.

"I have already wounded you, and you quickly make it plain that I
labored under an illusion when I hoped for your affection. And yet I am
so completely your slave, that I beg of you not to refuse your sympathy
to a passion which glows so warmly within me, that it has at this
moment entirely deprived me of my self-control."

Ilse gasped:

"I must away from here."

"Renounce that idea," cried the Sovereign, beside himself. "I cannot be
deprived of your presence or of the sound of your voice. However
slightly it may gladden me, it is the happiness of my days--the one
great feeling in a life without pleasure or love. The knowledge that
you are near me maintains me in my struggle against thoughts that
stupefy me in gloomy hours. Like the devout pilgrim who listens to the
bell of the hermitage, I listen to the slightest chord that vibrates
from your life into mine. Consent to accept the devotion of a lonely
man," he continued, more tranquilly. "I vow never more to wound your
delicate feelings. I vow to be contented with that share of your life
which you will freely give me."

"I repent of every word that I have spoken to your Highness, and I
repent of every hour in which I have thought with reverence of you,"
exclaimed Ilse, with kindling anger. "I was a poor trusting child," she
continued, excitedly. "I bowed submissively to my Sovereign before I
saw him as he is; now that I know him, he excites abhorrence in me, and
I gather up my garment and say. Monster, begone from me!"

The Sovereign fell back in his chair.

"It is an old curse that echoes in my ears from these walls; it is not
your own heart that drives me from you. From your lips should only come
words of love and compassion. I am not a tempter, I am myself a
wanderer in the wilderness, with nothing about me but desert sand and
towering rocks. I hear the laughter of children; I see the fair-haired
group passing by me; I see two eyes fixed on me with kindly greeting,
and a hand, with the filled cup, which beckons to the weary one; and,
like a vision of mist, it has all disappeared. I remain alone, and I
sink to my destruction."

He closed his hands over his eyes. Ilse did not reply. She stood,
turned from him, looking through the window at the clouds which flitted
across the heaven.

All was quiet in the room. Nothing moved, and no one spoke. At last the
Sovereign rose slowly: he approached Ilse. There was a glassy look in
his eye, and he moved with effort.

"If I have wounded you by what I have said in a moment of overwhelming
passion, forget it. I have proved to you that I am not yet free from
the weakness that hopes to gain a heart which would beat in unison with
mine. Remember only that I am an erring one who sought comfort from
you. It was an humiliating request: if you cannot respond to it, do not
be angry with the wretched one who asks."

He gazed on her with a long, protracted look of burning passion,
deadly, wounded pride, and something more, that inspired her with
terror, but she looked him firmly and rigidly in the face. He raised a
warning finger, and left the room.

She listened to his tread as he went away, marked every step as he
descended, and when he closed the house-door, pulled the bell.

Gabriel, who was standing in the anteroom, entered quickly.

"I wish to go away from here," exclaimed Ilse.

"Whereto, Mrs. Werner?" asked the frightened servant.

"Where to?" echoed in Ilse's ears.

"To my husband," she said; but, as if listening to her own words, she
shuddered. He also was in a house of the Sovereign. He was with the
daughter of the wicked man. He himself was not safe there--his wife
would not be safe with him. Where to? The question whirled in her head.
The son of the cruel man was with her father, so she must not go home;
her neighbour had said so. She sank her head as if stunned. A feeling
of helplessness lay like a dead weight upon her; but she raised herself
again, and approached Gabriel. "I will leave this city to-day--at
once."

The servant wrung his hands.

"I knew it would come to this," he exclaimed.

"You knew it," asked Ilse, gloomily; "and neither I nor my husband did?
Was it seen to every passerby, and yet a secret to him and me?"

"I noticed that there was something about this place that seemed
uncanny," answered Gabriel, "and that no one trusted the distinguished
gentleman who just now left. How could I tell you what seemed only my
foolish fancy?"

"It is not well to pay too little attention to people's talk," replied
Ilse; "I wish to go to some place where I can find a woman, Gabriel.
Get a carriage for me immediately, and accompany me to Mrs. Rollmaus.
We will leave everything here, and you must return to the house, that
you may be on the spot when my husband comes back."

"Where shall I get a carriage?" asked Gabriel, hesitatingly.

"From the city, and not from the castle stable."

Gabriel stood and reflected. At last he said, abruptly:

"I shall go; be careful to prevent the lackey from learning that you
are preparing for a journey."

"No one shall know it," said Ilse.

Gabriel hastened away, and Ilse locked the door and flew into the next
room. There she collected all that was indispensable for the journey.
She closed all the cupboards and wardrobes, and put the keys in a
bunch. "When Felix comes, he shall not say I ran away unthinkingly."
She went to his writing-table, and sealed up the letters in a packet.
"So that no curious eye can look upon you," she said. When she packed
up the letters of the children and her own answers, a shudder came over
her, and she concealed the bundle rapidly beneath other papers. She was
ready, and Gabriel had not yet returned. He seemed to linger long. With
firm steps she went through the rooms. "You have grown more strange to
me the longer I have dwelt here. What has become of the brilliant
impression of the first evening? It was a cold splendor, hostile to my
life. I would gladly root up every recollection of it from my soul."
She placed herself on the spot where, in the night, she had looked on
her sleeping husband. "That was my last sorrowful look at his dear
face; when shall I see it again? I go from you, Felix; who would have
thought it when we stood together before the altar? I leave you behind
among wicked men; you also in danger, and I go away alone, to seek
safety for myself far from you. Who would have said some days ago that
I should have marked him a liar to his face? I go, Felix, in order to
save myself for you. Think of that, and do not be angry with me. I
would not have gone for less cause." She sank down on a cushion, and
wrung her hands with tearless sorrow. She lay for a long time in this
condition. At last there was a knocking at the outer door. She jumped
up and opened it, but she drew back terrified when she beheld the pale
countenance of her faithful servant.

"I have not ordered a carriage," said Gabriel, "for it would be of no
use."

"What do you mean?" asked Ilse, angrily.

"Any carriage that went from here would not take Mrs. Werner where she
wishes, but only where another wishes."

"Then we will go ourselves, and take a vehicle in the city."

"Wherever we go," replied Gabriel, "we shall be observed, and if I
attempt to call a carriage it will be taken from us."

"You are frightened yourself, Gabriel, and see danger where none
exists," replied Ilse, annoyed.

"If we could only get an honest man to take you to Mrs. Rollmaus,"
continued Gabriel; "but it is doubtful whether you could get there. Do
you see that man below by the castle? He goes slowly as if he were
taking a walk, but he never turns his eyes from this house. That is one
of our spies, and he is not the only one."

"Who has told you that?" asked Ilse.

"I have a good friend here who belongs to the castle," replied Gabriel,
hesitating. "Do not be angry, Mrs. Werner, that I asked him, for he
knows all their tricks. It is possible, he said, that we may succeed;
for one cannot assume that all the people of the city are robbers or
deceivers, but it is uncertain and dangerous."

Ilse seized her hat and cloak.

"I am going, Gabriel," she said, quietly. "Will you accompany me?"

"Dear Mrs. Werner, wherever you wish," answered Gabriel. "But first
listen to my proposal. My acquaintance thinks that the safest way would
be, if the Crown Inspector should fetch you himself in the evening. The
evenings are dark, and you may then perhaps be able to leave the house
without the lackey or any one else remarking it."

"A prisoner!" exclaimed Ilse. "Who is your acquaintance?" she asked,
looking sharply at Gabriel.

"He is true as gold," Gabriel assured her, "and I will willingly tell
you later, but I beg you not to ask me to-day, for he has desired, for
his own safety, that no one should be told."

"I trust in your faithfulness," replied Ilse, coldly; "but you yourself
may be deceived; I will not follow the advice of a stranger."

"He has offered me a horse," said Gabriel, "it is outside the city. If
you will give me a line to the Crown Inspector, I will ride there and
bring the carriage in good time."

Ilse looked gloomily at the servant.

"Many hours must pass away, and I will not remain here alone. I will go
on foot along the high road to my friends."

"Look, Mrs. Werner, at the sky; a storm is coming."

"I do not care for it," exclaimed Ilse; "it is not the first time I
shall have gone through the rain. If you do not choose to accompany me,
you may wait here for my husband, and tell him that I have gone away to
my home, and when I am with good people I will write to him."

Gabriel wrung his hands; Ilse put on her cloak.

Suddenly loud altercation was heard on the floor below. Gabriel hastily
opened the door; the bass voice of a stranger was scolding the lackey
vehemently:

"But I tell you I am not the man who will allow the door to be shut in
his face; she is at home, I say."

Ilse threw off her hat and cloak, sprang down the stairs, and called
out.

"Mr. Hummel!"

"Your most obedient servant, Mrs. Werner," cried out Hummel. "I come
immediately, only I will first express to this major-domo my high
opinion of him. You are a scoundrel, sir, and an object to whom I wish
such treatment as he deserves--a well-seasoned switch and a tight
halter. I am coming, Mrs. Werner." He ascended the stairs heavily. Ilse
flew to meet him, led him into her room, and was so overcome that she
laid her head on his shoulder and wept.

Mr. Hummel was silent, and looked sympathizingly at Ilse.

"So these are Court ways?" he asked, softly; "and this is the fashion
in which people act here?"

"My husband is away. I wish to leave this place; Mr. Hummel, do help me
to escape!"

"That is exactly my situation," said Mr. Hummel: "I am implicated,
myself, in an elopement affair. I have come to this city in order to
convey to you a request from my daughter Laura, and to bring matters to
some settlement with the clergymen here. But where do you wish to go
to?"

"To kind friends who will take me to my father's house."

"That will certainly be the right course," replied Mr. Hummel.

"In times of despair, when everything totters in the world, the child
should go back to the father. His faithfulness remains; she is twenty
years old before that of the husband begins. As your father is not
here, allow one who knows what it is to feel anxious about a child to
take the place of a father to you."

Ilse clung to him: Mr. Hummel pressed her hand, after his fashion,
tenderly; but it was a hard pressure.

"Now for composure and cool blood. It can be no small matter which
moves you so strongly. I will not leave you until I see you well
protected." He looked at Gabriel, who made him a sign. "Do not trouble
yourself further in the matter. Be quietly seated, and allow me to
confer with Gabriel. I will take care of everything for you, and I
shall answer for everything."

Ilse looked at him thankfully and seated herself obediently. Mr. Hummel
beckoned Gabriel into the next room.

"What has happened here?" he asked.

"The master has gone away for a few days; meanwhile Mrs. Werner has
been treated in an unseemly way; great wickedness is carried on here,
and they will not let her go."

"Not let my lodger go?" cried Mr. Hummel; "ridiculous! I have a
passport to Paris in my pocket, we will skip over this country like
grasshoppers. I will fetch a conveyance immediately."

Gabriel shook his head. The confidants again conferred together. Mr.
Hummel came back and said, with greater seriousness, to Ilse:

"Now I must beg of you to write a few lines to the Crown Inspector--to
the husband, not to his wife, otherwise there would be confusion. You
must request him, immediately after the receipt of this letter, if he
is willing to do a great kindness, to come here in a closed carriage,
to stop in the suburb, at the Black Bear; and he must not leave his
carriage. Nothing further. This letter Gabriel will convey to him. How
he does so is his affair, not ours; if he chooses to fly, like this
ambiguous genius on the ceiling, who has forgotten its overcoat, it
will be so much the better. Now the letter is written, forgive me if I
read it. All right and accurate--away, Gabriel, quickly. When you have
passed the castle, then make speed: till then, act like a composed
philanthropist. I will allow you to whistle my Dessauer, if you can. If
they ask you any questions, say you are attending to some business for
me."

Gabriel hastened away. Mr. Hummel placed his chair in front of Ilse,
and looked at his watch.

"You will have to wait five hours for the carriage if all goes right.
Meanwhile you must bear my company, I will not leave the house without
you. Do not be troubled at the delay. I am glad of it; for I wish to
speak with you as with an honorable woman, to whom I can take off my
hat with true respect, concerning my own affairs, which I have much at
heart. We have time enough for it. I have also brought some papers to
the Professor; they are of little importance, but I will lay them on
the table, and we shall sit opposite each other like people of
business. Then I should be glad if you would give that Judas in the
servants' chamber a few instructions for me. Have the goodness also to
take everything away that might lead him to suppose that you and I were
going to elope."

Ilse looked round her, undecided.

"What shall I say to the man, Mr. Hummel?"

"You are so good a housewife," replied Hummel, politely, "that I can
leave entirely to you to decide what you will provide for me. I have
been travelling the whole day," and he made a significant gesture
towards his waistcoat.

"Ilse jumped up; in spite of all her anxieties, she could not help
laughing, and said:

"Forgive me, Mr. Hummel."

"That is the right frame of mind," replied Hummel; "there is no better
remedy for tragic spirits than a well spread table. I beg, therefore
that you will send not only for one plate, but for two. I could not eat
if you were looking on. Believe me, Mrs. Werner, the noblest feelings
are not to be depended on if an honest piece of bread and butter is not
impressed on them as a stamp. It makes people calm and firm--and you
will have occasion for these virtues to-day."

Ilse rang the bell.

"If the knave appears," proceeded Mr. Hummel, "mention to him my name
and my firm. I do not generally travel incognito, and I wish not to be
looked upon as a mystery here."

The lackey appeared. Ilse gave him orders to fetch the necessary
refreshment, and asked him how it was he had denied her dear landlord
admittance.

The man stammered an excuse, and went away hastily.

"When I came to the house I was aware that all was not right here. I
asked after you at the castle and received no satisfactory answer. I
asked a man at the back of the castle who was wandering about, which
was your house. He looked at me like a crossbill. You were travelling,
he declared, and he tried to discover my secret. Thereupon there was a
short conversation, in which cross-bill showed his spite because I in
ignorance called him by his proper title of spy. The sentinel came up
at this, and I saw that these jovial comrades had a great mind to
arrest me. Then a young gentleman appeared, who asked the other the
cause of the disturbance, and said he knew that you were at home. He
accompanied me up to this house, asked my name politely, told me also
his own, Lieutenant Treeclimber, and advised me not to be frightened
away, that the servants were insolent, but that you would be rejoiced
to see an old friend. He must be known to you."

The lackey laid the table. Whenever he offered Mr. Hummel a dish, the
latter gave him a withering look, and did not endeavor to make his
office easy to him. While the servant was removing the things, Mr.
Hummel began:

"Now permit me to talk of our affairs, it will be a long account; have
you patience for it?"

The evening had set in, darkness lay over the dismal house, the storm
came on, the windows rattled, and the rain poured down. Ilse sat as in
a dream. In the midst of the stormy scenes of the past day and the
uneasy expectation of a wild night, the comfortable prose of the Park
Street rose before her, where, fearless and secure, she was at peace
with herself and the world,--so far as the world was not vexatious. But
she felt how beneficial this contrast was; she even forgot her own
position, and listened with deep sympathy to the account of the father.

"I am speaking to a daughter," said Mr. Hummel, "who is going back to
her father, and I tell her what I have said to no one else: how hard it
is to bear my child's wish to leave me."

He spoke about the child whom they both loved, and it was pleasant
intercourse between them. Thus several hours passed.

The lackey came again, and asked respectfully whether Mrs. Werner had
sent Gabriel away.

"He has gone upon a commission for me," grumbled Mr. Hummel, to the
inquirer; "he is looking after some money matters with which I did not
choose to burden your honesty. If any one inquires from the city for
me, I must beg, Mrs. Werner, to request this man to say that I am at
home."

He again looked at his watch.

"Four hours," he said. "If the horse was good, and Gabriel did not lose
his way in the dark, we may expect him every moment. If he has not
succeeded, you may still be without anxiety; I will still take you from
this house."

The bell below rang, and the house door opened--Gabriel entered. There
was a gleam of pleasure in his countenance.

"Promptly, at ten, the carriage will stop before the inn," he said,
cautiously; "I have ridden hastily in advance."

Ilse jumped up. Again the terrors of the day and anxiety for the future
passed through her mind.

"Sit still," admonished Mr. Hummel again; "violent moving about is
suspicious. I will meanwhile hold council once more with Gabriel."

This council lasted a long time. At last Mr. Hummel came back, and
said, very seriously:

"Now, Mrs. Werner, prepare yourself; we have a quarter of an hour's
walk. Yield yourself quietly to our guidance; all has been carefully
considered."

Mr. Hummel rang. Gabriel, who had returned to the spy on the ground
floor, entered as usual, and took several keys and a screw-driver out
of his pocket, and said, cautiously:

"The first week we were here I closed the small back staircase and
secured the door with a large screw; the people do not know that I have
the keys."

He went to one of the back rooms and opened the entrance to a secret
staircase. Mr. Hummel glided after him.

"I wished to know how I was to let myself in again," he said, returning
to Ilse. "When I have taken you away some one must be heard moving
about here as your spirit, otherwise all the trouble would be lost.
Gabriel will take you down the back staircase, while I go out at the
front door and keep the lackey in conversation. I will meet you a short
distance from the house among the bushes; Gabriel will bring you to me,
and I will be sure to be there."

Ilse pressed his hand anxiously.

"I hope all will go well," said Mr. Hummel, cautiously. "Take care to
have a cloak that will disguise you as much as possible."

Ilse flew to her writing-table and in haste wrote these words:

"Farewell, beloved; I am gone to my father."

Again sorrow overpowered her; she wrung her hands and wept. Mr. Hummel
stood respectfully aside. At last he laid his hand on her shoulder:
"The time is passing away."

Ilse jumped up, enclosed the note in an envelope, gave it to Gabriel,
and quickly veiled herself.

"Now forward," admonished Mr. Hummel, "out of both doors. I go first.
Good bye, Mrs. Werner," he called out, through the open door; "I hope
you will rest well."

He stepped heavily down the stairs, the lackey was standing on the last
step.

"Come here, young man," shouted Mr. Hummel, "I wish to have you stuffed
after your death, and placed before the council house as a model for
later generations of the love of truth. When I return you may depend
upon it I shall again give myself the pleasure of expressing my high
opinion of you; then I will reveal to the Professor the consummate
meanness of your character. I have a great mind to make your
worthlessness known in the daily paper in order that you may become a
scare-crow to the world."

The servant listened with downcast eyes, and bowed mockingly.

"Good-night, courtling," said Mr. Hummel, going out and closing the
door behind him.

Mr. Hummel walked with measured tread from the house, turning to the
left side where a path entered a thicket; there he concealed himself.
The rain poured, and the wind roared in the tops of the trees. Mr.
Hummel looked cautiously about him when he entered the darkness of the
spot where Gabriel and Prince Victor had once spoken to one another of
the ghosts of the castle. There was a slight stir in the thicket, a
tall figure approached him and seized his arm.

"Good," said Mr. Hummel, in a low tone; "go back quickly, Gabriel, and
expect me in time. But we must seek out dark paths and avoid the
lights; you must conceal your face under your veil when we come into
the open."

Ilse took the arm of her landlord and walked along, covered by the
great umbrella which Mr. Hummel held over her.

Behind the fugitives the tower clock struck ten, when the outline of
the inn outside the gate was seen against the darkened heaven.

"We must not be too early nor too late," said Mr. Hummel, restraining
the steps of his eager companion. At the same moment a carriage came
slowly towards them out of the darkness. Ilse's arm trembled. "Be
calm," begged Mr. Hummel; "see whether that is your friend."

"I recognize the horses," whispered Ilse, breathless. Mr. Hummel
approached the coachman's covered seat, and asked, as a password, "From
Toad?"

"Ville," answered a firm voice. The Crown Inspector sprang down to
Ilse; there was a little movement in the carriage, the corner of the
leather curtain was lifted, and a small hand was put out. Hummel seized
and shook it. "An agreeable addition," he said. Without speaking a
word, the Crown Inspector unbuttoned the leather curtain. "My dear
friend," cried a trembling female voice from within. Ilse turned to Mr.
Hummel; "not a word," he said; "a pleasant journey to you." Ilse was
pushed in; Mrs. Rollmaus seized hold of her arm, and held it firmly;
and while the Crown Inspector was again buttoning the curtain, Mr.
Hummel greeted him. "It gives me great pleasure," he said, "but for an
exchange of cards this is not a favorable opportunity. Besides which,
our classes, according to natural history, are not the same. But
punctuality at the right time and goodwill were mutual." The Crown
Inspector jumped upon the coachman's box and seized the reins. He
turned the carriage, Mr. Hummel gave a farewell tap upon the wet
leather curtain, the horses trotted off quietly, and the carriage
passed into the darkness.

Hummel looked after it till the heavy rain concealed it from his view,
cast one more searching glance down the now empty road, and hastened
back to the city. He went to the Pavilion through the most remote part
of the grounds; at the spot where Gabriel had put the lady under his
charge, he dived into the deep shade of the trees, and made his way
cautiously through the wet bushes to the back of the house. He felt
along the wall. "Stop on the threshold," whispered Gabriel; "I will
take off your boots."

"Cannot I be spared this court toilet?" grumbled Hummel. "Stocking-feet
are contrary to my nature."

"All will have been in vain if you are heard on the staircase."

Hummel slipped up the stairs behind Gabriel into the dark room. "Here
are Mrs. Werner's rooms. You must move backwards and forwards in the
dark, and sometimes move the chairs, till I call you. There is now
another spy, they are talking together below. I fear they suspect that
we have something on hand. They look at me askance. The lackey every
day carries the lamps from the sitting-room, and nothing must be
altered; it would create suspicion if he did not hear some one moving
about in the next room. When all is quiet, then the lackey leaves the
house, and we can speak to one another."

"It is against my conscience, Gabriel," murmured Hummel, "to remain in
a strange house without the permission of the owner or lodger."

"Quiet," warned Gabriel, anxiously; "I hear the man on the stairs; close
the door behind me."

Mr. Hummel stood alone in the dark. He placed his boots near the
arm-chair, walked around them, and sometimes gave them a push. "Very
gently always," he thought, "for they are the movements of a
Professor's wife. The demands which now-a-days are made on a
householder exceed all imagination. An elopement from the house of a
stranger, and acting the part of a lady in the darkness of night." The
steps of men were heard outside, and he again pushed his boots.
"Darkness in a strange house is by no means desirable," he continued,
to himself. "I have always had a hatred of a dark room since I once
fell down into a cellar; this gloom is only good for cats and rogues.
But the most lamentable thing for a citizen is, that his boots should
be withheld from him." He heard a light tread in the next room, and
again moved the chair.

At last all became quiet in the house. Mr. Hummel threw himself back in
the chair, and looked wearily around the strange room. A pale ray of
light fell from without through a crevice of the curtains, and the
tassel of the curtain and the gilded top of a chair glimmered in the
darkness. Now at last Mr. Hummel might put on his boots, and then for a
time he occupied himself with severe comments upon the world. His usual
hour for rest had meanwhile come, and he was tired from his journey; he
sank gradually into a dreamy state, and his last distinct thought was,
"there must be no snoring in this princely darkness." With this
intention he closed his eyes, and said farewell to the cares of the
world.

In his sleep it appeared to him as if he heard a slight noise; he
opened his eyes and looked about the room. He saw indistinctly that the
wall looked different from what it had done. The large mirror that
before stood there, seemed to have vanished, and it appeared to him as
if a veiled figure stood in its place and moved. He was a courageous
man, but his limbs now trembled with terror. He barricaded himself
behind a chair. "Is this a magic lantern?" he began, with stammering
voice; "if so, I beg you not to disturb yourself; I admire your skill,
but have not my purse with me. But if you are a man, I should like a
more distinct knowledge of the fact. I call upon you to show yourself
in substance. I have the honor of introducing myself to you in this
scanty light. Hat-manufacturer, Henry Hummel; my papers are correct--a
passport to Paris." He put his hand into his breast pocket. "As a
respectable citizen is bound to defend himself in these dangerous
times, it has been inserted in my passport, _avec un pistolet_. I beg
you kindly to bear this in mind." He took out a pocket pistol and held
it before him. He again looked at the spot; nothing was to be seen; the
mirror stood as before. He rubbed his eyes. "Stupid stuff," he said;
"it was, after all, only a sleepy fancy."

The door of the house was closed outside. For a while Mr. Hummel stood
looking round suspiciously, and perspiration rose on his brow. At last
he heard Gabriel's knock at the door; he opened it, took the light
quickly from his hand, and approached the mirror so as to throw the
light upon the frame and wall.

"It seems to stand firm as iron," he said to himself; "it was only a
deception."

But he hastily seized his hat, and took the servant out of the room.

"I have had enough for to-day," he muttered; "I wish to get out of this
house as quickly as possible. I do not like to have you remain here
alone, Gabriel. Early to-morrow I will call for you; I have business
for the whole day in the city. Endeavor to sleep; in our beds we shall
both think of this intrigue and of her who is still seeking a secure
roof for protection from night-storms and spirits."

Ilse traveled through the night; the rain poured in torrents around
her, the storm howled through the trees, and the water splashed high
from the ruts about the horses and carriage. It was only between the
figures of the men on the front seat that she caught glimpses of the
midnight sky, which hung heavy and dark above the fugitives. Sometimes
a glimmer of light twinkled from the window of a house, and then again
there was nothing but rain, storm, and black night. She maintained a
terrified silence during the ghostly journey, Mrs. Rollmaus still
clasping her hand. Ilse was driving into the world, a storm-lashed
world, poor in light and rich in tears. There was uncertainty and
fearful anxiety everywhere, whether she thought of the loved one whom
she left behind her in the hands of the persecutor, or saw before her
the troubled countenance of her father, and the fields of the estate
where the young man dwelt whose neighborhood now threatened her with
new trouble; but she sat erect.

"When he returns to the door over which the dark angel hovers, he will
ask in vain for his wife. But I have done what I had to do: may the
sovereign Lord of life watch over me."

There was the sound of a horse's hoofs behind the carriage; it
approached nearer. Where the private road to the estate branched off
from the highway, a cavalier galloped up on a foaming horse; he spoke
to some one on the coachman's seat, the carriage and rider rushed
forward side by side for a few moments, then the rider reined in his
horse. The Crown Inspector threw a branch of a tree into the carriage.

"The rider has brought this for Lady Ilse; it is from the tree under
her window, and the reckoning is paid."




                           _CHAPTER XXXVII_.

                         THE LORD HIGH STEWARD.


At the same hour in which Ilse was listening to the comforting words of
her landlord, the carriage of the Lord High Steward was driving to the
tower castle of the Princess. The Princess received the announcement
with astonishment, and flew down to her reception-room. The Professor
caused the chest with its contents to be taken to his room, and was in
the act of bending over the manuscript, when the High Marshal entered
below to deliver himself of his commission. Meanwhile the Princess
awaited the old gentleman.

The Lord High Steward had been appointed to the honorable office of
attendance upon the Princess: it was a considerate way of removing him
from the person of the Sovereign. At the same hour every morning his
carriage was to be seen standing before the wing of the castle which
was occupied by the Princess. His personal relations to the young
Princess appeared cool; in Court society he was treated by her with
just as much distinction as was needful, and petitioners learnt
sometimes that their requests were imparted to him. He was esteemed by
the citizens on account of his benevolence, and was the only one of the
lords of the Court concerning whom one never heard an unfavorable
opinion. He dwelt in an old-fashioned house surrounded by gardens, was
unmarried, rich, without relations, and lived quietly by himself. He
was, it was supposed, without influence; he was not in favor, and was
therefore treated by the young cavaliers with chivalrous condescension.
He was, notwithstanding all this, indispensable to the Sovereign and
the Court. He was the great dignitary who was necessary for all
ceremonious affairs; he was counsellor in all family matters; he was
ambassador and escort in all transactions with foreign powers. He was
well known at most of the courts of Europe, had acquaintances in the
great diplomatic bodies, and enjoyed the special favor of various
rulers whose good will was of importance to the Sovereign; and as in
our courts the reputation that one enjoys at foreign capitals is the
standard of the judgment of the palace, the correspondence which he
carried on with political leaders in foreign countries, and the
abundance of broad ribbons of which he had the choice, gave him with
the Sovereign himself an authority which was at the same time
burdensome and valuable; he was the secret counsellor for the Court and
the last resource in difficult questions.

The servant opened the door of the Princess's room with a profound bow
to the old gentleman. Indifferent questions and answers were exchanged,
the Princess entered the adjoining room and intimated to her faithful
lady-in-waiting by a sign that she was to keep watch in front. When the
conversation was secure from the ear of any listener, the demeanor of
the Princess altered, she hastened up to the old gentleman, seized him
by the hand, and looked inquiringly at his earnest countenance:

"Has anything happened? No trifle could have caused you to take the
trouble of coming into this wilderness. What have you to say to your
little daughter,--is it praise or blame?"

"I am but fulfilling my duty," replied the old lord, "if I make my
appearance in order to take your Highness's commands, and to ascertain
whether the residence of my gracious Princess is suitably arranged."

"Your Excellency has come to complain," exclaimed the Princess, drawing
back, "for you have not one kind word for your little woman."

The High Steward bowed his white head in apology:

"If I appear more serious than usual to your Highness, it is perhaps
only the fancies of an old man which have intruded themselves at an
unseasonable time. I beg permission to relieve myself of them by
discussing them with your Highness. The health of the Sovereign is a
cause of anxiety to us all: it reminds us of the transitory nature of
life. Even the good humor of Prince Victor does not succeed in
dissipating my troubled thoughts."

"How does my cousin?" asked the Princess.

"He overcomes the difficulties of being a Prince in a wonderful way,"
replied the High Steward; "but he is sound to the core; he knows very
well how to manage serious things cleverly. I rejoice," added the
courtier, "that my gracious Princess feels warmly towards a cousin who
is faithfully devoted to her Highness."

"He has always been true and kind to me," said the Princess,
indifferently. "But now you have punished me severely enough. What you
have to say to me confidentially must not be carried on in this way."

She took a chair, and pushed it into the middle of the room.

"Here, sit down, my worthy lord, and allow me to hold the hand of my
friend when he tells me what makes him anxious on my account."

She fetched herself a low tabouret, held the right hand of the old lord
between hers, looking earnestly into his eyes.

"Your Highness knows the way of giving me courage to make bold
requests," said the courtier, laughing.

"That is more to the purpose," said the Princess, relieved; "I now hear
the voice and hold the hand of him in whom I most love to trust."

"But I wish for your Highness a nearer and stronger support than
myself," began the old lord, earnestly.

The Princess started.

"So it was that which occasioned your Excellency's journey?" she
exclaimed, with agitation.

"That was the anxiety which occupied me. It is nothing--nothing more
than an idea," said the High Steward, inclining his head.

"And is that to tranquilize me more?" asked the Princess. "What has
hitherto given me the power to live but your Excellency's ideas?"

"When your Highness, while still in widow's weeds, was called home, the
wish of the Sovereign, making it a duty to attend upon you, was welcome
to me; because I thereby obtained the right of carrying on this
conversation with your Highness."

He motioned with his hand to the seat, and the Princess again hastened
to place herself by his side.

"Now when I see your Highness before me in the bright bloom of youth,
richly gifted and fitted to confer the greatest happiness on others and
to partake of it yourself, I cannot forbear thinking that it is wrong
for you to be debarred from the pleasures of home."

"I have enjoyed this happiness and have lost it," exclaimed the
Princess. "Now I have accustomed myself to the thought of renouncing
much. I seek for myself a compensation which even you will not consider
unworthy."

"There is a difference between us of more than fifty years. A mode of
life, proper for me, an unimportant man, may not be permitted the
daughter of a princely house. I beg the permission of my beloved
Princess," he continued, with a gentle voice, "to draw aside to-day the
curtain which has covered a dark image of your early youth. You were
witness of the scene which separated the Sovereign from your
illustrious mother."

"It is a dark recollection," whispered the Princess, looking up
anxiously at the old lord; "my mother was reproaching the
Sovereign,--it was something concerning the fateful Pavilion. The
Sovereign got into a state of excitement that was fearful. I, then but
a little girl, ran up and embraced the knees of my mother; he dragged
me off, and--" the Princess covered her eyes. The old lord made a
motion to stop her, and continued:

"The after-effect of the scene was ruinous to the life of a noble
woman, and also to that of yourself. Then for the first time the
diseased irritability which has since darkened the Sovereign's spirit
displayed itself; from that day the Sovereign sees in you the living
witness of his guilt and his disease. He has for years endeavored to
wipe away from you that impression by kindness and attentions, but he
has never believed himself to be successful. Shame, suspicion, and fear
have continually ruined his relations with you. He will not let you go
away from him, because he fears that in your confidence to another man
you might betray what he would fain conceal from himself. He
unwillingly gave in to the first marriage, and he will oppose a second,
for he does not wish to see your Highness married again. But in the
hours when dark clouds lie over his extraordinary spirit, he rejoices
in the thought that your Highness might lose the right of secretly
reproaching him. The thought that he did an injury to the princely
dignity of his wife gnaws within him, and he is now occupied with the
idea that your Highness might under certain circumstances forget your
position as princess."

"He hopes in vain," exclaimed the Princess, excitedly. "Never will I
allow myself to be degraded by an unworthy passion; it has not been
without effect that I have been the child of your cares."

"What is unworthy of a princess?" asked the High Steward, reflectively.
"That your Highness would keep yourself free from the little passions
which are excited in the quadrille of a masked ball there can be no
doubt. But intellectual pastime with subjects of great interest might
also disturb the life of a woman. Easily does the most refined
intellectual enjoyment pass into extravagance. More than once has the
greatest danger of a woman been when under powerful external
excitement, she has felt herself to be higher, freer, nobler than her
wont. It is difficult to listen to entrancing music and to preserve
oneself from a warm interest in the artist who has produced it for us."

The Princess looked down.

"Supposing the case," continued the High Steward, "in which a diseased
man, in bitter humor, should meditate and work for such an object, the
sound person should guard himself from doing his will."

"But they should also not allow themselves to be disturbed in what they
consider for the honor and advantage of their life?" cried the
Princess, looking up at the old man.

"Certainly not," replied the latter, "if such benefits are in fact to
be gained by the playful devotion of a woman to art or learning. It
would be difficult for a princess to find satisfaction in this way. No
one blames a woman of the people when she makes a great talent the
vocation of her life; she may satisfy herself as singer or painter and
please others, and the whole world will smile upon her. But if my
gracious Princess should employ her rich musical talent in giving a
public concert, why would men shrug their shoulders at it? Not because
your Highness's talent is less than that of another artist, but because
one expects other objects in your life; the nation forms very distinct
ideal demands of its princes. If, unfortunately, the ruling princes of
our time do not find it easy to answer to this ideal, yet to the ladies
of these illustrious families the serious tendency of the present day
makes this more possible than in my youth. A princess of our people
ought to be the noble model of a good housewife,--nothing more and
nothing else: true and right-minded, firmly attached to her husband,
careful in her daily duties, warm hearted to the needy, kind and
sympathizing to all who have the privilege of approaching her. If she
has intellect, she must beware of wishing to shine; if she has a talent
for business, she must guard herself from becoming an _intrigante_.
Even the great social talent of virtuosoship she must exercise with the
greatest discretion. A well-weighed balance of female excellence is the
best ornament of a princess; her highest honor, that she is better and
more lovable than others, without parading it, with goodness and
capacity in everything, and with no pretensions of any kind. For she
stands too high to seek conquest and acquisition for herself."

The Princess sat near the speaker, her head supported on her arm,
looking sorrowfully before her.

"My beloved Princess does not hear me speak in this way for the first
time," continued the Lord High Steward. "I have often felt anxious
about the dangers which a high-flown spirit and active fancy prepare
for you, the cradle gift of an envious fairy, who has made your
Highness too brilliant and attractive. It is owing to these brilliant
gifts that you have not the same aristocratic nature as your
illustrious brother, the Hereditary Prince. There is too lively a
desire in you to make yourself appreciated, and to influence others.
One can leave your brother with full confidence to his own good nature.
Every attempt to persuade the soul of the much-tormented child has come
to naught. But you, that delicate artistic work of nature which now
gazes at me with those open eyes, I have endeavored constantly to guard
from an over-refined coquetry of sentiment. I am now the severe
admonisher to high duties, because I anticipate the dangers which this
love of conquest in your soul will bring upon yourself and others."

"I hear a severe reproof in loving words," replied the Princess, with
composure. "I should marry again in order to become distinguished."

"My dear Highness, I wish that you may obtain this great aim as the
wife of a husband who is not unworthy of your devotion. Only in this
way can a princess expect true happiness. Even this happiness cannot be
gained without self-denial, I know it; it is difficult to every one to
control themselves. To those who are born in the purple this virtue is
ten times more difficult than to others. Forgive me," he continued, "I
have become talkative, as often happens to us old people at Court."

"You have not said too much, my friend, nor too little," said the
Princess, much moved. "I have always cherished the hope to live on
quietly for myself, surrounded by men who would teach me the highest
things that it is possible for a woman to acquire. On this path also I
find tender duties, noble bonds which unite me with the best, and such
a life also would not be unworthy of a princess; more than one have, in
former times, chosen this lot, and posterity respects them."

"Your Highness does not mean Queen Christina of Sweden," replied the
High Steward. "But to others also this lot has seldom been a blessing.
Your Highness must remember that when a princess surrounds herself with
wise men, she means always one man who is to her the wisest."

The Princess was silent, and looked down.

"We have now long discussed the possible position of a princess," began
the old gentleman; "let us now consider the fate of the men who would
be united by tender bonds to the life of an illustrious lady. Granted
that she should succeed in finding a friend, who, without unseemly
pretensions, would attach himself with self-denial and real devotion to
the active and varied life of a princess. He must sacrifice much and
forego much; the right of the husband is that the wife should devote
herself to him, but in this case a man must fetter the powers,--nay,
even the passions of his nature,--for a woman who would not belong to
him, whom he could only cautiously approach at certain hours as a
friend unto friend; who would consider him at first, to a certain
extent, as a valuable possession and a beautiful ornament, but finally,
under the best circumstances, as a useful bit of furniture. The
greatest sufferer in such a position would be the artist or scholar. I
have always felt compassion for the walking dictionaries of a princely
household. Even men of great talent then resemble the philosophers of
ancient Rome, who, with the long beard and the mantle of their schools,
pass through the streets in the train of some distinguished lady."

The Princess rose, and turned away.

"Better, undoubtedly, is the situation of the man," concluded the High
Steward, "whose personality allows him to guide, by silent work, the
life-current of his high-born friend. Yet even he must not only himself
lose much of what is most delightful in life, but, even with the purest
intentions, he will not always be able to give pleasure to his
princess. He who would be more than a faithful servant diminishes the
security of his princely mistress. Should such chivalrous devotion be
offered, a noble woman should hesitate to accept it, but to endeavor to
attract it does not become a princess."

Tears rushed to the eyes of the Princess, and she turned quickly to the
old man.

"I know such a life," she exclaimed; "one that has been passed in
unceasing self-denial--a blessing to three ladies of our family. O my
father, I know well what you have been to us; have patience with your
poor ward. I struggle against your words; it is a hard task for me to
listen to you, and yet I know that you are the only secure support that
I have ever had in this life. Your admonitions alone have preserved me
from destruction."

Again she seized his hand, and her head sank on his shoulder.

"I loved your grandmother," replied the old man, with trembling voice;
"it was at a time when such things were lightly thought of. It was a
pure connection; I lived for her; I made daily self-sacrifice for her.
She was unhappy, for she was the wife of another, and her holiest
duties were made difficult to her by my life. I guarded your mother
like an anxious servant, but I could not prevent her from being unhappy
and dying with the feeling of her misery. And now I hold the third
generation to my heart, and before I am called away I would like to
impress my life and the sufferings of your mother as a lesson on you. I
have never been so anxious about you as I am now. If my dear child has
ever felt the heart of a fatherly friend in my words, she should not
lightly esteem my counsel now, whatever brilliant dreams it may
dispel."

"I will think of your words," exclaimed the Princess. "I will endeavor
to resign my wishes; but, father, my kind father, it will be very hard
for me."

The old gentleman collected himself, and interrupted her.

"It is enough," he said, with the composure that befitted his office;
"your Highness has shown me great consideration to-day. There are
others who also desire their share of your Highness's favor."

There was a knock at the door. The waiting-woman entered.

"The servant announces that Lady Gotlinde and the gentlemen are waiting
in the tea-room."

"I have still some business with his Excellency," answered the
Princess, gently. "I must beg Gotlinde to take my place in entertaining
our guest."





Evening had descended upon the castle-tower, the bats flew from their
hiding-places in the vacant room; they whirled about in circles,
astonished that they had awoke in an empty habitation. The owls flew
into the crevices of the tower, and searched with their round eyes
after the old arm-chairs, on which they had formerly waited for the
stupid mice; and the death-watch, which the scholar had carried down
from the lonely room, gnawed and ticked on the staircase and in the
rooms of the castle among living men. The rain beat against the walls,
and the stormy wind howled round the tower. The wife of the scholar was
driving through the night, flying like a hunted hare; but he was pacing
up and down his room, dreamily forming from the discovered leaves the
whole lost manuscript. And again he wondered within himself that it
looked quite different from what he had imagined it for years.

The wind also howled about the princely castle at the capital, and
large drops of rain beat against the window; there, also, the powers of
nature raged and demanded entrance into the firm fortress of man. The
darkness of the night seemed to pervade the halls and the decorated
rooms like gloomy smoke; only the lamps in the pleasure-grounds threw
their pale light through the window, and made the desolate look of the
room still more dreary. The melancholy tones of the castle clock
sounded through the house, announcing that the first hour of the new
day was come. Then again silence, desolate silence, everywhere; only a
pale glimmer from the distance on the covers of the chandeliers and the
golden ornaments of the walls. Sometimes there was a crackling in the
parquet of the floor, and a draught of wind blew through an open pane
upon the curtains, which hung black round the window like funeral
drapery. Here and there fell a scanty ray of light on the wall, where
hung the portraits of the ancestors of the princely house in the dress
of their time. Many generations had dwelt in these rooms; stately men
and beautiful women had danced here. Wine had been poured out in golden
goblets; gracious words, festive speeches, and the soft murmur of love,
had been heard here; the splendor of every former age had been outdone
by the richer adornment of later ones. Now everything had vanished and
withered; the darkness of night and of death hung over the bright
colors. All those who had once moved about and rejoiced in the
brilliant throng, had passed away into the depths. Nothing now remained
of these hours but a dreary void and dismal stillness, and one single
figure which glided about on the smooth floor, noiseless like a ghost.
It was the lord of this castle. His head bent forward as in a dream, he
passed along by the pictures of his ancestors.

"The timid doe has escaped," he whispered; "the panther made too short
a spring: in rage and shame he now creeps back to his den. The powerful
beast could not conceal his claws. The chase is over; it is time to set
at rest the beatings of this breast. It was only a woman--a small,
unknown human life. But the jade Fancy had bound my senses to her body;
to her alone belonged whatever remained in me of warmth and devotion to
human kind."

He stopped before a picture, on which fell the gloomy light of an
expiring lamp.

"You, my steel-clad ancestor, know what the feeling is of him who flies
from home and court, and has to give up to his enemy what is dear to
him. When you fled from the castle of your fathers, a homeless
fugitive, pursued by a pack of foreign mercenaries, there was misery in
your heart, and you cast back a wild curse behind you. Still poorer
does your descendant feel, who now glides fleeting through the
inheritance that you have left him. To you remained hope in your hard
heart; but I to-day have lost all that is worth the effort of life. She
has escaped my guards. Where to? To her father's house on the rock!
Cursed be the hour when I, deceived by her words, sent the boy among
those mountains."

He dragged himself onward.

"The third station on the road to the end," he meditated, "is idle and
empty play, and puerile tricks. So said the learned pedant. It
coincides; I am transformed into a childish caricature of my nature.
Miserable was the texture of the net which I drew around her; a firm
will could have broken it in a moment. He was right; the game was
childish: by a stroke of a quill I wished to hold him fast, and, before
the art of the Magister had accomplished its purpose, I disturbed the
success of the scheme by the trembling haste of my passion. When the
news comes to him that his wife has fled, he also will pack up his
books, and mock me at a safe distance. Bad player, who approached the
gaming-table with a good method, to put piece after piece on the green
cloth, and who in his madness flung down his purse and lost all in one
throw. Curses upon him and me! He must not escape from me; he must not
see her. Yet, what use is there in keeping him, unless I encase his
limbs in iron, or conceal his body below, where we shall all be
concealed when others obtain the power of doing what they will with us?
You lie. Professor, when you compare me to your old Emperors. I am
alarmed at the thought of things which they did laughing, and my brain
refuses to think of what was once commanded by a short gesture of the
hand. A ball and dice for two," he continued; "that is a merry game,
invented by men of my sort; as it turns up, one falls and the other
escapes. We will throw the dice. Professor, to see which of us shall do
his opponent the last service; and I will greet you, dreamer, if I am
the fortunate one that is carried to rest. Does thy wit, philosopher,
extend far enough to see thy fate, as happened to that old astrologer,
of whom thy Tiberius inquired about his own future? Let us try how wise
you are."

He again stood still, and looked restlessly on the dark pictures.

"You shake your heads, you silent figures; many of you have done injury
to others; but you are all honorably interred, with mourning marshals
and funeral horses. Songs have been sung in your honor, and learned men
have framed Latin elegies, and sighed that the golden shower has ceased
that fell upon them from your hands. There stands one of you," he
exclaimed, gazing with fixed eyes on a corner; "there hovers the spirit
of woe, the dark shadow that passes through this house when misfortune
approaches it--guilt and atonement It passes along bodiless to frighten
fools, an apparition of my diseased mind. I see it raise its hand--it
scares me. I am terrified at the images of my own brain. Away!" he
called out, aloud, "away! I am the lord of this house."

He ran through the room and stumbled; the black shadow hastened behind
him. The Sovereign fell upon the floor. He cried aloud for help through
the desolate space. A valet hastened from the anteroom. He found his
master lying on the ground.

"I heard a shrill cry," said the Sovereign, raising himself up; "who
was it that screamed above my head?"

The servant replied, trembling:

"I know not who it was. I heard the cry, and hastened hither."

"It was myself, I suppose," the master returned, in a faltering tone;
"my weakness overcame me."





In the early morning the Professor called to the Castellan, and rushed
up the staircase of the tower. He went about the room, pushing boards
and planks in all directions; he found many forgotten chests, but not
that which he sought. He made the Castellan open each of the adjoining
rooms; went through garrets and cellars; he examined the forester, who
lived in a house near by, but the latter could give him no information.
When the Scholar again entered his room, he laid his head on his hands;
prolonged disappointment and the consciousness of his impotence
overmastered him. But he chid and restrained himself.

"I have lost too much of the cool circumspection which Fritz said was
the highest virtue of a collector. I must accustom myself to the
thought of self-resignation, and calmly examine the hopes which still
remain. I must not be ungrateful also for the little I have gained."

He could not sit quietly by the discovered leaves, but paced
thoughtfully up and down. He heard voices in the court-yard; hasty
running in the passages; and at last a lackey announced the arrival of
the Sovereign, and that he wished to see the Professor at breakfast.

The table was spread among blooming bushes on the side of the tower
that faced the rising sun. When the Professor entered under the roof
which protected the place from rain and the rays of the sun, he found
there, besides the household and Marshal, the forest officials and the
Lord High Steward, who thought, with more anxiety than the Professor,
of the sudden arrival of the Sovereign. The old lord approached the
Scholar, and spoke on indifferent subjects.

"How long do you think of remaining here?" he asked, politely.

"I shall request permission to return to the city in an hour; I have
accomplished what I had to do."

It was a long time before the princely party appeared. When the
Sovereign approached them, all present were struck by his ill
appearance: his movements were hurried, his features disturbed, and his
looks passed unsteadily over the company. He turned first to the
forester, who was in attendance, and asked him, harshly:

"How can you tolerate the disagreeable screaming of the daws on the
tower? It was your business to remove them."

"Her Highness the Princess last summer requested that the birds be
left."

"The noise is insupportable to me," said the Sovereign; "bring out the
weapons, and prepare yourself to shoot among them."

As the practice of shooting was one of the regular country pleasures of
the Court, and the Sovereign had, even in the neighborhood of the
castle, frequently used his gun on birds of prey or other unusual
objects, the Court thought less seriously of this commission than did
the Scholar.

The Sovereign turned to the Lord High Steward.

"I am surprised to find your Excellency here," he said; "I did not know
that you too had taken leave of absence for this quiet life."

"My gracious master would have been surprised if I had not done my
duty. It was my intention to have reported to your Highness to-day at
the palace concerning the health of the Princess."

"So it was for that," said the Sovereign. "I had forgotten that my Lord
High Steward is never weary of his office of guardian."

"An office that one has exercised almost half a century in the service
of the illustrious family becomes in fact a habit," replied the High
Steward. "Your Highness has heretofore judged with kind consideration
the zeal of a servant who is anxious to make himself useful."

The Sovereign turned to the Marshal, and asked, in a suppressed voice:

"Will he remain?"

The Marshal replied, distressed:

"I could obtain no promise, nor even a wish from him."

"I knew it already," replied the Sovereign, hoarsely. He turned to the
Professor, and violently forced himself to assume a friendly demeanor,
as he said: "I have heard from my daughter of your campaign against
broken chairs. I wish to have some talk with you alone about it."

They sat down to table. The Sovereign gazed vacantly before him, and
drank several glasses of wine; the Princess also sat silent, the
conversation flagged, the High Steward alone became talkative. He asked
about a bust of Winkelmann, and spoke of the lively interest which the
nation took in the fate of their intellectual leaders.

"It must be an agreeable feeling," he said, politely, to the Professor,
"to be in a certain measure under the protection of the whole civilized
world. In the majority of cases the private life of our great men of
learning passes away uneventfully, but our people delight in occupying
themselves with the course of life of those who have departed. If happy
accident brings a person into contact with gentlemen of your standing,
he must take care that he does not suffer for all eternity under the
hands of later biographers. I confess," he continued, laughing, "that a
fear on this point has robbed me of many interesting acquaintances."

The Professor answered, quietly:

"The people are conscious that they have by the labor of scholars first
been raised from misery; but with greater experience in political life,
their interest in the promoters of our present culture will assume more
moderate proportions."

"I have told the Sovereign that you have found something here,"
remarked the Princess, across the table.

"There has been a remarkable discovery made in an ancient sepulchre,"
interrupted the High Steward; and he gave a diffuse account of a
funeral urn.

But now the Sovereign himself turned to the Scholar.

"Surely you may hope to find the rest?"

"Unfortunately, I do not know where to search further," replied the
Professor.

"What you have found, then," continued the Sovereign, with
self-control, "is unimportant."

It did not please the Professor that the conversation should again turn
upon the manuscript; he felt annoyed at having to talk about his
Romans.

"It is a few chapters from the sixth book of the Annals," he replied,
with reserve.

"When your Highness was at Pompeii," interposed the High Steward, "the
inscriptions on the walls attracted your attention. In those days a
beautiful treatise upon the subject came into my hands; it is
fascinating to observe the lively people of lower Italy in the
unrestrained expression of their love and their hatred. One feels
oneself transplanted as vividly into the old time by the naive
utterances of the common people, as if one took a newspaper in one's
hand that had been written centuries ago. If any one had told the
citizens of Pompeii that at the end of eighteen centuries it would be
known who they, in accidental ill-humor, had treated with hostility,
they would hardly have believed it. We indeed are more cautious."

"That was the hatred of insignificant people," replied the Sovereign,
absently. "Tacitus knew nothing of that, he only concerned himself
about the scandal of the court. Probably he also held office."

The Princess looked uneasily at the Sovereign.

"Is there anything in the contents of the parchment leaves which would
be interesting to us ladies?" she said, endeavoring to turn the
conversation.

"Nothing new," replied the Scholar. "As I had the honor of telling your
Highness, the same passage was already known to us from an Italian
manuscript: it is about small events in the Roman senate."

"Quarrels of the assembled fathers," interposed the Sovereign,
carelessly. "They were miserable slaves. Is that all?"

"At the end, there is another anecdote of the last years of Tiberius.
The disturbed mind of the prince clung to astrology: he called
astrologers to him to Capri, and caused those to be cast into the sea
whom he suspected of deceit. Even the prudent Trasyllus was taken to
him over the fatal rock path, and he announced the concealed secret of
the Imperial life. Then the Emperor furtively asked of him whether he
knew what would happen to himself that day? The philosopher inquired of
the stars, and called out, trembling: 'My situation is critical; I see
myself in danger of death.' At this passage our fragment breaks off.
The incident may have been repeated--the same anecdote attaches to more
than one princely life."

A couple of daws flew round the battlements of the tower, they cawed
and screamed, and told one another that underneath there stood a
sportsman who was seeking his game. The Sovereign suddenly arose.

"There must be an end to the screaming of these birds."

He beckoned to the forester. The man approached, and placed a weapon in
his hands. The Sovereign placed the but-end on the ground and turned to
the Professor, while the Princess, disquieted by the last words of the
Scholar, stood aside with her suite, struggling for composure.

"The Princess has told me," began the Sovereign, "that you have some
hesitation as to fulfilling a wish that we have all much at heart. I
hope that the hindrances may not be insurmountable."

"It becomes me," replied the Professor, delighted by the kind words of
the Sovereign, "to weigh calmly so honorable a proposal. But I have
other things to take into account besides the cause of learning."

"What others?" asked the Sovereign.

"The wish of a loved wife," said the Professor. A sudden convulsion
shook the limbs of the Sovereign.

"And how do you consider your relations to me?" asked the Sovereign, in
a hoarse voice.

The Scholar looked at the man, from whose eyes darted a look of deadly
hatred and malignity. He saw the muzzle of the weapon directed toward
his breast, and the raised foot of the Sovereign feeling for the
trigger. The flash of lightning impended, there was no room for flight,
no time for movement; the thought of the last moment passed through his
mind. He saw before him the distorted countenance of the Emperor
Tiberius, and he said, in a low voice:

"I stand on the verge of death."

"The Sovereign is sinking," called out the High Steward.

He threw himself with outstretched arms towards his master, and seized
his hands. The Sovereign tottered, the weapon fell to the ground, he
himself was received in the arms of those who hastened toward him. The
Princess flew up to them, and looked inquiringly into the pale face of
the Scholar.

"The Sovereign has been attacked by a sudden dizziness," answered the
latter calmly.

"My master is losing consciousness," cried the High Steward. "How are
you, Mr. Werner?"

The hands of the old man trembled. The Sovereign lay senseless in the
arms of his attendants, and was carried to the castle.

The by-standers expressed with much concern their terror at the event
and the Princess hastened after the stricken Sovereign. Before the High
Steward followed, he said to the Professor, whilst giving him a
searching look:

"It is not the first time that the Sovereign has been taken ill in such
a manner. Was that a surprise to you? You did not know that the
Sovereign was suffering in this way?"

"I know it to-day," replied the Scholar, coldly.

A few minutes afterwards the High Steward entered the room of the
Professor, who was preparing for his journey.

"I come to beg your indulgence," began the High Steward; "for I must
trouble you with an acknowledgment which is painful to me. You have
talked much lately in my presence to the Sovereign of the Caesarian
madness of the Roman emperors. What you then said was very instructive
to me."

"I now find," replied the Professor, gloomily, "that the place was ill
chosen."

"More than you assume," replied the courtier, drily. "To me it was
peculiarly instructive, but not so much what you said as that you said
it. I should not have thought it possible that any one would so acutely
reason upon the past, and so completely give up all judgment of that
which was around him. You then told a sick man the story of his own
disease."

"I have just discovered that," replied the Scholar.

"The Sovereign is diseased in mind. It is now necessary that you should
know it. I have a second confession to make to you. I discover that I
have misjudged you."

"I shall be glad if your present opinion is more favorable to me than
the former one," replied the Professor, with dignity.

"In your point of view, yes," continued the High Steward. "I have for a
long time regarded you in your relations here as a cautious man, who
was cleverly following out his objects. I have learnt that you are not
that, but something different."

"An honorable man, your Excellency," replied the Professor.

"We have nothing to reproach one another with," rejoined the courtier,
bowing; "as you misjudged the Sovereign, so did I misunderstand you;
but my mistake is the greater, for I am an older man, and I have not
the excuse of a specially intellectual mind, which sometimes makes it
difficult for a man to judge correctly of other natures. But we have
both one excuse. It is seldom easy to form a just estimate of those who
have grown up in other circles, and show a different combination of
virtues and weaknesses. We are all liable to be confused in our
judgment, according as our self-respect is satisfied or wounded. Where
genial tendencies find no response, displeasure erects a barrier; and
where powerful tones echo sympathetically to one's breast, there is the
danger of too rapid intimacy. Thus I have put too low a value on your
honorable openness and candor. I now pay the penalty, for I have to
confide to you a secret that I have no doubt you will accept with
proper regard."

"I assume that your Excellency does not make this communication to me
without a specific cause."

"There is a plan for keeping you in our city," interposed the High
Steward.

"Proposals of this nature have been made to me since yesterday."

The High Steward continued: "It is not necessary for me to be anxious
about your answer. You have learnt the meaning which is concealed under
a veil of civility. Do you know why the Sovereign made you the
proposal?"

"No; up to this morning I have not doubted that a certain personal
feeling of kindness, and the view that I might be useful here, were the
motives."

"You are mistaken," replied the High Steward. "It is not a wish to keep
you here merely for passing private interests. The real motive is, as
appears to me, the freak of a diseased mind, which sees in you an
opponent, and fears a sharp-sightedness that will remorselessly
disclose to the world a diseased spirit. You were to be fettered here;
you were to be cajoled, watched, and persecuted. You are an object of
interest, of fear, and of aversion."

The Professor rose.

"What I have experienced and what you tell me compel me to leave this
place instantly."

"I do not wish," said the High Steward, "that you shall depart from
here with displeasure, if this can be avoided; both on your own account
and for the sake of many of us."

The Professor went to the table, on which lay the parchment leaves.

"I beg your indulgence if I do not regain my composure immediately. The
situation in which we are placed is like that of a distant century; it
stands in fearful contrast to the cheerful security with which we are
wont to consider our own lives and the souls of our contemporaries."

"Cheerful security?" asked the High Steward, sorrowfully. "In courts,
at least, you must not seek this, nor under any circumstances in which
the individual passes out of private life. Cheerful security! I must
ask whether we have it in this century? It would be difficult to find a
time in which there is so much that is insecure; in which the old is so
decayed, and the new so weak."

The Professor raised his head, astonished at the bitter complaints of
the old man. The High Steward continued, indignantly:

"I hear everywhere of the hopes that one has in the nation, and I see
an abundance of young student-like confidence. There is not much mature
power, and I do not blame a sanguine man if he places his hopes on it;
nay, I even admit that this youthful spirit is in fact the best hope
that we have. But I am an old man; I cannot among these novelties find
anything that commands my respect, where they affect the interests of
private life. I feel the decay of vital power in the air which
surrounds me. My youth belonged to a time when the best culture of the
nation was to be found at Court. My own ancestors have for six
centuries taken an eager part in the follies and crimes, and also in
the pride, of their times; and I have grown to be a man in the
conception that princes and nobles were the born leaders of the nation.
I see with sorrow that they have for long, perhaps for ever, lost this
lead. Much of what you lately said exactly coincides with the last
decades that I have passed through. It has been a sorrowful time; the
hollow weakness in the life of the people has in a great measure
deteriorated the higher classes. But there has not been altogether a
deficiency of honorable and powerful men. What time has been entirely
without them? But what should be the noblest blossom of the national
strength is just what in this empty shallow time is most deeply
diseased."

The Professor interposed:

"It is a cause for sorrow; but where, perhaps, the individual loses,
the whole gains?"

"Undoubtedly not," replied the courtier; "if only the gain to the whole
was certain. But I see with astonishment that the greatest concerns of
the nation are carried on, on all sides, with school-boyish pettiness.
Much that is valuable is lost; nothing better is gained. The delicacy
of feeling which formerly expressed itself beneficially in all forms of
intercourse, and the discreet management of important affairs, become
rare. If these advantages did not suffice to form the character, as is
perhaps needed in the present, they made life pleasing and beautiful. A
secure feeling of superiority, and a gracious rule over others, was
general at courts and in business; of this we are deprived. Diplomacy
has ceased to be distinguished. One sets bluntly to work; not only
nobleness of feeling, but even the pleasing show of it is wanting; an
uncertain pettiness, a grumbling, irritable, reserved character has
gained the upper hand at courts, and in diplomacy ill-bred frivolity,
without knowledge and without manly will. Our princes rattle about like
accoutred idlers; the old court discipline is lost, and one feels
oneself incessantly on the defensive, and seeks for safety in senseless
attacks. It is impossible not to feel that by these acts one is
irretrievably going downward."

The Professor smiled at the sorrow of the old lord.

"I do not blame you," continued the High Steward, "if you do not feel
the misfortune of this change as deeply as I do. It is only a pity that
it should always be the highest earthly interests which are thus
trifled with."

"But is this misfortune so general?" replied the Professor.

"Some splendid exceptions have not been wanting," said the High
Steward; "some were granted us at a time when we played the greatest
tragedy before the world, as if here and there to preserve a bright
romance. They have scarcely been wanting in a country which possesses
the five qualities which are necessary to form a good court: an upright
sovereign, an amiable princess, a high-minded statesman, some
intellectual court ladies, and a superior spirit among the cavaliers.
But these requisites are seldom found."

"Were they ever frequent?"

"They were the pride of our nation at the time from which my earliest
recollections date," replied the High Steward.

"Just at this time we gained something else of which we may still be
proud," rejoined the Scholar. "There was a short period during which
the Court became the home of the most liberal culture of the time, and
it was only through the rare political circumstances of our nation that
this leadership was possible. Now it has passed into other circles, and
we have exchanged the increased capacity of many for the distinguished
culture of individuals."

"In this also there is a loss," returned the High Steward;
"distinguished men have become rare. I am ready to acknowledge the
advance which the citizen classes have made in the last fifty years.
But the capacity which a people develop in trade and commerce is
seldom united with secure self-respect, nay, seldom also with that
firmly-established position which is necessary to political strength.
Too frequently we find a wavering between discontented insolence and
over-great subserviency; covetousness abounds, and self-sacrifice is
small. Wealth increases everywhere; who can deny that? But not in the
same degree a comprehension of the highest interests of the nation."

"Time will improve," rejoined the Scholar, "and our sons will become
firmer and freer; here too our future belongs to those who work
laboriously."

"Much may be lost," said the High Steward, "before the improvement
which you expect becomes great enough to secure to those who are
struggling onward a salutary and active participation in the affairs of
government. I am too old to nourish myself with hopes, and therefore
cannot adopt your sanguine conception of our situation. I wish for the
good of our nation, in whatever way it may come. I know it has passed
through crises more critical than its present swaying between a
decaying and a rising culture. But I feel that the air in which I live
is growing more sultry; the tense excitement of contrast more
dangerous. When I look back on a long life, I sometimes feel horror at
the moral pestilence that I have contemplated. It was not a time of
gigantic vices like your Imperial era, but it was a time in which,
after short poetic dreams, the weakness of petty souls ruled and
brought distraction. The figures which in this lamentable time have
passed away will appear to posterity, not fearful, but grotesque and
contemptible. You, Professor, live in a new epoch in which a younger
generation awkwardly endeavors to rise. I have no sympathy for the new
style. I have not the courage to hope, for I have no power to promote
the culture of the younger generation."

He had risen. The old man and the young, vigorous man, the diplomat and
the scholar, stood opposite to each other; the one an advocate for the
world which was tending downwards; the other a proclaimer of a teaching
which was unceasingly to renew the old world; secret sorrow lay on the
calm countenance of the old man, and feeling, vigorous feeling, worked
in the animated features of the younger: a high mind and a refined
spirit were visible in the open countenance of both.

"What we had to say to one another," continued the High Steward, "is
said. I have endeavored to make amends for my mistake in regard to you.
May the gossiping openness with which I have exposed myself to your
judgment be some small compensation for my having been so long silent.
It is the best satisfaction that I can give to a man of your sort. As
respects the diseased state of mind of others, which was the subject of
our conversation, there need be no further words between us; both of us
will endeavor to do what is our duty concerning the men that are
entrusted to our care, to preserve them from danger and to guard
ourselves. Mr. Werner, farewell. May the occupation which you have
chosen preserve your joyful confidence in your time and your generation
for as many years as I bear on my head. This highest happiness of man,
I, an insignificant individual, have painfully felt the want of, as did
your great Roman."

"Allow me, your Excellency, to express one request to you," replied the
Scholar, with warm feeling. "Often may the unpractical activity of the
new apostles evoke a bitter smile from you, and the unfinished work
which we pioneers of learning throw off will not always satisfy the
demands which you make upon us; but when you are compelled to blame us,
remember, with forbearance, that our nation can only bear within it the
guaranty of renewing youth so long as it does not lose respect for
intellectual aspiration, and retains its simple honesty, in love and
hate. So long as the nation renews itself, it may inspire its princes
and leaders with new life; for we are not Romans, but staunch and
warm-hearted Germans."

"Nero no longer ventures to burn the apostles of a new doctrine,"
replied the High Steward, with a sad smile. "May I say something kindly
from you to the Sovereign, as far as is compatible with your dignity?"

"I beg you to do so," replied the Professor.

The Professor hastened to take leave of the Princess. She received him
in the presence of her ladies and the Marshal. Few words were
exchanged. Upon expressing the hope of seeing him soon again at the
capital, speech almost forsook her. When he had left the room, she flew
up to her library and looked down on the carriage into which the chest
was being put. She plucked some flowers which the gardener had placed
in her room, and fastened them together with a ribbon.

"His eye looked upon you, and his voice sounded in the narrow halls in
which you are passing your life. It was a short dream! No, not a dream,
a beautiful picture from a new world."

"As the womanly heart submits, in loving devotion, to the stronger mind
of a life-companion, her eye fixed upon his, such is the happiness of
which I have had a presage. Only once has my hand touched his, but I
feel as if I had lain on his heart, invisible, bodiless. No one knows
it, not even himself, I alone felt the happiness. Light, airy bond,
woven of the tenderest threads that ever were drawn from one human soul
to another, thou must be torn and blown away! Only the consciousness
remains that the inclination which drew two strangers together has been
forever a blessing to one of them.

"You, earnest man, go on your path, and I on mine; and if accident
should bring us together, then we shall bow civilly to each other, and
greet one another with courtly speeches. Farewell, my scholar. When I
meet with one of your associates, I shall henceforth know that he
belongs to the silent community, in whose porch I have humbly bowed my
head."

From the tops of the trees on which the princely child was looking down
the birds were singing. The carriage rolled away; she bent down, and
held the nosegay with outstretched hand; then with a powerful swing she
threw the flowers on to the top of a tree; they hung among the leaves;
a little bird flew out, but the next moment he again perched by the
nosegay, and continued his song. But the Princess leaned her head
against the wall of the tower.

The Scholar drove to the city with the chest he had found beside him.
More rapid and stormy than on his coming were the thoughts that flitted
through his soul; he hastened the coachman, and an indefinite anxiety
fixed his looks on the rising towers of the capital. But amidst all, he
ever saw the figure of the High Steward before him, and heard the
sorrowful words of his soft voice.

"Immeasurably great is the difference between the narrow relations of
this Court and the mighty greatness of Imperial Rome; immeasurably
great also the difference between the troubled Court lord and the
gloomy power of a Roman senator. And yet there is something in the
structure of the soul that has this day displayed itself to me which
reminds me of a figure from a time long past; and what he said sounds
in my soul like a feeble tone from the heart of the man whose work I
seek in vain. For just as we endeavor to explain the present from the
past, so do we interpret circumstances and figures of a past time in
the light of the men that live around us. The past unceasingly sends
its spirit into our souls, and we unceasingly adapt the past to conform
to the needs of our hearts."




                           _CHAPTER XXXVIII_.

                          THE MAGISTER'S EXIT.


Professor Raschke was sitting on the floor of his room. The bright
colors of his Turkish dressing-gown were faded; constant perseverance
in scientific service had given it a tinge of pale grey, but it still
continued worthily to cover the limbs of its master. The Professor had
seated himself by the side of his eldest son Marcus, in order to
facilitate the latter's study of the first book of A, B, C. While the
little one, tired of the pictures, was resting, his father made use of
the pause to draw a small copy of Aristotle out of his pocket. He read,
and made remarks with a pencil, not observing that his son Marcus had
long thrown away the picture book, and with the other children danced
round their father.

"Papa, take your legs away; we can't get round them," exclaimed Bertha,
the eldest, from whom, indeed, one might have expected greater
discretion.

Raschke drew in his legs, and as after that he found his seat
uncomfortable, he desired the children to bring him a chair. They
brought the chair, and he supported his back against it.

"We can't get around yet," cried the dancing children.

Raschke looked up. "Then I will sit upon the chair."

That was satisfactory to the children, and the noisy hubbub continued.

"Come here, Bertha," said Raschke; "you may act as my desk." He laid
the book on her head whilst he read and wrote; and the little one stood
as still as a mouse under the book, and scolded the others because they
made a noise.

There was a knock; the Doctor entered.

"Ha, Fritz!" called out the Professor; "I hardly recognized you; I must
try to recall your face. Is it right to set your friends aside in this
way, when a friendly greeting might do you good? Laura has told me what
has happened to your dear father. A heavy loss," he continued,
sorrowfully: "if I am not mistaken, two hundred thousand."

"Just one cipher too much."

"It matters little," replied Raschke, "what the loss is, compared with
the sorrow it occasions. I should have been with you, Fritz, at that
time. I started immediately, but a circumstance interfered with my
intention," he added, embarrassed. "I have long been accustomed to go
to your street in the evening, and--well--I got to the wrong house, and
with difficulty found my way back to the lecture."

"Do not pity me," replied the Doctor; "rejoice with me--I am a happy
man. I have just now found, what I despaired of obtaining, Laura's
heart and the consent of her father."

Raschke clapped the Doctor on the shoulder, and pressed first one hand,
then the other. "The father's!" he exclaimed; "he was the hindrance. I
know something of him, and I know his dog. If I may judge of the man by
his dog," he continued, doubtingly, "he must be a character. Is it not
so, my friend?"

The Doctor laughed. "There has been an old enmity brooding over our
street. My poor soul has been unkindly treated by him, like the Psyche
in the tale of Venus. He vents his anger upon me, and gives me
insoluble tasks. But beneath all his insolence, I perceive that he is
reconciled to my attachment. I anticipate happiness, for I am to-day to
accompany Laura to Bielstein. On my friend's account alone have I
wished to start earlier on this journey. I cannot rid myself of one
anxiety. I am disturbed that the Magister is in the neighborhood of
Werner."

Raschke passed his hand through his hair. "Indeed," he exclaimed.

"I have distinct reasons for this," continued the Doctor. "The dealer
who was said, to have brought the forged parchment strip of Struvelius
to the city was sent to me by the mother of the Magister. I dealt
severely with him, as was natural; but he assured me that he knew
nothing of such a parchment, and never had sold such a sheet to the
Magister. The anger of the man at the false assertion of the Magister
has made me very anxious. It confirms a suspicion that I have expressed
in a letter with respect to the genuineness of another piece of writing
which has been mentioned to me by Werner from the capital. I cannot
help fearing that the Magister himself was the forger, and a terror
comes over me at the thought that he is now exercising his art upon our
friend."

"That is a very serious affair," exclaimed Raschke, pacing up and down,
disquieted. "Werner trusted the Magister implicitly."

The Doctor also paced up and down. "Only think, if his noble confidence
should make him the victim of a deceit. Fancy what a bitter sorrow that
would be to him. He would long struggle sternly and self-tormentingly
with a painful impression, which we should not be able to obliterate
without great effort."

"You are quite right," said Raschke, again passing his hand through his
hair. "It is not in him to be able to overcome moral delinquency
without great excitement. You must warn him at once, and that face to
face."

"Unfortunately I cannot do that for several days; meanwhile, I beg of
you to make Professor Struvelius acquainted with the statement of the
dealer."

The Doctor went away. Raschke forgot Aristotle, and meditated anxiously
on the treachery of the Magister. Whilst so doing, there was a knock,
and Struvelius, with Flaminia, stood at the open door.

Raschke greeted them, called his wife, begged them to sit down, and
quite forgot that he was in his Turkish dressing-gown.

"We come with one wish," began Flaminia, solemnly. "It is with respect
to our colleague Werner. My husband will impart to you what has moved
us both deeply."

Raschke started up from his chair. Struvelius, whose emotion was only
visible in his bristly hair, began: "We were called yesterday to the
police-station. When the brother of Magister Knips fled to America, his
things were taken possession of on the application of petty creditors,
and as the greater portion of his effects were at his mother's house,
they were taken away from there. Amongst them were utensils and
portfolios which evidently did not belong to the fugitive, but to his
brother; one of those portfolios contained tracings after the style of
manuscripts, unfinished attempts to imitate old writings, and written
parchment sheets. The officials had been surprised at these, and
requested me to inspect them. It appeared upon closer observation that
the Magister had long been occupied in acquiring the skill of imitating
the characters of the Middle Ages. And from the fragments I have found
in the portfolio, there can be no doubt that he has other forgeries in
his collection, some of which answer exactly to that parchment strip."

"That is enough, Struvelius," began his wife. "Now let me speak. You
may imagine, dear colleague, that Werner at once occurred to us, and
that we were greatly alarmed lest the husband of our friend should get
into trouble through the deceiver. I asked Struvelius to write
Professor Werner, but he preferred to inform him through you. This
method also appeared most satisfactory to me."

Raschke, without saying a word, took off his dressing-gown, and ran in
his shirt-sleeves about the room, searching in all the corners. At last
he found his hat, which he put on.

"What are you about, Raschke!" exclaimed his wife.

"Why do you ask?" he said, hastily; "there is no time for delay. I beg
your pardon, Mrs. Struvelius," he said observing his sleeves, and again
put on his dressing-gown, but in his excitement he still kept on his
hat, and thus attired, seated himself opposite his friends. Bertha, at
a sign from her mother, gently took his hat off.

"A quick decision is necessary in this case," he repeated.

"There is no reason," continued Struvelius, "for withholding the
property of the Magister from his mother; but, meanwhile, they would
willingly allow you an inspection of the writings."

"That I do not wish," exclaimed Raschke; "it would spoil the day for
me. Your judgment, Struvelius, satisfies me."

There was some further excited interchange of views, and the visitors
left. Again Raschke rushed stormily about, so that the skirts of his
dressing-gown flew over the chairs.

"Dear Aurelia, do not be frightened; I have made up my mind. I shall
set out to-morrow."

Mrs. Raschke clasped her hands together.

"What are you thinking of, Raschke?"

"It is necessary," he said. "I despair of shaking the firm views of
Werner by letter. My duty is to try whether persuasive words and
detailed representations will have greater effect. I must know in what
relation my friend stands to the Magister. From certain intimations of
the Doctor, I fear the worst from the activity of the forger. I have a
short vacation before me, and I cannot employ it better."

"But, Raschke, you wish to travel!" asked his wife, reproachfully. "How
can you engage in such an undertaking?"

"You mistake me, Aurelia; in our city I sometimes do lose my bearings,
but in foreign parts I always find my way."

"Because you have never yet been alone in foreign parts," replied the
prudent wife.

Raschke approached her, and raised his hand warningly.

"Aurelia, it is for our friend, and one must pay no regard to trifles."

"You will never get there," rejoined his wife, with sad foreboding.

"It is much easier to speed through half the world in a secure vessel
than to go on two legs through our streets; half acquaintances are the
most unreliable."

"Then the money for the journey, Raschke?" whispered Mrs. Aurelia, in a
low voice, that the children might not hear.

"You have in your linen cupboard an old black savings-box," replied
Raschke, slily. "Do you think I know nothing of it?"

"What I have collected in that is for a new dress-coat."

"You wish to take away from me my old one?" asked Raschke, indignantly;
"it is well that I have made the discovery. I would now travel to the
capital even if I had no occasion for it. Out with the box!"

Mrs. Aurelia went slowly, brought the savings-box, and with silent
reproach, put it into his hands. The Professor tossed the money,
together with the box, into his breeches' pocket, threw his arm round
his wife, and kissed her on the forehead.

"You are my own dear wife," he exclaimed; "and now there must be no
delay. Bring me Plato and Spinoza."

Plato was the silk cap, and Spinoza the thick cloak of the Professor.
These treasures of the house were so called because they had been
bought with the money earned by two books on those philosophers. The
impression which the works had made on the learned world had been very
great, but the remuneration very small. A commotion arose among the
children, for in winter these beautiful articles were sometimes brought
out for a Sunday walk. The little troop ran with their mother to fetch
them.

"Be sure and bring them back, Raschke. I am so afraid you will lose one
of them."

"As I have told you, Aurelia, in traveling you may depend upon me."

"I will write a few lines to Werner; he must take care that you keep
them both. I will put the letter in your coat pocket, if you will only
give it to him."

"Why not?" exclaimed Raschke, courageously.

The following morning Mrs. Aurelia accompanied her husband to the point
from which the coach started and took care that he came to the right
place.

"If you were only safely home again!" she said, piteously.

Raschke kissed her gallantly, and seated himself on his traveling-bag.

"The seats are remarkably high," he cried out, with his legs dangling.
His traveling companions laughed, and he said, civilly, "I beg the
gentlemen to excuse me."





The lamps burned, and the moon shone through the white mist on the
walls of the Pavilion when the Professor returned there. No ray of
light fell from the windows. The house stood gloomy and abandoned, and
a blue phosphorescence seemed to glimmer above it. The door was closed;
the lackey had disappeared. The Scholar pulled the bell. At last some
one came down the stairs. Gabriel appeared, and gave vent to a cry of
joy when he saw his master before him.

"How is my wife?" asked the Professor.

"Mrs. Werner is not at home," replied Gabriel, shyly. He beckoned his
master into the room: there he gave him Ilse's letter. The Professor
read the lines, and held them in his hands as if stunned. This also was
a manuscript which he had found. It informed him that his wife had gone
from him: every word went like a dagger to his heart. When he looked at
Gabriel he perceived that he did not yet know all. The servant told him
what had happened. The Scholar pushed the chair from him; his limbs
trembled as in a fever.

"We will leave this house immediately," he said, faintly; "collect all
the things."

Like a Romish priest who prays in secret devotion to his God, he had
veiled his head from the sounds which sought to penetrate his soul from
the outward world. He had closed his ears and eyes to the figures that
moved about him. Now fate had torn the veil from his head.

"Mr. Hummel would not depart before your arrival," continued Gabriel;
"he is in great haste."

"I shall go to his inn; follow me," said the Professor; "but first
mention at the castle that I have departed."

He turned away and left the house. As he passed by the castle, he cast
a wild look on the windows of the room which the Sovereign inhabited.
"He is not returned yet; patience," he murmured. He then went, as if in
a state of stupor, to the inn. He ordered a room, and inquired after
his landlord. Immediately afterwards Mr. Hummel entered.

"Good news," began the latter, in his softest tone; "a messenger from
the Crown Inspector brings me the report that they have all made a safe
journey. It must have been a matter of caution that there is no letter
for you."

"It was indeed a matter of caution," repeated the Scholar, and his head
sank heavily on his breast.

Mr. Hummel seated himself close to him, and whispered in his ear. At
the last words the Professor sprang up in terror, and a groan sounded
through the room.

"A man is not a screech owl," declared Mr. Hummel, pacifyingly; "and it
would be unjust to expect of him that he should be able to distinguish
in the darkness the head from the tail of a rat; but every householder
knows that there are also worthless contrivances of architecture. These
intimations I make to you only, to no one else. I sent my card a few
days ago to your father-in-law. Little Fritz Hahn has, in your absence,
become a Doctor Faustus, who will carry off my poor child under his
fiend's cloak to Bielstein. May I announce your arrival there?"

"Say," replied the Scholar, gloomily, "that I will come as soon as I
have settled matters here."

He held Mr. Hummel firmly by the hand, as if he did not like to part
from the confidant of his wife, and led him down to the hall. New
travelers had arrived there, and a little gentleman in a cloak and a
beautiful silk traveling-cap, turned, without looking from under a
large umbrella, to the Professor, and said:

"I should be much obliged if you would show me to a room, waiter. Am I
in the right place here?"

He mentioned the name of the city; the Professor took the gentleman's
traveling-bag from him, seized him by the arm without saying a word,
and took him rapidly up the stairs.

"Very polite," exclaimed Raschke, "I thank you sincerely, but I am not
at all tired; my only wish is to speak to Professor Werner. Can you
arrange for an audience with him?"

Werner opened his room, took off his hat, and embraced him.

"My dear colleague," cried Raschke, "I am the most fortunate traveler
in the world: usually a pilgrim on the highroad is contented if no
misfortune happens to him, but I have met in the carriage with modest
and thoughtful men. The conductor on changing carriages carried my cap
after me, and some one kindly accompanied me to this house; and now
when, for the first time, I stand on my own feet, I find myself in the
arms of him whom I came to see. It is a pleasure to travel, colleague:
at every mile-stone one observes how good and warm-hearted the people
are among whom we live. We are fools that we do not deliver our
lectures in carriages; the anxieties of our wives are unjustifiable; a
man can manage by himself."

Thus did Raschke exult.

"Who lives in this room--I or you?"

"You may remain with me or have the adjacent room, as you please,"
replied Werner.

"Then with you; for I wish to be without you, my friend, as little as
possible."

"You come to a man who is in need of consolation," said the Scholar.
"My wife is with her father; I am alone," he added, with faltering
voice.

"You look to me like a traveler who draws his cloak around him in bad
weather," exclaimed Raschke; "therefore what I bring you will at any
rate not disturb you in cheerful repose. My business as messenger is to
lower a human soul in your eyes; that is hard for us both."

"I have to-day experienced what would shatter the foundations of the
strongest structure. There can be but little that would shock me now: I
am composed enough to listen."

Raschke seated himself by him and told his story. He fidgeted about on
the sofa, slapped his friend on the knee, stroked his arm, and begged
for composure.

Again was a veil drawn from the head of the seeker, who had believed
himself to be speaking alone with his God. The Scholar was silent, and
did not flinch.

"This is fearful, friend?" he said, at last.

With that he broke off, and the whole evening he did not say a word
about the Magister.

The following morning the Professors sat together in Werner's room.
Werner at last threw the two parchment sheets on the table.

"With these at least the Magister has had nothing to do. I myself
fetched them out of the old rubbish: there lies the missal on
the chest. It demands great self-control for me to look at that
dearly-bought acquisition."

Raschke examined the parchment.

"Highly valuable," he exclaimed, "if it is genuine, as it appears." He
hastened to the chest and examined the missal. "Probably the initial
letters of the book will afford some evidence as to whether the missal
was used in the cloister of Rossau," he said. "I regret that my
knowledge of monastic customs does not extend to this test."

He opened the chest and took up the contents. Of the absence of mind
which usually disturbed him nothing was to be observed: he looked round
with sharp eyes, as if he were searching the dark words of a
philosopher.

"Very remarkable," he exclaimed. "Only one thing surprises me. Has the
chest been cleaned out?"

"No," replied Werner, irritably.

"The three companions of a century's repose are wanting--dust, cobwebs,
and grubs; yet there ought to have been something on the inside of the
lid or on the bottom, for the chest has crevices which allow of the
entrance of insects."

He rummaged again, and examined the bottom.

"Under a splinter of wood there hangs a bit of paper."

He drew out a tiny piece of paper, and a deep shadow passed over his
noble features.

"Dear friend, compose yourself, and be prepared for an unwelcome
discovery. On this fragment there are only six printed words, but they
are the characters of our time: it is a piece of one of our newspapers,
and one of the six words is a name well known in the politics of our
day."

He laid the bit of paper on the table. Werner stared at it without
saying a word; his countenance was changed; it seemed as if one hour
had done the work of twenty years of care.

"The things were unpacked by me and again put back; it is possible that
the paper may have fallen in."

"It is possible," replied Raschke.

The Professor jumped up, and sought in great haste for his pocket copy
of Tacitus.

"Here is the reading of the Florentine manuscript, comparison with the
parchment sheets will throw light on it." He compared some sentences.
"It appears an accurate copy," he said, "too accurate--awkwardly
accurate."

He held the manuscript searchingly towards the light; he poured a drop
of water on the corner of the parchment and wiped it with a towel; the
next moment he flung towel and parchment to the ground, and clasped his
hands over his face. Raschke seized the leaves, and looked at the
damaged corner.

"It is true," he exclaimed, sorrowfully; "a writing that had been on
the parchment six hundred years would leave other traces on the
material."

He paced hastily up and down, his hands in his coat pocket, rubbed his
face with the towel, and, perceiving his mistake, threw it away from
him.

"I only know of one word for this," he exclaimed--"a word that men
unwillingly allow to pass their lips--and that word is villainy!"

"It was a piece of vile and rascally knavery," exclaimed Werner, in a
strong voice.

"Here let us stop, friend," begged Raschke; "we know that a deception
has been intended; we know that the attempt has been made lately; and
when we compare the place of the discovery and your presence here, we
may assume as a fact, without doing injustice to any one, that the
trick was intended to deceive you. Of the person who has practiced it
we have only suspicion, well-grounded suspicion, but no certainty."

"We will make it certainty," explained Werner, "before the day becomes
many hours older."

"Undoubtedly," replied Raschke, "this certainty must be obtained, for
suspicion ought not to continue in the hearts of men; it destroys all
ideas and thoughts. But the ultimate question remains: For what object
was the deceit practiced? Was it the willfulness of a knave? If so, the
wickedness of it is not, to an honorable mind, thereby lessened; yet it
is not the worst kind of turpitude. But if it was deliberate malice
with intent to injure you, then it deserves the severest condemnation.
On what terms are you with the Magister?"

"It was deliberate malice to injure a man, body and soul," replied
the Professor, with solemn earnestness; "but the doer was only the
tool--the idea was that of another."

"Hold," cried Raschke, again, "no further; this also is only
suspicion."

"It is only suspicion," repeated the Professor; "therefore I seek for
certainty. When I wished to go to the country castle I was detained
from day to day under trivial pretexts; the Magister was absent not
long ago for a day from the work which was entrusted to him; he excused
himself on the score of illness, and as he was profuse in his excuses I
was struck by a shyness in his manner. There was a wish to keep me here
for reasons which you, in your sphere of feelings, can scarcely
understand. It was hoped to attain this object by exciting the
fanatical zeal with which I was afflicted, without entirely contenting
it. Such is my suspicion, friend; and I feel myself miserable, more
miserable than I have ever been in my life."

He threw himself on the sofa, and again concealed his face.

Raschke approached him, and said, softly:

"Does it distress you so much, Werner, that you have been deceived?"

"I have confided, and deceived confidence gives pain; but in my sorrow
I feel not only for myself, but for the destruction of another who
belongs to us."

Raschke nodded his head. He again paced vehemently about the room, and
looked angrily at the chest. Werner rose and rang the bell.

"I wish to speak to Magister Knips," he said, to Gabriel, who entered.
"I must beg him to take the trouble of coming here as soon as
possible."

"How will you speak to him?" asked Raschke, stepping anxiously before
his friend.

"I need so much consideration myself," replied Werner, "that you need
not fear my violence. I also have been laboring under a disease, and I
know that I have to speak to one who is more diseased than I."

"You are not diseased," exclaimed Raschke, "only shocked, as I am. You
will say what is necessary to him, for the rest you will leave him to
his own conscience."

"I will only say what is necessary," repeated the Professor,
mechanically.

Gabriel returned, and reported that the Magister would call when he
left the Museum in the evening.

"How did the Magister take the message?" asked Raschke.

"He appeared alarmed when I told him that the Professor was stopping at
the inn."

The Professor had ensconced himself in a corner, but the philosopher
left him no rest; he kept talking to him about the occurrences at the
University, and compelled him to take part by frequent questions. At
last he expressed a wish to take a walk, to which the Professor
unwillingly consented.

Werner led him through the gate of the city; as they walked along he
briefly answered the lively talk of his friend. When they came to the
inn from which Ilse had got into the carriage of the Crown Inspector,
the Scholar began, with hoarse voice:

"This is the road along which my wife escaped from the city. I came
early this morning along this same road, and at every step I felt what
is the deepest humiliation to man."

"Before her was light, and behind her darkness," exclaimed Raschke.

He talked of Ilse, and now thought of the commission which his children
had given to their aunt.

Thus the afternoon passed. Werner again sat brooding in his room, when
Gabriel announced the arrival of the Magister. Before Raschke hastened
into the next room, he once more pressed the hand of the other, and,
looking imploringly at him, said:

"Be calm, friend."

"I am calm," replied he.

Magister Knips had profited by the refining influence of the Court. His
black suit had been made by a tailor who had the princely coat of arms
above his workshop; his hair was free from feathers, and his vocabulary
had been replenished with new expressions of respect. He now looked
furtively and defiantly around him.

Werner measured the man as he entered with a steady look; if, before,
he had had a doubt of the guilt of the Magister, he now recognized it.
He turned away for a moment in order to struggle with his aversion.

"Examine this," he said, pointing with his finger to the parchment
leaves.

Knips took a leaf in his hand, and the parchment trembled as he cast a
shy glance upon it.

"It is another forgery," said the Professor; "the reading of the first
Florentine manuscript, and even the peculiarities of its orthography,
are copied with a careful accuracy which would have been impossible to
any old transcriber. The writing, too, betrays itself to be recent."

The Magister laid the sheet down, and answered, with hesitation:

"It appears undoubtedly to be an imitation of an old script, as the
Professor has already discovered."

"I found this work," continued the Scholar, "in the tower of the castle
in the country, inserted in that torn missal, laid in that chest, and
concealed among old furniture. And you, Magister, have prepared this
leaf, and you have concealed it in this place. That is not all. Long
before, in order to put me on a false track, you placed the register of
a chest in the old records; you invented the figures 1 and 2 for the
chests, and further, you yourself wrote the register in order to
deceive me."

The Magister stood with lowered head, seeking for an answer. He did not
know on what confession of others these deliberate assertions were
grounded. Had the Castellan betrayed him? Had the Sovereign himself
exposed him? Terror came over him, but he replied, doggedly:

"I did not do it."

"In vain do you seek to deceive me anew," continued the Scholar. "If I
had not already sufficient ground to say to your face that you did
this, your demeanor in the presence of this sheet would be ample
evidence. No sound of astonishment, no word of horror at such an
attempt at forgery escaped you. What true scholar would look upon such
a thing and remain silent, if his own conscience did not close his
mouth? What have I done to you, Magister, that you should inflict upon
me this bitter anguish? Give me some excuse for your action. Have I
ever injured you? Have I ever aroused in you secret ill-will against
me? Any reason that will make this abomination comprehensible will be
welcome to me; for I look with dismay on this depravation of a human
soul."

"The Professor has never given me any ground for complaint," replied
Knips, submissively.

"Nevertheless," said the Professor, "in cold blood, with indifference,
with malicious levity, you have done your worst to me: it was wrong,
very wrong, Magister."

"Perhaps it was only a jest," sighed the Magister; "perhaps it was only
put in that way to him who prepared the writing. He only perhaps acted
by the command of another, not by free choice, and not of his own
will."

"What power on earth could command you to practice towards another so
deliberate a piece of knavery?" asked the Professor, sorrowfully. "You
yourself know right well what consequences this deception may have for
myself and others."

Magister Knips was silent.

"I have done with you," continued the Scholar. "I shall say nothing of
the plan which this falsehood was to serve nor make any further
reproaches concerning the injury that you have practiced towards a man
who trusted in your honor."

He threw the parchment under the table. Knips seized his hat silently
to leave the room.

"Stop!" exclaimed the Professor; "do not move from the spot. I must be
silent as to what you have endeavored to do personally against me. It
is not so much on account of this manuscript that I have sent for you.
But the man whom I see before me, on whom I look with an abhorrence
that I have never yet felt, is something more than an unscrupulous tool
in the service of a stranger; he is an unfaithful philologist, a
traitor to learning, a forger, and deceiver in that in which only
honorable men have a right to live, a cursed man, for whom there is no
repentance and no mercy."

The Magister's hat fell to the ground.

"You wrote the parchment strip of Struvelius; the trader has informed
against you in your native city. Your writings are confiscated and are
in the hands of the police."

The Magister still remained silent. He fumbled for his
pocket-handkerchief and wiped the cold sweat from his brow.

"Now, at least, speak out," cried Werner. "Give me an explanation of
the fearful riddle, how any one who belonged to us could willfully
destroy all that made his life noble. How could a man of your
attainments become untrue to science in so despicable a way?"

"I was poor and my life full of trouble," replied Knips, in a low
voice.

"Yes, you were poor. From your earliest youth you have worked from
morning to night; even as a child you have denied yourself much that
others thoughtlessly enjoy. You have in this way the secret
consciousness of having obtained for yourself inward freedom, and a
humble friendship with the great spirit of our life. Yes, you have
grown up to be a man amidst countless sacrifices and self-denials which
others fear. You have thus learnt and taught what is the highest
possession of man. In every proof-sheet that you have read for the
assistance of others, in every index of words that you have drawn up
for a classical work, in every word that you have corrected, in every
number that you have written, you have been obliged to be truthful.
Your daily work was an unceasing, assiduous struggle against what was
false and wrong. Yet more, and worse than that, you have been no
thoughtless day-laborer; you have fully and entirely belonged to us;
you were, in fact, a scholar, from whose learning many with higher
pretensions have frequently taken counsel. You not only treasured in
your mind a mass of rare knowledge, but you well comprehend the
thoughts to which such knowledge gives rise. You were all this--and yet
a forger. With true devotion and self-denial, you united malicious
willfulness; you were a confidential and assiduous assistant, and at
the same time a deceiver, bold and mocking like a devil."

"I was a tortured man," began Knips. "He who has lived otherwise does
not know how difficult it is, in the service of science, to be ever
following in the foot-steps of others. You have never worked for others
who knew less than yourself. You do not understand the feeling that
possesses one when others use haughtily, without acknowledgement and
without thanks, what one has given them from one's own knowledge. I am
not insensible to friendship. The Professor was the first who, in the
last lines of the introduction of his maiden work, mentioned my name
because I had been of use to him. And yet I have done less for you than
any other of my old patrons. The copy which you then gave me I have put
in the place of honor among my books. Whenever I have felt tired from
my night's work I have read those lines; I have seldom experienced the
like kindliness. But I have felt the torment of having more knowledge
than I had credit for, and I have had no opportunity to work my way out
of my narrow sphere. That has been the cause of all."

The Magister suddenly stopped.

"It was pride," said the Professor, sorrowfully, "it was envy, that
burst forth from an oppressed life against more fortunate ones, who,
perhaps, did not know more; it was the craving for superiority over
others."

"It was that," continued Knips, plaintively. "First came the idea of
mocking those who employed and despised me. I thought, if I chose, I
had you in my power, my learned colleagues. Then it became a purpose
and took fast hold on me. I have sat many nights working at it before I
went so far, and frequently have I thrown away what I have done,
Professor, and hid it under my books. But I was allured to go on, it
became my pride to master the art. When at last I had done so, it was a
pleasure to me to make use of it. It was less for the gain than for the
superiority it gave me."

"It is easy," replied the Professor, "to deceive men of our sort where
they are accustomed to place firm confidence. Where the acuteness that
we acquire in our work is not brought into play, many of us are like
children, and he who is colder and wishes to deceive may easily for a
time play with us. It is a weak glory to exercise the art of Satan
against the innocent."

"I knew that it was a devil with whom I was dealing; I knew it from the
first day, Professor, but I could not guard myself from him. Thus it
was," concluded Knips, seating himself exhausted on the chest.

"Thus it was, Magister," exclaimed Werner, raising himself up; "but
thus it cannot remain. You were one of us, you can no longer be so. You
have done an injury to the highest good which is granted to the race of
man--the honor of learning. You yourself knew that he who endangers
this honor is a mortal enemy to our souls. In our realm, where error
daily threatens the limited powers of individuals, the determination to
be true is a preliminary which none can be wanting in, without
involving others in his own destruction."

"I was only an assistant," sighed Knips, "and few cared about me. If
others had esteemed me as a scholar it would not have happened."

"You considered yourself so, and you had a right to do so," rejoined
the Professor. "You felt the pride of your learning, and you well knew
your high vocation. You well knew that you also, the humble Magister,
had your share in the priestly office and in the princely office of our
realm. No purple is nobler, no rule is more sovereign than ours. We
lead the souls of our nation from one century to another; and ours is
the duty of watching over its learning and over its thoughts. We are
its champions against the lies and spirits of a past time which wander
amongst us clothed with the semblance of life. What we consecrate,
lives; and what we condemn, passes away. The old virtues of the
Apostles are required of us--to esteem little what is earthly, and to
proclaim the truth. You were in this sense consecrated, like every one
of us; your life was pledged to God. On you, as on all of us, lay the
responsibility for the souls of our nation. You have proved yourself
unworthy of this office, and I grieve, I grieve, wretched man, that I
must separate you from it."

The Magister jumped up, and looked imploringly at the Scholar.

The Professor spoke impressively:

"It is my duty both towards you and others to speak out. What you have
done to my fellow professors, and what you have prepared for similar
attempts, cannot remain secret. Honorable men must be warned against
the art which you have been led by a demon to exercise. But in this
last hour in which you stand before me, I feel that I have done too
little to help you against temptation. Without intending to be unkind,
I have perhaps sometimes undervalued you, in comparison with others,
and have forgotten how hard was your daily life. If you have ever felt
depressed and embittered by my severity, I now atone for it. For when
I, short-sighted, erring man, advised you to accept a position which
was to raise you out of external need, I participated in your guilt, by
exposing you to new temptation here. That gives me bitter pain,
Magister, and I feel the anguish of this hour."

Magister Knips sat exhausted and cowering on the chest: the Scholar
stood over him, and his words sank like blows on the Magister's head.

"I cannot conceal the fact, Magister, that you are a forger; you can
never again move in our circle; your career is closed by your
transgression, you are lost to learning, lost to all who took an
interest in your work. You have vanished from the place which you held
amongst us; nothing remains but a black shadow. Human powers
laboriously trained, a spirit of uncommon acuteness and fullness, are
lost and dead to us; and I mourn over you as over a dead man."

The Scholar wept, and Knips covered his face with his hands. Werner
hastened to his writing-table.

"If you require means to maintain your ruined life in some other
neighborhood, here it is. Take what you require."

He threw some money on the table.

"Try to conceal yourself where no member of our community will meet
you. May all the good become your portion, which is still possible for
you to have on earth. But fly, Magister; avoid those places where one
shall think of you with the sorrow and repugnance that the faithful
workman feels towards one who is untrue."

Knips rose; his face was paler than usual, and he looked distractedly
about him.

"I need no money," he said, with faint voice; "I have enough for my
journey. I beg of the Professor to care for my mother."

The Scholar turned away, the strong man sobbed. Magister Knips went to
the door; there he stopped.

"I have the Homer of 1488; tell my mother to give you the book. Though
the thought of me be painful, yet keep the book. It was a treasure to
me."

The Magister closed the door and went slowly out of the house. The wind
drove through the streets; it blew against the back of the Magister,
and hastened his steps.

"It drives," murmured Knips again; "it drives me onward."

At the open square he remained standing in the wind; looking towards
the clouds, which were passing in hasty flight beneath the moon.
Distorted figures hovered in the grey vapor and glided over his head.
He thought of the last proof-sheets which he had read in his native
town, and spoke some Greek words; they were verses from the Eumenides
of AEschylus:--

        "Rush on! rush on! rush on! ye messengers of vengeance!"

He went up to the castle, and remained standing before the lighted
windows; the four black steeds which brought the Sovereign back from
the tower castle to the city dashed past him, and he clenched his bony
fist at the carriage. He then ran round the castle to the park side.
There, against a tree, beneath the windows of the Sovereign's
apartment, he cowered; looked up to the castle, and again raised his
fist against the lord of it, and sighed. He looked up at the dark
boughs that towered over him, gazed at the sky and the grey flitting
shadows which coursed along under the moon, and desperate thoughts
passed through his mind:

"When the moon vanishes that will be a token to me also."

He looked long at the moon. Amidst his wild thoughts a Latin sentence
entered his confused brain: "'The moon and the earth are but as little
points in the universe;' that is beautifully said by Ammianus
Marcellinus. I have compared the manuscripts of this Roman; I have made
conjectures on all sides with respect to his mutilated text; I have
pored for years over him. If I do here, in order to vex this ignorant
lord, what was done to Haman, all this preparation for my Roman would
be lost."

He rushed from under the trees and ran to his dwelling. There he
collected all his possessions, put his small copy of Ammianus into his
pocket, and hastened with his bundle to the gate.

They say he went to the same country to which his brother had gone
before him--far off in the West.

He passed away, he hid his head--an unfaithful servant, and at the same
time a victim of science. All his life long he had pondered over
written words; now the living words, which penetrated from another soul
into his, drove him from his home. Day and night he had been surrounded
with the letters of books and learned writings which had flowed from
the pen on to the white sheets; but the blessing of living words which
pass from the mouth to the ear, and echo from heart to heart, had
failed him at the right time; for what is in common use with us is also
our highest boon. Its power is as mysterious to us to-day as it was to
our ancestors; the generation of our literary period, accustomed to
contemplate tones in their imaginations, and to estimate the powers of
nature by measure and weight, seldom think how powerfully the echoing
word from the human heart rules within us; it is mistress and servant,
it elevates and annihilates us, it produces disease and health. Happy
the living being in whose ear it sounds full and pure, who incessantly
receives the soft sound of love and the hearty call of friendship. He
who is deprived of the blessing of the conversation which flows from
warm hearts, wanders among others as a living being in whom the spirit
is separated from the body, or like a book that one opens, makes use
of, and puts away at pleasure. The Magister had sinned by the written
word; a cry of agony uttered by a human voice had frightened him into
the misty and silent distance.




                            _CHAPTER XXXIX_.

                           BEFORE THE CRISIS.


The cattle lowed and the sheep-bells tinkled, and the springing blades
of wheat waved in the wind. The eldest daughter of the family was again
walking in the garden, surrounded by her brothers and sisters. What has
become of the glad brightness of your eye and the hearty child's laugh,
Lady Ilse? Your countenance has become serious and your demeanor
subdued; your looks scan critically the men about you and the paths
that you tread, and calm commands sound from your lips. Your home has
not made your heart light, nor given you back again what you lost among
strangers.

But it zealously exercises its right to be loved by you and to show you
love; it recalls familiar images to your soul, and old recollections
awake at every step; the people whom you fostered faithfully in your
heart, the animals that you cared for, and the trees that you planted,
greet you, and labor busily to cover with bright colors what lies
gloomily within you.

The first evening was painful. When Ilse, accompanied by her neighbor,
entered her home a fugitive, striving to conceal what tormented her,
amidst the terror of her father and the inquisitive questions of her
brothers and sisters, anger and dismay once more threw their black
shadows over her. But on the breast of her father, under the roof of a
secure house, together with the feeling of safety, her old energy
revived, and she was able to conceal from the eyes of her loved ones
that which was not her secret alone.

Another painful hour came. Ilse was sitting late in the evening, as
years before, on her chair opposite her father. After her story was
told, the strong man looked down anxiously, used hard words concerning
her husband, and cursed the other. When he told her that even in her
father's house danger threatened her, when he desired her to be
cautious at every step, and when he told her that in her childhood
there had been a dark rumor that a maiden from the house on the rock, a
child of a former possessor, had been the victim of a distinguished
prince, she raised her hands to heaven. Her father seized them and drew
her towards him.

"We are wrong to forget in an uncertain future how mercifully
Providence has guarded you. I hold you by the hand and you stand on the
soil of your home. We must do what the day requires, and trust
everything else to a higher Being. As for the talk of strangers we care
not; they are weather-cocks. Be calm and have confidence."

The younger children chattered innocently; they asked about the
charming life at the capital, they wished to know accurately what their
sister had gone through, and above all how the Sovereign of the country
had treated Ilse, he whom they thought of as a holy Christ, as the
unwearied dispenser of joy and happiness. But the elder ones were more
cautious in their language without exactly knowing why, with that kind
of natural tact which children show towards those whom they love. Ilse
accompanied her sister Clara through the upper floor, they arranged the
room for the guests who were expected, and placed an immense bunch of
flowers in the room which Mr. Hummel was to occupy. Her brothers took
her through the kitchen-garden into the narrow valley, and showed her
the new wooden bridge over the water to the grotto, which their father
had built as a surprise for Ilse. Ilse passed by the swollen brook, the
water rushed yellow and muddy over the rocks, it had overflowed the
small strip of meadow by its banks and flowed in a strong stream down
the valley to the town. Ilse sought the place where she once, under the
foliage and wild plants, lay concealed, when she read in the eyes of
her Felix the acknowledgement of his love. This cosy nook was also
flooded; the stream ran muddily over it, the flowers were broken down
and washed away, the alder bushes covered to their upper branches, and
reeds and discolored foam hung round them: only the white stem of a
birch rose out of the devastation, and the flood whirled round its
lowest branches.

"The flood is passing away," said Ilse, sadly; "in a few days the
ground will again be visible, and where the verdure has been injured
the mild rays of the sun will soon restore it. But how will it be with
me? There is no light so long as he is not with me, and when I see him
again how he will be changed? How will he, so serious and zealous, bear
the cold wind of adversity that has passed through his life and mine?"

Her father watched her carefully; he talked to her more frequently than
formerly. Whenever he returned from the field he told her of the work
that was doing on the farm; he was always taking care not to touch on
thoughts that might give her pain, and the daughter felt how tender and
loving was the attention of the busy man. Now he beckoned to her from a
distance, and near him was walking a thick-set figure, with a large
head and comfortable aspect.

"Mr. Hummel!" exclaimed Ilse, joyfully, and hastened with winged
footsteps towards him. "When will he come?" she called out, with eager
expectation.

"As soon as he is free," replied Hummel.

"Who detains him there?" said the wife, looking sorrowful.

Mr. Hummel explained. At his report the wrinkles on Ilse's forehead
disappeared, and she led her guest into the old house. Mr. Hummel
looked astonished at the tall race that had grown up on the rock: he
looked with admiration on the girls and respectfully at the heads of
the boys. Ilse did not to-day forget what becomes a good housewife in
welcoming a guest. Mr. Hummel was happy among the country people, and
delighted with the flowers in his room; he took the sprightly lad Franz
upon his knee, and made him drink almost too much out of his glass.
Then he went through the farm with the proprietor and Ilse; he was
clever in his judgment, and he and his host recognized in each other
sound common sense. At last Ilse asked him frankly how he was pleased
with her home.

"Everything is magnificent," said Hummel; "the development of the
family, their curly heads, the flowers, the cattle, and the domestic
arrangements. Compared to the business of H. Hummel, it is like a gourd
to a cucumber. Everything capacious and abundant, only to my taste
there is too much straw."

Ilse was called aside by her father. "The Prince is preparing to
depart. He has expressed a wish to speak to you first. Will you see
him?"

"Not to-day. To-day belongs to you and our guest, but to-morrow," said
Ilse.

On the morning of the day following, Professor Raschke entered his
friend's room prepared for the journey.

"Has the Magister disappeared?" he asked, anxiously.

"He has done what he was obliged to do," replied Werner, gloomily.
"Whatever his future life and fortune may be, we have done with him."

Raschke looked anxiously on the furrowed countenance of his colleague.

"I should like to see you on the road to your wife, and better still,
with her on the road back to us."

"Have no doubt, friend, that I shall seek both roads as soon as I have
a right to do so."

"Ilse counts the hours till your return," said Raschke, in still
greater anxiety; "she will not be at rest till she has fast hold of her
loved one."

"My wife has long been deprived of rest while she was with me," said
the Scholar, "I have not understood how to defend her. I have exposed
her to the claws of wild beasts. She has found from strangers the
protection that her own husband refused her. The indifference of her
husband has wounded her in that point which it is most difficult for a
woman to forgive. I have become a mere, impotent dreamer," he
exclaimed, "unworthy of the devotion of this pure soul, and I feel what
a man never should feel--ashamed to meet my excellent wife again." He
turned his face away.

"This feeling is too high-strained, and the reproaches that you angrily
make yourself are too severe. You have been deceived by the cunning
prevarication of a worldly wise man. You yourself have expressed that
it is ingloriously easy to deceive us in things in which we are not
cleverer than children. Werner, once more I entreat of you to depart
with me immediately, even though by another road."

"No," replied the Scholar, decidedly; "I have all my life long been
clear in my relations with other men. I cannot do things by halves. If
I feel a liking, the pressure of my hand and the confidence that I give
does not leave a moment's doubt of the state of my heart. If I must
give up my relation to any one, I must have the reckoning fully closed.
I cannot leave this place as a fugitive."

"Who demands that?" asked Raschke. "You only go like a man who turns
his eyes away from a hateful worm that crawls before him on the
ground."

"If the worm has injured the man, it is his duty to guard others from
the danger of like injury, and if he cannot guard others, he ought to
clear his own path.

"But if he incurs new danger in the attempt?

"Yet he must do what he can to satisfy himself," exclaimed Werner. "I
will not allow myself to be robbed of the rights that I have against
another. I am called upon by the insult to my wife; I am called upon by
the ruined life of a scholar, whom we both lament. Say no more to me.
Friend, my self-respect has been severely wounded, and with reason. I
feel my weakness with a bitterness that is the just punishment for the
pride with which I have looked upon the life of others. I have written
to Struvelius, and begged his pardon for having so arrogantly treated
him in the uncertainty that once disturbed his life. Here is my letter
to our colleague. I beg you to give it to him, and to tell him that
when we meet again I wish to have no words upon the past, only he must
know how bitterly I have atoned for having been severe with him. But,
however much patience and consideration I may require from others, I
should lose the last thing that gives me courage to live, if I went
from here without coming to a reckoning with the lord of that castle. I
am no man of the world who has learnt to conceal his anger beneath
courtly words."

"He who seeks to call a man to account," exclaimed Raschke, "should
have the means of getting firm hold of his opponent, otherwise what
should be satisfaction may become a new humiliation."

"To have sought this satisfaction to the utmost," replied Werner, "is
in itself a satisfaction."

"Werner," said his colleague, "I hope that your anger and indignation
will not draw you into the thoughtless vindictiveness of the weak fools
who call a brutal playing with one's own life and that of others
satisfaction."

"He is a prince," said the Professor, with a gloomy smile; "I wear no
spurs, and the last use I made of my bullet mould was to crack nuts
with it. How can you so mistake me? But there are things which must be
expressed. There is a healing power in words; if not for him who
listens to them, yet for him who speaks. I must tell him what I demand
of him. He shall feel how my words are forced down into his joyless
heart. My speaking out will make me free."

"He will refuse to hear you," exclaimed Raschke.

"I will do my best to speak to him."

"He has many means of preventing you."

"Let him use them at his peril, for he will thereby deprive himself of
the advantage of hearing me without witnesses."

"He will set all the machinery that his high position affords him in
motion against you; he will use his power recklessly to restrain you."

"I am no bawling soothsayer who will attack Caesar in the open street,
to warn him of the Ides of March. My knowledge of what will humble him
before himself and his contemporaries, is my weapon. I assure you he
will give me opportunity to use it as I will."

"He is going away," said Raschke, anxiously.

"Where can he go to that I cannot follow him?"

"The apprehension that you will excite in him will drive him to some
dark deed."

"Let him do his worst; I must do what will give me peace."

"Werner!" cried Raschke, raising his hands, "I ought not to leave you
in this position, and yet you make your friend feel how powerless his
honest counsel is against your stubborn will."

The Professor went up to him and embraced him. "Farewell, Raschke. As
high as any man can stand in the esteem of another, you stand in mine.
Do not be angry if, in this case, I follow more the impulse of my own
nature than the mild wisdom of yours. Give my greeting to your wife and
children."

Raschke passed his hands over his eyes, drew on his coat, and put the
letter to Struvelius in his pocket. In doing so he found another
letter, took it out, and read the address. "A letter from my wife to
you," he said; "How did it come into my pocket!"

Werner opened it; again a slight smile passed over his face. "Mrs.
Aurelia begs me to take care of you. The charge comes at the right
moment. I will accompany you to your place of departure; we will not
forget the cap or cloak."

The Professor conducted his friend to the conveyance; they spoke
together, up to the last moment, of the lectures which both wished to
give in the approaching term. "Remember my letter to Struvelius," were
Werner's last words, when his friend was seated in the carriage.

"I shall think of it whenever I think of you," said Raschke, stretching
out his hand from the carriage.

The Professor went to the castle for a last conversation with the man
who had called him to his capital. The household received him with
embarrassed looks. "The Sovereign is just starting on a journey, and
will not return for some days; we do not know where he is going," said
the Intendant, with concern. The Professor, nevertheless, desired him
to announce him to the Sovereign, his request was urgent; the servant
brought as an answer that his master could not be spoken to before
his return; the Professor might impart his wishes to one of the
aides-de-camp.

Werner hastened to the adjacent house of the Lord High Steward. He was
taken into the library, and gave a fleeting glance at the faded carpet,
the old hangings, which were covered with engravings in dark frames,
and on the large bookshelves, with glass doors, lined within, as if the
possessor wished to conceal what he read from the eyes of strangers.
The High Steward entered hastily.

"I seek for an interview with the Sovereign before his departure,"
began the Professor, "I beg of your Excellence to procure me this
audience."

"Pardon my asking you your object," said the High Steward. "Do you wish
again to speak to a sufferer concerning his disease?"

"The diseased man administers a high office, and has the power and
rights of a healthy one; he is answerable to his fellow-men for his
deeds. I consider it a duty not to go from here without informing him
that he is no longer in a condition to perform the duties of his
position."

The Lord High Steward looked with astonishment at the Scholar.

"Do you insist on this interview?"

"What I have learned since my return here from the country compels me
to do so; I must seek this interview by every possible means in my
power, whatever may be the consequences."

"Even the consequences to yourself?"

"Even these. After all that has passed, the Sovereign cannot refuse to
hear me speak before I go."

"What he ought not to do he will yet try to do."

"He will do it at his peril," replied the Professor.

The High Steward placed himself in front of the Professor, and said,
impressively:

"The Sovereign is going to Rossau to-day. The plan is secret. I
accidentally learnt the orders, which were given at the princely
stables."

The Scholar started.

"I thank your Excellence from my heart for this communication," he
exclaimed, with forced composure. "I will endeavor to send a speedy
warning beforehand. I shall not start, myself, till your Excellence has
seconded my efforts to speak to the Sovereign before his journey."

"If you seek an audience through me," said the High Steward, after some
consideration, "I will, as an officer of the Court, and from personal
esteem for you, immediately convey your wish to the Sovereign. But I
will not conceal from you, Professor, that I consider a criticism from
you upon past events as very risky in every point of view."

"But I am thoroughly impressed with the conviction that the criticism
must be made," exclaimed the Professor.

"To the Sovereign alone, or before others?" asked the High Steward.

"If the ears and mind of the Sovereign remain closed, then before the
world. I shall thus fulfil an imperative duty to all who might suffer
from the dark fancies of this disordered mind; a duty from which I, as
an honest man, cannot escape. If calm remonstrance will not move him, I
shall publicly arraign him before the rulers and people of our nation.
For it is not to be borne that the conditions of ancient Rome should
again rise to life among our people."

"That is decisive," replied the High Steward.

He went to his bureau, took out a document, and presented it to the
Scholar.

"Read this. Will you renounce a personal interview with the Sovereign
if this paper is signed by his hand?"

The Professor read, and bowed to the High Steward.

"As soon as he ceases to be what he has been, I shall consider him
merely as an afflicted man; in this case my interview with him would be
useless. Meanwhile I repeat my request to procure an audience before
the Sovereign's departure."

The High Steward took back the document.

"I will endeavor to act as your representative. But do not forget that
the Sovereign travels to Rossau in another hour. If we ever see each
other again, Mr. Werner," concluded the old lord, solemnly, "may both
our hearts be free from anxiety about that which sometimes one esteems
lightly, as you do at this moment, but which one does not willingly
allow one's self to be robbed of by the intervention of another."

The Professor hastened to the inn and called for his servant.

"Show me your fidelity to-day, Gabriel: none but a messenger on
horseback can arrive at Bielstein in time. Do your best, take courier's
horses, and put a letter into the hands of my wife before the Court
carriages arrive there."

"At your command, Professor," said Gabriel, with a military salute, "it
is a hard ride even for a hussar; if I am not detained in changing
horses, I trust to be able to deliver the letter in due time."

The Professor wrote in haste, and despatched Gabriel; then he returned
to the dwelling of the High Steward.





The Sovereign was lying wearily on his sofa, his cheeks pale and his
eyes dim--a thoroughly sick man.

"I had formerly other thoughts, and could, when I had touched the keys,
play more than one melody; now everything changes itself into a
discordant measure: she has gone, she is in the neighborhood of the
boy, she laughs at her foolish wooer. I see nothing before me but the
track on the high road that leads to her. A strange power eternally
strikes the same notes within me, a dark shadow stands near me and
points with its finger incessantly to the same path; I cannot control
myself, I hear the words, I see the road, I feel the dark hand over my
head."

The servant announced the High Steward.

"I will not see him," said the Sovereign, imperiously. "Tell his
Excellence that I am on the point of departing for the country."

"His Excellence begs admittance, it is a question of an urgent
signature."

"The old fool," murmured the Sovereign, "usher him in."

"I am unfortunately much pressed for time, your Excellence," he called
out to him, as he entered.

"I do not wish to make a long demand upon the time of my most Serene
Lord," began the courtier. "Prof. Werner begs that your Highness will
consent to receive him before his departure."

"What is the cause of this importunity?" exclaimed the Sovereign; "he
has already been here, and I have refused him."

"I must be permitted to make the respectful remark that after all that
has passed, the honor of a personal interview cannot well be refused
him. Your Highness would be the last to approve of so marked a
violation of seemly considerations."

The Sovereign looked vindictively at the High Steward.

"All the same, I will not see him."

"Besides these considerations, it is not advisable to refuse this
interview," continued the old lord, with emphasis.

"Of that I am the best judge," replied the Sovereign, carelessly.

"This person has become privy to certain things, the exposure of which,
for the sake of the princely dignity, must be avoided, even at a heavy
sacrifice, for he is not bound to keep the secret."

"No one will listen to an individual, and a dreamer at that."

"What he will divulge will not only be believed, but will excite a
storm against your Highness."

"Gossip from bookworms will not hurt me."

"This person is a highly-respected man of character, and will use his
observations to demand of the whole civilized world that the
possibility of similar occurrences at this Court should be made
impossible."

"Let him do what he dare," cried the Sovereign, with an outbreak of
fury, "we shall know how to protect ourselves."

"The exposure may yet be guarded against; but there is only one last
and radical remedy."

"Speak out, your Excellence; I have always respected your judgment."

"What inflames the Professor," continued the courtier, cautiously,
"will become generally known; at all events it will produce a great
sensation and dangerous scandal; nothing further. It was a personal
observation only that he was compelled to make at the foot of the
tower; it was a conjecture only which he gave vent to beneath the same
tower. According to his assertion, two attempts have been made, and yet
neither has been followed by evil consequences. To be able to provoke
the public judgment of the civilized world on such grounds is doubtful.
However upright the narrator may be, he may himself have been deceived.
Your Highness remarks rightly that the irritation of a single scholar
would occasion disagreeable gossip, nothing further."

"Most admirable, your Excellence," interrupted the Sovereign.

"Unfortunately there is one important circumstance that I have not yet
added. With respect to that personal observation at the foot of the
tower, the Scholar has a witness, and _I_ am that witness. When he
calls upon me for my testimony and speaks of my personal observation, I
must declare that he is right, for I am not accustomed to consider
half-truth as truth."

The Sovereign started.

"It was I who restrained the hand," remarked the courtier; "and because
that simple scholar is in the right, and because I must confirm his
views concerning the state of my gracious master's health, I tell you
there is only one last and radical remedy." The High Steward took the
document out of the portfolio. "My remedy is, that your Highness
should, by a great resolve, anticipate the storm, and high-mindedly
consent to make this declaration the expression of your will."

The Sovereign cast a look on the paper, and flung it away from him:

"Are you mad, old man?"

"Insanity has not yet been discovered in me," replied the High Steward,
sorrowfully. "If my gracious master would but weigh the circumstances
with his usual acuteness! It has unfortunately become impossible for
your Highness to carry on the duties of your high calling in the way
you have hitherto done. Even if your Highness considered it possible,
your faithful servants are in the painful position of not partaking of
this opinion."

"These faithful servants are my High Steward?"

"I am one of them. If your Highness will not consent to give your
princely approbation to this project, consideration for that which is
dearer to me than your Highness's favor will forbid my remaining in
your service."

"I repeat the question, have you become insane. Lord High Steward?"

"Only deeply moved; I did not think that I would ever have to choose
between my honor and my service to your Highness."

He took out another document from the portfolio.

"Your resignation," exclaimed the Sovereign, reading. "You should have
added to it, 'with permission.'" The Sovereign seized the pen. "Here,
Baron von Ottenburg, you are released from your office."

"It is no joyful thanks that I express to your Highness for it. But now
it is done, I, Hans von Ottenburg, express to you my respectful request
that your Highness would still, at this hour, be pleased to sign the
other document. For in case your Highness should hesitate to fulfil the
earnest entreaties of a former servant, this same request, from now on,
will be forced upon your Highness's ear in many ways, and by persons
who would not use so much consideration for your Highness as I have
hitherto done. Till now there has been one who has begged of you, a
professor,--now there are two, he and I,--in another hour the number
will become burdensome to your Highness."

"A former High Steward, a rebel!"

"Only a petitioner. It is your Highness's right, of your own free will,
to make the high decision to which I endeavor to influence you. But I
beg you once more to consider that it can no longer be avoided. Your
Highness's Court will, in the next hour, be brought front to front with
the same alternative as myself; for my regard for the honor of these
gentlemen and ladies will compel me, on the same grounds which have led
to my decision, not to be silent with respect to them. Without doubt,
the gentlemen of the Court will, like me, approach your Highness with
earnest entreaties, and, like me, will resign in case their entreaties
are unsuccessful, and without doubt your Highness will have to find new
attendants. Respect for the honor and the office of those who rule
under you will oblige me to make the same communication to your
Highness's ministers. True, these also might be replaced by less
important servants of the State. But further, from loyalty and devotion
to your Highness's house, from anxiety about the life and welfare of
the Hereditary Prince and his illustrious sister, as well as from
attachment to this country in which I have grown gray, I see myself
obliged to appeal to every Government connected with ours for an
energetic enforcement of this my request. As long as I was a servant of
the Court, my oath and allegiance compelled me to silence and careful
regard for your Highness's personal interests. I am now relieved from
this obligation, and I shall from henceforth advocate the interests of
our people in opposition to those of your Highness. Your Highness may
yourself judge what that would lead to; this signature may be put off,
but can no longer be avoided. Every delay makes the situation worse;
the signing will no longer appear as the voluntary act of a high-minded
decision, but as a necessity forced upon you. Finally, let your
Highness bear in mind that the Professor has made in the Tower Castle
another important observation,--another with respect to the conduct of
a certain Magister; it is my destiny to know much which does not belong
to the secrets of my department."

The Sovereign lay on his sofa, with his head turned away. He folded his
hands before his face. A long oppressive silence intervened.

"You have been my personal enemy from the first day of my reign,"
suddenly put in the Sovereign.

"I have been the faithful servant of my gracious master; personal
friendship has never been my portion, and I have never simulated it."

"You have always intrigued against me."

"Your Highness well knows that I have served you as a man of honor,"
replied the Baron, proudly. "Now, also, when once more I beg of you to
sign this document, I do not stand upon the right which many years of
confidence give me with your Highness; I do not advance as an excuse
for this repeated importunity the interest that I have been entitled to
take in the dignity and welfare of this princely house; I have another
ground for relieving your Highness from the humiliation of a public
discussion of your Highness's state of mind. I am a loyal and
monarchically-minded man. He who has respect for the high office of a
prince is under the urgent necessity of guarding this office from being
lowered in the eyes of the nation. This he must do, not by concealing
what is insupportable, but by extirpating it. Therefore, since that
scene in the tower, there has been this struggle between me and your
Highness, that I, in order to maintain your Highness's exalted office,
must sacrifice your Highness's person. I am determined to do so, and
there consequently only remains to your Highness the choice of doing
that which is inevitable, of your own free will, and honorably in the
eyes of the world, or dishonorably and at the instance of importunate
strangers. The words are spoken; I beg for a speedy decision."

The old lord stood close before the ruler. He looked firmly and coldly
into the restless eyes of his former master, and pointed with his
finger fixedly to the parchment. It was the keeper conquering the
patient.

"Not now--not here," exclaimed the Sovereign, beside himself. "In the
presence of the Hereditary Prince I will take counsel and come to a
decision."

"The presence and signature of your ministers are necessary for the
document, not the presence of the Hereditary Prince. But as your
Highness prefers signing in the presence of the Prince, I will do my
self the honor of following your Highness to Rossau, and beg one of the
ministers to accompany me for this object."

The Sovereign looked reflectively down.

"I am still a ruler," he exclaimed, springing up; and seizing the
signed resignation of the High Steward, he tore it up. "High Steward
von Ottenburg, you will accompany me in my carriage to Rossau."

"Then the minister will follow your Highness in my carriage," said the
old lord, calmly. "I hasten to inform him."




                             _CHAPTER XL_.

                        ON THE ROAD TO THE ROCK.


Towards the quiet country town which pious colonists had once built
about the monastery walls of praying monks, and towards the rock on
which the heathen maiden had once whispered oracles to her race, were
now hastening along different roads horses and wheels, together with
living men who were seeking the decision of their fate; here joyful,
rising hopes--there downward, declining powers; here the pure dream of
enthusiastic youth--there the destructive dream of a gloomy spirit. In
the valley and over the rock hovered the spirits of the country; they
prepared themselves to receive the flying strangers with the
hospitality of home.

The early dawn sent its pale glimmer into Laura's study; she stood by
her writing-table, and cast a lingering look on the familiar book in
which, with rapid hand, she had written the concluding words. She
fastened the book and the Doctor's poems together, and concealed them
under the cover of her trunk. She cast another look on the sanctuary of
her maiden life, and then flew down the stairs into the arms of her
anxious mother. It was a wonderful elopement--a quiet Sunday morning, a
mysterious light, gloomy rainclouds, contrasting strongly with the deep
red glow of morning. Laura lay long in the arms of her weeping mother,
till Susan urged her departure; then she passed into the street, where
the Doctor awaited her, and hastened with him into the carriage; for
the carriage was ordered to wait in a deserted place around the corner,
and not before the house; upon this Laura had insisted. It was a
wonderful elopement--a modest, sedate traveling-companion, the object
of the journey the house of a loved friend, and, lastly, a large
leather bag containing cold meat and other victuals, which Mrs. Hahn
herself carried to the carriage, in order that she might once more kiss
her son and Laura, and bless them amid tears.

Spitehahn had for several days found it difficult to bear his lonely
existence; since the departure of the learned lodgers he had been much
disturbed, but when the master of the house also disappeared, there was
no one to recognize him. This morning he cast cold glances on Laura as
she hovered round her sorrowing mother, and looked askance at Susan
when she carried the great traveling-trunk to the carriage; then he
sneaked out into the street in order to give expression to his hatred
of the neighboring house. But when Mrs. Hahn hastened to the carriage
with the leather bag, he saw that something was wrong and he crept
after his neighbor from across the way; and whilst she mounted on the
step of the carriage to warn her Fritz of the sharp morning air, and to
kiss Laura once more, he sprang upon the footboard and ensconced
himself under the leather apron of the coachbox, determined to abide
his time. The coachman seated himself, and supposing the dog belonged
to the travelers, cracked his whip and started off. Another look and
call to the mother, and the adventurous journey began.

Laura's soul trembled under the pressure of passionate feelings, which
were called forth by this long-desired but dreaded hour. The houses of
the city disappeared, and the poplars on the high road seemed to dance
past. She looked anxiously at her Fritz, and placed the tips of her
fingers in his hand. He smiled, and pressed the little hand warmly.

His cheerfulness was a support to her. She looked tenderly into his
true face.

"The morning is cool," he began, "allow me to fasten your cloak."

"I am very comfortable," replied Laura, again putting her trembling
hand within his.

Thus they sat silently together, the sun peeped modestly from behind
his red curtains and smiled on Laura, so that she was obliged to close
her eyes. Her whole childhood passed before her in fleeting pictures;
and finally, she heard the significant words of her friends at her last
visit. Her godmother had said to her. Return soon again, child; and
Laura now felt with emotion that this return was at an immeasurable
distance. Her other godmother had kindly asked, When shall we see each
other again? and a touching echo sounded in Laura's heart, Who knows
when? All Nature was stirring in the fresh morning: a flock of pigeons
flew across the field, a hare ran along the road as if racing, a
splendid cluster of blue flowers grew on the border of the ditch, and
red roofs shone from among the fruit trees. Everything on earth looked
green and hopeful, blooming and waving in the morning breeze. The
country people who were going to the city met them, a peasant sitting
on his waggon smoking his pipe nodded a good morning to Laura, who held
out her hand as if she wished to send a greeting to the whole world.
The milkwoman in her little cart, who was going to sell her milk, also
greeted her, saying, "Good morning. Miss Laura." Laura drew back, and,
looking alarmed at Fritz, said:

"She has recognized us."

"Without doubt," replied the Doctor, gaily.

"She is a gossip, Fritz; she cannot hold her tongue, and will tell all
the servant-girls in our street that we are driving together along this
road. This distresses me, Fritz."

"We are taking a drive," replied the Doctor, triumphantly; "going to
pay a visit to some one; we are going to act as sponsors together in
the country. Do not mind these trifles."

"It began by our being sponsors together, Fritz," answered Laura,
tranquilized. "It has all been owing to the cat's paws."

"I do not know," replied Fritz, slyly, "whether this misfortune did not
originate earlier. When you were quite a little girl I kissed you
once."

"I do not remember that," said Laura.

"It was for a basket of colored beans that I brought you from our
garden. I demanded the kiss, and you consented to give the price, but
immediately after wiped your mouth with your hand. From that time I
have liked you better than all others."

"Do not let us talk of these things," said Laura, troubled; "my
recollections of old times are not all so harmless."

"I have always been kept at a distance," exclaimed Fritz, "even to-day.
It is a shame. It must not go on so; I must have some serious talk
about it. Travelling together as we are, it is not fitting that we
should use the stiff _you_ in talking to one another."

Laura looked reproachfully at him. "Not to-day," she said, softly.

"It is of no use now," replied Fritz, boldly. "I will no longer be
treated as a stranger. I once heard the honest _thou_ from you, but
never since. It pains me."

Laura regretted that. "But only when we are quite alone," she
entreated.

"I propose it for all time," continued Fritz, undisturbed, "otherwise
there will be continually mistakes and confusion."

He offered her his hand, which she shook gently, and before she could
stop him she felt a kiss on her lips.

Laura looked at him tenderly, but then immediately drew back and
ensconced herself in a corner of the carriage. Fritz was quite
different to-day from usual; he looked confident and bold. In the house
he had always been modest, while Laura had more than once thought of
this relation, and had written in her book: "When two human beings are
united in soul they ought to let each other know it." Now he used
little ceremony. He looked boldly out of the carriage, and when they
met travelers did not retreat as she had done after meeting the
milkwoman, but looked as if challenging notice, and greeting people
first.

"I must begin about the Hindus," she said to herself, "in order to turn
his thoughts to other subjects."

She asked him about the contents of the Veda.

"I cannot think of it to-day," exclaimed Fritz, gaily. "I am too happy
to think of the old books. I have only one thought in my heart: 'Laura,
the dear girl, will become mine.' I could dance in the carriage for
joy."

He jumped up from his seat like a little boy.

Fritz was fearfully changed; she did not know him again; she withheld
her hand from him, and looked at him, suspiciously, askance.

"The heavens are covered with clouds," she said, sadly.

"But the sun shines above them," replied Fritz; "it will come out again
in a few minutes. I propose that we examine the great leather bag which
my mother gave us; I hope there will be something good in it."

Thus did the prose of the Hahn family betray itself, and Laura observed
with secret regret how eagerly the Doctor rummaged the bag. She had,
however, in her excitement thought little of her breakfast, so when
Fritz offered her some of its contents she extended her little hand for
it, and both ate heartily.

Something darkened the seat next the coachman; a misshapen head showed
itself at the window, and a discordant snarl was heard in the carriage.
Laura pointed terrified at the apparition.

"Merciful heavens, there is the dog again!"

The Doctor also looked angrily at the hostile figure. "Drive him away,"
cried Laura; "make him run home."

"He will hardly find his way back," replied the Doctor, thoughtfully;
"what would your father say if he were lost?"

"He has been the enemy of my life," exclaimed Laura; "and must we now
take him with us into the world? The idea is insupportable, and a bad
omen, Fritz."

"Perhaps we shall meet a wagon that will take him back again," said the
Doctor, consolingly; "meanwhile we must not let him starve."

In spite of his aversion he handed him some breakfast, and the dog
disappeared again under the apron.

But Laura continued disturbed.

"Fritz, dear Fritz," she exclaimed, suddenly, "you must leave me
alone."

The Doctor looked at her with astonishment. The _you_ was an
orthographical error which must be atoned for. He was again about to
give her a kiss, but she drew back.

"If you love me, Fritz, you must now leave me alone," she cried out,
wringing her hands.

"How can I do that?" asked Fritz; "we are traveling for good into the
great world."

"Get upon the box by the coachman," begged Laura, imploringly.

She looked so serious and depressed that Fritz obediently stopped the
carriage, descended from it, and climbed upon the coach-box. Laura drew
a deep breath, and became more tranquil. Her words had influenced him.
Intractable as he was, he would do much to please her. She sat alone,
and her thoughts became more cheering. The Doctor turned round
frequently, knocked at the window, and asked how she was. He was very
tender-hearted, and full of loving attentions.

"The whole responsibility for his health rests on me," she thought,
"what hitherto his dear mother has done for him now becomes my duty. A
delightful duty, dear Fritz. I will keep him from working at nights,
for his health is delicate, and every day I will go walking with him,
in the coldest weather, to accustom him to it."

She looked out of the carriage, the wind was stirring the leaves; she
knocked at the window:

"Fritz, it is windy, you have no shawl on."

"I shall no longer use one," called out the Doctor, "this effeminacy
must be shaken off."

"I beg of you, Fritz, not to be so childish. Put one round you, or you
will certainly catch cold."

"With a _you_, I will certainly not put it on."

"Take it, my darling Fritz, I beg of _thee_," entreated Laura.

"That sounds quite different," said Fritz.

The window was opened, and the shawl put out.

"He is firm as a rock," said Laura, seating herself again. "Complaisant
as he appears, he knows well what he chooses to do, and, contrary to
his own convictions, will not give in, even to me. That is all for the
best, for I am still a childish creature, and my father was in the
right; I need a husband who will look more calmly on the world than I
do."

It began to rain. The coachman put on his cloak, and Fritz spread his
plaid and enveloped himself in it. She became very anxious about Fritz,
and again knocked at the window.

"It is raining, Fritz."

This the Doctor could not deny.

"Come in, you will get wet and catch cold."

The carriage stopped, and Fritz obediently got down and entered it,
while Laura wiped away the raindrops on his hair and shawl with her
pocket-handkerchief.

"You said _you_ four times," began Fritz, reprovingly. "If it continues
thus, you will have a large reckoning to pay."

"Be serious," began Laura, "I am in a very solemn mood. I am thinking
of our future. I will think of it day and night, dearest one, that you
may not feel the loss of your mother. Your dear mother has always taken
your coffee up to you, but that is unsociable, you shall come over
to me and take your breakfast with me; your Hindus must grant this
half-hour to me. About ten o'clock I shall send you over an egg, and at
dinner-time you will come over again to me. I shall take care that the
cooking is good; we will live simply, as we are accustomed, and well.
Then you shall tell me something about your books that I may know what
my husband is occupied with, for this is a wife's right. In the
afternoon we will take a walk together in the streets."

"What do you mean?" asked Fritz, "'over there,' 'here,' 'in the
streets'? Surely we shall live together."

Laura looked at him with open eyes, and a blush slowly mantled over her
face up to her temples.

"We cannot, as man and wife, live in different houses?"

Laura held her hand before her eyes and remained silent. As she did not
answer, Fritz drew her hand quietly from her face, and large tears
rolled down her cheeks.

"My mother," she said, softly, as she wept.

So touching was the expression of her grief, that Fritz said,
sympathizingly:

"Do not grieve, Laura, about her, we will live where you like, and
exactly as you think fit."

But even these kind words could not comfort the poor soul, whose
maidenly anxieties cast a shadow over her future. The colored haze with
which her childish fancy had invested her free life in the neighborhood
of her loved one, had been dissolved.

She sat silent and sad.

The coachman stopped before a village inn to refresh himself and his
horses. The young landlady stood at the door with her child in her
arms; she approached the carriage and civilly invited them to alight.
Laura looked anxiously at the Doctor; he nodded, the carriage door was
opened. Laura seated herself on a bench in front of the door, and asked
the young woman questions about her family, in order to show the
self-possession of a traveller. The woman answered, confidently:

"This is our first child, we have been married scarcely two years.
Excuse me, but I suppose you are a young married couple."

Laura rose hastily, her cheeks glowed a deeper red than the rising sun,
as she answered with a low "No."

"Then you are engaged without doubt," said the woman, "that can be seen
at once."

"How could you discover that?" asked Laura, without raising her eyes.

"One sees evidence of it," replied the woman, "the way in which you
looked at the gentleman was significant enough."

"A good guess," exclaimed the Doctor, gaily; but he also colored
slightly.

Laura turned away and struggled for composure. The secret of her
journey was apparent to every one. It was known in the city and was
spoken of in the villages. Her betrothal had been settled by the talk
of strangers. Yet her parents had not laid her hand in that of her
lover, nor had any of her friends wished her happiness, but now the
stranger on the high road came and told her to her face what she was.

"If the woman had known all,--how that I was eloping secretly with
Fritz Hahn, without betrothal or marriage,--how would she have looked
upon me?" thought Laura.

She entered the carriage before the coachman had finished feeding the
horses, and again tears flowed from her eyes. The Doctor, who did not
anticipate this change of mood, was about to enter, when Laura, quite
beside herself, exclaimed:

"I beg of you to sit by the coachman, I feel very sad."

"Why?" asked Fritz, softly.

"I have done wrong," said Laura. "Fritz, I should like to return. What
will that woman think of me? She saw right well that we were not
engaged."

"But are we not?" asked the Doctor, astonished. "I consider myself as
decidedly engaged, and the friends to whom we go will clearly look upon
the affair in that point of view."

"I conjure you, Fritz, to leave me alone now; what I feel I cannot
confess to any human being; if I become calmer I will knock at the
window."

Fritz again climbed on the coach-box, and Laura passed a sorrowful hour
in the solitude of her carriage.

She felt something strange on her cloak, looked with alarm at the empty
seat, and started when she saw the demon sitting next her, the enemy of
her life, the red dog. He stretched out his forefeet, and raised his
moustache high in the air, as if he would say: "_I_ am carrying you
off. The Doctor is sitting on the box, and I, the mischief-maker, the
misanthropist, who have caused so much sorrow to this poetic soul, who
have been cursed in her journal in both prose and verse, I, the common
and unworthy being who used to lie at her feet, sit by her side the
gloomy figure of her fate, the spectre of her youth, and the bad omen
of her future life. I lie in the place where, in her childish poetry,
she has long dreamt of another, and I mock at her tears and anxiety."
He licked his beard and looked from under his long hair contemptuously
at her. Laura knocked at the window, resolved to leave the carriage
herself and sit upon the box.





Meanwhile the mothers sat anxiously in the hostile houses. Since her
daughter had left, Mrs. Hummel trembled for fear of the anger of her
husband. She knew from Laura that he had not objected to the journey to
Bielstein, and only wished to appear unconscious of it in order to
maintain his defiant character towards his neighbors. But of what was
to follow, he would give no information; when it came to a decision as
to what was to become of Laura and the Doctor, she felt there was
everything to fear from him. Mrs. Hummel had encouraged the journey in
order to compel the consent of the family tyrant; but now she felt
distrustful of her own cleverness. In her sad perplexity she put her
mantle on, over her morning dress, and hastened out of the house to
seek consolation from her neighbor.

The heart of Mrs. Hahn was burdened with similar cares; she also was
prepared, in her morning dress and mantle, to go over to Mrs. Hummel.
The women met outside the two houses, and began an exchange of motherly
anxieties. They made use of the neutral ground that lay between the
hostile domains for quiet intercourse, and forgot that they were
standing in the street. The bells sounded and the church-goers
returned, yet they were still standing together talking over the past
and future. The comedian approached them elegantly dressed; as he drew
near he made a dramatic salutation with his hand. Mrs. Hummel looked
with anxiety at her favorite guest, she feared his conjectures and
still more his sharp tongue. His face was radiant with pleasure and his
gestures were sympathetic.

"What a surprise," he exclaimed, in the tone of a warm-hearted uncle;
"what an agreeable surprise? The old quarrel made up; wreaths of
flowers from one house to the other; the discord of the fathers is
atoned for by the love of the children. I offer my hearty
congratulations."

"What do you mean?" asked Mrs. Hummel, perplexed.

"An elopement," exclaimed the comedian, raising his hands.

Both mothers looked terrified.

"I must beg of you, in your remarks, to have more regard for the real
state of things," replied Mrs. Hummel with offended dignity.

"An elopement," again exclaimed the gentleman triumphantly. "Quite in
conformity with the humor of this house; it is a master-stroke."

"I feel confident from our old friendship," said Mrs. Hummel, "that you
do not mean to insult us; but I must earnestly request you to have
regard, at least, for propriety."

The comedian was astonished at the reproaches of his patroness.

"I only repeat what I have just been informed of by post." He drew out
of his pocket a neat letter. "I hope that the ladies will convince
themselves." He read aloud: "'I beg to announce to you the betrothal of
Dr. Fritz Hahn with my daughter Laura, and their elopement this morning
from her parents' house. Yours humbly, Hummel.' This quite answers to
the character of our humorous friend."

The ladies stood aghast. Then the rustling of a silk dress was heard,
the godmother came up hastily, her hymn-book in her hand, and called
out while yet in the distance:

"What does one not live to see? You naughty people! Is it right that
the friends of the family should first learn from the preacher in the
church what is happening here?"

"What do you mean?" asked both ladies, quite confounded.

"That the bans of your children have been proclaimed in church to-day
for the first, second, and third time. There was general astonishment,
and though you have acted in so unfriendly a way as to keep it a
secret, all your acquaintances were delighted. Now the whole city is
full of it."

Without speaking a word the two mothers flew into each others' arms in
the open street, midway between the houses. The comedian stood on one
side with his hand in his breast pocket, the godmother on the other
with folded hands.





It was also a troublous Sunday on the estate of Ilse's father. During
the previous night a waterspout had burst on the hills, and a wild
flood poured down where formerly the brook ran between the meadows. The
oldest people did not remember such a rush of water. Before this the
brook had been much swollen by the rains of the previous week, now it
roared and thundered through the narrow valley between the manor-house
and the sloping hills, and overflowed the fields where it was not
defied by the steepness of the country and rocks. Furiously did the
water rush and foam over the rocks and about the heads of the willows,
carrying away the hay from the meadows in its course, uprooting reeds
and tearing off branches of trees, and also the ruins of habitations,
which, though far above, had been reached by the flood. The people of
the estate stood by the edge of the orchard, looking silently upon the
stream and the ruins it bore along with it. The children ran eagerly
along the side of the water, endeavoring to draw toward them with poles
whatever they could reach. They raised loud cries when they saw a
living animal floating along. It was a kid standing on one of the
boards of the roof of its stall. When the little creature saw the
people standing near, it cried piteously, as if begging to be rescued.
Hans put out a well-hook, caught hold of the plank, the kid sprang
ashore and was taken in grand procession by the children to the
farmyard and there fed.

Ilse was standing at the new bridge leading to the grotto. It had only
been built a few weeks, and was now threatened with destruction.
Already the supports were bending on one side. The force of the water
worked against the lower end, and loosened the pegs. The foam of the
water whirled round the projecting foot of the rock, which formed the
vault of the grotto, and the power of the rising water made deep
furrows in the flood.

"There comes some one running from the mountain," exclaimed the people.

A girl came hastily round the rock, with a large kerchief full of
fresh-mowed mountain grass on her back. She stopped terrified on the
platform of the rock, and hesitated about crossing the unsafe bridge.

"It is poor Benz's Anna!" exclaimed Ilse; "she must not remain there in
the wilderness. Throw your burden away--be brisk, Anna, and come over
quickly."

The girl passed rapidly across the bridge.

"She shall be the last one," commanded Ilse. "None of you shall attempt
to go upon it, for it will not bear the pressure long."

Her father came up.

"The flood will subside to-night if fresh rain does not fall; but the
injury it has done will long be remembered. Below, at Rossau, it
appears still worse; it has overflowed the fields. Mr. Hummel has
hastened down, as he is anxious about the bridges on the road on which
his daughter is coming. In the village the water has entered some of
the houses; the people are preparing to move to our farm-yard. Go down
and help them," he said, turning to some laborers, and continued, in a
low tone, to his daughter: "The Prince has gone to the village to
examine the damage there. He wishes to speak to you; would you like to
see him now?"

"I am ready," said Ilse.

She went towards the village with her father; there she ascended to the
churchyard.

"I shall remain in the neighborhood," said he. "When the Prince leaves
you, call me."

She stood by the side of the wall, looking at the grave of her dear
mother and at the spot where the old Pastor reposed with his wife. The
branches of the trees which she had planted here hung over her head.
She remembered how fond her old friend had been of dilating on the fact
that everything was just the same in the great world as in his village,
the nature and passions of men were everywhere alike, and that one
might make the same experience in their little valley as amidst the
tumult of the Court.

"Here my father is master," she thought, "and the people are accustomed
to obey us, his children, and to regard us as we do our rulers. And
their children, too, might experience what others have had to
experience, were their master an evil-minded man. Yet they may ask for
justice at any moment and find protection.

"How will he, the proud man, bear that his wife should not find justice
or protection from the injury which has been done to both her and him?
We ought to do good to those who injure us. If the wicked Sovereign
should now come to me sick and helpless, ought I to receive him in my
house? and ought I to place myself by his couch, when such a mark of
kindness might expose me to fresh insult? I have worn a white mantle;
the stain which he has cast upon it, I see every hour, and no tears
wash it away. He has taken from me my pure robe; shall I also at his
bidding give him my gown? O high and honorable precept, taught me by my
departed friend, I tremble to obey. It is a struggle between duties,
and the thought of my Felix says to me, 'No.'

"I have done with the young Prince too, however innocent he may be. I
know that he once sought encouragement from the simple woman with all
the warmth of his heart, and my vanity has often told me that I have
been a good friend to him in his high yet lonely life. Fearfully have I
atoned for this vain pride. He also from henceforth must be a stranger
to me. What can he still wish from me? I imagine that he thinks exactly
as I do, and only wishes to take leave of me for ever. Well, I am
prepared for it."

The Hereditary Prince came along the footpath from the village. Ilse
remained standing by the wall of the churchyard, and bowed calmly to
his greeting.

"I have made known at the capital my wish to travel," began the Prince;
"I hope my request will be granted. And I have therefore come to say
farewell to you."

"What you now say," answered Ilse, "shows that I have rightly judged
your Highness."

"I had little opportunity of speaking to you in the city," said the
Prince, shyly; "it would grieve me if you should deem me capable of
ingratitude or of coldheartedness."

"I know the reasons that kept your Highness away," replied Ilse,
looking down; "and I am thankful for your good intentions."

"To-day I wish to tell you, and at the same time your husband,"
continued the Prince, "that I shall endeavor to make what I have learnt
with you useful for my future life. I know that this is the only way in
which I can thank you. If you should ever hear that my people are
contented with me, you may feel, gracious lady, that I have to thank,
above all, you and yours for the strengthening of my sense of duty, for
an impartial judgment of the worth of men, and for a higher standard of
the duties of one who has to guard the welfare of many. I shall
endeavor to show myself not quite unworthy of the sympathy you have
accorded me. If you learn from others that it has benefited me, think
kindly of me."

Ilse looked at his excited countenance; there was the gentle, honest
expression which she had so often watched with anxious sympathy; she
saw how deeply he felt that something had interposed between him and
her, and how thoughtfully he endeavored to spare her. But she did not
fathom the deep and powerful grief of the young man, the poetry of
whose youthful life a father had destroyed. She did not guess that the
punishment which could not reach the father had fallen upon the
innocent soul of the son. The injury that the father had inflicted had
clouded the happiest feeling of his young life--his warm friendship
for the woman to whom he clung with enthusiastic admiration. But the
kind-hearted Ilse understood the full worth of him who now stood before
her, and her cautious reserve disappeared; with her old frankness, she
said to him: "One must not be unjust to the innocent, nor be untrue to
those whose confidence one has had, as I have yours. What I now wish
for your Highness is a friend. I have seen that this is what your life
needs, and I have observed, too, how difficult it is to avoid forming a
low estimate of men when one's sole companions are servants."

These kind words of Ilse broke down the composure which the Prince had
been struggling to maintain. "A friend for me?" he asked, bitterly.
"Fate early disciplined me; I am not permitted to seek for or enjoy
friendship; poison has been poured over the love that I felt. Forgive
me," he suddenly said; "I am so accustomed to complain to, and seek
comfort from you, that I cannot help speaking of myself, although I
know that I have lost the right to do so."

"Poor Prince," exclaimed Ilse, "how can you look after the welfare of
others, if your own life is void of light? The happiness which I desire
for your Highness's future life is domestic love, a wife that
understands you, and would become the friend of your soul."

The Prince turned aside to conceal the pain that this speech occasioned
him. Ilse looked at him sorrowfully; she was once more his good
counsellor as before.

A beggar-woman crept round the wall of the churchyard.

"May I beg of you to day?" began a hoarse voice, at Ilse's back. "When
it is not the father, it is the son."

Ilse turned round; again she saw the hollow eyes of the gipsy, and
cried out, dismayed, "Away from here."

"The lady can no longer drive me away," said the gipsy, cowering down,
"for I am very weary, and my strength is at an end."

One could see that she spoke the truth.

"The troopers have hunted me from one boundary to another. If others
have no compassion on me, the lady from the rock should not be so
hard-hearted, for there is old fellowship between the beggar and her. I
also once had intercourse with noble people, I have abandoned them, and
yet my dreams ever hover over their golden palaces. Whoever has drunk
of the magic cup will not lose the remembrance of it. It has again and
again driven me into this country, I have led my people here--and they
now lie in prison, the victims of the old memories that pursued me."

"Who is this woman?" asked the Prince.

The beggar raised her hands on high.

"In these arms I have held the Hereditary Prince when he was a child
and knew nothing; I have sat with him on velvet in his mother's room.
Now I lie in the churchyard on the high road, and the hands that I
stretch out to him remain empty."

"It is the gipsy woman," said the Prince in a low tone, and turned
away.

The beggar-woman looked at him scornfully, and said to Ilse:

"They trifle with us, and ruin us, but they hate the remembrance of old
times and of their guilt. Be warned young woman, I know the secrets of
this noble family, and I can tell you what they have tried to do to
you, and what they have done to another who flourished before you on
yonder height, and whom they placed, as they did you, in the gilded
prison, over whose portal the black angel hovers."

Ilse stood bending over the beggar woman, the Prince approached her.

"Do not listen to the woman," he exclaimed.

"Speak on," said Ilse, with a faint voice.

"She was young and finely formed like you, and like you she was brought
to that prison, and when the mother of this man removed me from her
service because I pleased the Sovereign, I was appointed to serve the
stranger. One morning I was made to ask for leave of absence from the
imprisoned lady, because she was to be alone."

"I entreat of you not to listen to her," implored, the Prince.

"I listen," said Ilse, again bending down over the old woman, "speak
low."

"When I came back the next morning I found a maniac in the house
instead of the fair-haired lady, and I escaped from the place in
terror. Do you wish to know through which door madness made its way to
that woman?" she continued in a low murmur. Ilse put her ear to her
mouth, but sprang suddenly back and uttered a piercing shriek, hiding
her face with her hands. The Prince leaned against the wall and wrung
his hands.

A loud call sounded from the carriage-road, and a man hastily
approached; he held out a letter while still at a distance.

"Gabriel!" exclaimed Ilse, hastening towards him. She tore the letter
from him, read it, and supported herself convulsively against one of
the stones of the churchyard. The Prince sprang forward, but she held
out the letter as if to stop him and exclaimed:

"The Sovereign is coming."

The Prince looked terrified at Gabriel.

"He is hardly a mile from here," announced the exhausted servant. "I
overtook the princely carriage, and succeeded in getting ahead of it.
The horses are struggling along the unfinished road, but the bridge
between this and Rossau is now scarcely fit for horsemen or carriages;
I was obliged to leave my horse behind; I do not believe they will be
able to cross it, except on foot."

Without saying a word the Prince hastened down the road to Rossau. Ilse
flew with her letter in her hand up the rock to her father, who came
with Mr. von Weidegg to meet her.

"Go and pay your respects to your master," she called out wildly, to
the Chamberlain. "My Felix comes!" she called to her father, and sank
upon his breast.

People were collected near the temporary bridge between Rossau and
Bielstein. Gabriel also hastened back to the water; he had met Mr.
Hummel there, who was passing up and down along the bank looking across
the stream.

"The world is wretchedly small," exclaimed Mr. Hummel, to his
confidant, "people always meet again. One who has been galloping, like
you, should take care of himself; you are exhausted, and look greatly
changed. Sit down on this log and rest yourself like a sensible man."

He pushed Gabriel down, buttoned his coat, and patted him on the cheek
with his large hand.

"You must be in great need of refreshment, but the best we have here is
a water-perch, and I do not like to treat you like a despicable New
Zealander, who in the booths at a fair consumes five cents-worth of raw
whitings. Take the last restorative of a Parisian traveler."

He forced him to take a piece of chocolate.

A few steps from them, at the bridge, stood the Prince with folded
arms, looking at the water, which on the side of Rossau had spread
itself over the meadows and low fields about the town. Rapidly did the
expanse of water increase; on the nearest part of the new road, which
had not yet been paved, puddles of water gleamed between the heaps of
sand and the wheelbarrows of the workmen; the road projected like a
dark strip out of the muddy flood. A few individuals were coming from
Rossau; they waded through the thick mud of the road and supported
themselves timidly by the smooth poles which supplied the place of the
bridge-rails. For the water rushed violently against the beams instead
of flowing deep under the arches, and the spectators on the Bielstein
side called aloud to them to make haste. The Chamberlain hastened down
to his silent master and looked anxiously in his face. He was followed
by the Proprietor.

"If I could do as I wished, I would break these tottering planks with
my own hands," he said, indignantly, to Mr. Hummel.

"The carriages are coming," called the people. The Sovereign's carriage
with four horses drove at a rapid trot through the gate of Rossau.
Beside the Sovereign sat the Lord High Steward. The former had during
the wearisome journey been in a state of gloomy stupor; an occasional
wild word, and a look of intense hatred, was all his intercourse with
his companion.

The courtier had in vain endeavored to draw the Sovereign into quiet
conversation. Even the consideration of the two servants sitting at the
back of the open carriage could not restrain the Sovereign's mood.
Exhausted by the secret strain of this journey the old gentleman sat,
the attendant by his invalid, and his sharp eye watched every movement
of his companion. When they drove out of the town into the open
country, the Sovereign began, musingly:

"Did you recognize the horseman that overtook us in such haste?"

"He was a stranger to me," said the High Steward.

"He conveyed information of our arrival; they are prepared to receive
us."

"Then he has done your Highness a service, for they would hardly have
had any anticipation at the hunting-lodge of your Highness's important
resolution."

"We are not yet at the end of our drama. Lord High Steward," said the
Sovereign, tauntingly; "the art of foreseeing the future is lost. Even
your Excellency does not understand that."

"I have always been satisfied with observing cautiously what surrounds
me in the present, and I have thereby sometimes guarded myself from
being disagreeably surprised by the future. If by any accident I should
myself be prevented from carrying out my _role_ in the drama of which
your Highness speaks, I have taken care that others shall act my part."

The Sovereign threw himself back in his seat. The carriage went on
through the mire, the horses floundered, and the coachman looked back
doubtfully.

"Forward!" called out the Sovereign, in a sharp voice.

"The Hereditary Prince awaits your Highness at the bridge on foot," said
the High Steward.

They went on at a good pace, the coachman with difficulty restraining
his horses, who were frightened at the glittering expanse of water and
the roar of the flood.

"Forward!" again commanded the Sovereign.

"Permit the coachman to stop, your Highness; the carriage cannot go
further without danger."

"Do you fear danger, old man?" exclaimed the Sovereign, his face
distorted with hatred. "Here we are both in the water--the same fate
for us both, Lord High Steward. He is a bad servant who abandons his
master."

"But I wish to restrain your Highness also," replied the High Steward.

"Forward!" cried the Sovereign again.

The coachman stopped.

"It is impossible, most gracious master," he said; "we can no longer go
over the bridge."

The Sovereign jumped up in the carriage, and raised his stick against
the coachman. The man, frightened, whipped his horses; they reared and
sprang off to one side.

"Stop!" cried the High Steward.

The frightened lackeys readily jumped down, and held the horses. The
High Steward opened the carriage door, and scrambled out.

"I beseech your Highness to alight."

The Sovereign sprang out, and, casting a look of vindictive hatred at
him, hastened forward on foot. He stepped on the bridge, and the flood
roared around him.

"Stay back, father," entreated the Hereditary Prince.

The father laughed, and advanced over the tottering planks; he had
passed over the middle of the bridge and the deepest part of the
stream; only a few steps more and his foot would touch the shore of
Bielstein. At that moment there rose up near the bridge a bent figure,
that cried out wildly to him:

"Welcome to our country, Gracious Lord; mercy for the poor
beggar-woman. I bring you greeting from the fair-haired lady of the
rock."

"Away with the crazy creature," exclaimed the Chamberlain.

The Sovereign gazed-fixedly at the wild figure; he tottered, and
supported himself by the rails. The Hereditary Prince flew towards him;
the father drew back with a shudder, lost his footing, and rolled down
the side of the slippery planks into the flood.

There was a loud scream from the bystanders; the son sprang after him.
The next moment half-a-dozen men were in the water--among the first,
Gabriel, cautiously followed by Mr. Hummel. The gigantic form of the
Proprietor towered above the stream; he had grasped the Sovereign,
while Gabriel and Hummel seized the Prince. "The Sovereign lives,"
called out the Proprietor to the son, laying the unconscious man on the
shore. The Hereditary Prince threw himself down by his father on the
ground. The latter lay on the gravel road, the beggar-woman holding his
head; he looked with glazed eyes before him, and did not recognize his
kneeling son, nor the furrowed countenance of the stranger who bent
over him. "He lives," repeated the Proprietor, in a low tone; "but his
limbs cannot perform their office." On the other side of the water
stood the High Steward. He called out to the Chamberlain in French,
then hastened back with the carriage to Rossau, in order to reach a
safer crossing. It was with difficulty that the carriage was brought
back. Meanwhile, on the Bielstein side, a plank was torn off the
half-destroyed bridge and the Sovereign laid upon it and carried to the
Manor. The children of the Proprietor ran ahead and opened the door of
the old house. In the hall stood Ilse, white as marble. She had been
told by her brother that the Sovereign was saved from the water; he was
approaching the house, to two generations of which he had been a curse
and a terror. She stood in the entrance-hall no longer the Ilse of
former days, but a wild Saxon woman who would hurl the curses of her
gods on the head of the enemy of her race; her eyes glowed, and her
hands closed convulsively. They carried the exhausted man up the steps.
Then Ilse came to the threshold, and cried:

"Not in here."

So shrill was the command, that the bearers halted.

"Not into our house," she cried the second time, raising her hand
threateningly.

The Sovereign heard the voice; he smiled, and nodded his head
graciously.

"It is a Christian duty. Ilse," exclaimed the Proprietor.

"I am the Professor's wife," cried Ilse, passionately. "Our roof will
fall upon that man's head."

"Remove your daughter," said the Hereditary Prince, in a low tone. "I
demand admittance for the Sovereign of this country."

The Proprietor approached the steps and seized Ilse's arm. She tore
herself away from him.

"You drive your daughter from your house, father," she exclaimed,
beside herself. "If you are the servant of this man, I am not. There is
no room for him and my husband at the same time. He comes to ruin us,
and his presence brings a curse!"

She tore open the gate into the garden and fled under the trees, burst
through the hedge, and hastened down into the valley; there she sprang
upon the wooden bridge, from which she had shortly before driven the
village people; the flood roared wildly beneath her, and the woodwork
bent and groaned. A rent, a crack, and with a powerful spring she
alighted on the rock on the other side; behind her the ruins of the
bridge whirled down to the valley. She stood on the rocky prominence in
front of the grotto, and raised her hands with a wild look to heaven.
Her eldest brother came running behind her from the garden, and
screamed when he saw the ruins of the bridge.

"I am separated from you," exclaimed Ilse. "Tell father, he need not
care for me; the air is pure here; I am under the protection of the
Lord, whom I serve; and my heart is light."




                             _CHAPTER XLI_.

                              IN THE CAVE.


The dark water gurgled and streamed through the valley; the reflection
of the setting sun shone on the bay-windows of the old house; the wife
of the Scholar stood alone beneath the rock overhanging the entrance to
the cave. Where once the wives of the ancient Saxons listened to the
rustling of the forest-trees, and where the wife of the hunted robber
hurled stones on his pursuers, now stood the fugitive daughter of the
Manor on the Rock, looking down on the wild surging of the water, and
up to the house where her husband's foe was resting in the arm-chair of
her father. Her breast still heaved convulsively, but she looked kindly
on the brown rock which spread its protecting vault above her. Below
her roared the wild, destructive flood, while around her the diminutive
life of nature carelessly played. The dragon-flies chased one another
over the water, the bees hummed about the herbs of the sloping hill,
and the wood-birds chanted their evening-carols. She seated herself on
the stone bench, and struggled for peaceful thoughts; she folded her
hands and bent her head; and the storm within her bosom spent itself in
the tears that flowed from her eyes.

"I will not think of myself, but only of those I love. The little ones
will inquire after me when they go to bed; to-night they will not hear
the stories of the city that I used to tell them, to put them to sleep.
They were all wet after their fishing, and in the confusion no one will
think of putting dry stockings on them. In thinking of other things I
have forgotten to care for them. The youngest persists in wishing to
become a professor. My child, you do not know what it is you wish. How
much must you learn, and what a change will come over you! For the work
which life accomplishes in us is immeasurable. When I formerly sat here
near my father, I believed, in my simplicity, that the higher the
office, the more noble were the men, and the most exalted of all the
best, and that all that was important on earth was done by great and
refined minds. And when the two scholars came, and I talked about books
with Felix for the first time, I still imagined that everything in
print must be indubitable truth, and every one who wrote, a thoroughly
learned man. Many think thus childishly. But I have been an obstinate
thing, and have vehemently opposed myself to others, even to my
husband, who stood highest in my opinion."

She looked with a sad smile before her, but immediately afterwards bent
her head, and again the tears poured from her eyes.

She heard the call of her brother from the garden.

"Holloa, Ilse! are you there? The strangers are still in the house;
they are making a sedan chair for the invalid; he is to be taken to the
ranger's lodge. Father is busy sending out messengers. The bridge at
Rossau has also been carried away by the water; we cannot get to the
town, and no one can come from the town to us. We feel very anxious
about your getting back to us."

"Do not mind about me, Hans," said Ilse; "tell the girls they must not
be so engrossed with the strangers as to forget our dear guest. Greet
the children for me; they must not come to the edge of the water to bid
me good night, for the bank is slippery."

Ilse placed herself at the entrance of the cave and looked all about.
Early that morning she had seated herself here, and when the water
began to rise high, she had hastened over the wooden bridge to warn her
brothers and sisters. Her work still lay on the bench, together with a
book that had been given her by the Pastor when she was a girl. It was
the life of the holy Elizabeth, written by one of the most zealous
ecclesiastics of her church.

"When I first read about you," she thought, "Saint Ilse of the
Wartburg, my distinguished namesake, your life touched me, and all that
you did and that was told of you appeared to me as an example for
myself. You were a pious, sensible, and amiable woman, and united to a
worthy husband. Then the longing for higher honor in his knightly
order, and martial fame, made him blind to the nearest duty of his
life, and he left you and the people of his home, and went to the wars
in the far-off land of Italy. Two long years he wandered and fought,
and finally returned, weary and worn. But he found not his beloved wife
as he had left her. In the solitude that surrounded you, you had
yearned for your husband, and your overpowering sorrow had brought you
to ponder upon the great mysteries of life; your own life had been full
of longing, and for this you had become a pious penitent. You wore a
garment of hair, and scourged your back; you bowed your head and
thoughts before an intolerant priest. You did what was not right nor
seemly; to please your God, you laid the leper in the bed of your dear
husband. In your over-strained piety you lost your warm heart and the
modesty of womanhood; you were canonized by the clergy; but you, poor
woman, in your striving for what they called the grace of God, had
sacrificed human feelings and duties. It is not good, Ilse, that man
and wife separate without great necessity."

"When people act harshly towards those they love, they do so because
some wrong has been done them or because they fancy themselves
offended. But why should you care for invalid strangers on the couch
that your husband had forsaken? I fear me, blessed Elizabeth, that it
was the spite of offended love, that it was secret revenge for having
so hopelessly longed for your husband. Your history is no good teaching
for us, but rather a warning. My sweet old friend Penelope, the poor
heathen woman, was far more human than you and a far better wife than
you. She wept night after night for her loved husband, and when he
finally returned, she threw her arms about him for his having
recognized the secret signs of the nuptial couch."

Again a voice sounded from the other side of the water.

"Do you hear me, Ilse?" cried her father, from the other bank.

"I hear you," answered Ilse, raising herself.

"The strangers are going away," said the father; "the invalid is so
weak that he cannot injure others; you are, in truth, separated from
us. It is becoming dark, and there is no prospect of being able to
repair the bridge over the water before night. Go along the valley on
your side over the hill to Rossau, and there remain with some one of
our acquaintances until morning. It is a long way round, but you may
reach it before night."

"I will remain here, father," Ilse called back; "the evening is mild,
and it is only a few hours till morning."

"I cannot bear, Ilse, that my wilful child should sleep beneath the
rocks in the very sight of her home."

"Do not mind about me. I have the moon and the stars over me; you know
that I do not fear the dwarfs of the cave, nor on my mountain the power
of man."

The twilight of evening fell on the deep valley, and the mist rose from
the water; it floated slowly from tree to tree, it undulated and rolled
its long, dusky veil between Ilse and her father's house. The trunks of
the trees and the roof of the house disappeared, and the grotto seemed
to hover in clouds of air separated from the earth amidst indistinct
shadows, which hung round the entrance of the rock and fluttered at
Ilse's feet, then collected together and dissolved.

Ilse sat on the bench at the entrance, her hands folded over her knees,
appearing in her light dress, like a fairy woman of olden times, a
ruler of the floating shadows. She gazed along her side of the shore on
the mountain-path that led from Rossau.

The distant steps of a wanderer sounded through the damp fog. Ilse took
hold of the moist stone. Something moved on the ground near her, and
glided indistinctly forward--perhaps it was a night-swallow or owl.

"It is he," said Ilse, softly. She rose slowly, she trembled, and
supported herself against the rock.

The figure of a man stepped out of the white mist; he stopped
astonished when he saw a woman standing there.

"Ilse!" called out a clear voice.

"I await you here," she answered, in a low tone. "Stop there, Felix.
You find not your wife as you left her. Another has coveted that which
is yours; a poisonous breath has passed over me; words have been said
to me which no honest woman ought to hear, and I have been looked upon
as a bought slave."

"You have escaped from the enemy."

"I have, and therefore am here; but I am no longer in the eyes of
others what I once was. You had a wife free from all taint; she who now
stands before you is evilly talked of, both on account of father and
son."

"The noise of tongues dies away like the surging of the water beneath
your feet. It signifies little what others think when we have done what
is satisfactory to our own consciences."

"I am glad that you do not care for the talk of others. But I am not
quite so proud and independent as I was. I conceal my sorrow, but I
feel it always. I am lowered in my own eyes, and, I fear, Felix, in
yours also; for I have brought on my own misfortune--I have been too
frank with strangers, and given them a right over me."

"You have been brought up to trust in those who hold high positions.
Who can give up loyal trust without pain?"

"I have been awakened, Felix. Now answer me," she continued, with
agitation, "how do you return to me?"

"As a weary, erring man, who seeks the heart of his wife and her
forgiveness."

"What has your wife to forgive, Felix?" she again asked.

"That my eyes were blinded, and that I forgot my first duties to follow
a vain chase."

"Is that all, Felix? Have you brought me back your heart, unchanged to
me as it was before?"

"Dear Ilse," exclaimed her husband, embracing her.

"I hear your tones of love," she exclaimed, passionately, throwing her
arms round his neck. She led him into the grotto, stroked the drops of
water out of his damp hair, and kissed him. "I have you, my beloved
one; I cling firmly to you, and no power shall ever again separate me
from you. Sit here, you long-suffering man; I hold you fast. Let me
hear all the trouble you have gone through."

The Scholar held his wife in his arms, and related all. He felt her
tremble when he told her his adventures.

"Indignant anger and terror impelled me along the road to Rossau after
the Sovereign," he said, concluding his account, "and the delay for
change of horses seemed insupportable to me. In the town I found a
crush of vehicles worse than on a market-day; before the inn a confused
noise of wheels, and the cries of men, drovers, and court-lackeys, who
could not cross the water. In the city I learned from strangers that
the foe of our happiness had been overtaken by a fate which pursued him
to the water. We have done with him, and are free. They called out to
me that the bridge on the way to you was broken. I sprang out of the
carriage in order to seek the footpath over the hills and the road
behind the garden. Then the dog of our landlord ran past me, and a
coachman from our city came up to me and stated that he had brought
Fritz and Laura to the town, but that they had gone further down the
stream in order to find a crossing. You may believe that I would not
wait."

"I knew that you would seek this path," said Ilse. "To-day you are come
to me--to me alone; you belong only to me; you are given to me anew,
betrothed to me for the second time. The habitations of men around us
have disappeared; we stand alone in the wild cave of the dwarfs. You,
my Felix, to whom the whole world belongs, who understand all the
secrets of life, who know the past and divine the future--you have
nothing now for a shelter but this cleft of the rock, and no covering
but the kerchief of poor Anna for your weary limbs. The rock is still
warm, and I will strew the grass of our hills as a couch for you. You
have nothing, my hero in the wilderness, but the rocks and herbs, and
your Ilse by your side."

The stillness of night reigns about; the stream rushes gently around
the roots of the brambles; and the white mists hang like a thick
curtain over the cave. Dusky phantoms glide along the valley; they
hover, in long white dresses, past the rocky entrance, down into the
open country, where a fresh breath of air dissolves them. High above,
the moon spreads its white, glimmering tent, woven of rays of light and
watery vapors; and the old juggler laughs merrily over the valley and
down upon the rocky grotto. As the delusive moonlight harasses mortals
by its unreal halo, so do they harass themselves by the pictures of
their own fancy, in love and hate, in good and bad humor; their life
passes away whilst they are thinking of their duty and err in doing it,
whilst they seek truth and dream in seeking it. The spirit flies high,
and the heart beats warm, but the hobgoblin of fancy works incessantly
amidst the reality of life; the cleverest deceive themself, and the
best are disappointed by their own zeal. Sleep in peace, Ilse. Thou
sittest upon thy low stone bench and boldest in thy lap the head of thy
husband. Even in this hour of bliss, thou feelest the sorrow that came
to him and thee, and a gentle sigh sounds through the cavern like the
movement of a moth's wings against the walls of rock. Sleep in peace.
For thou hast lived, in the weeks gone by, through that which for all
future time will be a gain to thee. Thou hast learned to seek in the
depths of thy own life judgment and firm resolve. It would not be
fitting. Ilse, that the lightly-woven tale of that which thou hast
suffered, should separately bring up the lofty questions of eternal
moment that thou hast raised--thy doubts and thy fierce battles of
conscience. That were a too heavy burden for our frail bark. Yet as the
mariner at sea, his eye fixed upon things below, recognizes in the
waters beneath the reflection of the clouds of heaven, so will thy
attainment of freedom, Ilse, be seen in the reflection of thy thoughts,
in thy countenance, thy manner, and thy conduct.

Slumber in peace, you children of light! Many of your hopes have been
deceived, and much innocent trust has been destroyed by rough reality.
The forms of a past time--forms that you have borne reverentially in
your hearts--have laid a real hold on your life; for what a man thinks,
and what a man dreams, becomes a power over him. What once has entered
in the soul continues to work actively in it, exalting and impelling it
onward, debasing and destroying it. About you, too, a game of fantastic
dreams has played. If at times it has given you pain, it has still not
impaired the power of your life, for the roots of your happiness lie as
deep as it is granted man, that transitory flower, to rest in the soil
of earth. Slumber in peace under the roof of the wild rock; the warm
air of the grotto breathes round your couch, and the ancient vaulting
of the roof spreads protectingly over your weary eyes! Around you the
forest sleeps and dreams; the old inhabitants of the rock sit at the
entrance of the cave. I know not whether they are the elves in whom
Ilse does not believe, or the old friends of the scholar, the little
goat-footed Pans, who blow their sylvan songs on their reed pipes. They
hold their fingers to their mouth, and blow so gently in their pipe
that it sounds sometimes like the rushing of the water or the soft sigh
of a sleeping bird.




                            _CHAPTER XLII_.

                           TOBIAS BACHHUBER.


Ilse gently touched the head of her husband. Felix opened his eyes,
threw his arms round his wife, and for a moment looked in confusion at
the wild scene about him. The mist hovered like a white curtain before
the opening of the cave; the first dawn of morning cast a glow on the
jagged projections of the dark vault; the redbreast sang, and the
blackbird piped; the pure light of day was approaching.

"Do you not hear something?" whispered Ilse.

"The birds singing, and the water rushing."

"But under us, within the rock, some strange power is at work. It stirs
and groans."

"It is some animal from the wood," said the Professor; "a fox or a
rabbit."

The noise about their seat became louder; something was pushing against
the stone bench; it was working and sighing like a man who carries a
heavy burden.

"Look," whispered Ilse, "it is coming out; it is slipping round our
feet. There sits the strange thing; it has shining eyes and a
glittering cloak."

The Professor supported himself on his hand and looked at the dark
spot, where a small figure sat with hairy face, its body covered with a
stiff, glittering garment.

They both looked motionless at the figure.

"Now do you believe in the spirits of this place?" asked her husband,
in a low tone.

"I am afraid, Felix; I distinctly see the gold of the dress, and I see
a small beard and a horrible face."

She raised herself.

"Are you the Dwarf-King, Alberich," asked the Professor, "and is the
Nibelungen treasure concealed here?"

"It is the red dog," cried Ilse, "he has a coat on."

The Professor jumped up; the dog crouched whining before his feet. The
Scholar bent down, felt a strange material round the body of the dog,
and took off the covering; he stepped to the entrance and held it up in
the dawning light. It was old rotten stuff, woven with golden thread.
The dog, freed from his burden, rushed out of the cave with a growl.
The Professor gazed long on the torn tissue, let the rag fall, and said
gravely:

"Ilse, I am at the goal of my long search. These are the remains of a
priestly vestment. The dog has drawn this out of some hole into which
he has crept; the treasure of the monk lies in this grotto. But I have
done with my hopes. A few days ago this discovery would have
intoxicated me, now so dark a remembrance is attached to it that the
pleasure that I might have had in what is concealed in these depths has
almost all vanished."

There were loud voices on the opposite bank. Hans hallooed again
through the mist; he greeted his sister and Felix who now came out from
the cave on the broad rock, with the joyful news--"The water has
fallen." The other brothers and sisters rushed after him and came close
to the water shouting and screaming. Franz brought a sandwich in a
paper, and declared his intention of throwing this breakfast over to
them, that they might not starve. The children contended against this
decision, and eagerly devised a plan of throwing over a piece of twine
on a ball and attaching the sandwich to it. Life on the estate had
again resumed its ordinary routine.

"Has Fritz come?" asked the Professor, across the stream.

"They are still at Rossau," called out Hans. "The bridge has been
repaired; Mr. Hummel is up, and has gone down there."

The father also came, followed by a troop of laborers, who brought
beams and planks. The men went into the water and drove a support into
the soft ground, upon which they laid several slender tree-trunks
across the water; the Professor caught the rope which was thrown to
him. After a few hours' work a small bridge was erected. The Proprietor
was the first who passed over to his children, and the men exchanged a
grave greeting.

"If the men have an hour's time to spare during the day," said the
Professor, "they may do one last work for me here. The hiding-place of
the monks was in this cave."

In the meantime Mr. Hummel was descending with rapid steps towards
Rossau. The carpenters were still working at the bridge. He cast a
searching look on the spot where he had caught hold of the young Prince
in the water and murmured:

"He went down like a cannon-ball. This nation has no capacity for the
sea either in its upper or lower classes,--in this whole neighborhood
they have not so much as a boat. Twenty years ago there was one here,
it is said, but it has been cut up to boil coffee. The best thanks that
one can give to this Bielstein man for the disturbance that we have
occasioned him, will be to send him a boat to keep among his bundles of
straw."

With these thoughts he entered the door of the Dragon; there he went up
to the sleepy landlord and asked:

"Where is the young couple that arrived yesterday evening?"

"They are up stairs, I suppose," returned the latter, indifferently;
"their bill is to be paid yet, if you will know."

As he was about to ascend to the upper floor, he heard a cry of joy.

"Father, my father!" exclaimed Laura, rushing down the stairs; she
threw her arms round his neck, and gave vent to such warm expressions
of tenderness and sorrow that Mr. Hummel at once became gracious.

"Vagrants!" he exclaimed; "have I caught you? Wait! you shall pay
dearly for this escapade."

The Doctor also rushed headlong down stairs, and greeted Mr. Hummel
with outbursts of joy.

"Your carriage will bring the things after us; we will go on ahead,"
ordered Mr. Hummel. "How did your Don Juan behave?" he asked, in a low
tone, of his daughter.

"Father, he took care of me like an angel, and sat on a chair the whole
night before my door. It was terrible, father."

"And how does the affair please you? So romantic! It calls forth superb
feelings, and one thereby escapes the almond-cake and the unseasoned
jokes of the comic actor."

But Laura pressed up to her father, and looked imploringly at him, till
Mr. Hummel said:

"So it has been a cure? Then I will joyfully pay the bill of the
Dragon."

They walked out of the door together.

"How did she behave on the way?" he asked the Doctor, confidentially.

"She was charming," he exclaimed, pressing the arm of the father, "but
in an anxious state of mind; I was sent up on the coach-box four times
that repentance overcame her."

"What, and did you climb up?" asked Mr. Hummel, indignantly.

"It gave me pleasure to see that she was so deeply affected by the
unusual nature of the journey."

"'It gives me pleasure that my poodle should go into the water,' said
the flea, and was drowned," returned Mr. Hummel, mockingly. "Why did
you not look calmly on the anxiety of my child? It would have saved you
many a bond if you had been firm with her the first day."

"But she was not yet my wife," said the Doctor.

"O, it was tolerant mischievousness, was it?" replied the father, "may
you bide your time."

When they approached the courtyard, the daughter hanging on the arm of
her father--which she would not let go--he began:

"Not a word to-day, now, about this abominable elopement. I have hushed
up your thoughtless folly before the people here, and thrown a mantle
over it, that you may be able to open your eyes; you are announced and
expected as quiet travelers. We shall remain here together to-day;
to-morrow I shall speak to you, in my office of father, a last word
concerning your romance."

At the door the wanderers were joyfully welcomed by their friends. The
Professor and the Doctor embraced each other.

"You come just in time, Fritz; the adventure which we began here years
ago will conclude to-day. The treasure of Brother Tobias is
discovered."

After some hours the whole party started for the cave; the laborers
followed with iron crows and levers.

The Proprietor examined the block of stone at the back of the cave. At
the bottom on one side he saw a hole, the same through which the dog
had crawled.

"This opening is new," he exclaimed; "it was closed by a stone which
has fallen in."

The large stone bench was with some exertion rolled away, and an
opening wide enough for a man to creep in without difficulty became
perceptible. The lights were lowered into it, and showed a continuation
of the cave sloping downwards, which went many yards further into the
mountain. It was a desolate space. In the time of the monks it had
undoubtedly been dry, but was no longer so. Roots of trees had driven
the crevices of the rock asunder, or the strata had sunk, owing to the
penetration of the damp. Thus an entrance had been given to water and
animals, and there was a confused mass of litter from the wood and
bones. The workmen cleared it with their tools, and the spectators sat
and stood by, full of curiosity. The Professor, in spite of his
composure, kept as close to the spot as he could. But the Doctor could
not long bear to look on. He took off his coat and descended into the
opening. Mouldy pieces of thick cloth were brought up; probably the
treasure had been conveyed in a large bag to its place of concealment.
Then came altar covers and ecclesiastical robes.

There was a cry of joy, and the Doctor handed out a book. The face of
the Professor was suffused with color as he took it. It was a missal on
parchment. He gave it to the Proprietor, who now looked on with great
interest. The Doctor handed out a second book; all pressed near. The
Professor sat on the ground and read. It was a manuscript of St.
Augustine in a deplorable condition.

"Two!" he said, and his voice sounded hoarse from inward emotion.

"The Doctor handed a third book, again spiritual Latin hymns with
notes. The fourth, a Latin Psalter. The Professor held out his hand,
and it trembled.

"Is there more?" he exclaimed.

The Doctor's voice sounded hollow from the cave.

"There is nothing more."

"Look carefully," said the Professor, with faltering voice.

"Here is the last," cried the Doctor, handing out small square board,
"and here another."

They were two book-covers of solid wood, the outside ornamented with
carved ivory. The Professor perceived at once from the style of the
figures that it was Byzantine work of the latest Roman period--the
figure of an Emperor on a throne, and over him an angel with a halo.

"A large quarto of the fifth or sixth century. It is the cover of the
manuscript, Fritz; where is the text?"

"There is no text to be found," again replied the sepulchral voice of
the Doctor.

"Take the lantern and throw the light everywhere."

The Doctor took the second lantern in. He felt with his hand and
pickaxe all round in every corner of the rock. He threw the last blade
of straw out, and the last remnant of the bag. There was nothing of the
manuscript to be seen--not a page, not a letter.

The Professor looked at the cover.

"They have torn it out," he said, in a faint voice; "probably the monks
took the Roman Emperor in ivory for a saint."

He held the cover to the light. On the inner side of one of the pieces,
amidst dust and decay, might be read, in old monkish writing, the words:

                    "THE TRAVELS OF THE SILENT MAN."

The silent man was now drawn from his hiding-place. But he spoke not:
his mouth remained mute for ever.

"Our dream is at an end," said the Professor, composedly. "The monks
have torn out the text from the cover, and left it behind; there was no
more room for the manuscript in the crowded bag. The treasure is lost
to science. Our hand touches what was once the cover of the manuscript,
and we cannot help having the bitter feeling of sorrow for what is
irreparable, the same as if it had passed away in our sight. But we
return to the light in possession of our faculties, and must do our
duty in making available to our generation, and those who come after
us, what remains."

"Was this genius called Bachhuber?" exclaimed Mr. Hummel; "judging from
appearances, he was an ass."

The Proprietor laid his hand on the shoulder of his son-in-law.

"After all, you learned men have been in the right," he said, "Close
the opening by the stone bench again," he said, addressing the
laborers; "the cave shall remain as it was."

The party returned silently to the old house. The boys carried the
books, the girls the bundles of torn monks' dresses, and made plans for
drawing out the gold threads for themselves. The Professor kept the
cover of the lost manuscript.

As they entered the house there was a sound of horse's feet on the
other side. The Proprietor went to the door. The old Chief Forester
drew in his black horse.

"I have ridden in haste through the farm to bring you news. Everything
with us is topsy-turvy. We have Court Officials and Ministers, and
doctors are fetched from every quarter. My people have all been sent
out, and I myself have come to Rossau to order a courier. I fear his
Serene Highness is very low; he knows no one. The Hereditary Prince is
now awaiting the arrival of the Court physician; as soon as he gives
permission the party will start for the capital. All these terrible
things are owing to the unfortunate additions to my quiet dwelling. One
thing more, while it occurs to me--your son-in-law is searching for old
papers and books. There are some chests at our place containing such
lumber of ancient times, when the ranger's lodge was still a royal
shooting-box. Over the door, from under the plaster, one can discover a
foreign word, _solitudini_, which means, they say, 'in solitude.' The
chests are rotten: in the course of the building they have been moved
from their place. When things become quieter with us the Professor
will, perhaps, look over them."

"Then here is the Castle Solitude, with the genuine chests of the
official," exclaimed the Professor. "I shall never go to that house."

The Doctor seized his hat, and spoke in a low tone to Laura and the
Proprietor.

"I beg leave of absence for to-day," he said, going out.

He did not return till evening.

"In the chest there are accounts for repairs to the monastic buildings
and for the estate at the end of the seventeenth century; there are,
besides, some volumes of Corneille. The vicar who went to America is
related to the Chief Forester."

"We have been led astray," said the Professor, calmly. "It is well that
every doubt has disappeared."

"But," replied the Doctor, "there is still no proof that the old
manuscript is destroyed. It is yet possible that it may come to light
somewhere in fragments. Who knows but there may be strips on the back
of some books?"

"On the books which the Swede has written in characters of fire at
Rossau," replied the Professor, with a sad smile. "It is well, Fritz,
that the tormenting spirits are forever banished."

Early on the morning of the following day a line of carriages left the
ranger's lodge; the first was closely curtained--it was the prostrate
Sovereign, guarded by his physicians. Before starting, the Hereditary
Prince beckoned the Chief Forester to his carriage:

"Is there any other way to Rossau than that by the manor-house through
the Bielstein estate?"

"Over the ridge through the wood," replied the Chief Forester; "but it
is a roundabout way."

"We will take the road through the wood," commanded the Hereditary
Prince. On the way he said to his attendant: "I expect from you,
Weidegg, that, should occasion present itself, you will show
considerate attention to the people who dwell in that house. I am the
son of the sick Sovereign to whom a voice refused reception there. I
shall, therefore, never again cross the threshold of that house; and I
wish that you never again mention the name of that woman in my
presence."

The sad procession passed close by the spot where once the lightning
had struck the pine-tree. The carriages moved at a slow pace along the
ridge of hills upon the forest-road.

"Drive on ahead," said the Prince; "I will walk a short distance
alone."

He stepped to the edge of the hill; the early dawn tinged the dark
bushes of heather with a golden green. From that same height, where
once a merry party had rested, the Prince looked down on Bielstein,
which stood out in the white morning mist, on the roof and balconies of
the old house. Long he stood motionless; the bell sounded from the
village church through the mountain air; he bent his head till the last
echoes of the melancholy tones passed away; then he stretched his hand
greetingly towards the manor, turned quickly back, and went along the
forest-road.





The cocks crowed in the farmyard at Bielstein, the sparrows twittered
in the vine arbor, and the people were preparing for the day's work.
Then Mr. Hummel knocked three times with his ponderous fist at the door
of the room in which his daughter slept.

"Get up, eloper," he shouted, "if you still wish to take leave of your
forsaken father."

There was a noise in the room and a prattering of slippers, and Laura's
head peeped through the opening in the door.

"Father, you are not going to leave us!" she said pleadingly.

"You have left me," replied Mr. Hummel; "we must have a few final words
together. Dress yourself properly, and you shall accompany me down the
hill. I will wait for you in the hall."

He had to wait some time for his daughter, and paced impatiently up and
down, looking at his watch.

"Gabriel," he said to the servant, who came up to him in his best
attire, "much misfortune arises from women's long hair. It is on that
account that they never can be ready at the right time; this is their
privilege by which they vex us, and it is on that account that they
maintain they are the weaker sex. Order and punctuality will never be
obtained unless all womankind have their pig-tails cut off on one day."

Laura glided down the stairs, clung to her father's arm, and stroked
his cheeks with her little hand.

"Come into the garden, my little actress," he said; "I must speak to
you alone for a few minutes. You have succeeded in eloping, you have
gone through the scandal,--in what state of mind are you now?"

"Uneasy, dear father," said Laura, dejectedly. "I know that it was a
folly, and Ilse says so too."

"Then it must be so," replied Mr. Hummel, dryly. "What is now to become
of you?"

"Whatever you wish, father," said Laura. "Fritz and I are of opinion
that we must follow your wishes unconditionally. I have by my folly
lost all right of expressing a wish; if I could still venture to make a
request," she said, timidly, "I should like to remain here for a short
time."

"Then you wish to get rid of your seducer?"

"He is going back to his parents, and we will wait, my father, until he
has an appointment at the University: he has prospects."

"Indeed," said Mr. Hummel, shaking his head. "All that would have been
very sensible before the elopement; now it is too late. Your banns have
been published in church, now, three times."

"The people would not have it otherwise," continued Mr. Hummel. "When
it was known that you had eloped, the clergy could not avoid publishing
the banns; you had not been long out of the gate when this calamity
took place."

Laura stood terrified, and a burning red suffused her cheeks. The bells
of the little church by the wood below sounded. Mr. Hummel took a paper
out of his pocket.

"Here are those cursed old godmother's gloves; I wish at last to get
rid of the trash. Here you have your dowry, I can give you nothing
more; put them on quickly, that people may at least observe by your
hands that this is a festive day for you. When it comes to the business
of the wedding-ring you can easily take them off."

"Father," cried Laura, wringing her hands.

"You could not bear the idea of a wedding-cake," said Mr. Hummel, "so
you must do without a wedding-dress, and many other things. These
dramatic attitudes would have been very suitable before the elopement,
now you must be married without question either immediately, or not at
all. Do you think that one goes out into the world for a joke?"

"My mother!" exclaimed Laura, and the tears rolled from her eyes.

"You chose to run away from your mother, and if your father, out of
consideration for these strangers, had not come, you would have had to
do the business alone. You wished to escape from our homely, simple
feelings."

Laura laid hold of a tree with trembling hands, and looked imploringly
at her father.

"You are not so bold as I thought. Now the timid hare in you comes to
light."

Laura threw herself on her father's breast and sobbed; he stroked her
curls.

"Little Hummel," he said, kindly, "there must be punishment, and it is
not severe; I am satisfied that you should marry him. He is a worthy
man; I have observed that; and if it is for your happiness, I shall
easily get on with him, but you must not immediately begin to hum and
buzz if I sometimes bristle up in my way. I wish, too, that you should
marry him to-day, that is now the best course for all parties. You may
exercise your bridal feelings later and go through your emotions as you
like. Be brave, now, my child, the others are waiting, and we must not
delay them. Are you ready?"

Laura wept, but a soft "Yes" was heard.

"Then we will awake the bridegroom," said Mr. Hummel. "I believe the
sacrificial lamb sleeps without any foreboding of his fate."

He left his daughter, hastened to the Doctor's door, and looked into
the room. Fritz lay fast asleep. Mr. Hummel seized the boots which were
standing before the door and bumped them down beside the bed.

"Good morning, Don Juan," he shouted; "have the kindness to get
immediately into this leather. These are your bridal boots. My daughter
Laura begs you to make haste, and the clergyman is impatient."

The Doctor sprang out of his bed.

"Are you in earnest?" he asked.

"Terribly in earnest," said Hummel.

He did not have to wait long for the Doctor. He entered the garden
where Laura was still sitting alone in the bower, uneasy, like an
imprisoned bird that does not venture to leave its cage. Mr. Hummel led
the Doctor up to her.

"There, you have her," he said solemnly. "It is a fine morning, just
like that when I set out as a boy. To-day I send my child into the
world, and that is another kind of feeling. I do not object to it if
you live happily together, till first your children run away from you
into the world, and then the grandchildren: for man is like a bird, he
takes pains and collects the bits of straw together for his home, but
the young brood do not care for the nest of the parents. Thus the old
raven must now sit alone and find few who will be vexed with his
croaking. Take my stubborn girl, dear Fritz, and do not let her have
too much of her own will. I have watched you for some time, and I
will tell you something in confidence: ever since the affair of the
cat's-paws it occurred to me, that in the end you would be no bad
husband for this Hummel. That you are called Hahn is, after all, only a
misfortune." He kissed them both right heartily. "Now come, runaways,
for the others are expecting you."

Mr. Hummel walked before his children to the house; he opened the door
of the sitting-room where the whole family were assembled. Laura flew
to Ilse, and concealed her hot face on the breast of her friend. The
latter took the bridal wreath, which her sisters had brought, and
placed it on Laura's head. Gabriel opened the door. Years before the
Doctor had drawn his friend from the bramble bush against the wall into
the church; now he walked into the little village church hand in hand
with his love, and again the children strewed flowers. When the
clergymen joined the hands of the bridal pair. Ilse also clasped the
hand of her husband.

"Your mother is wanting," said Hummel, to the bride, when she embraced
him after the wedding; "and the Doctor's family also. But you are
citizen's children, and however exalted your feelings may be you must
accommodate yourself to our customs. You will go from here back to your
native town. There your mothers will keep the after-nuptials, and you,
runaway, shall not escape the bad poetry. You must excuse me if I am
not at home on that day; I have to make a business journey, and it is
not suitable to marry one's child twice in a week." He then said, in a
low tone to his daughter: "between ourselves, I do not wish to peck of
the same wedding-cake with the Hahn family. You are not to live with
me, nor in the house over the way:--that has been advised by our
friends, and I think it quite right. After the marriage feast you may
travel for some weeks, and then return to your own home."

"The bridal journey you will make alone," said the Professor; "not with
us. Ilse and I have determined, after a short rest, to return to the
city. I have some months of the vacation still before me which I shall
endeavour to make of use to a select circle of students. Among books we
shall again find what we lost among strangers,--peace with ourselves,
and peace with those about us."



It was about Easter the following year. Mr. Hummel and Gabriel stood
dressed in festive black before the door of No. 1. Park Street.

"I was to see her, Gabriel," began Mr. Hummel, confidentially. "I took
the money to her this time myself, because you wished it. I inquired
concerning her of the people at the Inn and of the neighbors. She
behaves with modesty, and her character is greatly changed. Much water,
Gabriel," and he pointed to his eyes.

"You were kind to her?" asked Gabriel, faintly.

"As a lamb," replied Mr. Hummel, "and she the same. The room was poor,
one picture only hung there without a frame, Gabriel, as a remembrance
of her happy position in that house. It was a cock with golden
feathers."

Gabriel turned away.

"At last the place became too moist for my dry constitution, but care
has been taken of her. She is to be placed in a respectable business as
a saleswoman, and as for the illegitimate Knips, the ladies will take
care of him. I have spoken with Madame Hummel, and she with the Hahn
woman over the way; they will arrange for the charitable collections.
But as far as you are concerned, Gabriel, with all respect,--what is
too much is too much."

Mr. Hummel respectfully seized Gabriel's waistcoat button, and twisted
the averted face as by a screw round to himself. Then he looked into
the sad eyes for some time without saying a word, but they both
understood each other.

"It was a hard time, it was a mad time, Gabriel, in every point of
view," began Mr. Hummel, at last, shaking his head; "what we went
through with princes was no trifle."

"He was very light," said Gabriel, "and I carried him like a feather."

"That is nothing to the purpose," said Mr. Hummel; "the affair was
creditable. Just think what it is to have saved a young Sovereign.
That few of us can do. For a moment, ambitious thoughts came into my
head--that is to say, the Chamberlain, no ill-disposed man and an old
acquaintance of ours, sounded me on a delicate point when he last
called."

"He also sent for me," interposed Gabriel, with dignity. "Prince Victor
had commissioned him to send his respects, and to say that the Prince
was to marry the Princess."

"Even this kind of householder becomes domestic," said Mr. Hummel,
"that is at least a beginning. Well, the Chamberlain assured me of his
Serene Highness's gratitude, made eloquent speeches, and probed me at
last with a 'predicate.' Do you know what that is?"

"Hum," said Gabriel, "if it is something that is given away at that
Court it would be like a colored tobacco pouch without any tobacco in
it; it must be a title."

"You have hit it," said Mr. Hummel. "What do you think of Sir Court Hat
Maker and Householder, Henry Hummel?"

"A swindle," replied Gabriel.

"Right, it was a weakness; but I overcame it at the right time. Then I
asked this Chamberlain, 'what would you expect of me'? 'Nothing at
all,' he said, 'except that you should carry on a distinguished
business!' 'That is the case now,' I said. 'But what hats will they
expect me to keep?' For he, who has had experience like mine, becomes
suspicious, and look you, Gabriel, then the fraud came out, for what
was his idea and expectation? I was in his eyes a man who dealt in
straw hats. Then I thanked him for the honor, and turned my back to
him."

"But," said Gabriel, "there should be some concession with regard to
this matter; we are on good terms now with the people over there; and
if you have given your daughter to the family, why not also an article
of business?"

"Do not interfere in my affairs," said Mr. Hummel, irritably. "It is
bad enough that I, as father, and in a certain degree as neighbor, have
been obliged to give up my old grudge. How can one irritate oneself
now, when one is obliged to have one's hand pressed here, and to drink
family punch under the cursed Muse there? No, I was a weak father, and
as a neighbor, an inexcusably fickle man. But, Gabriel, even the worm
which is trod upon keeps its sting. And my sting is my business. There
the enmity still remains. Every spring, vindictiveness; and every
winter, triumph. I have lost my child and made over my money to a
coxcomb, but I am still man enough to hold my own against the fellow
across the way."

He looked at the empty place on the door-steps, where his dog Spitehahn
formerly used to sit.

"I miss him," continued Mr. Hummel, pointing significantly to the
ground.

"He is gone," said Gabriel.

"He was a dog after my own heart," continued Mr. Hummel, slowly; "and I
have an idea. What do you think, Gabriel, if we were to erect a
monument to him in the garden. Here near the street; there would only
be a low stone and upon it a single word--'Spitehahn.' When the doors
stand open one could read it across the street. It would be a memorial
of the poor beast, and especially of the good time when one could pluck
the feathers of a Hahn without being indicted for infanticide."

"That will not do," replied Gabriel. "What would the son-in-law's
people over the way say to it?"

"The devil!" exclaimed Mr. Hummel, and turned away.

Yes, Spitehahn had disappeared from the world. Since that hour, when in
the dim grey of the morning he had wound round him the golden dress of
the deceased Bachhuber like a ruff, he had disappeared. No inquiries
and no offers of reward had enabled Mr. Hummel to obtain a trace of
him. In vain were the shepherds and laborers of the neighborhood, and
even the magistrates of Rossau, set in movement--he had vanished like a
spirit. The place on the steps remained empty; the blank which he had
left behind in society was filled by a younger race of dogs in Park
Street; the neighborhood in every walk along the street felt a
satisfaction which they had long been deprived of; the cigar dealer
again placed his stand near Mr. Hummel's garden; and the young ladies
in white dresses, who went to the Park, gradually gave up the custom of
turning away from Mr. Hummel's house, and going over to the straw side.
The memory of Spitehahn passed away without regret from any; only with
the old inmates of the street the remembrance of him remained as a dark
tradition. Gabriel alone thought of the lost one evenings when he saved
the bones for miscellaneous dogs of the neighborhood. But he did not
wonder at the disappearance of the animal: he had long known that
something mysterious must sometime or other happen to him.

There came a confirmation of this view, which furnished food for
thought for the rest of Gabriel's life; for when, in the following
autumn, he again went in company with his master and mistress to visit
the Manorhouse of Bielstein, directly upon his arrival he begged
permission to have an afternoon's holiday, and, as he often did now,
walked alone with his thoughts. He went in the wood, far past the
ranger's lodge, amongst large mossy beech-trees, ferns, and bilberries.
It was evening, and a grey twilight overtook the wanderer; he was
uncertain of his direction, and, somewhat uneasy, sought the road to
the house. Thunder rolled in the distance, and sometimes a bright
flash of lightning passed over the heavens, and for a moment lighted up
the trunks of the trees and the mossy ground. Amid a bright flash he
saw himself suddenly on a cross-road; he started back, for a few
steps from him a great dark figure was moving across the path, with a
broad-brimmed felt hat on his head and a weapon on his shoulder; it
glided by noiselessly and without greeting. Gabriel stood astonished;
again a flash, and along the same road ran two dogs, a black and a red
cur, with huge heads and bristly hair: suddenly the red one stopped and
turned towards Gabriel, who saw at the back of the dog a tuft which it
wagged. The next moment there was profound darkness, and Gabriel heard
at his feet a slight whimpering, and it appeared to him as if something
licked his boot. Another slight noise, and then all was still.

The people on the estate maintain that it was a poacher, or the great
deer-stealer from the other side of the frontier; but Gabriel knew who
the night-hunter was, and what the dog was. He who had before sent the
dog to Hummel's house, without money and without name, had also called
him away. The hound now barked again in the night, when the storm blew
like a hunting-horn, when the clouds flew under the moon, and the trees
bent their heads, groaning, to the earth. Then he ran over the hills
from Rossau, through the grounds of Bielstein; he howled, and the moon
laughed mockingly down on the place in which Tobias Bachhuber had
deposited his treasures, and among them the cover of the lost
manuscript.

But if no observer could be in doubt as to the fate of the dog, far
more uncertain is the judgment of the present day concerning another
figure which hovers about the grotto.

What can thy fate be, unfortunate Brother Tobias Bachhuber? Thy conduct
towards the manuscript we have been seeking transcends everything one
could have expected of a Tobias. It is much to be feared that thy
disregard of the highest interests of mankind may have injured thy
social position in the other world. Grievous doubts arise, Bachhuber,
as to thy heavenly happiness: for the wrong that thou hast done to us
would have drawn tears from an angel. To us mortals it is impossible to
think of thee with the confidence which thy true-hearted words would
impress upon us: _haec omnia deposui_,--I have deposited all this. That
was an untruth, Bachhuber, and the wounds of deceived confidence will
always bleed afresh.

Answer my question, Tobias--what views didst thou hold of the unity of
the human race? of the bonds of union binding the souls of men of
past ages with the souls of men of the present? or of that stupendous
net-work, humanity, in which thou wert a mesh? Thy views were pitiable,
indeed. Thou didst stuff the great manuscript, the hope of our century,
into a bag and thou didst rip out the text when thou foundest the bag
too full, and didst carefully preserve the covers for later
generations! For shame, thrice for shame!

And yet, withal, thou didst ever hover restlessly about the cave of the
forest, and since Swedish times didst bustle about unceasingly in the
rooms of the old house!

Why didst thou do that, Tobias, silly monk? Is't possible that thou
hadst something in store, that thou wast guarding something, for the
happiness of those who came after thee, that thou wert, after all,
laboring for the unity of mankind that we said thou hadst no conception
of?

Yes, a treasure was found. It did not have the appearance that our
scholars thought it would, when their glance first rested on the faded
letters of thy record. The treasure that both the scholars found, had
clenched fists, and dimpled cheeks, and sweet, bright eyes. Their
treasure came to them alive, nor was it of the silent kind. Bachhuber,
can it be that thou hast frivolously transcended the rules of thy
order? Was it thou that set down this treasure in the 'dry hollow
place' commonly called a cradle? in the cradles of two homes?

To-day there is a great christening at the Professor's house--a double
one. The Professor's son is called Felix, and the Doctor's young
daughter Cornelia. Almost at the same time the children resolved to
narrow the space of the over-crowded world by their appearance. The
sponsors of the boy are Professor Raschke and Mrs. Struvelius; the
sponsors of the girl are Professor Struvelius and Mrs. Raschke; but Mr.
Hummel is godfather for both, stands in the middle and swings first
one, and then the other godchild.

"I am delighted that yours is a boy," he said, to the Professor; "he
will be fair and jolly. For womankind is rapidly getting the upper
hand, and will soon become too powerful for us; we must strengthen
ourselves by an increase, otherwise a complete revolution will take
place. I am delighted that yours is a girl," he said, to his daughter;
"the creature is dark and bristly; it will be no Hahn, but a Hummel."

The christening is over, and Professor Raschke raises his glass.

"There are two new human souls in the kingdom of books, two more
scholars' children in our blustering, curious, pedantic, and whimsical
community. You children will take your first riding-lessons on your
fathers' folios; you will make your first helmet and your first dress
from your fathers' proof-sheets: you will regard, earlier than others,
with secret terror the books that surround your rosy youth. But we hope
that you too will help preserve for a future generation the proud and
lofty spirit with which your fathers have dedicated their lives to
science, to thought, and to creative activity. You too, be you man or
woman, must become the faithful guardians of the ideals of our people.
You will find a national spirit that takes a stronger flight and makes
higher demands on its intellectual leaders. As we in the present, so
you in the future, will often be accorded a smile. But see to it that
it be kindly. And see to it that the office that has come to you from
your fathers, remain worthy of the people. And see to it that you too
shall acquit yourselves as steadfast and honest workers in the fields
of Science--true to your faith in the good genius of this our life."

Raschke spoke: and waved his glass.

"Pray, Professor Raschke!" exclaimed Mrs. Struvelius; "you have my
glass. My gloves are in it. Do not drink them, I beseech you!"

"True enough," said Raschke, apologetically; and he poured with
measured deliberation the wine from the flask on the gloves, to join
with great appreciation in the toast he had offered.

But in the dimly, lighted corner, by the book-case, whereon the tiny
record of our loved Brother lay, appeared the humble figure of
Bachhuber,--Tobias Bachhuber, observed by no one--in the resemblance of
a nurse. He greeted, and graciously bowed his thanks.

When the friends had departed. Ilse sat on the sofa, the child before
her in her lap. Felix knelt at her side, and both looked down upon the
young life between them.

"It is so small, Felix," said Ilse; "and yet all that was and all that
is, does not make the mother so happy as the soft beating of the little
heart in its breast."

"Restlessly the thinking mind struggles after the eternal," exclaimed
the Scholar; "but he who holds wife and child to his heart, feels
forevermore united in holy peace with the high power of life."

The cradle rocked, as if moved by spirit hands. Thus does the treasure
look, blessed Bachhuber, that thy active hand has helped bestow upon
a future race. Thou hast not acted well by us. Thou hast done us
wrong. But when we think how studiously active thou wast, in the old
manor-house and elsewhere, to perform, to the glory of coming
generations, the kindly offices of a match-maker, we cannot be angry
with thee on this solemn, festive occasion. All in all, we must say
thou wert an unfortunate, ill-starred fellow, and hast been the cause
of much trouble. But thy heart was kind. And after all, Tobias, thou
hast been taken up into heaven--with a question-mark it is true: for
thou shalt ever wear on the back of thy celestial cowl a tag of Satan's
making--a mark for all future time of thy dealings with the lost
manuscript of Tacitus.



                               [THE END.]



FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Compare the library scene in the chapter "A Day of
Visits," Vol. 1, p. 265, of this novel.]

[Footnote 2: _Andres_ means "the other."]

[Footnote 3: A festive and bibacious celebration, in honor of some
prominent person, or commemoration of a great event.]






                             THE OPEN COURT

                           A MONTHLY MAGAZINE

Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science, and the
Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.




_THE OPEN COURT_ does not understand by religion any creed or dogmatic
belief, but man's world-conception in so far as it regulates his
conduct.

The old dogmatic conception of religion is based upon the science of
past ages; to base religion upon the maturest and truest thought of the
present time is the object of _The Open Court_. Thus, the religion of
_The Open Court_ is the Religion of Science, that is, the religion of
verified and verifiable truth.

Although opposed to irrational orthodoxy and narrow bigotry, _The Open
Court_ does not attack the properly religious element of the various
religions. It criticises their errors unflinchingly but without
animosity, and endeavors to preserve of them all that is true and good.

The current numbers of _The Open Court_ contain valuable original
articles from the pens of distinguished thinkers. Accurate and
authorised translations are made in Philosophy, Science, and Criticism
from the literature of Continental Europe, and reviews of noteworthy
recent investigations are presented. Portraits of eminent philosophers
and scientists are published, and appropriate illustrations accompany
some of the articles.

Terms: $1.00 a year; $1.35 to foreign countries in the Postal Union.
Single Copies, 10 cents.




                               THE MONIST

                        A QUARTERLY MAGAZINE OF
                        PHILOSOPHY AND SCIENCE.



_THE MONIST_ discusses the fundamental problems of Philosophy in their
practical relations to the religious, ethical, and sociological
questions of the day. The following have contributed to its columns:

Prof. Joseph Le Conte,   Prof. G. J. Romanes,    Prof. C. Lombroso,
Dr. W. T. Harris,        Prof. C. Lloyd Morgan,  Prof. E. Haeckel,
M. D. Conway,            James Sully,            Prof. H. Hoeffding,
Charles S. Peirce,       B. Bosanquet,           Dr. F. Oswald,
Prof. F. Max Mueller,     Dr. A. Binet,           Prof. J. Delb[oe]uf,
Prof. E. D. Cope,        Prof. Ernst Mach,       Prof. F. Jodl,
Carus Sterns,            Rabbi Emil Hirsch,      Prof. H. M. Stanley,
Mrs. C. Ladd Franklin,   Lester F. Ward,         G. Ferrero,
Prof. Max Verworn,       Prof. H. Schubert,      J. Venn,
Prof. Felix Klein,       Dr. Edm. Montgomery,    Prof. H. von Holst.

Per Copy, 50 cents; Yearly, $2.00. In England and all countries in
U.P.U. per Copy, 2s 6d; Yearly, 9s 6d.



                                CHICAGO:
                        THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.,
                      Monon Building. 324 Dearborn St.,
               LONDON: Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner & Co.




                       CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS
                                 OF THE
                       OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.



COPE, E. D.
THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION.
121 cuts. Pp., xvi, 547. Cloth, $2.00, net.


MUeLLER, F. MAX.
THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF THOUGHT.
With a correspondence on "Thought Without Words," between F. Max Mueller
and Francis Galton, the Duke of Argyll, George J. Romanes and others.
128 pages. Cloth, 75 cents. Paper, 25 cents.

THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE.
The Oxford University Extension Lectures, with a Supplement, "My
Predecessors." 112 pages. 2nd Edition. Cloth, 75 cents. Paper, 25c.


ROMANES. GEORGE JOHN.
DARWIN AND AFTER DARWIN.
An Exposition of the Darwinian Theory and a Discussion of
Post-Darwinian Questions. Three Vols., $4.00. Singly, as follows:
1. The Darwinian Theory. 460 pages. 125 illustrations. Cloth, $2.00.
2. Post-Darwinian Questions. Heredity and Utility. Pp. 338, $1.50.
3. Post-Darwinian Questions. Isolation and Physiological Selection. Pp.
181. $1.00.

AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM.
236 pages. Cloth, $1.00. Paper, 35c.

THOUGHTS ON RELIGION.
Edited by Charles Gore. M. A., Canon of Westminster. Third Edition
Pages, 184. Cloth, gilt top, $1.25.


RIBOT. TH.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION.

THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY.

THE DISEASES OF THE WILL.
Authorised translations. Cloth, 75 cents each. Paper, 25 cents. _Full
set, cloth, $1.75, net_.


MACH, ERNST.
THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS.
A Critical and Historical Exposition of its Principles. Translated by
T. J. McCormack. 250 cuts. 534 pages. 1/2 m., gilt top. $2.50.

POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES.
Second Edition. 382 pages. 50 cuts. Cloth, gilt top. Net, $1.00.

THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS.
Pp. 208. 37 cuts. Cloth, $1.25, net.


GOODWIN. REV. T. A.
LOVERS THREE THOUSAND YEARS AGO.
As Indicated by the Song of Solomon. Pp. 41. Boards. 50c.


HOLYOAKE. G. J.
ENGLISH SECULARISM. A Confession of Belief.
Pp. 146. Cloth, 50c., net.


CORNILL, CARL HEINRICH.
THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL.
Popular Sketches from Old Testament History. Pp., 200. Cloth, $1.00.

THE RISE OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL.
See _Epitomes of Three Sciences_, below.


BINET, ALFRED.
THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS.
Authorised translation. 135 pages. Cloth, 75 cents; Paper, 25 cents.

ON DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS.
Studies in Experimental Psychology. 93 pages. Paper, 15 cents.


WAGNER, RICHARD.
A PILGRIMAGE TO BEETHOVEN.
A Novelette. Frontispiece, portrait of Beethoven. Pp. 40. Boards, 50c.


WEISMANN, AUGUST.
GERMINAL SELECTION. As a Source of Definite Variation.
Pp. 73. Paper, 25c.


NOIRE. LUDWIG.
ON THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE. Pp. 57. Paper, 15c.


FREYTAG, GUSTAV.
THE LOST MANUSCRIPT. A Novel.
2 vols. 953 pages. Extra cloth, $4.00. One vol., cl., $1.00; paper,
75c.

MARTIN LUTHER.
Illustrated. Pp. 130. Cloth, $1.00. Paper, 25c.


HERING, EWALD.
ON MEMORY, and THE SPECIFIC ENERGIES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. Pp. 50.
Paper, 15c.


TRUMBULL, M. M.
THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND.
Second Edition. 296 pages. Cloth, 75 cents; paper, 25 cents.

WHEELBARROW: Articles and Discussions on the Labor Question
  With portrait of the author. 303 pages. Cloth, $1.00; paper. 35
  cents.

EARL GREY ON RECIPROCITY AND CIVIL SERVICE REFORM.
With Comments by Gen. M. M. Trumbull. Price, 10 cents.


GOETHE AND SCHILLER'S XENIONS.
Selected and translated by Paul Carus. Album form. Pp., 162. Cl., $1.00


OLDENBERG, H.
ANCIENT INDIA: ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS.
Pp. 100. Cloth, 50c. Paper, 25c.


CARUS, PAUL.
THE ETHICAL PROBLEM.
90 pages. Cloth, 50 cents; Paper, 30 cents.

FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS.
Second edition, enlarged and revised. 372 pp. Cl., #1.50. Paper, 50c.

HOMILIES OF SCIENCE.
317 pages. Cloth. Gilt Top, $1.50.

THE IDEA OF GOD.
Fourth edition. 32 pages. Paper, 15 cents.

THE SOUL OF MAN.
With 152 cuts and diagrams. 458 pages. Cloth. $3.00.

TRUTH IN FICTION. Twelve Tales with a Moral.
Fine laid paper, white and gold binding, gilt edges. Pp. 111. $1.00.

THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE.
Second, extra edition. Price, 50 cents. R. S. L. edition, 25c. Pp. 103.

PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY.
240 pages. Second Edition. Cloth, $1.00. Paper. 25c.

THREE LECTURES: (1) The Philosophy of the Tool. Pages, 24. Paper, 10c.
(2) Our Need of Philosophy. Pages, 14. Paper, 5c. (3) Science a
Religious Revelation. Pages. 21. Paper, 5c.

THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA. According to Old Records.
4th Edition. Pp., 275. Cloth. $1.00. Paper, 35 cents. In German, $1.25.

BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS.
Pages, 311. Cloth, $1.25.

KARMA. A Story of Early Buddhism.
Illustrated by Japanese artists. 2nd Edition. Crepe paper, 75 cents.


GARBE, RICHARD.
THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A Tale of Hindu Life.
Laid paper. Gilt top. 96 pages. Price, 75c. Paper. 25c.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA.
Pp. 89. Cloth, 50c. Paper, 25c.

EPITOMES OF THREE SCIENCES.
1. The Study of Sanskrit. By _H. Oldenberg_. 2. Experimental
Psychology. By _Joseph Jastrow_. 3. The Rise of the People of Israel.
By _C. H. Cornill_. 140 pages. Cloth, reduced to 50 cents.




                   _The Religion of Science Library_.



A collection of bi-monthly publications, most of which are reprints of
books published by The Open Court Publishing Company. Yearly, $1.50.
Separate copies according to prices quoted. The books are printed upon
good paper, from large type.

The Religion of Science Library, by its extraordinarily reasonable
price, will place a large number of valuable books within the reach of
all readers.

The following have already appeared in the series:

No. 1. _The Religion of Science_. By Paul Carus. 25c.

    2. _Three Introductory Lectures on the Science of Thought_. By F.
       Max Mueller. 25c.

    3. _Three Lectures on the Science of Language_. By F. Max Mueller.
       25c.

    4. _The Diseases of Personality_. By Th. Ribot. 25c.

    5. _The Psychology of Attention_. By Th. Ribot. 25c.

    6. _The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms_. By Alfred Binet. 25c.

    7. _The Nature of the State_. By Paul Carus. 15c.

    8. _On Double Consciousness_. By Alfred Binet. 15c.

    9. _Fundamental Problems_. By Paul Carus. 50c.

   10. _The Diseases of the Will_. By Th. Ribot. 25c.

   11. _The Origin of Language_. By Ludwig Noire. 15c.

   12. _The Free Trade Struggle in England_. By M. M. Trumbull. 25c.

   13. _Wheelbarrow on the Labor Question_. By M. M. Trumbull. 35c.

   14. _The Gospel of Buddha_. By Paul Carus. 35c.

   15. _The Primer of Philosophy_. By Paul Carus. 25c.

   16. _On Memory, and The Specific Energies of the Nervous System_.
       By Prof. Ewald Hering. 15c.

   17. _The Redemption of the Brahman_. A Tale of Hindu Life. By
       Richard Garbe. 25c.

   18. _An Examination of Weismannism_. By G. J. Romanes. 35c.

   19. _On Germinal Selection_. By August Weismann. 25c.

   20. _Lovers Three Thousand Years Ago_. By T. A. Goodwin. 15c.

   21. _Popular Scientific Lectures_. By Ernst Mach. 35c.

   22. _Ancient India: Its Language and Religions_. By H. Oldenberg.
       25c.

   23. _The Prophets of Ancient Israel_. By Prof. C. H. Cornill. 25c.

   24. _Homilies of Science_. By Paul Carus. 35c.

   25. _Thoughts on Religion_. By G. J. Romanes. 50 cents.

   26. _The Philosophy of Ancient India_. By Prof. Richard Garbe. 25c.

   27. _Martin Luther_. By Gustav Freytag. 25c.

   28. _English Secularism_. By George Jacob Holyoake, 25c.

   29. _On Orthogenesis_. By Th. Eimer. 25c.



                  THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.
                324 Dearborn Street, Chicago, Ill.
            LONDON: Kegan Paul, Trench, Truebner & Co.