Garry drew a deep breath.

"That's what I've been trying to establish in my own mind," he
faltered.  "I've been thinking perhaps--but, pah!"  He spat out a
fragment of laughter as though it were bitter to his tongue.  "I tried
one job--I tried once!  I ought to know better than to wonder even,
now.  And if a man can see no reason for living his life, it's his to
quit, if he wants to!"

And then Steve abandoned his air of tolerance; he changed his style of
play.  The contempt in his retort could not have been more measured,
even had it been other than a premeditated thing.

"Quit is the right word," he came back coolly.  "I wasn't quite sure
until now.  You asked me if the others had told me what sort of man you
had become.  And if silence is affirmation, you had your answer.  You
inquired concerning my own opinion and I withheld it.  Whatever it was
doesn't matter now.  Maybe I was guilty of bad judgment, but you have
set me right."

Each word was tipped with scorn.  Again, with deliberate intent,
Stephen O'Mara lied.

"And I tell you now that had I been sure you wanted that hemlock to get
you, I'd have left you where you stood.  The world is all cluttered up
with fools, as it is."

It came so quickly that Garry was not immediately aware of the attack.
He smiled, covertly.

"Accidents will happen," he feigned a protest.

Abruptly the taller man wheeled, lids a-droop.

"--Fools, and quitters, too," he supplemented, levelly.  "Quitters and
men who show a streak of yellow that doesn't assay even a little bit of
pure gold.  A minute ago I gave you one reason for my attempt to keep
you here.  But I made a bad mistake there, too.  It's men I need!"

He couldn't have straightened the other any more quickly had he swung
and slapped his face.  Garrett Devereau went paper white.  They reached
the edge of the heavier timber and came out upon the soggy sod of the
clearing in the hush which followed that wickedly barbed speech.  Steve
always stopped there, whenever he came back to the cabin alone.  He
liked to look up at Joe's light, waiting in the window.  And now, a
pace or two in the lead, Garry turned back and stared widely into
Steve's cold eyes.  It had taken heat lightning to clear that brain
which had been all day befogged.

"That was frank, and altogether plain," he said.  "Joe took it upon
himself to hire me, during your absence--the figure mentioned was
eighteen a week.  Now, quite as frankly, I am admitting his lack of
authority."

Dusk comes quickly in the woods; twilight is only the briefest of
pauses between daylight and dark.  In the half-light as he stood there
it would have been very easy to have mistaken Garry Devereau for the
man whose clothes he wore.  And while they waited, strained and tense,
facing each other, a lone sapling between them and the eastern fringe
of the clearing swung frantically earthward as if stricken by an
invisible hand, and then thrashed upright again.  A fragment of green
bark flew aloft.  They heard the deflected bullet go whining away.
Then the tardy bark of a rifle.

It was instant-quick, and yet little quicker than the expression that
sped over Garry's features.  He turned and faced the thicket from which
the report had come; he lifted his chin and opened his arms and laughed
aloud.  The second time that day Steve reached out and jerked him
viciously from his feet.  This time the bullet missed the sapling.
They felt the air shock of its passage.

There was nothing deliberate nor premeditated in the outburst which
Steve loosed upon the man who had gone to his knees beneath the grip of
his hands.

"You fool!" he grated.  "You crazy-brained madman!"

Garry rose and made as if to dust his knees.

"Poor work," he criticised, easily.  "Too hurried--the first shot.
There should have been no excuse for a second."

With angry roughness Steve thrust him back into the deeper shadow.

"Wait here!" he commanded.

But Garry was only a step behind him when, a moment later, the former
leaned over the spot where that invisible marksman had stood.  There
were deep imprints in the forest mold--an empty shell upon the leaves.
And by that time Steve had regained his grave composure.

"Some idiot of a hunter," he ventured quietly, when he had straightened
from a glance at those marks.  "One of those enthusiasts who shoot in
haste at any rustle in the brush, and investigate at leisure."

Momentarily the intimacy which had existed in other days between them
was restored.  Garry's answer held no more of antagonism than had
Steve's calm comment.  He tried to follow the tracks that led into the
deeper timber.  It was too dark to follow far.

"This is a hunter in a hurry, then," he remarked.  "Too much of a
hurry, even, to investigate."

"Hungry, and late for supper," suggested Steve.  "And we'll be late,
ourselves, unless we travel along."

He faced about and started straight across the clearing, and he
maintained the lead in spite of Garry's effort to supplant him.  Before
they reached the door of the cabin reserve that amounted to actual
coolness once more cloaked them both.  Only once did either of them
offer to speak.

"You might do well to vary your costume a little," Garry observed
impersonally, "if your nimrod friend who hunts at dusk is going to
persist in mistaking you for a deer."

He drank hard that night from the bottle which Fat Joe, in obedience to
Steve's command, had left standing upon the shoulder-high shelf--drank
first in a self-conscious fashion with a mumbled excuse to Joe that the
rainfall had chilled him; then more and more openly, until he forgot
that he had ever felt the need of an excuse.  Not one of the three men
had made a move to go to bed, and before midnight came around Garry's
black fit of absorbtion had given way to another mood.  Blithely he
chafed Fat Joe one minute, blind to that one's sullen reception of his
jocularity; the next moment he turned eyes that had long before lost
their enmity in a glassier light of goodwill upon Steve, working over a
drawing-board at the other end of the table, impatient yet elaborately
approving of his industry.  And when Steve finally laid aside his work,
signifying with a sigh that he had finished, Garry rose and lifted a
half-emptied glass and made him a rollicking toast.

"Here's to young Virtue's triumph, Steve," he chanted, "and damnation
to the opposition!  I may be leaving you--I'll be on my way back to
town to-morrow at this time--but I'm leaving my moral support behind
me."

Steve's reception of that flourish was in no way like what Fat Joe had
expected.  He smiled cordially--a little absently.

"Thanks, Garry," he said.  "And I guess I'll be needing all the support
I can find, both moral and otherwise, before spring comes.  So you're
not figuring on stopping off at Morrison?  Planning on going straight
through, eh?"

Garry made a gesture which was meant to embrace the whole chain of
hills outside.

"Absolutely!" he emphasized.  "This country is all right for those who
were born to it--purple hills and purling brooks and silence brooding
over all!--but it's too intense for your effete comrade.  Too
quiet--too easy to think!  I'm going away from here just as fast as
steam will haul me."

The other man stretched his arms and swung one foot negligently over
the chair arm.  His unqualified agreement brought sudden alarm to Joe's
eyes.

"I suppose you're right," he drawled.  "It does get on any man's
nerves.  Right this minute I'm as tired of it as I ever dare let myself
get.  I've sloughed around in the mud enough for one session."

Garry frowned, perplexed.  His fast numbing brain refused to
reconstruct clearly, and yet dimly he knew that this sentiment was not
the one which he had heard a few hours before from Steve's lips.

"Too true," he was content to reply sadly.  "Too true!"

"We've both earned a vacation."  Steve's gentle smile never left his
lips.  "To-day I couldn't help but think that it was a shame to miss
such perfect hunting weather as this.  I wonder if I couldn't persuade
you to postpone your going for just a day or two longer.  I can show
you some deer, Garry."

The frown upon the latter's forehead deepened with his effort at
recollection.  Then he brightened with happy satisfaction.

"Deer!" he chuckled, addressing himself to Joe.  "Hunter took me for a
deer, thinking I was Steve."  He blinked, for the statement did not
entirely please him.  "Doesn't sound logical," he pondered, "but it's
so.  Fired twice and missed both shots.  Poor work--very poor work
indeed!"

Joe squared around, his perplexed scrutiny an accusation now.  Steve
had neglected to apprise him of that incident which had happened on the
way home, and Joe had not heard the rifle reports.  But O'Mara clung to
the subject which he had introduced.

"That's the trouble with hunting right here in the front yard," he
admitted.  "There are too many gunners anxious to hear their rifles go
off.  We might swing over toward the west branch, though.  As long as
this rain holds on the leaves will be quiet as a carpet.  You've never
seen my own private shooting box, either, have you Garry?"

The questioned one tried hard to pay attention, but the attempt was no
more than an indifferent success, for he was still grumbling to himself
over that unknown marksman's lack of skill.

"Never knew you had one," he answered.

"My inheritance," laughed Steve.  From his manner he might have been
talking to a sober man.  "And also the haunt of my boyhood days.  It's
the shack, you know, where I spent a good many years with Old Tom.  It
lies a half dozen miles through the woods from here.  I've made it
weather-tight and dry.  I spend a day or so up there whenever I have a
chance to get away.  We're sure of a shot if we still-hunt over in that
direction--sure of a tight roof and good beds, too.  How does it appeal
to you?"

Garry spilled over his glass and had to fill it again, with many
apologies for his clumsiness, so ardent was his acceptance of the
invitation.  He rose and insisted upon shaking hands.

"A personally conducted tour," he stammered gayly.

"A pilgrimage to the nest from which young genius first spread its
wings, personally conducted by my friend, Mr. O'Mara."  But his moods
were growing more and more uncertain and changeable, now.  He bent a
baleful glance upon Fat Joe.  "Is this--person going to accompany us,"
offensively he wanted to know.

Steve shook his head.

"Joe'll have to stay here and hold things down until we return," he
explained.

Garry resumed his seat.

"Then I'll go," he stated.  The baleful light was slow in leaving his
eyes.  And, after a rambling, muttered something to himself: "Too
officious . . . wouldn't let me have but one drink every three
hours . . . better we left him alone.  He might shoot somebody,
too--looks as though he might shoot and investigate at leisure."

With that he turned once more to thoughts of him who, firing from
ambush, had left a trail of hob-nails to voice mutely the haste of his
retreat.  It had a fascination for him; his mind went back to it
automatically, the only idea apparently upon which he found it possible
to center his faculties.  Now and then he referred to it aloud, in
jumbled and meaningless ejaculations.  Both men knew that he did not
know what he was saying, and yet his reference to Fat Joe had left a
hint of pain in the latter's eyes.  It was still there when Joe arose,
an hour later, and jerked his head toward Garry's quarters.

"If you need me, sing out," he said.  "There's whiskey locked in the
medicine chest--and I'll be sleeping light."

The words meant nothing to Garry, but he noted Joe's departure.  Steve
saw that his eyes were fixed, his lips crusted with fever, when he too
came to his feet in a supreme effort, and steadied himself by the back
of his chair.

"I've been most thoughtless, Steve," he apologized charmingly.  It was
the spirit of the old Garry talking through the flesh of the Garry he
had become.  "I've been unpardonably selfish.  You must be tired; you
have worked hard to-day."

In turn he made as if to cross to the door.  Steve drew him back.

"Joe's taken your bed," he explained.  "He's been an hour asleep by
now.  We'll be getting away at daybreak, and he always did hate to be
waked an instant before his hour, so you'll have to occupy his bunk."

It took Garry a minute or two to assimilate that.

"Surely," he agreed.  "Daybreak."  Then, drearily, with no knowledge of
what he was saying: "I wish I could go to sleep--I wish it was
daybreak, now!"

Yet he was almost sober again when Steve shook him awake at four the
next morning, his first inquiry concerning the state of the weather
proving that he recalled their plans of the night before.  But his
politeness had given way to a pallid stubbornness that would not budge
an inch until he had had a drink and filled a pair of flasks with all
that the fresh bottle from the medicine chest contained.  He refused
breakfast with sickened finality; declined even the coffee which Steve
tried to press upon him.  When the latter handed him Joe's rifle and a
handful of extra shells, however, his eagerness to be away showed in
his eyes.

Steve did not like that gleam any more than he understood it, and he
did not understand it at all.  It went around him--through him--much as
though Garry was peering cunningly at a far-off, bodiless something
which the other man could not see.  And throughout the whole morning
Steve was conscious of it whenever they met after skirting a swamp, or
slipped noiselessly over a hardwood knoll, to rejoin each other.  The
day was half gone before Steve realized that it was the telltale sign
of a brain no longer sober, even though Garry's body continued to
maintain an incredible steadiness.

Long after it seemed that eyes such as his had become must needs be
sightless the latter went on picking his way carefully over rough bits
of going; when he had reached a condition where he no longer heard the
word or two which, now and then, Steve addressed to him, he still
flattened his body and crouched at the expected nearness of game.  It
became an uncanny exhibition of mechanics after a while--a
sleep-walking sort of thing which wore upon Steve's nerves until he was
more than once at the point of taking possession of Joe's repeater.
And yet it was Garry who jumped a spike-horn buck, just before
nightfall.  It was he who fired twice before Steve's rifle reached his
shoulder.  But they found only blood on the leaves when they hastened
forward.

"You hit him!"  Steve leaned over to examine those crimson stains.
"You must have found him with both shots, judging from the way he's
bleeding.  He's gone into that cedar swamp; he won't travel far, and I
hate to let him crawl in there, wounded like that, to die."

Indecisively he paused, not sure just what to do.  In that moment of
quiet Garry lifted a flask to his lips and finding it empty let it slip
heedlessly to the ground.

"Two shots," he muttered darkly.  "Two, where one should have been
enough."

That echo of the night before helped the other man to decide.

"This strip of dark timber runs straight west to the river--are you
listening, Garry?" he asked.  "Straight to the river--it's only a scant
mile--and you'll find the cabin on the rise of ground in a clump of
balsams, three or four rods to the right.  I'm going to take your
gun--you look fagged out.  You skirt around the edge of the bad going
and I'll drive straight through.  It may be only a scratch, after all,
although it doesn't seem possible, with all this blood.  I'll take your
gun and, now, are you sure you can make it--sure you won't get turned
around?  It'll be dark in half an hour, you know."

Garry gave up his rifle without a sign of demur.  His eyes were burning
with some sort of feverish anticipation, but his answer was clear
enough.

"I'll wait for you at the river," he said, and he started forthwith
toward the west.

Steve watched him out of sight before he turned to take up,
irresolutely, the trail that zig-zagged into the cedar brake.  But once
he had started he went ahead rapidly, jumping the wounded buck within
five minutes and giving him no time to lie down again.  And after he
had covered a quarter of a mile Steve saw that it was much as he had
told Garry it might be; it was a flesh wound that bled profusely and
that was all.  For the deer, holding to a direct line down the middle
of the swamp, continued to travel strongly.  Steve had all but reached
the river-edge where they were to stop for the night, before he
detected a stirring in the bushes ahead of him and his ear caught the
crackle of a dry branch.

Instantly he forgot everything save the quarry he was running down;
forgot Garry and the strange persistence with which the latter had gone
back, after twelve hours, to quote himself word for word.  With rifle
poised he edged forward a step and halted; he stooped and laid Garry's
gun at the foot of a tree and went on again.  Once he made out a
movement behind a nearer tangle and saw the branches shake before a
heavy body that was forcing slowly through them.  His own rifle came
up; his finger was on the trigger when he thought better of it.  Old
Tom, more than a half-score of years before, had switched him well, not
so very far from that very spot, because he had not made certain first
of the target at which he was firing.

There was an open patch to the left.  If the buck held to that quarter
he would have to cross that clear.  Rock-steady the muzzle came down
and covered the first indistinct brown bulk which entered the notch of
the sights.  And then, with an oath, Steve let the gun slip to the
ground at his feet and stood shaking, checks gone white.  Garret
Devereau, wearing an old tan canvas coat which he had unearthed in the
cabin peered slyly around a bush which he had been stirring gently with
one hand.

"Go ahead 'n' shoot," he ordered aggrievedly.  "Hunter'sh alwaysh shoot
at rush'le in the dark.  Good joke on hunter'sh--good joke on my good
frien', Misther O'Mara!  Think'sh's got deer until he inves'gates at
leisure.  Best joke of all'sh on myself."

The muscles which all day had been a marvel of firmness beneath him
gave way altogether.  Without a sound he pitched forward upon his face.
A second later Steve reached his side, but the horror had not faded
from his own eyes after he had picked that prostrate figure up and
carried it into the clay-clinked shack.  His memory played him an odd
trick during that moment.  A vivid picture came back to him of the
grave-faced boy he had been, struggling to steady Old Tom's helpless
feet up that same rise.

Garry was limp and blue and pulseless when Steve stretched him out,
inside.  The second flask stood there where Garry had left it, upon a
table, and while he was loosening the latter's clothing Steve shook it,
experimentally, and found it empty.  He swung it aloft and drove it
through a window.  The crash of shivered glass made the other stir.  He
opened his eyes and stared vacantly up into his friend's face.

"Steve," he moaned.  "Steve, I'm cold!"

And that was the burden of the complaints which he lifted, time and
again, throughout the first part of the night.  Even after Steve had
wrapped him in everything which the bare room afforded he still
continued to whimper like a sick boy.  But his body held strong.  Just
as, all day, it had been his brain which had shown the effects of the
alcohol which he had consumed, so now, all night, it was his brain
which suffered most.  Again and again he called aloud a woman's name,
in a voice which Stephen O'Mara had never before heard from his lips.
In inconceivable tenderness he whispered it--the name of Mary
Graves--only to cry aloud, "Steve--Steve," in accents of heartbreak the
next.

Long before morning came his pulse was steady--a little jumpy but
reassuringly rhythmic.  But the sunlight was two hours old upon the
floor before the silent watcher saw the white lids flutter and then
part with a gaze that was once more sane.  Garry's smile had always
been mocking; it was shamed and wistful now.  The clearness with which
he remembered was a miraculous thing.

"You see, Steve," he faltered.  "You see now, don't you, that I'm not
worth trying to save?  Oh, you've tried hard; I knew how hard you were
trying!  That's why I did--what I did.  I'm no good; there's no use,
friend of mine.  Why don't you let me go?"

Steve groped and found the hand groping for his.  He nodded his head,
bruskly, to hide his eyes.  But his voice was not brusk.

"I almost shot you, Garry," he said, and there was a husky echo of
horror in the words.  "In another minute I'd have killed you.  Right
now I don't know just what kept me from firing."

"And I meant you to," Garry murmured almost inaudibly, "I planned that
you should--started to plan last night.  I--I've been hating you for
twelve hours--hating you because you were making me ashamed to do the
thing I wanted to do most."

He tried to rise and fell back, slack.  But his voice was stronger with
sudden, swelling bitterness.

"It wasn't for myself, Steve," he cried.  "It wasn't for what I might
get out of it, or--or what it might bring me, I used to scoff at
whatever others considered big and fine and clean, but I played it
straight, just the same.  I played it as well as I knew how--straighter
than you'd believe.  I thought it would make her happier, because I
tried that hard.  And she . . .  Steve, if I had been a woman--a woman
like what I thought she was, little and clean and white--I couldn't
have let a man like him so much as touch my little finger!  And she--by
God, she married him!"

The agonized voice broke there--the voice of a boy who had had to learn
that it is woman and not women who is fastidious.  Garry sat and
swallowed, fighting for self-control.  His eyes were numb, but Steve's
had taken fire, for he knew that the hour for which he had been waiting
had come at last.

"You've been trying to help me," Garry found his voice again, "you've
been trying to throw me a line.  And, for a day or two, I tried to
catch it, Steve.  But it isn't in me to try that hard, any more.  Some
men do things for what there is in it--the pecuniary reward, I mean;
some men--you for instance--because their self respect won't let them
stop, win or lose.  But now and then there happens one who keeps on
trying only because there is one other person, at least, who may be the
gladder for his success.  I don't expect you to understand; I know it
will sound small and cowardly to you. . . .  It's too lonesome living,
Steve, when there's no one who cares whether you live or not!"

"That does not fit your case," Steve objected instantly, "when your
danger or your safety keeps a woman watching, white-faced with terror
through the night, for your return."

Garry propped himself upon one elbow, the better to see the speaker's
countenance.

"My safety?" he repeated, blankly.  "My return?"  And then, wanly
grateful: "You are not the sort of man who lies convincingly, Steve."

And then Stephen O'Mara let him have it--all the story which had lain
so many days in his heart.  There were times when Garry went even paler
during the short recital; times when everything else was submerged by
the incredulity that flooded his face.  But before Steve had finished
the last trace of doubt was gone.  Before the end came Garry had bowed
his head, this time in flushed, self-conscious wonder which
transfigured him.

"Miriam Burrell!" he breathed.  "Proud, intolerant----"

His head came up.  The next instant he voiced the words which Steve
most wanted to hear.

"You shouldn't have told me this," said he.  "You had no right,
unless----"

Steve laughed at him.

"God bless you, boy," he exclaimed.  "I asked her if I might.  Why,
don't you understand that she meant to, herself, if I didn't?  You see,
she is--far, far braver than you are, Garry."

Garry lifted his hands and hid his face.

So quietly that his exit made no sound Steve slipped to his feet and
passed outside.  It had stopped raining; the hardwood ridges, touched
by frost, were flaming streaks of color against the rainwashed
evergreens, when he picked his way down to the river and found a dry
stone for a seat.  An hour and more he sat there, while his thoughts
went back over the trail of the years--the trail which had led him from
that cabin to a pair of violet eyes and lips that arched like a boy's.

Steve let his mind turn again, unreservedly, to his own problem that
morning; he tried to face, sure-eyed, the road which still stretched
ahead.  He did not know that Garrett Devereau, the debonaire, the
cynical, the world-weary and world-wise, had broken down and was
sobbing noiselessly, as men sob, in the room which he had left--shaking
with deep and terrible gasps that racked his very soul.  But it was
already daybreak; it was trail's-end now for Garry.  It does make a
difference if one knows that someone cares.




CHAPTER XVII

HONEY!

Upon their return to Thirty-Mile, two nights later, Joe's attitude of
criticism was the first thing which piqued Steve's interest.  There was
something ludicrous in the former's voice as he sat and anathematized
the food which the cook-boy brought to the table, even though he
devoured hungrily all that his plate would hold.  And because Joe was
so obviously primed for a sensation that evening, out of sheer
perversity Steve struggled to draw him into a discussion of a topic,
which, just as obviously, had no appeal just then.

"What I hope to do," he confided gravely to Garry, "is to finish up at
Morrison and make possible the transfer of some of those men up here.
We are working only one shift now.  With two I figure we could sail
along a-fogging.  How does that strike you, Joe?"

That was only one of his many attempts, but all of them, save for the
inner laughter which they afforded; were totally without result.  Joe's
answers were monosyllabic--his attention wandering at best.  To that
particular question he nodded his head, spiritlessly.

"This butter ain't none too fresh," he growled sourly, "and I wonder if
that cook-boy thinks we dote on ham every meal?  I don't for one.  It
may be all right, if a man's plumb starving to death, but it don't lend
no real elegance to a repast."

That gloomy complaint brought little more than a sparkle to Steve's
eyes, but it made Garry lean forward in his place.  Throughout the meal
while the other two fenced in just such fashion he forgot his own food
to listen, delighted anticipation in every feature.  And when they had
finished supper and pushed back their chairs, he stood grinning a
little, watching Joe survey that littered room which served as office
and sleeping-quarters for the chief engineer of the East Coast Company.
Fat Joe's gaze swung from wall to wall, from littered corner to
heaped-up chair.  Then he shook his head in despair.

"It looks to me, Steve," he grunted, "as though you ain't never had no
real training in tidiness, have you?  There don't seem to be no system
at all in the way you leave your things around.  There's one boot over
in that corner; it's got a mate, I know, because I saw you take them
off last night.  I wouldn't be certain otherwise.  And it's the same
way with all your things.  Just look at this room!  A nice place to
receive callers in, now ain't it?"

That was the first lead he tendered them, but Steve, rather than
gratify him with a direct question, chose to go forward in the dark.
He leaned over and followed his usual custom when he wanted to think.
He tapped out his pipe.

"But I can always find everything," he defended, "that is, unless you
have taken the trouble to put things away.  Then it's a toss-up that
something or other will never be found, until it turns up of its own
accord.  It's not so bad, Joe."  He, too, swung to survey the room.
"Not so bad!  Just a little unsettled, that's all.  Are we likely to
have any callers, do you think, who would object to this layout?"

Joe snorted, but his eyes were mournful.  He knew that there was
nothing else to do but yield, a part at least.

"We ain't likely to," he murmured.  "We're just naturally bound to have
'em.  They're comin' in to-morrow, and I ask you again, ain't this a
pleasing prospect to greet 'em?"

For all that he seemed to be staring ruefully down the room, he was
watching for the surprise that darted across Steve's face.  Momentarily
the latter had forgotten his assumed air of placidity.

"To-morrow?  Who?"  And then Steve laughed.  "Go ahead and tell us,
Joe.  I'm beat!  I'll admit that I'm panting with curiosity."

Joe pulled up a chair and dropped into it.  It appealed to him--this
method--whenever he had the time to spare.  His pink face was still
innocent of guile.

"I don't mind the men-folks," he resumed.  "That fat party, I mean, who
wears the plaid suits, nor Caleb Hunter, either.  Both of them are used
to such truck as this.  And I reckon it'll tickle the ladies, too.  But
I can see Honey sticking his nose in the air and sniffin', supercilious
like, the first minute he gets his nose in the door.  He ain't going to
approve at all, at all--not any way you look at it."

"Honey!"

Both Steve and Garry ignored the rest of Joe's explanation to gasp that
single word in concert.

"Who in the world do you mean by 'Honey'?"

"Who could I mean?" Joe demanded collectedly.  "I didn't give him the
name, did I?  I mean that chap Wickersham who owns the timber north of
us.  Foreign, ain't he?  Sure, I thought so?  Well, every time I run
across that man's path my heart swells with patriotism.  I guess I'm
just as glad to be born plain United States."

The first part of that statement was listened to closely enough by both
men; the last sentence or two, for all that it was heartfelt and
sincere, was lost upon them both.  And Steve's mirth was even more
hysterical than was that of Garry Devereau.

"Honey!" he panted.  "Now isn't that a wonder?  Joe, you're too good!
You are altogether too good to be wasted on these timbered solitudes.
Men pay two dollars a seat, Joe, to hear performers work who are rank
amateurs in comparison with you."

The riverman's eyes grew belligerent.

"Funny, is it?  So awful funny!  Well, perhaps you think I can't read
plain print yet, never havin' enjoyed a liberal education.  But take a
look for yourself."

He pulled up a pile of newspapers which had come in since their
absence, sorted out one that was creased open, and handed it to Steve.
It was an announcement of Barbara Allison's engagement to the Hon.
Archibald Wickersham--that column to which Fat Joe had folded the
sheet--a many-days-old announcement, now.  But the smile did not even
stiffen upon Steve's lips.  The picture which accompanied it was a poor
one, heavy-shadowed and smeared and lacking in detail, yet Barbara's
face was unmistakable.  The room became quiet.  In that hush Garry
realized that Joe's mistaken translation of the title had not been, as
Joe had himself suggested, due to lack of knowledge, but to a desire to
apprise his employer, delicately, of that which he believed was still
news to him.  And yet, from the easy way in which he read it, word for
word, Garry was positive that all this which the New York daily
blazoned forth with its customary mixture of snobbishness and vulgarity
was no longer news to Steve.  The latter's eyes lifted and dwelt long
upon Fat Joe's face.

"So that's where you got it, was it, Joe?" he asked evenly.  "You make
it 'Honey,' do you?  And when do they come in, Joe?"

"To-morrow night.  One of the teamsters brought word this afternoon,
just before you got back.  Honey is going to have a look at his trees
and things, the way I understand it.  And the rest of them, I take it,
want to look us over in our wild state.  Where are we going to put them
girls?"

Steve's answer was long in coming.

"Miss--Allison?" he wanted to know.

"--and her maid," Joe corrected promptly.  "Her maid, Cecile.  She's
comin', too, and that tall, red-headed one.  I don't remember her name?"

As studiously as he had done a moment before, Garry again avoided
Steve's eyes.

"Miriam Burrell," the latter supplied the omission.  "And that's fine,
isn't it?  How long are they going to stay, Joe?"

But Joe had finished with trifling.

"Where are we going to put them?" he insisted doggedly.

"Why, we have a couple of shelter tents somewhere in the duffle,
haven't we?  We might pitch those if----" he looked about,
ruminatively--"if you think this is too squalid."

Joe turned appealingly to Garry, only to meet eyes flaring with
deviltry.

"If you think that I'm going to give up my quarters for a troup of
curious sight-seers, you're mistaken.  If that's what you turned toward
me for, don't allow yourself to dwell upon it another minute.  I'm a
laboring man and I have to have decent rest at nights. . . .  Do you
suppose Cecile would really mind a tent?"

And then Joe's face went red.

"Now ain't you the pair of rough jokers?" he whined.  "Ain't you,
though?  But what's it going to be--this room or Garry's?  The way I
look at it we're elected to camp out ourselves.  We're hardened sons of
the wilderness, you know.  That's what they always call us in print.
But how am I going to get this place cleaned up?"

For another hour Joe argued it, and at last settled upon the
store-house building as the likeliest for sleeping quarters for the
feminine portion of the visitors.

"We have to eat in here, anyhow," he argued, "so I guess it's the best
arrangement we can hit on.  Honey won't be here much to meals, either.
That'll be one nice thing about it.  He'll be going north directly.
And now--now I guess I'll go out and have a look at the pantry, even if
it does make me feel sort of faint every time I think of the grub we've
got on hand.  Canned beans and boiled potatoes, and ham and bacon, to
round out a banquet.  Why couldn't a couple of mighty hunters like you
bring home more than one little haunch of venison?  Bacon and beans!
Steve, you sure have been living mighty low-down on this job!"

He went out with a great show of haste, but returned almost
immediately, forgot the urgency of matters in general in finding Garry
idly shuffling a deck of cards.  Throughout the evening Joe had
exhibited an unwillingness to meet the third man's glances directly,
but it was impossible for him to remain oblivious to the clicking of
the chips.  He balanced first on one foot and then on the other for a
moment; then diffidently drew up a chair.

"Just a friendly hand or two, I suppose," he suggested, when the other
made no move to begin.  "Low limit and wide open, eh?"

Garry still toyed with the cards.

"I don't suppose you've ever forgotten the first game in which we
indulged, have you, Joe?" he asked at length.  Joe was not comfortable.

"Scarcely," he admitted.  "Scarcely."

"Nor the--stakes?" pursued Garry.

"I--I seem to recall 'em, faintly."

Garry's peal of amusement was as rollicking as a boy's.

"So do I," he exclaimed.  "And if I remember rightly you stated on that
occasion that cash was no consideration with you.  Does that still hold
good?"

It was the first good look Joe had had at the other's face.  The change
he found in it seemed to perplex him more than a little.

"I take it that it does."  Garry did not wait for his reply.  "And
now--what do you say to that same full bottle against a--a ninety-nine
year blanket restriction, with me at the wrong end of the odds?"

Joe slitted his eyes.

"When they tuck a ninety-nine year clause into a franchise they mean
it's forever, don't they?" he wanted to know.

"Forever, to all intents and purposes!" said Garry.

Joe's chest sank and rose in a long, long breath.

"It's no word to trifle with," he cautioned at last.  "If you lose
it'll be a considerable drouth."

"Cut!" invited Garry, and they started to play.

That other night Garry's stack of chips had lasted far longer than they
did on this second occasion.  A half hour later, when he rose to go to
bed, his ninety-nine year promise of abstinence was piled symmetrically
before Fat Joe.  But his good-night was gay.  For a time after his
departure Joe eyed Steve, sidewise.

"Hum-m-m," he cleared his throat.  "Hum-m-m!  And I was expectin' you
to turn up any hour of the last twenty-four with a request that I come
and help bring home the remains.  You must be quite a silver-tongued
exhorter, aren't you, Steve?"

Stephen O'Mara was silent over the paper which Joe had handed him
earlier in the evening, and the lack of any offer on his part to go
into details did not trouble his questioner.  Fat Joe sat and bobbed
his head over what would never cease to be a miracle in his eyes.

"And he'll stick this time," he vented his wonder aloud.  "He's surely
going to stick!" Then he smiled widely.  "And I reckon you'll have to
admit that I handled the small part that come my way with ease and
dispatch, when I tell you that he didn't catch so much as one lonesome
pair, all the time I was dealing.  I'm ashamed of myself.  I haven't
seen such a mean, crooked game of stud dealt since I come East!"

Garry was very quiet the next morning when he and Steve went back to
their work; before noon came his uneasiness had become very apparent to
the man whom he was assisting.  But neither his silence nor his
nervousness any longer worried Steve.  Instead, the latter let himself
smile over both those outward evidences of inward panic, whenever his
thoughts were on Garry at all.  For the latter's diffidence as the day
aged became a flushed and warm-checked thing, until at four in the
afternoon Steve could no longer withhold the suggestion for which
wordlessly, Garry was asking.

"Joe was more than half right," he remarked, one eye to his level, "in
spite of the fact that we refused to take him seriously.  We can't let
those people come in and find everything too hopelessly uncomfortable,
so perhaps you'd better run ahead now, Garry, and see what he has
accomplished.  I don't want to leave this spot myself until I have some
figures upon which I know I can rely.  But you might run ahead, if you
will.  I'll be along later."

It was couched in the form of a request, but Garry's face flamed.  He
went, albeit a bit reluctantly.  And he stopped more than a few times
in his climb from the edge of the timber to the door of Steve's shack.
But once he had passed over the threshold to find that unrecognizably
trim room empty, his face grew heavy with disappointment; he was on the
point of going back outside to scan the bowl of the valley when a tall,
short-skirted figure, enveloped in a voluminous apron which Fat Joe in
a moment of mistaken zeal had once provided for the cook-boy, flashed
through the passage-way from the kitchen annex and barely missed
catapulting into his arms.  Miriam Burrell, pink-faced from the heat of
the roaring wood-stove, and smudged with flour on forehead and cheek,
lifted her apron and swung it like a flag of victory.

"I've found it," she sang triumphantly.  "I've found out what was the
matter!  I'd just forgotten the baking-powder, that was all!  Next
time----"

Then she recognized him.  With outstretched hands still clutching the
edge of her apron, she stood, almond eyes widening, and scanned him
from head to foot.  Even Steve, who had been with him every moment, had
noticed the hour to hour change that had been taking place in Garry's
appearance.  To the girl who had not seen him for weeks, that flushed,
self-conscious man was a different Garry than she had ever known
before.  Hungrily her gaze went from open shirt to caked boots, from
steady hands to clear eyes which made her own eyes shy.  And then
Miriam Burrell, cool and poised Miriam, did what many another maid in a
checkered apron has done in similar situations.  She lifted that stiff
gingham to hide her unutterable happiness.  But before he could speak
she found her voice; nor was it very steady, at that.

"I thought you were that party of idlers come back," she hesitated.
"How--how tanned you are becoming, Garry!  I thought they--oh, I can't
tell you how glad I am to see you so--so well.  I'm making biscuits for
supper--that is, I've just been practising until now.  It seemed as
though I'd forgotten something that was necessary to the recipe,
because they were flatter after they were cooked than when I put them
in the oven.  And most marvelously heavy, too!  But it was just the
baking-powder, that was all.  Do you--do you think you'd care to help?"

[Illustration: "Oh, I can't tell you how glad I am to see you--so
well."]

Steve was very late in returning to camp that night.  Throughout the
rest of the afternoon he set himself a pace, knee-deep in slushy mud,
which Garry could not have maintained.  But when he paused there in the
dark where he always stopped for a moment and a tumult of voices swept
down to meet him, he forgot his fatigue.  He had lifted his battered
hat from his head, striving to distinguish a single note in all that
treble of girlish laughter when, framed suddenly against the background
of light within, he saw a slender silhouette take up its station in the
doorframe.  Barbara was still peering out across the darkness when he
came up to her.

"We've been waiting dinner for you for almost an hour," she rebuked
him, in place of what might have been a commonplace greeting.  "We've
been waiting in the face of Mr. Morgan's insistence that it was
practically useless.  He has been telling us that when a man here in
the hills fails to turn up for a meal you never bother to look for him;
you know that the worst has happened."

Over her head the first eyes that Steve encountered that evening were
those of Archibald Wickersham.  While shaking hands with the girl, he
bowed in grave welcome to the tall figure in leather puttees and
whipcord riding-breeches, and Wickersham, from the far side of the
room, bowed back in equal gravity.  Then Caleb Hunter grasped Steve's
elbow and spun him around toward the light and peered at him
accusingly.  Barbara had not noticed until then how tired Steve looked.

"Before the others get to talking," said Caleb, "before the tide grows
too strong for my weak voice, young man, I want to deliver a message.
Miss Sarah wants it explicitly understood that unless you stop in to
say hello on your next trip down, she herself will take the trail up
here.  And lest that ultimatum sound too little threatening, I might
add that when Miss Sarah takes the trail she never travels with less
than six trunks."

Caleb clung so tightly to his arm that it brought a tinge of color to
Steve's cheeks.  It was minutes before he could get away to change his
wet clothes, and in that minute or two he could not help but contrast,
grimly, his own mud-spattered attire with that of Archie Wickersham.
The tired blue circles beneath his eyes wore even more noticeable when
he returned, to be ushered with much ceremony by Fat Joe to the head of
the table.

It was an utterly irresponsible gathering that leaned over the red
tablecloth that night--an oddly assorted group which, from the very
first, Joe realized was not at all to Wickersham's liking.  Dexter
Allison himself, fairly radiating good-will, sat at the foot of the
table, with his son-in-law-to-be on one side and Barbara's little maid,
Cecile, on the other.  And between Cecile and Barbara, who sat opposite
Garry and Miriam, Fat Joe leaned both elbows upon the table edge and
monopolized the conversation.  The seating arrangement was Joe's; it
was his party.  And the absolute inattention to detail, the large
indifference to veracity which his discourse disclosed before that
noisy supper was over, grew to be an astonishing thing.  His nights of
fancy left Steve aghast in more than one instance; they even forced a
stiff smile to Wickersham's lips, and that is saying much for Joe's
success as an entertainer, for in the bearing of those two men toward
each other there had been evident from the first a chill antipathy
which amounted, actually, to armed truce.  And the color in Miriam's
cheeks, whenever his gaze strayed to that side of the table, helped
Steve to forget, temporarily, much that he found not pleasant to recall
at all.

For Miriam's tongue was no less irresponsible than was Joe's.  Her mood
was so mercurial that she drew, time and again, the eyes of all at the
table.  She chattered with an abandon that scandalized Barbara; broke
in and interrupted every argument with hoydenish trivialities, in one
breath, to appeal to Garry the next for refutation.  And Garry, the
light-tongued and quick-witted, sat almost dumb of lip before her happy
garrulity.  But his eyes never left her; they spoke his thought aloud.
The quick lift and droop of her eyelids, the brilliancy of her lips,
made Miriam's face a living thing of happiness--made Barbara's silence
seem even more profound.  For the latter's withdrawal from the
hilarity, dominated half the time by her father's booming bass, was
nearly as complete as was that of Wickersham himself.

Just once, shortly before they withdrew for the night, Steve caught a
gleam of mischief in the dark eyes she turned toward him.  She rose the
next moment and started slowly around the room, poking demurely into
corners and closetted nooks.  Every eye was following her when she
finally found the thing for which she was searching.  She drew a red
felt, yellow-mottoed cushion from beneath the deer-hide covering a
chair, and held it up so that all might read.  "What Is Home Without a
Father?" it ran, and when the joy that stormed through the room made it
sure that the exhibition needed no interpreter, Fat Joe turned and hid
his face.  Miriam rose languidly and joined the other girl in an
examination of his handiwork.  Smooth face tinted by the firelight,
copper hair almost dishevelled in its disarray, she was an exquisitely
lovely thing.  In her alto voice she expressed her opinion.

"It's an entirely new stitch to me, Bobs," she averred.  "I don't think
I have ever before seen just this method employed."  And she turned to
Stephen O'Mara.  "Do you suppose, Mr. O'Mara," she asked, "that I might
learn it from the one who did this work for you?  It's rather"--and her
head tilted to one side--"it's rather a pretty thing!"

Again they succumbed to mirth, and then Joe rose, bristling, and went
forward much as a gamecock might step out to do battle.  He took the
cushion from the hands of the girls, who no longer had strength enough
even to hold it.

"If you are aiming to do any sewing around this camp," he stated, "you
can start in sewing on buttons.  This kind of work is entirely too
nerve-wearing for amateurs."

He carried the cushion across the room and placed it, not where it had
been hidden by the deer-hide, but in colorful prominence against the
back of the chair.  Long after he had crossed with Steve and Garry to
their tents he continued to explode with soft chuckles.

"I never did say," he defended himself, "that that sentiment was
strictly appropriate.  I always stated that it was the best I could.
And as for my technique--well, either of you guys try it some time!
You just take a needleful of that yellow worsted and start tracking
across a couple of yards of red and pathless desert, and see where you
come out.  I know, because I've done it.  I'm a pioneer.  But if I ever
tackle another job like that it's going to be a crazy-quilt!"

And Joe considered, in spite of the din which answered him, that his
challenge was ample.




CHAPTER XVIII

I'M TELLING YOU GOOD-BYE

It was fully an hour after Fat Joe and Garry had rolled themselves up
in their blankets when Steve, who had elected to sit up for one last
pipe even though his body was aching with fatigue, heard behind him the
approach of her footsteps.  Outside at the top of the rise some fifty
yards in front of the tents, he had seated himself on a log, chin
buried in one palm and eyes vacantly steady before him; but even before
he turned--before he rose slowly to his feet--he knew who was coming,
knew and realized that she should not have come.  Wrapped in a long
heavy coat, face half-hidden by the upturned collar, bare of head,
Barbara came quietly down to where he waited.  And without word of
greeting on the part of either of them, they sat down together, facing
the silvered bowl of the valley.

Time passed before Barbara opened her lips for a long, quivering intake
of breath.

"I never dreamed it could be so big," she murmured in awe.  "And then
to think that some day--within a few months in reality--engines will go
screeching their signals across this very place.  It doesn't seem
possible; it seems almost a shame to spoil it, too."

Her earnestness was so unconsciously wistful that Steve could not help
but smile at it a little, even though he had been telling himself,
since the moment of her coming, that he must not let himself dwell just
then upon that wistfulness which, for many hours, had been most
apparent to him.

"I've felt that way about it often," he answered, almost dully.  "I
like it better myself, as it is.  It does appear to be a long way
ahead, doesn't it--that day of completion which you cover in the
screech of the whistles?  Only to-day, when we were scrambling about
down there in the alders, it took nearly all the imagination I
possessed to see two streaks of steel where there is nothing but
thicket now.  But as for the bigness of it"--he laughed
deprecatingly--"it isn't so very big, you know.  It's just a--a mean
sort of proposition."

Barbara leaned forward, delicate chin resting upon interlocked fingers.
She was not quite certain whether she had caught a thread of weariness
in those words.

"To me," she said, "to me it is colossal!  Why, I thought the work at
Morrison seemed complicated and tangled enough, but there--there isn't
even a beginning or an ending here.  There's nothing but woods and
water."

She pointed out across the valley toward a mound-like outline yellow
under the moon; pointed into the north and asked another question.

"Is that part of the embankment?" she wanted to know.  "Is that the
direction in which Mr. Wickersham's timber lies?"

The man nodded.

"Just a few miles up through that notch," he told her.  "That's the end
of the rail-bed which we have been building along the river-edge."

Her next words made him start and then try to cover that moment with a
readjustment of his long body.

"I'm going up there to-morrow.  Mr. Wickersham has asked me to ride
with him, in the morning."  She waited a moment or two.  "That--that's
why I came out here to-night.  We'll be going back to town the next day
or two, and I wanted to have a chance to bid you good-bye, before I
left Morrison for the winter."

He had known that she would not be likely to remain in the hills much
longer.  He had realized that each day which he checked off, always
hopeful that the next might open the way for him to see her again, was
steadily bringing nearer the date of her departure.  But he had not let
himself think that it would come so soon.  There was no doubt this time
about the heaviness of his voice.

"I see," he said.  "I see."

There came another long silence.  Rising out of it, Barbara's voice
sounded very, very little.

"I've never known a sky in which the stars were so thick.
They're--they're like a field of buttercups.  And have you ever seen
such an irrepressibly happy creature as Miriam was to-night.  She was
radiant--positively shameless!  Did you know that Garry knows----"

"I told him, myself," said Steve, simply.

The girl faced around in her surprise.

"You?"

"Most certainly!  Why not?"  His voice was not quite so unenthusiastic
now.  "It's one of the few unmistakable opportunities I've ever had to
make two people permanently as happy as Miriam was to-night.  I'd feel
guilty all my life if I didn't help all I could, knowing how happy I am
going to be, myself!"

Thus did he work around, quite without abruptness, to a renewal of that
discussion which she had thought to close, weeks before.

"Are you trying to infer that I am to be a part of that happiness?" she
asked none too promisingly.

"You ought to know.  I said 'all my life.'"

And there, suddenly, Barbara laughed.

"I suppose now they'll marry and live happily ever after!" she
exclaimed with an attempt at airiness.

"Most certainly," asserted Steve, although her mirth puzzled him.  "Why
is it funny to you?"

"It isn't, but--yes it is too, now that it's no longer a thing one need
worry about.  That's always the trouble with emotions which are too
intense.  They're either very sad to contemplate, or very, very absurd.
And they will persist in exchanging faces, to the confusion of the
on-lookers.  Garry was so dangerously in love with Mary Graves, you
see!"

"He was in love with an idea," the man contradicted flatly.  "He was in
love with just that.  And it is not safe for any man to live alone with
an abstract conception of anything.  He's bound, sooner or later, to
lose his grip on tangible things if he does.  He's likely to start
destroying property to further the cause of labor, or liable to turn to
shooting men who were born to jobs I'm certain some of them never
wanted--kings and that sort, I mean--figuring on solving the social
problems of men and women who must solve that problem themselves.
Perfection is a fine thing to anticipate; expectations of it are
dangerous.  And women aren't made that way."

"No?" her voice slid coolly upward.

"No," he told her, and smiled with that serenity she had come to know
so well.  "Not even you, though I suppose I'd about annihilate anyone
else if he ever hinted at it."  He chose to be didactic in tone.  "No,
you're not perfect; you've too much intelligence for that.  Why, right
now you're fighting with your brain against the dictates of your heart,
and if you were above mortal error in judgment you'd know that you are
wasting your time."

The girl forgot entirely that she, too, had promised herself that their
leave-taking should not cross the border of personalities.  And with
that lazy joy of her on his tongue she might not have been quite so
quick to hold that she could love no man, had she stopped to give it
thought.  Her advance to the skirmish was most spirited.

"Your opinion has the merit of sincerity," she said, "although, looking
back upon a--a certain day, I can't help but wonder whether you haven't
been guilty of mouthing pretty nothings for my poor ears."

"That proves my point right now."  He was imperturbable.  "You're
begging the question to gain----"

"You said----" she flashed, and then grew red.

"I said I'd let you ask no pardon of me.  I said I'd let myself find no
flaw in you.  But how does that embarrass my present argument?
Flawless perfection would be a mighty difficult thing to live with, day
in and day out.  Living with a woman who never made a mistake could
have no appeal for me.  She'd always be emphasizing my own
shortcomings.  You become consistent and you'll catch me yawning some
day; grow logical and you'll almost scare me off!  Why, you're a girl!"

Her laughter was like a bell on the still air.

"And you--you still sit there and insist that perfection has no
attraction for you?  When you've just described, without knowing it,
the--the sort of a girl you think is perfect."

His lips curled in a way to quicken any woman's pulse.

"You have me beaten," he laughed.  His eyes, dark as was the shadow
upon his face, made her breath unsteady.  "I would like to watch you
play poker with Fat Joe.  Your game would puzzle him more than a
little.  Yes, you've surely left me without a leg on which to hobble
off, because it would be small spirited in me, wouldn't it, if I were
to tell you that you are the exception that makes my general rule hold
sound?  I wouldn't, however, prescribe such a degree of perfection for
any other man's daily diet.  It would prove his destruction."

"Your own superiority, of course, rendering you immune?"

"Maybe."  At least, whether she knew it or not, she loved his serenity.
"Maybe--and maybe I'm an exception too."

He sat very still.  She had turned away once more.

"You'll be back again in the spring?" he asked with that gentleness he
saved for her alone.

"I hope--I think so."  The smallness of her voice angered her.  She
feigned a short, carefree laugh.  "Unless I am too busy.  Getting
married seems to become a more and come complicated problem of proper
costuming, doesn't it, with every passing season!"

She couldn't have told why she said it; she was trying to think of
something else to say which would be kinder by far.  And then, half
lifting her, he had swung her around to him.  For a moment he held her,
face close to that small, frightened face buried in its deep collar,
while she struggled uselessly against those hard arms which tried not
to hurt her.  Her lips continued to rebel, long after her eyes had
closed--long after body and brain were quiescent.

"You mustn't!" she gasped.  "Oh, I can't let you . . . the moon . . .
we--we're sure to be seen!"

His lips on hers silenced that last incoherent resistance.  She sat,
wavy brown head bowed, when he had set her free.

"I was going to ask you not to forget!"  There was no weariness now in
his voice.  "I had planned to ask you just that, a little ago, and it
would have been a weak and useless request, wouldn't it?  Any man who
has to beg to be remembered is not the sort to remain long in any
woman's brain.  So I have taught you to remember, instead.  You aren't
going to forget, ever, now!  You're coming back in the spring, and
you're coming to stay!  And now _I'm_ telling _you_ good-bye.  It's
time you were asleep."

He helped her to her feet.  Together they turned--and Archibald
Wickersham, tall to gauntness in the moonlight, was coming across
toward them from the direction of the cabin.  The girl's slim body
stiffened, but Steve saw her chin come up.  His own body grew lazier
still, it seemed, in length and limb.

Wickersham's approaching steps were crisply precise; he stopped an
arm's length in front of them, and his words were an echo of that last
sentence of Steve's.

"It's time you retired," he said, ignoring the other man's presence
entirely.  "It's cold, and you have a long, hard ride ahead of you
to-morrow."

For a barely perceptible moment, with the eyes of both men upon her,
Barbara kept her place.  Neither of them saw that her teeth were
tightly closed over one full lip; neither knew that she had closed her
eyes, dizzily, for an instant.  And then, without a word, she put her
hand upon the arm which Wickersham offered her; but Steve, on the other
side, walked with her that night, as far as the door of the storehouse
shack.  Miriam herself opened the door and snatched Barbara within, and
then laughed with her consummate impudence into both men's faces.

"G'lang wid ye's now," she flung at them, "an' quit disturbin' dacint
folks that likes to sleep o' nights!"

She slammed the door upon them.

They stood there a second or two, Wickersham an inch or more taller and
inches narrower in shoulder and girth of chest.  Perfunctorily they
nodded, each to the other, and wheeled silently upon their heels.

Steve did not respond the next morning when Joe summoned the rest with
a long spoon applied heartily to the flat of a huge tin basin; and over
the breakfast table Joe explained to the assembled guests the reason
for his absence.  Before daybreak a rider had come from Morrison,
bearing word from Hardwick Elliott that Ainnesley was on from Manhattan
and wanted to talk with him; before the camp was fairly awake he had
ridden away into the south.  And returning two days later, travelling
the lower, lesser trails that followed the river, in order to save
time, Steve missed her party going out.  So, in the last moment, after
days and days of patient waiting, did Chance trick him sadly.

How much or how little Wickersham might have overseen the night before
he betrayed not at all at breakfast the next morning, either by word or
look.  And throughout that day, and the day that followed, while she
rode at his side, undetermined whether she should attempt an
explanation, Barbara found his face inscrutable.  It was a week later,
the night preceding her departure from the hills, long after the girl
had ceased to think of him at all in connection with the incident,
before she learned how much he really knew.

Miss Sarah had found her brother most uncommunicative upon his return
from Thirty-Mile.  In response to her first question concerning Steve
he had assured her, lifelessly, that the latter was looking very well
indeed, and let it go at that.  Because she was a very remarkable
woman, Miss Sarah had been able to curb her curiosity for several days,
but on that particular evening she found it impossible calmly to wait
longer.

"You have not told me yet, Cal," she reproached him at dinner, in her
slightly lisping voice, "how much progress Steve seems to have made.
You know how interested I am, and you must realize how undignified a
thirty-mile dash on horseback would be on my part, in order to find
out, myself."

While up-river Caleb had found much time in which to talk with Garry
Devereau--that is to say, quite a little time, in view of the fact that
Miriam Burrell, in boots and mackinaw, had insisted upon following
Garry wherever he went.  And since his return to Morrison he had been
spending a surprisingly large share of his days in conference with
Hardwick Elliott and his partner, Ainnesley.  Now his reply to his
sister's query was startlingly fervid.

"Progress!" he exclaimed.  "Progress!  I tell you he's going to win
out, in spite of all of them, damn 'em!"

Miss Sarah froze in her chair.

"Caleb!" she expostulated.  "Caleb!"

And Caleb's face went hot.

"I am very sorry," he muttered contritely.  "But I couldn't help it.
When I think of the way that boy has plugged on alone, all his life,
with no one to give him a lift, it--it angers me to think that the very
man whom I have prized as a friend should be the one to make his
problem harder."

"Would you mind explaining, lucidly?" Miss Sarah requested.  "And if it
is business to which you are referring, will you please try to make it
as brief and non-technical as possible?"

Once he started to tell her, Caleb realized that it was just what he
had needed to do all along, without knowing it.  Briefly as she had
requested, he sketched for her the facts which, so far as he was
concerned, had made of his first sneaking suspicion an absolute
certainty.  And he waxed wroth in the recital.

"It's treachery," he snapped, "rank, contemptible treachery.  And the
worst part of it all is that, even now, when I am morally certain of
his culpability, I--I can't bring myself to despise the man.  He's been
my friend for thirty years, Dexter has, and damn it----  I beg your
pardon, Sarah--but, damn it, I keep on thinking of him, in soft
moments, as my friend now.  I sit by the hour trying to foist the blame
upon Archie Wickersham, and he's no more guilty than Dexter.  Dexter's
merely good-natured about his crookedness; wholesome about it, somehow.
And Wickersham's a sneak!"

In all the years they had lived together Miss Sarah had never heard her
brother talk so bitterly.  Yet her voice remained soft.

"It's very unpleasant, no doubt," she sympathized, "although I can't
quite see why they don't all join hands and try to make a success of
the project between them.  Surely it seems feasible.  And, somehow,
even after listening to you, I don't seem to find myself greatly
perturbed about our boy, Steve.  He's very big and strong, Cal,
and--and I am very old-fashioned.  I still believe in the might of
right.  It may sound very feminine to you, but I do not find myself
worried at all over his lack of assistance in his work.  And I must
confess that I did not have it in mind, at all, when I asked in regard
to his progress."

Caleb looked up, suspiciously.

"Well?" he said.

"I meant how--how did he and Barbara appear to--get on together?"

Caleb spilled a spoonful of soup.

"Her!" he exploded with no regard for his grammar.  "Why, she is true
to her blood!  If she weren't she wouldn't be engaged to that thief who
masquerades as a gentleman.  She isn't blind, and she's going to marry
him!"

"You are positively violent, Cal," reproved his sister.  "And your
reference to Barbara does not do you credit.  If I were your wife I
suppose I'd rise coldly now and sweep upstairs to leave you alone with
your bad mood.  But being merely your sister I remain to hear you
apologize.  Barbara is not yet married to Wickersham, I might add."

"I am exceedingly sorry," said Caleb.

"And, without any reason for it, save my womanly intuition, I feel very
certain that she will never marry him," Miss Sarah went on.  "But you
spoke about Steve having no one upon whom he could depend for
assistance, and it was really a helpful hint to me.  Did I fail to hear
you say how they seemed to get on together?"

"She didn't think he was good enough for her, ten years ago," growled
Caleb.  "She wouldn't think so, now.  He cares for her, so she treats
him like a dog, of course."

Miss Sarah had to smile.

"Then I think it is high time I did something about it," she stated
thoughtfully.  "For she is a lovable girl, and she hasn't any mother of
her own.  She's very pretty and little and finer than any girl I know.
If she weren't, Steve would not be in love with her, I am sure.  And
Dexter Allison is no doubt an estimable man in many ways, even though,
as you feel positive, he has a tendency to acquisitiveness which is
deplorable.  Your continued regard for him convinces me of that.  I
wish, however, that Steve was not so entirely dependent upon what he
earns.  There are many beautiful things--beautiful and intimate and
feminine things--which no man can remain happy in seeing paid for by
other money than his own, for the woman he loves."

Ten minutes after it was done Caleb could not have told what impulse
was to blame for the deed, but he rose forthwith and went to his
strong-box, to return with the legal-looking document and the bunch of
tax-receipts which he had found among Old Tom's papers, years and years
before.

"There's the deed to some thousands of acres of the finest timber in
this country," he announced challengingly, "all ship-shape in the name
of Stephen O'Mara, 2nd!  Old Tom bought them for the boy he hid away
with him, in the days when timber-lands were going for a song.  He paid
the taxes until he was drowned, and I--I've paid 'em since, my dear!
Three or four hundred thousand dollars, or more, ought to buy quite an
amount of--er--feminine necessities, it seems to me."

With delicately thin fingers Miss Sarah leafed the papers through.

"You have never told me of this matter before, Cal," she murmured.

"Never told anybody!" chirruped Caleb triumphantly.  "I tried to find
the boy--both of us did, that is--and we failed.  And when he turned up
of his own accord--well, I knew a half year more of ignorance
concerning his legacy wouldn't see him starve.  Sarah, I wanted to see
how that boy of ours would behave, without any backing.  I wanted to be
sure of the stuff he is made of!"

They had finished a much interrupted meal, but Miss Sarah lingered a
moment at table.  With incredible calm she had listened to the secret
which her brother had been keeping to himself so long.

"A very good reason," she agreed, "one that would seem to have many
points to excuse it.  And although it is not within the letter of the
law I--I think, Cal, I shall become an accessory before the fact.  Very
shamelessly I am going to ask you to see that no one knows of this
property of Steve's, for a little longer, at least.  I have spoken with
the utmost confidence concerning Barbara; your reference to all that
she said to Steve in a childish burst of passion years ago does not
affect my attitude at all.  But I have not been blind to what might be
her--opinion now, either, impossible and ignoble though it seems.  You
will not tell Stephen of this matter for a while, Cal, for it would
please me to know, without room for doubt, just what stuff she is made
of, too!"

She straightened her diminutive body and started upstairs.

"She will be over to bid us good-bye to-night," she added.  "Will you
see that she comes directly up to me?"

And once more, from the landing, she spoke over her shoulder:

"You said that she treated him like a dog, Cal," she managed to keep
her features grave, "and being a woman I can understand exactly why
that is so.  The joy of a breathless pursuit, it is often said, is the
only choice left for the female.  But can you tell me why a man hunts
out the deepest, most comfortable chair he can find and ensconces
himself therein, once he had overtaken the idol of his fancy?  They
often do, you know, sometimes for the rest of their lives."

Caleb lighted his pipe and cast about for his paper.  "Maybe it's only
the natural consequence," he retorted, his face turned away, "of such a
pursuit as you mention.  Maybe he feels the need of a long, long rest!"

And then Miss Sarah laughed.

An hour later, when she ran upstairs, Barbara found Caleb's tiny
spinster sister, in negligee and boudoir cap, sitting cross-legged like
a girl in the middle of the floor.  There was an orderly litter of
papers around her, and a confusion of clothes; and Barbara hesitated on
the threshold until Miss Sarah nodded her head.

"Come in, my dear," she invited.  "I'm indulging in one of the few joys
left to advanced, unmarried years, that is all.  But even memories need
prodding with more material things, at times, I find."

The dark-eyed girl crossed and found a clear spot and seated herself.
Without seeming to look at her, Miss Sarah saw that those eyes were
vaguely troubled.

"I'm leaving to-morrow," Barbara began after a minute.  "I came over to
say good-bye."

Miss Sarah went on with her sorting.

"We'll see you again soon," she suggested pleasantly.

There was trouble in the girl's voice, too.

"I--don't think so."

"It's a very pretty country--a hard country to forget."  Miss Sarah
very wisely gave no heed to the woebegone note.  "Perhaps," archly,
"perhaps you'll be returning as the new Mrs. Wickersham?"

Barbara flushed duskily.  Miss Sarah, however, was gazing at a
dog-eared picture--a very old-fashioned picture of a youth in brave and
resplendent garb of a period long dead.  No one but herself and her
brother had seen that photograph for many years, and he only because he
had rummaged in a pigeon-hole in which he had no licence to look.  His
sister's eyes, as well as her posture, were girlish when she laid it
aside to hold up to view a battered black velvet suit with wide collars
and cuffs.

"I wonder if you could ever guess who once wore this?" she laughed
lightly.

Politely Barbara examined it.

"I'm sure I couldn't," she answered.  And, very slowly:

"Miriam is going to marry Garry Devereau.  She is disgracefully happy
about it."

The older woman received this irrelevance with composure.

"How charming," she said.  "And I am sure that they will continue to be
as happy as I hope you will be soon.  This suit was Steve's--little
Steve's.  Dear me, what a day that was!"

After a moment of hesitation Barbara leaned forward to examine the
silver buttons.

"It--it doesn't seem possible," she faltered.  "What sort of a--a day?"

And then, with smooth, serious face upturned, she listened to Miss
Sarah's tale--her own story of how she had dressed a gloomy-faced boy
in half-century-old finery and sent him townward for eggs.  When it was
finished and she had decided, abruptly, that she must be going,
suddenly, wet-eyed, she wheeled in the doorway and went blindly back to
the older woman's arms.  Miss Sarah hugged her once; then stood her
away at arm's length.  She knew how few women weep, without hiding
their heads.

"There, we mustn't be temperamental," she chided.  "It's only for a
winter, at most.  Remember, I love you very dearly, Barbara; write to
me whenever you are lonely.  And be a very good girl."

It was a brave bit of comfort, but Caleb's tiny sister, whose face had
never lost its pink-and-whiteness, looked suddenly tired and old when
she was alone again.  As blindly as Barbara had come into her arms, she
reached for the dog-eared picture and held it to her flat breasts.
There is no greatness of soul save there be simplicity.  Very directly,
very simply Miss Sarah stood there in the middle of her girlish room
and spoke to her Creator.

"I do not mean to meddle, dear God," she whispered, with tears
squeezing from beneath tight lids.  "I only want to help a little, if I
may.  You see, I've never had a baby of my own."

The door of the ground floor room which served Dexter Allison as an
office was ajar when Barbara re-entered the house beyond the hedge.
There was a streak of light running out across the floor of the dim
hall from within, and the girl lingered on her hurried way to her own
room to bid her father good-night.  But she found Wickersham alone when
she pushed wider the door.  The light was behind him and she could not
see how distorted was his face, yet as she paused on the threshold and
a thin and pungent odor crinkled her nostrils, she sensed, somehow,
that he had not been long alone.

"Father gone to bed?" she called.  "Well, that's wise.  You'd better
come, too; it's time you were asleep."

She did not remember, just then, that other night when he had addressed
those same words to her.  She only knew that his features became
suffused with purple even before she had finished.  And then she
realized quickly that it was alcohol she smelled; knew, too, that it
was not Wickersham who had been drinking, even though Wickersham had
trouble with his tongue.  And while she waited, puzzled and frowning,
the man gave up an attempt at his usual nicety of phrase and blurted
out all that which had been many days hidden behind his impassivity.

"We haven't yet set a certain date for our marriage, Barbara," his
voice was strained.  "Don't you think it is high time we did?"

The girl colored.  It was, at least, very unexpected.

"Why, no, we haven't," she admitted.  "But we can if you wish it.  Have
you thought of a day you'd prefer?"

"I have," he stated.  "Would the first of May be too early for you?"

Often, afterward, she wondered at her humility of that night, for
whatever the quick thought might have been which made her reach out one
hand to touch the doorframe beside her, her words were merely mild.

"It is, rather.  But I think I can manage it, if it will please you."

Wickersham had come to his feet, but he would not turn so that she
might see his face.  He spoke with eyes averted.

"It would," he answered with an effort, "and--and in the interim I am
going to be very sure, now, that no thoughtlessness of yours will be
derogatory, either to my profound respect for you or your own respect
for yourself."

The small hand closed then until it was clutching whitely the woodwork
beneath it.  She understood at last how much Wickersham had seen; she
was never to understand entirely her mood of that moment.  For had she
waited she would have left him with finger ringless.  Instead she
wheeled without a word and climbed, white-lipped, upstairs.

Miriam Burrell loomed in one window of her bedroom when she entered--a
different Miriam than the one who had once sat in just such an
attitude, gazing into the north.  The older girl's gladness of heart
throbbed in her voice.

"I don't want to leave it, Bobs," she sighed.  "I love every brawling
rapid and sulky, ragged old peak.  Did you ever see a more perfect
night?"

Through the gloom the younger girl's answer lashed back, reckless of
what hurt she might do.

"I hate it!" she gasped vehemently.  "I hate it--hate it!  And I must
ask you, please--I want to go to bed."

There is a poise which comes only with hard-bought knowledge of one's
self.  It was Miss Sarah's; Miriam had acquired it, too.  Without a
hint of resentment in her manner she rose and withdrew.  But Barbara
did not go to bed.  She took that vacated seat at the window.  And long
after her breathing had ceased to be quick and sharp she was still
wondering why the odor of stale alcohol should recall to her, with
elusive vagueness, the threatening face of a red-haired riverman who
found it hard to keep his feet.




CHAPTER XIX

SOME LETTERS AND A REPLY

Her letter came to him a week later, though she had posted it the
morning she took the train from Morrison.  It had lain for days in the
post-office box of the East Coast Company, waiting the day when one of
the teamsters should call and carry it in overland.  Steve had never
before seen her handwriting.  It was his first letter from her; yet he
recognized it the instant Big Louie put it in his hand.  And he was
glad that night that both Fat Joe and Garry were absent from the
up-river camp--glad that he was to have the next hour alone.  But when
he broke the flap of it Big Louie, who lingered uneasily in the open
doorway--even Big Louie, whose wits were not particularly keen--knew
from the expression which passed over his superior's face that this
heavy envelope which he had brought had not contained good news.  The
quick contraction of muscles which tightened his jaw was too much like
a spasm of pain.  For her first letter, so the sentence ran, was to be
her last; she wrote "less kindly than she would have wished to write,"
that she and Mr. Wickersham had decided upon the first of May, and
after the silence had become a throbbing thing Big Louie decided,
instinctively, that he would let go until later the demand which he had
planned to make for a raise to meet that raise which, so he had heard
it gossiped in town, was being paid the men in the northern
lumber-camps.  He stumbled going out and lost his balance so that the
door crashed to behind him, violently.  But Steve stood as he had stood
when his eye's sought the first line of her note, nor did the crash
penetrate his ears.

Repeatedly, in the interval which had elapsed since she had bidden him
good-bye, the latter had told himself that she would not write, but the
repetition had been unconvincing.  He knew that now.  With the note
which smelled faintly of her there in his hand he realized that he had
gone beyond mere expectation of a letter; he had dared to hope
concerning its contents.  How was he to know that she, too, after
mailing it, had suffered as keenly as he was suffering that moment,
wishing that she had employed less abrupt phrases, rebelliously
regretting that she had sent it at all?

That night his fingers closed until the monogrammed sheet was reduced
to a crumpled ball.  The edges of the paper took fire slowly, then it
exploded softly into flame upon the bed of coals in the fireplace where
he had tossed it.  And at that he laughed aloud, a harsh taunt for his
own high hopes, without thinking how much his mirth of that moment was
like what Garry's once had been.  He lowered himself into a chair, and
he was still there, motionless before a dead fire, when morning dawned
greyly.  His face had become less hard; he even found it possible to
smile a little when the cook-boy, starting at the sight of him fully
dressed at that hour, advised with alarmed volubility that breakfast
would be ready immediately.  But the few men who still remained at
Thirty-Mile, felling and hauling the piles which were to carry the
track across the swamp, noticed a difference in their chief that
morning which made them careful to hear him, the first time he spoke an
order.

Barbara did not write again, and in this, at least, the man who loved
her anticipated her correctly.  The letters, however, which Garrett
Devereau received each day from Miriam--bulky, extra-postage
epistles--brought often news of her; and these fragments Garry, knowing
without being told for whom they were meant duly delivered to Steve, in
weekly or fortnightly instalments, whenever the latter's duties brought
him to Morrison.  For Garry and Fat Joe, who had been transferred to
the lower end of the work, along with the bulk of the up-river force,
had noticed that difference too.

"Miriam says for me to keep my feet dry this cold weather," he'd tell
the other man, laughingly, "and Barbara sends her regards to all of us,
and hopes that we are making splendid headway."  Or again: "Barbara's
looking a little pale, Miriam writes.  She says she's--er--trying to do
altogether too much for her endurance."

Whatever the bit of news was Garry passed it on religiously, a little
guiltily, sometimes, because of his own great happiness.  Once he had
failed, signally, to read behind his friend's moody silences; his
surmise concerning the reason for Steve's changed bearing was not so
wide of the mark this time.  Often, within himself, Garry's wrath
seethed hot, but he was no longer as ready as he had once been with
verbal, cynical criticism.  Only to Fat Joe did he dare pour out his
soul with that vivid incisiveness which always held Joe spellbound.

"He's eating his heart out over _her_," he'd explode, "over a girl who
is proving every day that she isn't worth a minute's heart-ache of a
man like him.  I used to think she had brains, if any of them did; I
used to think that Barbara Allison was something besides a fluffy
little fool!  Why can't he see for himself that she's just as worthless
as most of the rest of them?"

And from there, without knowing how truly funny such argument sounded,
coming from his lips, he would soar to wonderful heights of profanity.
But save for the pleasure which he took in the pyrotechnics, his
outbursts made little impression upon Fat Joe.  The latter maintained a
sort of placid superiority, perhaps because he had learned early that
this attitude aggravated Garry's rages; perhaps because he was so very
certain of his man.

"I wouldn't go to getting all stirred up like this, so early in the
game," he'd reply with unvaried calm.  "Shucks, it's too early to begin
counting either man's pile of chips--" either man to both minds meaning
Steve and Wickersham, without the naming of names.  "You are too liable
to premature enthusiasms or discouragements, Garry.  That's why I
mostly manage to beat you as easy as he beats me, whenever we throw a
hand or two.  Ain't you never going to learn that a man must gamble a
bit on the cards still waiting to be dealt?"

And again, confidently:

"He's worried--of course he is!  He ain't enjoyin' his meditations a
little bit these days, but he's enjoyin' 'em more all by himself than
he would be if we were up there with him, forcin' him to look
everlastingly like four aces, when it's deuces at present he's holding.
He's worried, and that's why I don't grow nervous myself.  Because it
is only the man who is too sure who is awful likely to finish broke.
Don't you waste any pity on him yet, and I wouldn't let him hear me
passing uncomplimentary words concerning his girl, either, if I was
you.  Lightning ain't particular where it strikes when it's been a long
time cooped up.  Every man to his own taste in such matters, says
I--and shucks, man, can't you tell, just from seein' 'em together that
they was made for each other?  If a man quit every time a woman began
to put him over the jumps we'd have a dangerous decrease in marriage
licences staring us in the face.  He's just learning to care more for
her, that's all, and caring a lot about anybody never was a comfortable
state to be in.  It's entirely too uncertain and unsettling--but you
wouldn't enjoy not caring about anybody at all, yourself, would you?"

Garry admitted that he wouldn't.

"Well, then, don't waste your time pitying him."  A cold gleam
flickered in those bleached blue eyes.  "Don't you suppose I'd have
taken apart long ago this animated ice-chest who is making all the
trouble, just to see what makes him so cold, if I didn't know I'd be
spoiling the big show?  Couldn't you see, without my tellin' you, that
I'd rise up some day and leave him looking like a premature blast,
after all I've learned he's plannin' to slip us, if I wasn't sure that
he's going to get it, worse than I could ever give it to him, from that
girl herself?  Well, I would.  He makes me shiver, that man; makes me
crawl and itch to take his head in one hand and his throat in the other
and exert a little strength in opposite directions.  Give our entry
time!  The game is running dead against him at present, I'll admit, but
he's husbanding his chips.  He ain't drawing wild and squandering his
chances.  And he's only _begun_ to play."

Which, in part, was very, very true; in part not so close to the facts.
Before snow came that fall Steve had recovered his outward confidence,
at least; he had begun to hope again, while he waited and labored
prodigiously against the coming of spring.  But in his heart he was no
longer sure; he could not summon back that serene self-surety which,
toward the end, had shaken even the girl's certainty in herself.  He
could no longer argue convincingly with a vision of her, as he had
often argued with Barbara herself, that his way would be her way in the
end.  For he had begun to realize the width of that gulf which he knew
must seem to exist between them, if not to her then to the eyes of
others of her world.

It was his memories which gave him consolation those long nights, but
they also gave him doubt.  Remembering the daintiness of her as she had
come to him, the night of her party, recalling the things to which she
had been accustomed since she had opened her eyes on the first light of
day, he began to ask himself as every man like him has asked who ever
loved a woman, how in any fairness he could expect her to accept the
little which he could offer in return.  To Steve and Fat Joe, to the
men of his gang, his confidence was that of the old, old Steve who, ten
years before, had cocked his head at one of Allison's switch engines
and promised gravely, "I'll hev to be gittin' one of them for myself,
some-day."  But his heart ached.  And when that ache became so leaden
that he couldn't endure it any longer in silence, he carried it to the
one person in his life who was best calculated to understand.
Diffidently he broached the subject with Miss Sarah, approaching it in
a roundabout fashion least likely to deceive that bright-eyed little
lady.

"Garry is saving his money against the fatal day," he laughed one
night.  "He has become a rank miser!  Joe says he goes for days at a
time, borrowing his tobacco, and he won't play anything but penny-ante
now, when he can be coaxed to play at all!"

Miss Sarah was too kind to look at him directly that evening.

"The regeneration of Garry is one of the things which had made my life
most happy," she answered.  And then, paving the way for what she knew
was on his mind.  "I suppose you will be surprising us yourself, one of
these days.  And no doubt you'll be just as happily positive as Garry
is, that your choice is the only one in the world."

They were alone in the big living-room.  Caleb was still in town,
gossiping with Hardwick Elliott.  And Steve's bruised smile clutched at
Miss Sarah's heart.

"I!" he overdid his amusement.  "I have lived too much alone, I'm
afraid, ever to prove very attractive to any woman's fancy.  Bachelors
are not always born; they are sometimes the habits of loneliness."

"Stuff and nonsense!" the good woman ridiculed him.  "Why--why, if it
weren't for a suspicion that you might have your eye on some small
person or other, I'd drop everything and hunt one up for you, myself.
Why, Stephen, what a remark for me to hear from you!"

Both were silent for a moment.

"Marriage is a mighty--expensive proposition," he commented at length,
profoundly.

"Is Garry such a plutocrat any more?"

"That is not a fair illustration for us to employ," he countered, and
Barbara Allison was not the only woman who loved his lazily final
statements.  "Both Garry and Miriam have been taught that there are
worse things than the hardship of making last year's limousine do for
another season."

Miss Sarah laughed at this drollery.  She was a better antagonist than
most.  She had practiced on Caleb.

"Can't one girl learn what another has been taught?" she wanted to
know.  "Stephen, do you mean to sit there and infer that you could
continue to _care_ for a girl who could not care for you, just for
yourself?"

His reply told her how tired he had become in trying to stem the tide
of doubt alone.  It warned her, too, that she had gone too close, for
he veered off sharply.  Steve persisted in generalities, but he wanted
to talk.

"I have been wondering if that is not an old-fashioned attitude," he
said.  "Women, they tell, us, have broadened since they usurped many
places in the business world once held by men.  They are looking mighty
keen-eyed toward the vote now, and a share in the legislation of their
growing affairs, or at least so they explain.  You have heard many men
say 'business is business.'  Maybe you have watched quite a few
charming brides walk to the altar, and wondered if that wasn't their
sentiment, too."

She chose to be suddenly vexed with him.

"I do not like such humor, and of course you are joking.  I have heard
Garrett Devereau talk in just such a strain too often to be amused by
it.  And if you mean----"

"If I meant it, I was crying the baby," stated the man coldly, and Miss
Sarah knew that he was rebuking himself.  "I could care for such a
girl--yes.  But I doubt if I would marry a woman who had even the
smallest doubt.  There are too many sharp places to be smoothed over,
without chancing that tragedy of discontent.  It's merely habit that's
to blame again, that's all."  He cast about for a parallel.  "One does
not miss sugar so very much from a meal, until he knows he can't have
it.  And then--well, Miss Sarah, I have many times talked peevishly,
for a man, because there was none to be had."

"We are talking of women.  What about salt?" she inquired quickly.

"That is very indispensable, too, but----"

"Of the two which do you always take care shall not be missing from
your pack, whenever you turn into the woods?"

"I see where you are heading, but----"

"I do not like dissemblance, Stephen," she warned.  "You know without
the salt of love the sugar of life can grow sickeningly cloying."

He did not win his argument, but defeat gave him far more happiness
than could have come from victory.  Leaving her that night, he closed
his hand over her delicate fingers in a clasp which left her smiling in
wonder after he had gone.  She watched horse and rider disappear into
the whiteness of the new winter till both were lost to her sight.

"Bless the boy," she murmured then.  "Bless the boy!"  And to Caleb,
her brother, when he came stamping in: "I surely must take a hand with
these children.  They have been left to their own devices long enough."

Caleb had recovered his good-natured view of the whole affair; he was
given to grinning those days at her flutterings.  On more than one
occasion he told her, none too flatteringly, that she made him think of
an officious hen with a brood which a high rate of mortality and
prowling night-raiders had left bereft of all save two of her hatch.
But this particular witticism did not bother her in the least, perhaps
because she realized how pat the comparison was.  Instead of silencing
him she showed him the letter which she constructed some days
later--constructed most painstakingly, the second week in December.
She deigned to read it aloud to him, before she dispatched it on its
journey.


"Barbara, dear child," she wrote, "this is the appeal of a lonesome
spinster lady who finds that winter, still only a lusty infant here, is
the season for younger, warmer pulses.  I am very tired of Caleb's
continued company; that is, with nothing to leaven it.  The keenest of
epigrammarians, my dear, becomes very commonplace, you know, to ears
too long tuned to one voice.  So I am writing you in dignified
desperation to come to me this holiday season--Caleb is not always as
epigrammatic as I could wish.

"I am going to be positive that you will come, unless you have already
made other plans.  And, on second thought, if you have already done so,
I am going to fall back upon the privileged tyranny of one who once
carried you in her arms.  You must come to me this Christmas!"


There was another whole paragraph of rambling, repeated arguments, and
then a full page devoted to the beauties of the hills and season.


"The days are diamond brilliant," she wrote, "and the nights as drily
cold and crisp as Caleb's few last cherished bottles of champagne.  We
have a foot of snow, two feet in the ell of the house where the
mint-bed lies, and that has afforded Caleb much peace of mind, too.
The roots will live nicely under their warm blanket, you see--all of
which must read frivolously to you, coming from staid Miss Sarah.  I
can only plead that already I must be less lonely for anticipation of
your arrival.  Are you well?  You will find new roses for your cheeks
in this climate.  And you may telegraph your acceptance, this once, if
you are too busy to write, although you know I deplore the lack of
those punctillios which once made of all custom and etiquette a most
charming thing."


It was signed, "Yours, my dear, Sarah Hunter."

There was a quaint twist to the letter S; sharp angles in the
chirography which a newer decade of femininity might have found sadly
lacking in a largeness of loops now indispensable as indication of
"character."  And there was a postscript, of course.


"Stephen O'Mara has been several times to dinner, since your departure.
He is working very hard, but most successfully, I am sure, for he
appears to be very happy.  He is thinner than he was, but who could
have guessed that the boy he was would grow to be such a handsome man!
Men with eyes like his and such voices used to break the hearts of
susceptible maids, when I was sixteen.  Do come!  S. H."


She read it aloud from beginning to end, nor did she falter much when
Caleb greeted the postscript with a shout of joy.  Caleb was most
high-spirited those days, for the line in regard to the progress of
Steve's work was in truth an under-statement if anything, even though
the assurance of his happiness might have been called a misconstruance
of facts.  Caleb had almost begun to think that he had done Dexter
Allison, his friend, an injustice.  He had begun to congratulate
himself on having said nothing to him directly.

"What do you think of it?" his sister asked pleasantly, when she had
finished reading.  "Will it--do?"

"If you mean--will it fetch her, I can only say Heaven knows!"  Indeed
he was enjoying himself.  "You feel positive that she cares for him,
you say? . . .  But I thought you were always inclined to believe Steve
rather easy to look at, even as a boy?"

"I was!" maintained Miss Sarah.  Her voice grew girlish.  "Do you
remember the night you gave him my old hunting coat, Cal, and he went
to sleep with it in his arms?"

Some of the teasing note left her brother's voice.

"Then why do you tell Barbara--why do you seem to infer--" he foundered
hopelessly.

"Stupid!" said Miss Sarah.  "Will she come?"

"She won't!" he stated solidly.

When he spoke in that tone Miss Sarah always chose to believe the
contrary, and events in this instance proved her right.  Barbara did
not wire.  She wrote a long letter full of little twists and turns
which led at last to the subject which Miss Sarah had mentioned so
parenthetically.


"I am delighted at the prospect of getting away from town for a week,"
she closed as she had opened her reply--"delighted at Mr. O'Mara's
splendid success.  Last night I overheard father telling some business
associates that he would one day be the biggest power in the north
country, unless something happened to check him soon.  That was very
flattering, wasn't it?  It will make you very proud, I know.  Tell Mr.
O'Mara I wished to be recalled to him.  As I have already warned you in
this letter, father insists on coming with me.  I think he must be a
little tired of the city himself, for he is very restless.  And remind
Uncle Cal that I am to have the wish-bone, or I will not come at all!"


This reply Miss Sarah also read aloud to her brother, in a voice that
was not quite Christian, however, for it was gloating in tone.

"There!" she breathed, "and, Cal, aren't you ashamed sometimes to have
your judgment so often refuted by a mere woman?"

Caleb had been reading in the Morrison Standard that the East Coast
Company had made unbelievable strides in its work, in spite of many
conspiring hard-luck circumstances; he was frowning over that oddly
veiled compliment of Allison's, which his daughter had so innocently
repeated, but he was glad to hear that Dexter, too, planned to run up
for the year-end.  He was a bit bored himself.  Now he grinned over
another thought.

"She fails to mention whether she ever noticed the color of his eyes,"
he choked a little, "or--or the heart-breaking quality of his voice!
Maybe she hasn't noticed 'em yet herself, eh?"

Miss Sarah scorned to answer.  She went upstairs to her desk and she
wrote two letters that night, before she retired.  One went back to
Barbara.  The other had not so far to travel, but it was longer in
reaching its destination.




CHAPTER XX

BLUE FLANNEL AND CORDUROY

The world was snow-bound--all that small world which lay between the
hills in the valley at Thirty-Mile.  For two days it had been snowing,
great flakes so plume-like that they seemed almost artificial, making
one think of the blizzards which originate high in theatre-flies under
the sovereignty of a stage-hand who sweats at his task of controlling
the elements.  For two days it snowed so heavily that all work moved
but intermittently at the up-river camp; and then, two days before
Christmas, the mercury dropped sharply into the bulbs and the weather
cleared.

Stephen O'Mara, standing at a window of his cabin late in the
afternoon, peering out upon that cold white world, was wondering if she
would have found it as wonderful as it seemed to him at that moment; he
was wondering whether he would have to break a fresh trail himself,
upon snow-shoes, if he were to join Fat Joe and Garry in town for the
holiday, when a team of horses came toiling into view far across the
snow.  It was Big Louie, sitting huge and stolid upon his load of
supplies, coming in a whole day late and cracking his long lash over
the glossy backs of the bays which the lash was never allowed to touch.
Behind him another sledge appeared in turn, with two figures on the
seat, but even at that distance they looked neither so huge nor so
stolidly reconciled to the bite of the wind.  Fallon was driving;
Shayne was beating his arms across his chest.  And the second team was
fagged and caked with frozen lather.  Big Louie had been breaking trail
for twelve bitterly hard hours, but his animals were still far from
spent--not so tired in fact but what they could throw forward their
heads and nicker at the sight of warm stables.  Big Louie loved horses
as he loved nothing else in his whole dull world.  Sober he fed them
bits of sugar, with strange throat-sounds which they must have
understood, it seemed; drunk he threatened the life of any man who
might chance to maltreat them.  That was the reason Steve had made Big
Louie his head-teamster only two weeks before.

From his window he watched the heavy loads crawl up to the store-house
door; he watched the drivers throw tarpaulins over the boxes and knew
that they were too weary to unload that night.  And he was still there
at the frosted pane when the three men, Big Louie still plowing ahead,
hove into view again from the direction of the stables and came
straight toward his own shack.  He opened the door and bade them enter
before they had had a chance to knock.  The swagger in the shoulders of
two of them told him what to expect.  Big Louie was only clumsy, as
usual.

"You did well to make it," he told the latter, kindly, as he always
addressed him.  His nod to the others, who reeked of white whiskey, was
in part a question, in no wise a welcome.  "Well?" he asked.

Apparently there had been a conference beforehand, for there was no
hesitancy on the part of Fallon, who had been ordained spokesman.

"We've come for our time," he growled.

Steve nodded gravely.

"I see," he murmured.  "May I ask what's your grievance, this time."

They were the satellites of Harrigan.  Because of that he had kept them
all where his eyes could find them at times.  And even though their
arch-leader in discontent had not crossed his path in many days he
listened now to an echo of Harrigan's activities.

"They're offering three a day in the Reserve camps."  Fallon should not
have gloated.  "Three a day and a bonus for the high week cut.  We're
going back to the river."

"I see," again observed Steve.  "Are they guaranteeing this wage for as
long as you want to work."

Apparently they had decided, too, that there should be no bargaining.

"We want our time," Fallon reiterated.  "This is going to be a man's
year on the river!"

"You, also?" Steve inquired of Shayne.

That worthy gloated too.

"Yes, me also," he came back, "an' a hundred others, before the ice
goes out."

Big Louie he had given up for lost long before that, and yet it was
with Big Louie that Steve made a sincere effort.

"I'd like to have you stay, Louie," he faced the third man.  "I need
you, for you can do more with horses than any man I know.  You are
worth three a day to me.  Do you care to think it over?"

Big Louie's eyes had been mournful when he stumbled in out of the cold.
They were that now.  He started to turn toward the window for a look at
the stables, and then thought better of it.  Resolutely, for him, he
shook his head.

"I am done--me," he muttered.  "I work for no company that will leave
honest men to starve."

It was hopeless from the start, yet Steve tried again.

"I can promise you work as long as you are able to hold a rein," he
offered, but he moved nearer the door while he was speaking.  "That is
all I can promise."

Perhaps Fallon believed that Big Louie was weakening; perhaps he felt
that the situation was too highly dramatic to be wasted, for he made a
wide flourish with one hand.

"We want our time, and we want it now," he threatened.  "We're going to
show you who bosses this river, before we're done with you!"

Fallon shouldn't have gloated; he shouldn't have threatened.  And
Shayne shouldn't have smiled.  Steve had slipped the latch loose.  Now
he swung open the door.

"Call for your time at the Morrison office," he said evenly, "and if
you're going--why, go!"

By collar and belt he swung him back and drove him sprawling into a
drift.

"Are you in a hurry, too, Shayne?" he asked pleasantly, and Shayne
buried his head beside Fallon's in the snow.  Then Steve closed the
door carefully and turned again to Big Louie.

"Louie," he said, "I make it a rule to urge no man who does not wish to
stay.  If it needs persuasion to keep you, I do not want you here.  But
you are running with the wrong crowd, Louie; you'll learn it
someday--but someday may be too late."

The big, dreamy-eyed man was hardly listening, but he gestured toward
the door.  And Steve treated his departure kindly, as he had always
treated his presence.  Outside where Shayne and Fallon had picked
themselves up, Big Louie hesitated and fumbled in his pocket with a
cold-cramped hand.  He delivered the letter which had been entrusted to
him, before he went down the hill.  There are many men like Big Louie
who are pitifully faithful until events outstrip their intellects.
Steve was sorry for him; and a half hour later, after he had read Miss
Sarah's prim note requesting his presence at dinner at seven-thirty,
Christmas eve, he grew sorrier still while he watched the ill-assorted
trio meet once more, blanket-packs upon their backs and snow-shoes on
their feet.  Big Louie had joined the other two from the direction of
the stables.  There were words between them, for Steve saw the huge
man's arm lift to strike Shayne to the ground, and then drop harmlessly
back to his side.  And Steve knew what that bit of pantomime meant.
Big Louie had been to bid his team good-bye.  There was a smudge of
brown sugar across his coat, though the watcher was too far away to see
that.  But he knew that Big Louie had been crying, knew that Shayne had
smiled.  It was the second time that Shayne had smiled that
evening--his second bad mistake.  Long after they had disappeared into
the north toward the Reserve Company's camps, Steve wondered that it
had not cost him his life.

Miss Sarah's note which had been almost a week on the way was very
primly correct, but the inevitable postscript which under-ran it
sounded a more intimate note.

"We are not excessively formal as a rule, Stephen," she wrote, "so a
dinner jacket will be adequate.  As I am expecting two other guests
besides your friends, Mr. Morgan and Garrett Devereau, I must ask you
to let no business matters interfere with your promptness."

Steve dared not let himself wonder who those other guests would prove
to be, Miriam Burrell, he knew, had already written Garry that this was
to be the saddest Christmas, and the merriest, that she had ever known,
giving as respective reasons her inability to be with him, and the fact
that she was so entirely his.  Because he would not let himself hope
this time he was not disappointed, or at least so he told himself, when
he found only Dexter Allison with Caleb, the next afternoon near six.
And on a sudden thought his eyes went roving around the room then,
looking for Archibald Wickersham; but Miss Sarah gave him no time for a
protracted scrutiny.

"Your room is ready, Stephen," she told him, and steered him toward the
stairs.  "You have an hour in which to dress--and you know already that
I am old-maidenishly strict."

Surely Archibald Wickersham was the other guest whom they were
expecting.  Allison's very presence argued that.  Yet Steve's nose
played him a startling trick as he mounted upward.  He could have sworn
that he smelled that faint perfume which always made him remember, now,
his first letter from her; had he not been afraid to hope he would have
been positive that there was a flurry of skirts retreating above him.
But he knew that she could not have come.  He knew it!  And then,
three-quarters of an hour later, when he had dressed and turned again
to the stairway, she was there at the foot of the flight, waiting for
him to appear.  In a little low pink satin gown that made rounded her
slenderness--made her appear even smaller than she was--she gave him an
elaborate courtesy from the main floor, and flung up at him her
laughter.

"Merry Christmas, Sir Galahad," she called.

Just as he had paused there a half-score of years before, Stephen
O'Mara paused now, with Caleb and Miss Sarah again gazing up at him.
It was the first time Sarah Hunter had seen the grown-up Steve in
conventional black and white; her emotions were much the same as they
had been on that remoter day.  But Steve did not even see her glowing
face below him in that instant, nor Caleb's, nor that of Allison
either, who watching Steve's eyes, had suddenly ceased to smile.  Caleb
knew what his sister's thoughts were, however, for he was recalling
that black velvet suit with silver buttons himself.  While Steve and
Barbara were shaking hands he gained her ear in whispered admiration.

"Sarah," he commented, "Sarah, you are clever!"

Miss Sarah was on the point of taking Dexter Allison's arm to lead the
way to table.  Her reply was tuned to Caleb's ear alone.

"She had thought of him in terms of blue flannel and corduroy long
enough," she said.  "If you please, Dexter--Stephen, do you and Barbara
want any dinner?"

Those two were still shaking hands.  Steve, who was only dimly aware of
the fact that Garry and Fat Joe had arrived, the latter guilty of his
first dinner jacket and enormously proud of his guilt, stood looking at
Barbara while she was chattering at him, without hearing distinctly a
word she spoke.  Miss Sarah's question helped to bring him back.

"You look as though I were a wraith," the girl accused him.  "Am I so
pale after a few weeks of sophisticated city air?"

But her man had taken command of himself again, by then.

"I thought you looked like--shall I tell you what I thought?"

"Most certainly," she was forced to insist.  "Wasn't it a bald enough
invitation for a pretty speech?"

"I thought you looked like a small pink bon-bon," responded Steve
leisurely, and while the rest laughed at her discomfiture, Fat Joe
leaned over and nudged Garry.

"What'd I tell you?" he demanded.  "What'd I tell you?  Say, ain't he
working well to-night?"

But for once Joe had himself been misled into premature enthusiasm such
as he had decried in Garry.  For if Barbara had, in Miss Sarah's
phrase, been thinking of Steve in terms of blue flannels and corduroy,
until then, before the dinner ended she was aware of a difference in
the attitude of this man who loved her, too great to be explained by
the clothes he wore.  The very light in his eyes, whenever she
contrived to catch him gazing at her, convinced her of what was behind
his new restraint; and then, immediately, perversely, she set herself
to break it down by those very methods best calculated to strengthen
it.  More than once that evening Dexter Allison withdrew from the
general conversation to watch the play of his daughter's glances upon
O'Mara's tanned face; several times he fell to chewing his lip as was
his custom when deeply perplexed.  Complications scarcely ever troubled
Dexter Allison.  He was beginning to awake to one now which already
worried him more than he cared to admit.

There was no keeping the girl within doors after dinner was over.  She
ran upstairs and changed into moccasins and white blanket coat, and
skirt that barely met the moccasin tops half-way.  And Steve, who had
changed too and was waiting for her when she came down, had knotted a
crimson scarf about the middle of his belted jacket to match the white
one twisted about her throat.  With much approval Miss Sarah noted,
while she watched them away on snow shoes, the bit of color it added to
his soberer garb; she promised herself to recall it to Caleb at some
future date.  Caleb had very pronounced views regarding the lack of
vanity in men's dress.  But for the time being she was content to go
upstairs and be alone with her campaigning.

The man and girl climbed far that night in quite unbroken silence.
They had reached the crest of the first hill and stopped with the
higher ridges in front of them, black bulks filigreed with white,
before Barbara decided that she would have to make him talk.

"Aren't you going to say anything at all?" she challenged then.

She needed no explanation of his mood.  To a woman there is no subtler
flattery than a man's dumb acknowledgement of her unattainability.  He
talked when she bade him talk, but she was not positive whether she was
vexed or not because their conversation was of common-place things: The
work he was doing, upon which he was aggravatingly reticent, or the
severity of the last storm, or the amazing clarity of the night.
Certainty, however, was hers that he was no longer sure of
himself--that he was fighting silently against a growing conviction
that she was beyond his reach.

It made her very happily sad, somehow, and when Steve told her about
Big Louie and his horses, the sadness became a lump in her throat, and
a blur in her eyes which the man could not help but see.

"It is too bad," he said slowly.  "I have been sorrier for him myself,
since his going, than I've been over anything for years.  I do not know
just why, but I'm afraid for him.  The others--"  He stopped there,
catching himself before he had said too much.  "I could always tell Big
Louie how I wanted a thing done, and know without one little bit of
doubt that he would stick to my orders.  But that is the trouble with
his kind.  Because he has no initiative of his own, he has to depend
upon the ideas which other men supply him.  And there is no guarantee
whether they will be good or bad ideas."

From the first he talked fitfully that night.  On other occasions she
had noticed how his mind seemed to veer, whimsically, from one topic to
another with little apparent continuity of thought, only to swing back
again, just when she was beginning to feel that she had lost the thread
of inference, to point his argument with parallels that were new and
delightful wisdoms to her ears.  But to-night his grave-voiced
divergences, oftener than not, left her thoughts behind his thoughts.

"It is a very easy country to get lost in," he next remarked, when he
had had to insist that his sense of direction, and not hers, should be
the one to be trusted.  "He was never able to go fifty rods into the
brush himself, without getting completely turned around, and he was
born in these hills, at that."

Then he had to tell her that it was Big Louie to whom he was referring,
before she understood quite what he meant.  But he abandoned that
trend, freakishly, the very next moment.

"It doesn't seem complicated," he pondered.  "To a man who has come
into the world with his sense of north and south and east and west all
safely relegated to his backbone instead of having to depend upon the
flighty functions of his brain for his guide, it's about the simplest
thing there is.  He finds his way without thinking about the lay of the
land, or moss on the trees, or the sun or stars.  But the other
one--the one who has to stop and reason that he must travel so many
miles to the west to reach home in the afternoon, because he came that
many in the morning--why, he even gets to doubting his compass, until
night catches him without a roof over his head and no wood collected
for a camp-fire."

Long before then she had learned how sensitive a thing was his
spirit--and she wanted him to go on.

"It must be a terrible thing to--to know that one is lost."  Her hands
were buried deep in her pockets; she found it hard to keep pace with
his stride.  "I am always afraid of the night noises in the woods."

It was the girl in her which had spoken at which he smiled, but his
smile was absent-minded.

"That is very strange, too," he accepted her lead, after contemplating
it for a time.  "It is always the one who can't trust his compass who
loses his head, once he knows he's mixed up.  Big Louie was that way.
He was lost once, for two days, before we found him; he was half mad
with terror and pretty near dead with fatigue.  He had been running in
a big circle for hours, and we had to corner him before he would see
that we were friends.  He'd been listening to the night noises, you
see; dwelling on the blackness and the silence and his lack of a fire,
until his brain was no longer any use to him."

"What should one do?" she asked him faintly, when she knew that he was
waiting for her to speak.  Yet his answer persisted in adding to that
word-image which his mind was molding.

"Quit letting yourself look back over your shoulder, to see if anything
is following you!"  He was suddenly gruff, and she knew that he was
talking at himself.  "Quit dwelling on the crackle in the brush, and
the darkness, and the things you are afraid to fear.  The wise man
stops when he knows he's lost his bearings; he busies himself
collecting wood for a fire, if not to keep the chill from his body by
exercise, then because it keeps his mind off himself.  And he sleeps if
he can.  Anyhow he lies quiet and rests.  And when morning comes he
uses his reason better for having rested, if his instincts still play
him false.  He has a look at the stars before daybreak; he watches the
sun come up, and he holds a straight line by the height of land, or by
the river flow, and he hits familiar country soon."

This time the girl did not interrupt him.  She was watching his face.

"And that doesn't apply just to one little corner of the woods, or one
little corner of life, either, does it?" he mused.  "When a man's
instinct fails him, he can stop and get his bearings back; when he's
afraid he can kindle a fire within him, always, if he'll only rustle
around before it gets too dark to search for fuel.  But at that it
isn't so very easy, in life, to get one's bearings straight again.
It's stormy, some nights, maybe, and the stars don't shine; sometimes
day dawns cloudy and the sun is not advertising its location too
strongly.  Instinct has always been strong in me, but there have been
times, too, when I have had to hold my eyes mighty steady on some
object far beyond me, to keep my line dead straight."  He stopped short
and faced her.  "You would be afraid, yes," he told her, "but you would
try hard to discipline yourself.  You would never go rushing blindly
into a worse tangle, spending your strength and breaking your sanity
down.  Big Louie is a child; discipline is wasted on him.  And--and I
have always been able to find my way myself."

She knew now toward what point he had been talking.  Mentally he had
been wandering, as Big Louie once wandered in the flesh, in a wide
circle that fetched up again against that doubt in himself which was
hurting her, even while it was making her happy.  He had taken the
example of Big Louie and applied it to his own life, and suddenly the
girl realized how infinitely greater was his philosophy thereof than
was hers.

"I shall try to remember that," she answered soberly.  "If ever I am
lost I--I shall try to wait confidently for daylight, and keep my eyes
to the fore."

She was near to tears when he stooped and knelt in the snow to tighten
a thong slipping from one webbed foot.  Below them stretched a plain of
shimmering frost-points, bounded by inscrutable walls of black timber.
Somewhere within the warmer heart of a swamp a fox yapped hungrily;
somewhere within her own heart his whimsical discourse had awakened a
sense of the mystery of his wilderness--its friendship for those who
love it--its implacable enmity for those who do not understand.  And he
looked up just when that emotion came flooding into her face.

"It is wonderful--wonderful--wonderful!" she breathed, throwing out
both arms with that ecstatic impulsiveness which he knew so well.  "Now
I know why you said men always return to it, once they have felt its
spell."

"You are lovelier than you know!" came back from him, almost gruffly
again; and she could not parry with lightness so swift and strained a
speech.

"You always tell me very pretty things," was all she could think of to
say in reply.

But then, rising, he flung back his head and shook himself as if
throwing off a burden too restraining and irksome.  He laughed aloud,
and from that minute until he loosed her feet from the snowshoes he was
more like her "blue flannel and corduroy" lover again.  But his attack
no longer made her fear herself.

"If I cared for you, yes," he made her admit before he would let her go
in that night.  "If I cared for you, my engagement to no man could
stand in the way.  But that is the reason I know I do not care."

She had seen him grave with doubt that night; seen him fight to shake
it off.  There was doubt in his answer now.

"Because I am not----"  But he could not force himself to ask it.

"Because I could never care as you would demand the woman should care
who marries you."

She wanted to help him a little, she didn't know just why.  Pity is a
very dangerous emotion, when pity is not sought.

"You are loving me that way this minute," he said, but his words were
dogged.  "Loving me more than you know."

There was neither reference to her letter nor mention of that night at
Thirty-Mile when she had stolen out to bid him good-bye.  Other long
tramps followed, on other pale and zero nights, but his attitude
remained much the same.  Whimsically at times he shared his innermost
thoughts with her; always he told her that he cared, with a gentleness
in the telling that made it hard for her to listen.  Barbara least of
all realized what those days were doing to her, but before that week
had run its course even Caleb's eyes were opened to the change in Steve.

"I told you so," he said, but he took no delight in recommending it to
his sister's attention.  "If he didn't know it before, she's taught him
this trip that he hasn't a chance."

"Your sensation is ancient history, Cal," was all she would reply.

And even though, so far as Steve's peace of mind was concerned, Miss
Sarah's scheming had not helped at all, that tiny lady still chose to
view her activities complacently the day Barbara took leave of her
again.

"Write me every detail of your plans," Miss Sarah ordered her.  "Proxy
bridal preparations are better than none, my dear, and I am madly
interested."

At the last minute Barbara bobbed her dark head in reply.

"I will," she promised meekly.  And then, wide eyes vague with fear:
"Aunt Sarah, I--I'm not sure that I want to be--married at all!"



"You will be coming back," he told her again the day he put her on the
train.  "You will be back in the spring?"

It was his old, hopeful challenge, with all the hope left out.

"I think so," she faltered in return.  "I mean to come and see the
completion of your work, if father will let me."  She knew a moment of
confusion.  "I wonder, many nights, if you are safe, up here in the
hills."

Indeed, Miss Sarah had made progress, though the surface indications
were small.  The girl would never think of him again simply in terms of
blue flannel and corduroy.  But that was not the most disturbingly
vivid memory which she carried away with her.

"I love you," he framed the words silently as the train was pulling
out, and although their positions were reversed, the moment was so
reminiscent of that day when he had leaned out of her father's switch
engine cab and asked if she wanted a ride, that it made her throat ache.

She waved a small gloved hand to him on the platform.

She did not want to go.




CHAPTER XXI

SETTING THE STAGE

There are two interviews which should be mentioned here, if for no
other reason then merely because they were both so entirely the outcome
of Miss Sarah's Christmas party.  Neither of them were long; the last
one which took place between Wickersham and the girl he was to marry
was the briefer of the two.  But her prettily serious argument that the
first of May was too early a date for their wedding, in view of the
work which he had to do and her own state of unpreparedness, left him
so white of face that she felt guiltily sorry for him for many days to
follow--felt guiltier still at the relief she experienced when she had
established that reprieve.  The other interview was longer, and took
place days earlier, but it was no more of a delight to Archibald
Wickersham.

Dexter Allison had returned home almost a week in advance of his
daughter, pleading stress of business, but in spite of the demands upon
his time and attention, he had found it impossible to forget the night
of the dinner, when he had watched his daughter's eyes upon Stephen
O'Mara's face.

Allison had never professed a knowledge of women.  Like her mother,
Barbara had been many, many times an enigma which he who had often
taken men's souls apart had not dared even to try to solve.  Partly
because of that, partly because his observation in other quarters had
taught him the dangerous futility of it, he had lifted his voice
neither in encouragement nor protest of Archibald Wickersham.  The two
had grown up from childhood together--Barbara and the man whom she was
engaged to marry--and more than once her father had assured himself
that at least there was a long knowledge of each other's shortcomings
to make for safety in the long run.

His own dislike for Wickersham he had never allowed to sway his middle
course of non-interference.  And he had never liked the boy; never
learned to like the man he had grown to be.  Underneath Dexter
Allison's jovial exterior there was a cynicism which for hardness would
have made Garry Devereau's worst moments seem mere childish fits of
spleen.  Men do not watch other men whimper and beg for mercy--little
rascals who have been nipped in a greater schemer's trap--without
beginning to wonder, soon or late, how much of man is warped and
twisted; and he had been watching Archie Wickersham now for months.  He
believed that men's men were not women's men, the oft-repeated epigram
to the contrary.  He had eaten too many dinners at which the lion of
the evening who sat on the charming hostess's right hand, was a man of
rank and a thing of ranker repute.  But after his first shock at the
realization that his baby was a woman grown, he had promised himself
that her engagement and Wickersham's should be a long one; promised
that the man into whose keeping she was given should have earned the
title in full.

Wickersham's code, in many respects, was above reproach.  Allison had
taken pains to ascertain that.  But beyond that he did not let himself
go; he neither allowed himself to wonder at, nor regret, her choice.
He was too honest to decry in another much which he knew would not
measure up to Golden Rule standards in himself.  And he had a really
great man's unshakable faith in his own flesh and blood.

Yet he had been troubled more than a little since his Christmas trip to
Morrison.  When he turned a page he turned it for all time, but in the
last day or two he had caught himself surrepticiously trying to steal a
glance at some which had only just rustled into place.  Dexter Allison
had left brilliant men of cross-examination panting impotently at the
barrenness of their efforts; he had known it and enjoyed it to the
full.  But he knew, too, that he could never face, jauntily or
otherwise, one reproach in the dusky eyes of the girl with whom he had
more than once played truant, to breakfast with Caleb and Miss Sarah.
And he was facing that thought, nearer to panic than he had ever been
before, the night before New Year's, when Wickersham was announced at
nine.  He was thinking of Barbara's mother when he beckoned his guest
to a chair, shook his head over his red cheeks, and offered a cigar.

"Devilish cold weather," he grunted, none too graciously, for he had
not wanted to be disturbed just then.

The younger man admitted that it was.  His mind, plainly, was not upon
the weather, but he found difficulty in introducing a topic of his own
choosing.  Outspokenness had never been one of Archie Wickersham's
boldest characteristics, so Allison assisted him now.  Allison liked a
man to be outspoken.

"Well," he demanded, "let's hear it.  What's on your mind?"

There are times when hatred will betray 'most any man.  Hatred now led
Wickersham to speak not wisely but with venom.

"I want you to refuse to renew your name on the East Coast notes," he
said.  "They are due on the second."

Few men had ever said "I want you to" to Dexter Allison and, as he put
it, "gotten away with it to any great extent."  And of all nights this
one in particular was the least likely to prove propitious for such an
attempt.  That was Wickersham's oversight.

"So!" said Dexter, "so!  Well, now for your reason."

Wickersham had not learned until after Barbara's departure that she was
spending the holidays in Morrison, for he had himself expected to be
away.  And it is only fair to the girl to say that she had honestly
forgotten to apprise him of her plan, in her real excitement at going.
But finding it out for himself had not made the fact any pleasanter to
Wickersham.

"It should be clear enough without explanation," he enunciated each
word nicely, "if you want that road they are building."

Allison glanced up, surprised at the tone employed.

"Meaning of course I do," he mused.  "And yet--and yet, I don't know!"

Fear burned in the tall, thin man's eyes that night--fear that made his
hatred for the absent man who was teaching him fear anything but a
pretty thing to watch.

"I've tried to buy off their men."  He was holding himself with an
effort that made him tremble.  "I've held up their supplies on every
track that we control, but they've had the luck with them.  They've
made up lost time by working day and night.  I've----"

"You've set a drunken fool to steal his plans," drawled the other with
deadly sarcasm, "like a second-rate, one-night-stand villain.  Don't
forget to mention that, too!"

In many ways it resembled an earlier conference which they had shared
together; in many points it differed from it.  For if Allison had
goaded the other man, on that former occasion, largely from a malicious
delight in stirring him to verbal violence, such a thought was farthest
from his mind now.  Allison was talking from a new angle.  If a turned
page was a turned page to him, at least his memory was good.  His
lounging body shifted a little.

"Archie, do you remember what I told you about that woods-rat, as you
called him once?  Did I tell you that he would fight?  Well, listen and
listen closely while I repeat it for you.  He hasn't even warmed to it
yet!"

Wickersham went yellow at that, but his icy self-control held firm.  He
did not break into vituperation this night; he smiled, though his voice
was only a whisper.

"Men have dropped out of sight before now, in those woods," he husked.
"I'll win, or I'll see that he lies and rots in one of his own
sink-holes."

A big voice is a wonderful weapon at times.  Allison's booming bass
made Wickersham's threat seem only mean and hollow when the heavy man
leaped to his feet and shook a finger under that high-bridged nose.

"No you won't!" he snapped.  "No you won't!  And if I didn't know,
after hearing you talk, that you haven't stuff enough in you to be
dangerous, I'd fix you so you'd be in no condition to bushwhack anybody
for the next six months.  I'm in a bad mood to-night.  Drop out of
sight, eh?  You'll play this fair--fair at least as I see it by my
standards, and they are better standards than yours.  You've come
dictating to me, ordering me to slip a knife into their backs.  Are you
that kind of a sneak?  Did you think I was?  Now listen again, and
listen well, for I mean what I say!

"I want that railroad, if the man who is building it is too weak to
keep me from taking it away from him.  But if I don't get it on such a
basis, I'll know that there is a man at the head of it who is big
enough to take care of my share of it.  Have you got that?  Very well.
And now go back to your melodrama, if you want to.  Steal his men, if
he will let you; fight him every inch of his construction--that is your
job--and I'll still insist that it is his fault if he is tardy on the
first of May.  But it's you and O'Mara from now on, Archie.  I'll be a
spectator now!  And, by Gad, don't you ever come near me again with a
request that I . . . don't you ever let me hear you threaten that
you----"

Allison's face was suffused before he finished, and Wickersham,
astounded past utterance, slid from his chair away from that
flourishing hand which had become a fist.  It was no scene to take
place between a man and his prospective son-in-law.  Realizing that
Allison tried to laugh, deprecatingly, at his temper.

"Go out and get him, Archie," he invited.  "I'll be watching, don't
doubt that.  And I know how much you want to win.  It's a bigger stake
than most folks realize!"

Like Barbara he tried to make his side of the interview kindly at the
end, but he sent the other man away wondering whether he had understood
that last remark, and afraid to think that he had.  And two other
things Allison had done.  For once he had started to pay hush money to
his conscience.  Once and for all, like Fat Joe, he had registered at
last a refusal to interfere in any way that might spoil the climax of
the "big show" for which Fate or Chance or Destiny, or whatever men may
call it, was setting the stage, with an unhurried calm that contrasted,
ironically, with the mad haste of her actors.

But he watched, as he had promised he would.  The same day that more
than half of O'Mara's men went on strike and deserted to the Reserve
Company's payroll, the news reached him that a trainload of laborers
had been shot in to take their places--those very types of laborers
which Steve himself had warned Elliott would not last an hour, in the
event of trouble.  For a week Allison wondered that there was no clash
between the displaced men who believed that the river was theirs alone
and this new corps which Garry Devereau was handling at the lower end
of construction, not by physical prowress, as Fat Joe had ruled, but
just as surely and all because, as Joe himself put it, he could damn a
man merely by bidding him good-morning.

"Honey crossed north to-day to have a look at his winter cut," Joe
would observe to his chief at supper at Thirty-Mile; and before the
night was many hours older Allison too, in Manhattan, would have
learned by wire in less picturesque phraseology, that Archie Wickersham
was missing no chances.

"They have now finished hauling their logs to the river," Joe told
Steve one night after a prolonged scouting trip.  "They are turning
their attention to their float dams, now!"

And when that news was relayed to the big man who never ceased to watch
he understood why there had been no violence when the rivermen went on
strike.

With a clumsiness that shamed him Allison contrived to pass on to his
daughter all such bits of gossip which dribbled down to him; that is,
all which appertained strictly to Stephen O'Mara's race against time,
and not to the opposition which he was meeting.  Her excitement was a
bubbling thing, innocent of suspicion or premonition, but he was like a
war-worn veteran who stands watching column after column wheel into
position, waiting the word to go in, and knows he cannot respond.

Many times Barbara tried to write to Steve in those days and each time
destroyed the badly scored sheet, either in dismay at the wilful
intimacy of her pen or disgusted with its stilted aloofness.  She saw
less and less of Wickersham that winter, partly because his affairs
were monopolizing all his time, partly because she managed to spend
most of her waking hours with Miriam Burrell or her father, who
appeared doubly, humbly glad of her companionship.  Always she insisted
that Stephen O'Mara would win through; she made happy, petty wagers
with both of them, in anticipation of their journey north, against the
first of May.  But there was one bit of news which her father had not
been able to pass on to her.  For Dexter Allison had had no way of
learning of a night when the man who was most in their thoughts had
finally lifted a bleak face from his arms, in his cabin up-river, and
forced himself, hard-eyed, to acknowledge one defeat.

It was the bitterest January that the hill country had known in twenty
years; but mile by mile that month the twin lines of steel crept
steadily into the north under the urgings of Garry's smooth voice.  The
snowfall for February broke all records for half that period; but
Steve, with his handful of men at Thirty-Mile, put his piling down.
And then it rained--it rained until small brooks ran torrents and the
river tumbled white and thunderous its entire length.

The snow went off the last of March that spring and the gorges could
not carry away the water.  The sun turned summer hot; it burned the
higher ridges dry while the valleys still lay hidden in flood.  It was
August temperature, the third Sunday in April, when Stephen O'Mara
stood and watched, beneath the glare of kerosene torches, his bridge at
Thirty-Mile go into position between dark and dawn.

There was no man among them that day who did not show upon his face the
strain they had been under.  They were few, they were unshaven and
dirty and lean as hungry hounds; but they were the men whom Steve had
once bidden Hardwick Elliott to watch, once they had begun to scent
combat.  Fat Joe was no longer plump.  Steve was worn down to actual
thinness.  And it would have taken a careful eye to have selected the
chief from their ranks that Sunday.

The huge timbers had dropped into place like bits of jig-sawed puzzle.
At three in the afternoon, too tired both in body and soul for elation,
Steve watched them drive home the last spike and heard their hoarse
effort at a cheer.  He had turned to start toward his shack, not like a
man who knows that the end of a well-nigh hopeless task is in sight,
but like a beaten man.  The first of May meant more to Steve than any
clause of the East Coast Company's contract could convey.  He had not
had even one letter since he put her upon her train.  Wickersham's
appearance on horseback, at the head of the valley, picking his way
around the flooded meadow, halted him in his heavy-footed climb.  A
whistle shrilled, far to the south of them, down the completed track.
And then, after ten years and more, they were face to face again.

"That bridge will have to go down!"  Wickersham was breathing hard, for
all that he had been riding.  "I'm going through with my drive to-day!"

He had dismounted.  Steve smiled at him.

"You're a whole week previous, Wickersham," he said, wearily.  "I'll be
signaling for your first load of logs in less than sixty hours."

Archibald Wickersham wished that he could have believed it impossible,
for it would have given him courage and lent conviction to his stand.
But he knew just how fast those few remaining miles of open roadbed
would be spanned.  His eyes were furtive; there was no body to his
voice.

"My men are on the banks," he blustered.  "My first head of logs has
started down.  It's too late to argue now--too late for your promises
that none but fools ever believed!"  The sure irrevocability of what he
was saying blanched his cheeks.  "I cannot wait for a miracle to be
performed.  My timber must come out on this flood."

Stephen O'Mara had whipped him once, but men had interfered.  This day
Chance or Destiny or Fate--whatever you may choose to call it--saved
him from destruction.  The lean and weary man who had not been out of
his clothes for three days and three nights, save for a plunge in the
icy river, had taken his first step forward, when the whistle screamed
a nearer warning.

She had told him that she would come to see the finish of his race, but
he had long since stopped believing that.  And now when she stood and
waved her hand at him from the brass-railed observation platform of
Allison's private car which a switch engine, out of patience with the
grade, was shunting across the lower end of the clearing, he could only
stand and stare dully, no faith in his eyes.

The loud plaid of her father's garb flashed behind her in the doorway.
Hardwick Elliott's fine face peered over his shoulder.  And Wickersham,
who had not seen his fiance in a month, had started toward them,
stiffly erect in his immaculate whipcord habit.  Wickersham was
smiling; Wickersham was safe again.  For Fate or Chance or Destiny who
had been setting the stage was bringing on her principals.  She would
brook no _ad lib_ now.

A low mutter in the north became an ominous murmur while Steve was
following slowly in Wickersham's steps, and he realized what it meant.
He stopped to stare at his handful of men, rearing their heads to
listen, too.  Steve had been all winter alone with the puzzle of his
own inferiority which he could never understand.  And a minute later,
when he had reached out to help to the ground a little blue clad figure
with fur at throat and wrists, she drew the be-furred edge of her skirt
about her ankles and laughingly refused his assistance, and jumped to
the ground unaided.  She was far too excited to know what she was
doing; she hardly saw him at all in that first moment, but the act
spelled much to him.  His hands were grimy, his face stubbly and
streaked with sweat and mud, and he had been months alone with his
too-sensitive spirit.

"You should not be here," was all he said to her.  "This is no place
for you."

He shook hands with the men, mechanically--Allison quizzical, Elliott
concerned.  He went back to his bridge.  The water had come up a half
foot in the last few minutes some one--Fat Joe, perhaps--told him; it
was sucking greedily at the piles.  And in the north the ominous murmur
had become a rhythmic roar.

Wickersham's men were driving the river.  They were singing "Harrigan,
That's Me!"




CHAPTER XXII

IT HAPPENS IN BOOKS

It is said that men remember many things when death is imminent; and
for days and days something had been dying hard in Stephen O'Mara's
breast.  His step was slow that afternoon when he drew apart to take up
his position alone upon a bit of higher ground, his shoulders heavy and
drooping; yet his brain was feverishly active.  Recollection of many
long gone days--thoughts of many things--came darting to his mind; but
they were not thoughts of desperate, last-minute expedients which might
stave off this present crisis.  For if he had believed that force alone
would win for him; if he had had faith that mere numbers could save his
construction, he would not have left Garry Devereau with his scores of
laborers, busy five miles to the south.  Steve was not thinking of his
construction now; it had become a dim and remote consideration.  It had
lost its importance in his scheme of things.

They came slowly at first--Wickersham's logs--thudding heavily, one by
one, into the underpinnings of the bridge, sliding free or lodging
cross-current as the case might be; then in a thicker and thicker tide
that ground and up-ended and settled with the weight of the
coffee-colored flood behind it.  In the beginning the handful of men
who had put those timbers into place set themselves, doggedly, to save
their completed structure, until the man who had worked with them,
shoulder to shoulder, through the night called them with a nod back to
the bank.  Obediently then they collected in a small knot behind him,
murmurous, gutterally grumbling; waiting his further word they squatted
on their haunches, staring hungrily at their chief who stood in seeming
surrender, head bowed before them.

The coming of Wickersham's men was not a thing of degrees.  They poured
into view through the brush fringe at the north edge of the marsh and
halted, but only for an instant.

"Who is your friend at the time when you need a friend?----Harrigan,
that's me!"

The maudlin menace of that chorus rocketed from ridge to ridge.  Then,
a tight-ranked mass of humanity, they had formed and were sweeping
forward again, stepping out to the beat of the ragtime which was their
marching hymn.  And still the man who stood apart from the rest gave no
sign that he was aware of their approach.  Once he did straighten; when
separate faces began to be distinguishable in that reeling mob he
turned and gazed, emptily, toward the group a few yards
away--Wickersham putty-skinned before this storm which he had brewed;
Allison himself pale; and the girl whose eyes were staring back at him
with no clear understanding in their depths.  He made no move toward
action, not even when the singing pack surged up and spread out before
him, until a jostling crescent, straggling at the points, half
encircled him and swallowed up as well the little knot behind which had
come bristling to its feet.  Their onslaught had seemed an irresistible
thing, bent upon instant violence; and yet little by little their
syncopated defiance died away until they, too, were staring uncertainly
at that worn and mud-stained figure which seemed to hang its head.  His
very inertia robbed them of their impetus.

"Harrigan, that's me!" they faltered now, and there came a lull in the
valley at Thirty-Mile, broken only by heavy breathing and the crunch of
logs jamming beneath the bridge, and the ugly swirl of backed-up water.
It held quiet while Steve looked up, mildly, and scanned the ring in
front of him and nodded in recognition to a sullen few; then oaths
broke that silence, and a command for room to pass.  An upheaval
disrupted the crescent's centre.  Steve saw Big Louie's face high above
the heads of his shorter companions; he watched him plow heavily
forward.  Shayne he glimpsed, automatically, and Fallon, faithful
henchmen.  And then Harrigan stood forth.

Long arms dangling, palms back, almost to his knees, that red-headed
one minced forward on the balls of his feet.  Harrigan was redeeming a
promise many weeks overdue.  It was spring, and Harrigan had come back!

"I'm here," he spoke to that bowed head, "if you are afther carin' to
welcome me!"

"I've been expecting you, Harrigan."

Again that startling mildness.

There is little wonder that it deceived the riverman.  Listening,
watching O'Mara's slack form even Fat Joe's face burned; even Archie
Wickersham's dared flash in triumph.  And Harrigan's went savagely
exultant.

"You talked out loud to me, once," he taunted.  "Is it so difficult you
find it now to speak up so I can hear?"

"Would you promise to listen to argument, Harrigan?"

Vilification tore at the other's lips, until friend and enemy marveled
at what Steve took in silence.

"You have begun many things in this counthry," the obscene tirade
ended.  "You came out of these woods with rags on your back and started
at bein' a gentleman when we were only bhoys.  You've made a gr-reat
success av it with the ladies, we'll gr-rant you that; but you should
have stuck to your soft and lily-white pastime.  For when you aimed to
turn this river into a gentleman's proposition you started something
too big for you to finish.  I'm taking it off your hands, now.  Can't
you even talk back like a man?"

There must be fire starting over in the north-east, Steve meditated
with an irrelevance strange even to himself--and that reference to her
surely was not needed!  Yes, there was a smudge of smoke rising behind
Twin-face; people should be more careful whore they dropped matches in
an unseasonably hot spring like this--and Harrigan's sneer for the boy
who had come, wonder-eyed, out of the wilderness and looked upon the
picture-thing in kilted velvet which she had been was certainly
squandered viciousness now.  Past and present they trouped before him,
thoughts that spanned years of time and covered leagues of country, yet
long before Harrigan had finished with his question Steve knew how he
was going to answer it.  He didn't have to debate that, and
deliberation only gave him the keener joy of anticipation.

All his life opposition had been a familiar of his.  Days of hunger he
had known and cold, and nights of black discouragement, but never so
black until now but what he had been able to hold his vision clear.
But that vision was not his any longer to contemplate.

Circumstance had been his handicap; Circumstance he had met and thought
to bend to his will; and yet Circumstance had beaten him; in the end
Custom was laughing in his face.  Beside those intangible antagonists
which had been his this personal enemy was only puny, only braggard and
swaggering and cheap.  But it was a bone and muscle antagonist; it was
an entity--a thing upon which one might hurl oneself and spend one's
bitter intoleration.

Steve had stopped thinking; he had had too much of thought.  Suddenly
that question which had been a riddle to him was a riddle no longer.
He had the answer, and could see himself as others no doubt had seen
him--a fool who had believed in the supremacy of fineness; a boy who
had reached for the moon.  But it left the issue clearer now.  He, too,
was a riverman; the degree was different, that was all.  And rivermen
did not vex their brains with abstract problems; they fought with their
hands.  His bowed head came back then, and the mass of men, catching
sight of the mad, glad light that flared in his eyes, rolled back to
give them room.  He laughed at Harrigan.  He was laughing at himself.
They heard and marveled at the pleasantry of his answer.

"Maybe you are right, Harrigan," he said.  "You may be--I do not know.
I have started big things and left them unfinished.  But you are wrong
for the rest of it, Harrigan, for I am going--to--finish--you!"

Men tell of that encounter now; it is already epic on the river.  One
may listen to its details, and he chance into any of a half dozen
places:--Mulcahy's, Laduc's, or Whitted's that once was Brown's.  And
always one will hear different details, but always one accord of
verdict.  They will tell you that no man ever went through worse
vengeance and stayed a living man.

For like a blast of wrath O'Mara lifted and struck him.  Harrigan's
hands had not left his hips before he met the ground, and he was back
on his feet like a bounding ball only to go down again before the
smashing impact of those blows.  Caution he tried to use in rising and
they searched out his face, his chin, and drove him hither and yon.
Open fighting was not the river style of fighting and he closed this
time and wrapped his gorilla arms about this fury who fought with
lightning strokes to keep him off.  His greater weight o'erbore them
both; he broke away and his hob-nailed boots, lashing out, bit the
flesh of O'Mara's temple--they tore the turf where his face had been.

There was madness in Harrigan's hideous roarings of hate, madness in
his blind rushes; but his bull-strength availed at first.  He weathered
destruction and managed to close again.  This time the lighter man was
ready for the scuff of those armed boots; he twisted and covered his
face with his shoulder, and only his shirt ripped open to let blood
stream from the rent.  On their feet they rocked--to their knees!
Faces grinding into the earth they strained and broke away.  And always
Harrigan came back and found him, blindly.  Once his hairy hands
searched O'Mara's face and O'Mara's forehead went wet with the agony of
fingers tearing at his eye-sockets.  Dropping he escaped that gouging
grip, coming up he caught Harrigan's chin and turned him over backward.

Harrigan squandered his strength in drunken rushes, his breath in
screams of hate.  He tore forward when the other had already stepped
aside, and Steve, shaking away the blood that was trickling rivulets
into his eyes, met him returning.  There came a time when Harrigan's
enveloping arms found him less readily; came a change when Harrigan had
to stand up and fight.  And then, with deadly, insensate purpose which
made the other's madness a wild and futile thing, Stephen O'Mara set
himself to chop his face to pieces.  Flail-like blows he side-stepped,
and whipped to the other's eyes.  That open guard he feinted wider and
laid flesh open raw.  Harrigan could no longer curse, for his lips were
puffy things pulped between his own teeth and those merciless knuckles.
He could only sob, great groaning gasps for breath--and then he
couldn't see!

And now Steve was laughing aloud.  He knew that _she_ was watching;
knew what loathing was in her eyes.  And he--he was a riverman!
Sobbing himself for air, dripping crimson from forehead and shoulder,
he set himself and swung from the waist.  Like a pole-axed ox, Harrigan
stopped as he was lurching in.  His mouth sagged; his eyes flew wide in
a fixed and stupid stare.  Then his legs folded under him and he swayed
limply down.  But that blast of wrath would not let him lie!  It raised
him and beat him down again; raised him and beat him down.  By his
throat Steve swung him up--by throat and buckled belt.  High over his
head he swung that bulk and lashed forward from his heels.  And
Harrigan went back to his panting followers; twisting and spinning, his
body swept Shayne and Fallon to the ground.

Allison had not stirred, nor putty-faced Wickersham, nor the girl who
stood with hands at breasts.  And now toward them Stephen O'Mara
wheeled.  His legs would fail him, and he steadied them; blood blinded
him, and he wiped it away.  Swaying giddily, he managed, somehow, a
smile.

"Wickersham, I have met the man whom you hired to fight for you," he
called clearly, "and he has earned his wage!  Are you man enough to
step forward now and fight for yourself?"

Wickersham clucked drily in his throat, and lifted an elbow to shield
his face.  Shrinking back behind the first shelter that chance afforded
him he put the girl between him and his fear.  And then weakness seized
upon that sick and swaying man, but he spoke to her--to the unspeakable
horror in her eyes.

"Barbara," he called thickly, "Barbara!"

He groped toward her, and she cried out, and drew back from such hands
as those.  Then a black wall rose before him and shut her from his
sight.  Fat Joe caught him as he fell.

Like huddled sheep, O'Mara's men and Wickersham's watched Joe bear him
up the hill.  Shayne and Fallon were bending over Harrigan; by the
others he lay ignored.  It was a mob without a leader until, as is the
way in all crises, a new leader arose.  Big Louie, stolid face no
longer stolid, strode between those two factions and achieved the
unknown heights for which his eyes had always hungered.

"I work for no man but is a man," he boomed.  "That bridge--she still
is hold!"

Steve had bidden Hardwick Elliott watch these men if their big moment
ever came.  And Elliott and Allison watched now.  They were sheep no
longer, nor malcontents, nor misled tools of cunning.  Like wolves they
followed that nameless man who was out upon the jam.  Wickersham's men
were back on the river, but that bridge would continue to hold!  And
while they worked, while Elliott and her father watched spellbound,
blindly Barbara Allison turned, with no thought of what she was doing,
and walked blindly into the brush.

The river was running clear by dusk when they raised the first hue and
cry for her.  It was dark when a runner bore the news to the cabin on
the hillside that she was missing.  And when men had been beating the
woods for her for twelve hours as best they could in the dark, and no
word came that she was found, Fat Joe no longer dared let lie in sleep
his friend whose body he had cleansed and bandaged.  At daybreak Joe
waked him and told him Barbara was lost.  They tried to argue with him,
for his knees were still unsteady; even Allison whose jovial body
seemed to have shrunk during his hours of waiting tried to convince him
that the men now looking for her would find her soon or had already
found her, perhaps.  But he brushed them away while he was dressing; he
threw off the hands that tried to detain him.  And it was Steve who
found her, as he had known it would he, just before a second night of
dread was closing in upon her.

In circles of ever increasing radius he traveled at a foxtrot which
thoughts of Fallon and Shayne and Harrigan would not let him abandon;
but he had to run her down when he caught sight of her, for she fled
like a wild thing before him.  Floundering in a cedar swamp, soaked to
the knees, little blue be-furred suit heavy with black muck, he came up
with her.  She was kneeling, shaking with terror, face hidden by her
loosened hair, when he bent over her and raised her to her feet.

"Please," she whimpered, "Oh, please----"

Yet when he spoke her name her head leaped back and she recognized him
instantly.

"I tried to wait," she chattered with all the voice she had left.  "I
tried to sit still until someone came for me, but I thought I knew the
way.  I tried not to listen to the noises; I remembered about the
stars; and I knew I shouldn't run.  But I thought you were--I thought
you were----"

Remembered terror choked her.  Consciousness slipped away.

By the same trail which once had led him to the "city" of Morrison he
carried her now to that cabin which stood on the balsam knoll in the
crook of the west branch; nor was it far for she had traveled straight,
though in the wrong direction.  But it was long after dark when the
river gleamed ahead of him through the trees, jet and glassy in the
deep pools, streaked with blurred star-reflections in the riffles.  A
grown woman is a grown man's burden, even though she seem very small to
him; and Steve had to travel slowly.  His head was spinning from
fatigue and the throb of the jagged tear above his temple when the log
building, streaked white with clay chinking, loomed up ahead, and yet
involuntarily he stopped there a moment with his burden.

He had pictured, many times, a night when he would bring her there,
with both of them watching the moon in the rapids and listening to the
waves lipping the banks.  This was not that night; that night would
never be.  But the rebellion and bitterness was gone from his heart.
After he had removed her wet shoes and stockings and brush-whipped suit
and sheer black blouse, and she slept the sleep of exhaustion into
which she had slipped from unconsciousness without even opening her
eyes, he built a fire and sat before it until morning came.  And when
it dawned and she waked dazedly while he was preparing breakfast, he
had finished reconstructing many things.

Her eyes went from wall to wall, frightened still and questioning at
first, so he merely nodded and went outside and left her to remember
alone.  Returning with wood on his arm he found recollection of much in
her gaze.  She was looking at the thin heeled, buttoned boots before
the fireplace; the stockings and furred garments cleaned of mud and
dried on the backs of chairs.  A cloud of color stole up from the
blanket edge at her throat to the line of her hair.

"You were wet," he explained simply, "and you were too spent to help
yourself.  I could not let you sleep in them."

"I understand," her answer faltered a little.  "I was just
thinking. . . .  I knew such things happened, but I thought it was only
in books."

Drowsily she watched him bending over frying pan and coffee pot,
content herself to lie and rest.  But after a time, with fuller
awakening, the bandage about his head claimed her attention.  To her it
seemed impossible that this smoothly shaven man in clean blue shirt
could be the same one who had emerged from a struggle still sickeningly
brutish to her.  Involuntarily she shuddered a little without knowing
that he watched.

"I am going to the spring for fresh water," he told her then.  "There
will be time for you to dress; and breakfast will be ready when I come
back."

Submissive before his tone she replied that she was hungry; that she
would be ready, too.  She had donned blouse and skirt and stocking and
shoes and finished braiding her hair when he re-entered.  He showed her
a tin basin outside filled with icy water for her face and hands.  And
then they sat down in silence to breakfast.

Once he had dreamed what their first meal together in that room would
be like.  This morning when she insisted upon pouring the coffee and
scorched her hand in the attempt and chided him for careless
housekeeping, pain showed in his smile.  But she did not immediately
understand.  She only realized how sombre he was; how thin he looked
and tired.  Again her eyes went to the bandage around his head.  It had
a fascination for her, even though it filled her with repulsion for a
decision which, she knew now, might have been hers, two days before.
But eventually it was to that topic she turned.

"You have been very good to me," she said.  "Far better than I was to
you--the day before yesterday.  I can never hope to thank you enough
for coming to help me."

Wistful she had seen him, and grave and sober-eyed, but never sad until
now.

"I should have helped you," she went on.  "I would have, only I had
come expecting . . .  I thought to see----"  Two days before when she
alighted from her father's car, her heart a tumult in her ears, she
could have told him perhaps.  She could not tell him now.  "I am not
used to such things," she finished weakly.

"I know," was all he replied, but the words were final, somehow.  They
thrust her back, roughly, from any share in his thoughts.  They ate
again in silence.

"Miriam would have helped," she forgot herself and argued aloud once.
"She would not have failed.  But--blood sickens me, I think."

"It was neither a pretty nor prepossessing sight," he helped to excuse
her, but excuse nor pardon was not what she wanted.

"I told you that you would find out someday," she murmured.  "I warned
you you would wake suddenly and see how shallow I am."

Until she had finished eating he would not talk.  But she had finished
now.  He faced her with an abruptness that startled her.

"Waking has been no sudden thing with me!  I finished with dreams a
long time back, but you are what you have been always in my thoughts.
It's conditions I've waked to, not you!"

With unwitting gruffness he had sometimes spoken to her, but never with
constrained vehemence such as that.

"Why should I find fault in anything you have done, or failed to do?"
he demanded of both her and himself.  "Why should you be apologetic or
regretful.  Such a thing as I had to do two days ago has held no place
in your world, and never could, but I can't find it in myself to be
apologetic, either, because it is a part of mine.  I meant to kill
him--wanted to kill him--because I was certain of your scorn!  That was
vindictive; that was foolish for a man.  But as for the rest of it--I
know I may have it all to do over again, any day.  It was a vulgar
brawl to you; to me----"

"Not just a brawl," she contradicted quickly, anxious to be understood.
"Just--oh, so needlessly brutal.  At first it left me only dazed and
nauseated, but after I had had time to think, I made myself see your
side of it.  You must crush insubordination.  And still it seems as
though there might have been a less horrible way."

"He had balked my work," he told her sternly.  "He has fired upon me
from cover, when he dared not come out into the open.  He has been
taking money for his work from a man who was bent on beating me at any
cost.  Could I ask him please not to spoil my bridge?  Is that your
idea of a man's way?"

She had given no thought to Wickersham until that moment, and now she
thought of him only in connection with a night when she had found him
alone in her father's office and wondered at the stale odor of alcohol.

"I do not know," she hesitated.  "I am not sure, only----"

"You should know!"  But he was less vehement now.  Wearily he set
himself to get at it in his own fashion.  "Some men are only physical
cowards," he went on.  "But you have almost made a moral coward of me.
Yes, you had nearly made me afraid to be the man I must be, if I am to
do my work."

"There are other fields----"

He would not let her argue that.

"There is no other field for me at present.  This is my work and while
I continue in it men who oppose me with their brains I will fight with
my brain.  But men who force me to meet them with fists I must beat
with like weapons.  There is no alternative.  I have no choice--unless
I quit.  And that is the reason I know that this is the end, for you
and me!"

Sadness she had never known before in his voice, nor the edge which was
cutting all it came against.  Now it grew gentler, with that gentleness
he saved for her alone.

"Once we argued whether I was 'good enough' for you, and we wasted many
words that day, for 'good enough' can cover too many qualities to be a
safe basis for general comparison.  I have been arguing it with myself,
blind to the vital question, but I am blind no longer.  Combat which
sickened you has cleared my eyes.  What if I did believe that I was not
good enough to touch your little finger?  What if you believed that
too?  Would that have hindered us, in the end?  You know it wouldn't;
you have seen too many women give themselves to men whom they knew were
unworthy in a hundred ways, because they could not help themselves.
But that way would never have done for me."

"It isn't that," she cut in desperately.  "I know you are big and fine
and clean.  It isn't that----"

But he knew better than she did what it was she could not phrase.  He
left her dry of lip now, for he had read her thoughts.

"My ways would have had to be your ways, and we have learned at last
what I have feared for long and long.  They lie too far apart for them
ever to meet.  My man's way is not your woman's way, but I could not
stay a man in your eyes if I let it become secondary to yours; and I
would have to do just that to earn you.  Once I thought that there was
no height I could not scale to gain your side.  I worked for you, but
that is no way for a man to work.  He must work because he is a man and
needs must win as big as he can to keep his own self-respect.

"I promised to teach you to love me, and I've failed.  And knowing that
my failure is not all my own fault is not going to make it any easier
for me.  You've taught me loneliness I'm never going to forget as long
as I live, but I don't love you any the less for that.  I dreamed big
dreams for both of us."  His voice was dreary of a sudden.  "I promised
I'd make those dreams come true, because I thought my life could be
your life.  I've not done so; that thing could never be.  I've talked
bigger than I could practice, and that is not going to help my
self-confidence any, but as it stands now I can earn it back.  I
couldn't have done that if I had married you, and waked some day to
find you shrinking from me.  It would have killed it, and my
self-respect too, to have learned too late that you believed still in
your own greater fineness."

"I tell you it is not that," she cried out.  "Can't I make you
understand----"

"You have made me understand till I am sure," he stated.  "I am no
longer vexing myself with trivial things.  Birth?  My name means as
much as yours.  Education?  You would not tell me, would you, that I am
not wiser in most ways you'd think to mention.  I'd break any man who
gave to your ears many things I have learned."  He was whimsical for a
flash.  "I could outspell you without an effort; books have been my
partners when you had rather dance.  Oh, you could not lose me, no
matter where you strayed in fields like that.  In any way you care to
mention I have outstripped you, for I decided long ago that I must know
more than you.  Yet I have not forgotten how to play, either.

"You have been uncertain; I have seen that.  You are certain now.  And
the fundamental thing remains unchanged.  In me there is that man who
once man-handled Harrigan--and you didn't want me to touch you!  You
don't have to tell me any more that you can't love me.  When you drew
away from me, that was enough."

His voice held a question, but the girl couldn't answer at first.

"Wasn't it?" he repeated very gently, for he would have it from her own
lips.

Her face lifted.  Her eyes were blurred with tears, but she nodded in
affirmation.

So roughly that the dishes rattled he rose.

"I do not want your pity," he ended it.  "I am the wrong sort of a man
for you."

She sat and watched him put the room in order, and that hurt her more
than anything else, for he would not let her help.  He made her change
her high-heeled boots for moccasins which he brought and laced upon her
feet; but the remainder of the day it was the old Steve who helped her
over the bad bits of going and talked disconnectedly of many things
meanwhile.  And yet no longer the old Steve, who had been so entirely
her own.  Hers was the sad face when they entered the clearing at
Thirty-Mile and a hoarse shout saluted her return.  In her father's
embrace she clung and wondered that she did not cry.  And two pages had
turned for her that day, for she sent Wickersham back his ring the same
night the private car rolled down to Morrison.

Harrigan was with Archibald Wickersham when the package, unaccompanied
by explanation, reached the latter in his hotel room in town.  Harrigan
was waiting for a reply to a question which he had just asked, when
Wickersham opened the box and sat fingering for a while the thin hoop
of gold with its single brilliant stone.  Once Fat Joe had spoken
prophetically; this was the hour he had foreseen.  And when Wickersham
raised his head the riverman's battered face lighted shockingly with
triumph.

"Go out and get him," said Wickersham.  "And see that you get him--for
good!"




CHAPTER XXIII

TO-MORROW--

For two days and two nights the girl fought on alone against the outcry
of her own heart, and as on a former occasion she chose again the open
roads for her battlefield.  While she pounded Ragtime mercilessly over
the little-traveled northern highways, she struggled rebelliously with
stubborn arguments which only left her more and more bewildered, the
more conclusive they became.  She summoned parallels by the score to
her support, but she lacked the trick of facile finality, somehow,
which had always marked his usage of such argument.  Hard moments she
knew when she closed her teeth tight upon her decision and told herself
that it was final, but the next moment, after she had laid whip across
the black horse's flank and faced homeward, she was biting her lips in
shaken, panic contemplation of another thought which would not be
denied.

There were times without number when Barbara hated the one whose very
gentleness toward her was making her position hardest to maintain;
times when she hated the work which, absorbing him by day at least,
must be making his suffering less difficult to endure.  For she
understood that there was still much for him to do, although the
hill-country was already ringing with his victory.  And throughout
every hour she hated herself most of all for that spirit behind the
doubt which was swinging her, pendulum-like, between brain's reason and
heart's desire.

Barbara needed her mother in those days of wretchedness, for she came
and went as blind to the helpless misery which followed her always from
the eyes of her father as she was heedless of who might read the misery
in her own.  She turned a chill, set face to the one attempt to help
made by Miriam Burrell, who, at the first inkling of violence on the
river and possible danger to Garry Devereau, had come rushing overnight
into the hills, purposed never to leave them again unless it was with
him, as the wife of the man she loved.  Barbara wanted her mother, and
when that occurred to Miss Sarah, the latter could no longer continue
in passive sympathy.  Without compunction or loss of more time, she
reversed a decision at which she had arrived herself only a short time
before.  For Miss Sarah had stopped campaigning.  Caleb, with fire in
his eye, had brought her the story of how "her boy" Steve had broken
Harrigan with his bare hands.  She had had little to say concerning
that episode, but her brother, noting that she did not condemn it as
regrettable, wondered too that he had never noticed before how hard his
sister's eyes could be.  The news that Barbara was lost had reached
Miss Sarah hours before Allison's private car brought the girl and her
father and Hardwick Elliott back to Morrison.  Thereupon, with her
first glimpse of Barbara's wanly mute and suffering face, she had
pieced the details together; she had told herself, with sorrow and
understanding in her heart, that she must no longer interfere.  And
now, though she did summon Barbara to her, the end of the second
endless day, it was with no thought for evasion or finesse.  Barbara
obeyed that summons reluctantly.  In the face of an almost sullen light
in the girl's eyes when she entered on lagging feet, the older woman
knew that she could not have persisted in such an attempt, even had she
planned to employ it.  Additional warning was not needed, but Barbara's
first words told her that the hour was long past for such methods.

At first the girl refused to sit down.  She wandered aimlessly around
the room, switching nervously at her booted ankles with her
riding-crop, to stop suddenly and raise a pale and stormy face.

"I know why you sent for me," she exclaimed, "and I know just what you
think of me.  But I must tell you, Miss Sarah, that there is nothing
which can alter now, the least little bit, a decision which I know is
wisest and best!"

So she had the first word, never dreaming that Miss Sarah had seen to
that.  Nor did the latter smile or seem to proffer argument at first.
Oh, Miss Sarah had the true instincts of a big soul!

"Barbara," she answered quietly, after her formal firmness had
prevailed and the girl had seated herself, "Barbara, when I sent for
you it was not with a belief that I might influence you, for both of us
know that this is your problem alone.  I merely hoped to comfort, that
was all.  More than once I have been guilty of trying to manage you a
little, but you will forgive me, I know, when I tell you that I have
loved Stephen almost all his life, as though he were my own, and hoped
as long for his great happiness.  On more than one occasion I contrived
situations which I thought might make your choice my happiness, too.  I
know now that I was no better than any other meddling old woman, whose
efforts are well meant but dangerous for all that.  And I will meddle
no more.  But--but my heart aches a little, too, to-day, Barbara.  May
I just talk to you?"

Barbara blinked in surprise at the subdued sadness in the older woman's
voice.  But her lips remained sullen.

"There is nothing more to be said," she reiterated uncompromisingly.
"I tell you I am sure!"

And from that statement, minutes before she had thought to hear it,
Miss Sarah learned, thankfully, just how deep was the girl's
uncertainty.

"Then I need not fear that I may sway you one inch from your own way of
reasoning."  Her gentle voice might have held relief.  "For you will
not consider it argument when I agree with you that hard and fast
reasoning is not always a dependable guide for a woman."

The girl was switching her ankles again.

"Why isn't it?" she demanded abruptly, hungry for it now that the
other, ostensibly, did not want to argue.  "If reason is no guide, what
else is there left?"

"My dear, I do not know," acknowledged Miss Sarah.  "Intuition is a
much over-worked word.  And yet, had hard and fast reason been your
guide, you would not have refused Stephen, I am sure.  For it would be
difficult to name one particular in which he is not entirely a man."

The violet eyes grew quickly hostile.  The girl was keen enough to
argue, but she was in no mood for refutation.

"I am afraid that I do not follow you?" came coldly from her.

"There comes a day in every woman's life, of course," Miss Sarah
ignored sweetly the interruption, "when she has to leave girlhood
behind.  And lest that sound bromidic and trite, I will add that I do
not mean the trivial material things of immaturity, but rather the
happy irresponsibility which has no place in a woman's life."

That statement offered a plain enough opening.

"Am I responsible for his unhappiness?" Barbara flashed out.  "Is the
fault entirely mine because----"  She faltered, ashamed of her
abruptness which had brought a hurt bit of color to Miss Sarah's
cheeks.  "I never gave him to understand--I told him always I could not
care!"

"Please bear with me a little to-day."  Miss Sarah's sweetness had
become humble.  "I seem vagarious, I know.  And we are not considering
Stephen, Barbara.  If you had been doing so, all these hours while you
have been wasting your nervous energy in tearing around the
country-side, it would be different.  But women never consider the man
in such a situation, do they?  Aren't they too entirely heedless for
that?  I was merely trying to tell you that the day has come when you
must consider well your own happiness."

Instantly Barbara condemned such a doctrine.

"If that is true of others," she retorted, "they are even more
despicable than I know myself to be."

Until that moment Caleb Hunter's tiny sister had kept her brave eyes
clear.  They clouded now.  They went beyond that pale and sullen and
stormily pretty visage.

"I was a woman like that," she said, with her quaint simplicity of
accent.  "Do you look upon me with any such degree of scorn?  I was
face to face with such a decision; and yet not the same either, for
mine was far simpler than yours.  But I considered neither his
happiness nor my own, simply because I lost sight of the years and
years to come, in the momentary joy I found in his--his importunity.
He was very big and strong and cheerful, like Stephen, Barbara, and I
was sure he would not grudge me my last moment of girl-vanity, when I
did surrender--to-morrow."

There the quaint voice caught and broke.  The girl's eyes flew wider
and hotter shame for her sulkiness stained her cheeks.  For suddenly
Miss Sarah was fighting against tears.

"I did not know," Barbara breathed her contrition.  "I never
dreamed----"

"No one ever does," faltered Miss Sarah.  "I--I am an old, faded,
hopelessly unmarried woman to you, my dear--oh, child, you need not
protest a kinder opinion!  I am just 'Caleb Hunter's spinster sister'
to the people of this village.  But to--to myself, Barbara, I am at
times the same girl who waited, roses in her hair and roses in her
cheeks, for him to come, so that I might tell him that I was his, body
and soul.  And he never came!  Oh, my dear, I do not mean to break down
like this, for you have your own heart-ache.  But I trusted to reason.
I told myself that to-morrow would be soon enough.  And when to-morrow
came--they let me--go to him.  He died very bravely, Barbara, to save
the life of another.

"Since you are so sure, I can tell you this without seeming to warn
you--without being accused of attempting to influence you.  But now you
know why I say that every woman, if heedlessness for which she is
perhaps not to blame will not let her consider the happiness of the man
she loves, should still take care that she does not barter for an hour
of quickened pulses the happiness of her whole life.  I was innocent
enough.  It was harmless play to me.  But I have paid--and paid--and
paid!  I would not have you, whom I cherish, rise each morning and
wonder why you had to be the only one to suffer out of thousands who
played the same way.  And now will you please forgive me this
uncontrolled moment?  I usually inflict them upon no one; I hide them
in my room.  But, Barbara, I was so proud of him--so sure--so positive
that he was the only man in the world!  And I lost my chance to tell
him how much I cared."

The riding-crop lay neglected on the floor.  It had slipped and
clattered down while Barbara sat and stared at the tiny woman who was
dabbing at her eyes with a very girlish square of linen.  And then
slowly Barbara rose and took an uncertain step or two.  She sank to her
knees and pillowed her head upon Miss Sarah's lap.  Momentarily she had
forgotten the struggle which was going on in her own heart.  Now even
pity for the other could not keep her from turning hack to it.

"But I do not know," she gasped.  "I--sometimes I think I must care,
and then I am afraid----"  She lifted a face dry-eyed and tense.  "I
ought to be proud of him, too.  If I loved him I would be, wouldn't I?
If I cared I wouldn't ask anything more than just what he is.  Don't
you see I'm only petty and rotten with snobbishness?"

Miss Sarah sniffed, ever so delicately.

"What a sentimental old woman I am!" she exclaimed.  "And, my dear, you
talk as though you had just discovered a new and terribly perplexing
complication.  Don't you know that it is as old as the feminine mind
itself?"  Her handkerchief came down, then, disclosing eyes that were
very bright and very tender.  "Why, a woman never loves a man merely
for what he is!  She always reserves a few little things, at least,
which she means--well, to rearrange.  She loves him just a bit more for
what she secretly promises herself he shall be."

Barbara's sullenness was gone.

"I know," she whispered.  "I thought of that, too, long ago.  But it
isn't just a--little thing.  A few days ago, Miss Sarah, when we took
the train to go up north, I could scarcely wait for the engine to draw
us there.  I think I counted every click of the rails, I know I sang
his name in my heart with every click.  And then, when I wanted to walk
straight off the steps of the car into his arms--when I . . .  Why do
you sit there and listen and not say that you loathe me as I do myself?
I know that he is all man, but his work and my world--oh, when that
terrible thing happened, and he came lurching toward me, instead of
helping him, do you know what I did?  I was sick at the sight of
him--sick at the reck and grime and blood of him!  I just wanted to get
away, and--and shudder at the thought of----"

Miss Sarah's composure had returned, but her face grew more sober
still.  This was a different, a graver thing, even than she had
expected.

"Your world?"  Deliberately now she dared to argue.  "Barbara, didn't
you know, from the beginning, that his world would have to be yours?
Did you ever think that you could change him--that way?"

Barbara moved her head.

"I wanted both," she said.  "I wanted all I have--and him, too.  I
learned that night he took care of me how much I cared; I know he'd be
as careful of me, all his life.  But I had thought that he might be
able to do as father has done and let other men handle the----  But he
knows now!  He understands me!  I tell you I'm no good.  I've no
backbone.  I'm just pink and white flesh without any spirit!"

The other woman sat and smoothed the bright head and wished she knew
what to say.  "It would please me to know just what stuff she is made
of, too," Miss Sarah had once admitted to her brother.  She wondered if
at last she knew.

"I do not know what to tell you," she murmured slowly.  "I thought if I
talked with you I might be able to help you, but I am afraid now that I
cannot.  He is a better man than you are woman, Barbara; because he has
builded with his hands, he has reared him a soul as well.  He knows the
depths, and the heights are far more wonderful for such knowledge.  Oh,
dear me, I wish I knew----"

She paused there, shaken by her own impotence.  Doubt and aching regret
were overwhelming her.

"I have told Mr. Wickersham that I will not marry him."  The brown head
burrowed lower and muffled the words.  "I know that I could let no
other man so--so much as touch me now.  Is that--caring enough?"

But Miss Sarah only half heard the question.  She was expecting no
surrender now.

"----Nor how to advise you," she struggled on.  "For you have lived as
all girls like you live.  You've lived for yourself; hoped for
yourself; prayed for yourself--as all women pray, I suppose, directly
or indirectly.  And yet is merely a question of whether you could live
with him in his world, day for day and night for night?  Is it as
simple as that?  I have told you what difference one day made with me.
Have you thought what it might mean to wake and realize that you must
live _without_ him, all the rest of your life?"

Miss Sarah had stopped hoping.  And so there was sheer amazement in the
triumph which rose and drove the regret from her faded pink-and-white
face when the girl's dark-fringed eyes lifted.

Since Stephen O'Mara had brought her back to her father, Barbara had
wondered why she did not cry.  Great tears were sliding noiselessly
down her cheeks when she raised her head.

"I've tried to think--I haven't dared," Barbara sobbed.  "But he
doesn't want me now.  He doesn't want the kind of a girl I am any more!"

Thus in her moment of capitulation did the girl's heart cry aloud the
one thought which, unknown to her, had been her unbearable pain.  And
straightway Miss Sarah's illuminated countenance became a glorification
of her spirit.  Silently she leaned over and folded the kneeling one
round.

Later she found it possible to speak.

"You have convinced me forever of the futility of all snap judgments,"
said she, and she marveled at the shyness in her own voice, "but you
could never convince me of that.  You may go home now, Barbara, for you
have worn yourself out.  But to-morrow I would suggest that you--ask
him for corroboration, if you still hold to such an opinion."

Instantly Barbara rose and bobbed her head.  She had always been a slim
creature of moods mercurial; she would always be that.  And now her
violet eyes radiated anticipation, perverse and impish and far, far
different from the sullen dullness which had filled them an hour
before.  Miss Sarah had spoken with well-seasoned wisdom, as was her
wont: there are sometimes big moments which are the bigger for lack of
analysis.  The girl did not know why, all in one breath, she no longer
feared nor doubted--but she _knew_!  And that was a world and all of
joy.  She bobbed her head.

"Ask him?" she echoed, demurely confused.  "Ask--_him_!  To-morrow I am
going to dare him to ask _me_--again!"

But she did not obey Miss Sarah's suggestion that she return home and
rest.  On winged feet she flew back through the hedge-gap and ordered
Ragtime saddled once more; yet when she touched that splendid beast
with the crop and sent him at a gallop down the drive, there was no
longer any sting in the lash.  Even the groom, with critical eye,
noticed the difference in the girl's seat that afternoon; for days and
days to come he was the better contented with the companionship of
horses, which was his lot, in dwelling upon the crazy moods of women.
And Miriam Burrell, sighting Barbara's face as the latter wheeled
toward the hills, flew from her window to scratch off a note to
Garry--her third note that day, for she seemed always omitting most
important things which needed saying.

"It's come," she scrawled in delighted haste, "and Miss Sarah is a
visiting angel from Heaven! . . .  When are we going to be married?"

Others knew of it almost as soon as she did herself, but knowledge of
that did not mar Barbara's rosy contemplation of this new-found,
totally unbelievable happiness.  Once before she had ridden that road
with him alone in her thoughts; now she realized that she had loved him
then as she must have loved him always, and marveled at such blindness.
Once, on that other day, she had told herself that all ignoble and
unworthy comparisons of herself and him were done and gone.  Now she
did not need such reassurance, when her lips were tremulous.

Rest?  Pressing steadily into the north that afternoon, first at a
gallop, then more and more slowly until Ragtime was picking his own
gait, the girl smiled in pity for Miss Sarah and her day which had
never dawned.  But there was scant room for sadness in her present
mood.  Tomorrow?  She let herself be afraid for an instant, to tremble
in delicious mock-terror, because there was nothing for her to fear now
in the whole wide world.

She grew pensive at times; at times in an abandon of gaiety she
chattered back at a quarrelsome squirrel in the thicket.  She could
rest later; and if she could not go to him immediately, at least every
step the horse took was bringing them, for a little while, closer
together.  And her to-morrow was only one twilight and one dawn away;
her to-morrow would be his, as utterly as was she herself.  Dusk came,
and regretfully she told herself that she must be turning back home.
Two rifle shots, sharp and startlingly close, whipped through the quiet
of that lazy afternoon, but they meant nothing to her.  She had reached
the height of land, where he had found her the day her roan mare
strayed off while she sat mooning on a log; she was holding out both
arms toward the spot where the valley of Thirty-Mile must lie, when a
team of heavy horses broke around a turn in the road, slowed to a trot
at the sight of her, and came to an abrupt standstill.  When the girl
rode nearer to them, merely surprised and curious at first, they
snorted and showed the whites of their eyes and shied back nervously.

Something chill clutched at Barbara's heart while she spoke
pre-emptorily to Ragtime, who was dancing in sympathetic panic.  There
was nothing to tell her, but she knew that these were Big Louie's
horses.  And Big Louie was a dreamy incompetent--he had left them for a
moment, that was all, and they had become frightened and bolted.  But
Big Louie never neglected his team . . . they were not wet . . . they
had not been running far.  And their fright became less when she
dismounted and approached them, soothing them with her voice until they
let her touch their sleek sides, without rearing away.

Dusk had come and gone, for it was growing dark.  Uncertain, more and
more unnerved as she stood and gazed at the forbidding, black-shadowed
ridges beyond her, the girl had to fight suddenly against an impulse to
turn and race back to the lower country and Morrison and home.  Even
then the rifle shots meant nothing to her--and pride would not let her
run.  She remounted and rode on a rod or two, and stopped to look back
at the team which was watching her; she pressed on and rounded the
curve.  Ragtime reared and snorted there, and she barely stifled the
cry which his strange behavior brought to her lips.  Because of her
senseless panic she punished him the more severely, and sent him on.
And then she saw what the horse had already seen.

A blue-shirted figure lay half in the road, half in the undergrowth
that fringed it, one arm crooked under him and his face prone in the
dust; a bulkier mass was stretched wholly within the trail--and she
recognized him, too.  Big Louie's face was upturned, and the
explanation of the two rifle reports and the driverless team was here.
For Big Louie's hand still clutched the handle of a canvas pail.  They
had stopped to water the horses; they had been shot down from behind.
And first of all, unable to move, while horror parched her lips, the
girl remembered words which the limp one, half in the road and half in
the underbrush, had spoken to her in a moment of sternness.

"He has fired upon me from cover," the man who loved her had said.  "He
has been taking money from a man who was bent on beating me at any
price!"

Giddiness rose and swayed her, and she beat Ragtime mercilessly for his
fear.  Instinct clamored flight, and she forced herself to wait,
panting for that other shot which might leave her, too, lying in the
road.  But even in that first frozen moment she began to reason
clearly.  Back with the sleek team which welcomed her with questioning
eyes she left Ragtime, for he would stand there, and retraced her way
on foot.  She could not do it, she sobbed drily--but she raced to him
and knelt and searched with swift fingers before the words were past
her lips.  Her hand found moisture beneath his right shoulder; it was
stained red when she held it up and stared at it.  And then she was
closest to fainting.

"Blood sickens me!" she whimpered aloud.  "Blood sickens me!"  But she
managed to turn him over upon his back.  With brown head against his
heart, she listened--listened and would not believe that her to-morrow
might come too late.  And then she caught the slack pound of his pulse.

From there on she was less panic-stricken; she gained control of
faculties shocked for a time into uselessness.  Method marked her
acts--deliberation mechanical but sure.  She was horribly afraid of Big
Louie, but she finally disentangled the handle of the pail from those
loose fingers, and ran to the brook which babbled near at hand.
Returning, she drenched Steve's face with icy water; she lifted his
head and propped it, as comfortably as she might, upon one thigh, and
opened his flannel shirt.  The ball had passed through, for back and
front the shirt became immediately wetter with fresh blood.  Blood
sickened her, but she whipped off the coat of her boyish riding-habit
and wrenched the sleeves from her linen blouse.  They were desperately
scant, yet they provided pads with which to check that dreadful oozing.
And when they were in place she turned again to bathing his forehead.

A folded sheet of paper came to view when she tried once to ease his
heavy body from the position which was numbing her leg, and she seized
upon it fiercely.  It was only a brief line, bidding him come to her,
but it bore her name.  With instant, bodiless clarity which had marked
all her mental processes so far, its purport was hers.  She had not
written--the hand that had traced her signature had been unstrung for
once.  She understood, though such knowledge seemed of little moment
now.

She kept the pads cold and wet; she went for fresh water and stumbled
and fell more than once, because of the treacherous footing in the
deepening shadows.  But she was no longer afraid of the dark; she had
grown to fear Big Louie less, even though there was no help for Big
Louie any more.  It was the first time that Barbara had looked upon the
face of a man who had died in violence.  Big Louie's face was growing
indistinct now, but she knew that he was smiling--knew that his eyes
were dreamy and mild.  Death, like Life, had been a quite
incomprehensible puzzle to that slow-witted one who had no name.  But
he had smiled seldom in life.  In death his smile was almost childish,
almost sweet, and questioning beyond all else.

Alone with him who still lived, the pallid girl sat and waited and
wondered how long--or how soon--it would be.  But she wasn't afraid
now.  They were his hills; it was his wilderness.  And could any harm
come out of them equal to separation from him?  This was only the
beginning of one night of darkness, and Miss Sarah had endured with
patience and bravery through a whole lifetime of days and nights as
black.  "Your face was the first . . . it will be the last thing I'll
see, as long as there is sight in my eyes!" had been his words to her.
She waited and she prayed shamelessly for herself--for one more
chance--as Miss Sarah had said women always prayed.  But he was looking
at her, when she opened her eyes after a long and incoherent appeal; at
her first word he tried to rise and she had trouble in persuading him
to lie back again.  She heard herself scolding, while she rearranged
the bandages so that they would cover both wounds, and he listened,
hot-eyed, without recognizing her.  Yet when she bade him wait, until
she could bring the team, he nodded his comprehension; he was watching
for her return.  And he came to his feet with a readiness that made her
heart leap with hope; but he fell twice before she lifted him, half
with her hands, half with her voice, to the seat.

She crawled in beside him, and the next moment she had to struggle
madly to prevent his returning to Big Louie.

"He will wait quiet until we come for him," she protested.  "There
isn't room for Big Louie--and he won't mind----"

Her logic made an impression upon him, for he smiled.  There was no
sequence in his acquiescence, however.

"I have always been afraid for him," he told her in reply, as
studiously grave as though he had been conscious of what he was saying.
"The others--they can take care of themselves.  They are wrong ones
together.  But Big Louie is only a child--but he won't mind--he'll
understand----"

She thought then that he had recognized her; she dared to hope that his
brain was clearing.  But when the team went forward, nervously
unmanageable at first, then more decorous as they drew away from him
who would never feed them brown sugar again, the man beside her only
persisted vacantly with his topic.

"Big Louie never could find his way alone," he mused, "and that is
strange, too, for he was born in these hills.  He was always getting
lost----"  And with that he must not desert Louie!  She had even more
trouble with him this time.  "He will lose his head," he expostulated
mildly--his old, unfailing attitude of gentleness toward her.  "He will
lose his head and waste his strength in running from things which do
not exist."

"Big Louie will find his way this time."  She was whimpering again in
her helplessness.  "He is--already home."

There she learned that her voice could control him when her arms
availed not at all against even his dead weight.  And so she talked as
steadily as she was able while she drove.  Once he lurched against her;
when he pulled himself together he was so sanely apologetic of a sudden
that she searched his face with hungry eyes.  But he was talking now to
himself.

"I must not touch her!" he stated firmly.  And then, drearily: "I am
sick. . . .  I have never been so sick--before."

With that he subsided, but his silence was far more dreadful than his
wanderings had been; and as fast as she dared she pushed the heavy team
on, with Ragtime following behind like a dog.  He slipped back against
her almost immediately, and this time he had not the strength with
which to apologize nor lift himself erect.  With his head heavy in the
hollow of her arm, they came at length to the open pasture hills; they
topped the rise and faced the loops on loops of highway that ran down
to Morrison at the river-edge.  And so she brought him home.  At the
sight of his "city" she sobbed aloud, but he, sunken and slack, was
conscious neither of distance covered nor change of country.  He
climbed down from the seat, however, in response to her urgings, when
the team halted before Caleb Hunter's white-columned house--he turned
and started stubbornly back the way they had come.

She ran after him and clung to his arm.

"You promised that you would come back to me," she cried up at him.
"Oh, you cannot leave me now!"

That halted him, momentarily.

"I must go back to my bridge," he explained, plainly nonplussed.  "But
then I'll surely come back to you."

She pleaded with him--raged at him.

"I must go back to my bridge," he reiterated gruffly now.

Her arms went around him in desperation, and then, with one swing, he
had swept her yards away, reeling before his blazing wrath.

"Take your fingers from my eyes, Harrigan," he gasped in sudden agony.
"I am going to kill you now--and _she_ is looking on!"

The girl was afraid of him; she dared not try to hold him.  She
screamed wildly for help, and screamed again.  And he had gone on, and
wavered and crashed over upon his face, when Caleb Hunter and her
father came running heavily across the lawn in answer to her shrieks.

Between them they lifted him and carried him into the house.




CHAPTER XXIV

--AND TO-MORROW, AND TO-MORROW

They carried him into the house and bore him upstairs, and laid him,
quiet now and almost pulseless, upon the bed.  They stood there,
dumfounded, at the bedside, until Miss Sarah, re-entering the room,
coolly ordered them from underfoot and sent them back downstairs.  And
at that their unprotesting obedience was of greater assistance than
their hands could have been; but when, after one glance at the girl's
stricken face, she tried the next instant to dismiss Barbara, for once
Miss Sarah's will alone proved insufficient.  The girl refused,
point-blank, to go.

"He half undressed me and put me to bed," Barbara flung back in reply
to the spinster's final objection, "and if that did not shock you,
surely my staying now need not!"

The refusal itself brought a glint to the older woman's eyes and the
phrasing thereof a flush to her cheeks, but she wasted no more words in
what she knew to be useless argument.  And though the girl grew sick
and sicker still while Miss Sarah cut away the sodden shirt and
started, with competent skill, to cleanse the wound, the latter let her
remain and hold a basin of antiseptic and replenish it when necessary.

Miss Sarah knew what to do; and she worked with unhurried thoroughness.
They had sent for the doctor, and after ages had passed for the girl,
maddeningly cool and unruffled, he arrived.  But his first words, too,
were an order that she leave the room, and unable to combat his
professional bleakness, meekly she had to obey.  Little and wholly
hopeless she stole downstairs.

Caleb and her father were confronting each other before the fireplace
when she reached the lower floor, but the queer note of restraint in
their voices meant nothing to her, until she heard her father cry out
in sudden anguish.

"Cal," he cried, "Cal, you don't think I was a party to this attempt at
murder?"

Then, at Caleb's reply, which went hurtling back at him, the girl was
crouching, white and still, and clutching at the stair-rail.

"Party!  Attempt!  Because you did not pull the trigger are you any the
less guilty?"

"Do you believe that I would murder the man my girl loves?" Dexter
Allison moaned now.

Barbara gasped at the deadly anger which crossed Caleb Hunter's face.
Caleb had lifted a hand in righteous accusation.

"You have dealt in crookedness," he thundered.  "You have thrived on
cunning.  And, being a law unto yourself in this country, you have gone
unpunished until now.  You aided and abetted a vicious and unscrupulous
scoundrel in his villainy; and now you have looked upon the result of
your works.  Law has never touched you, sir--reprisal has passed you
by.  But, by God, sir, I warn you if that boy dies--if he dies--I shall
see that you meet me at thirty paces the next morning.  And I shall not
miss--I shall be your law!"

They had been friends for close to forty years, yet they were worse
than strangers now.  Dexter Allison could not answer; he could not
speak aloud.  Caleb's finger had swung toward the door in a gesture
unmistakable.  Allison turned, and, ghastly of face, met the eyes of
his daughter.

"Barbara," he appealed to her, frantically.  "Baby----"

But she shrank, a huddled heap of misery, away from him.

"You--too?" she whispered.  "You!"  And then, dully: "And you're my
father!"

The shoulders beneath the garish plaid rose and fell, pitifully.  This,
then, was the moment which he feared.  He gulped aloud and hung his
head, and turned his feet toward home.  Barbara rose after he had gone
and crept into a chair.

One after another they tried to persuade the girl to rest.  Miriam came
and talked to her, and Caleb; and even Miss Sarah, passing through the
room, stopped to urge her again to go to bed.  But she met them all
with the same wordless refusal; she was waiting for him when the
doctor, descending in the morning, tried to combine, diplomatically,
praise for what she had done with disapproval of her obstinacy.

"My dear child, this insubordination will help no one," he said, "and
it may end in your collapse at just the moment when you are needed
most."

"Will he live?" was all she would say.  "Will he live?"

And before such hopelessness the doctor could not lie.

"He is hard hit and very, very weak," he had to admit.  "The shock is
great and the tissue damage--unpromising.  It is far worse than I
expected, but he is still alive, and most men would have been already
dead.  And his vitality is a marvel, even to me."

He might have comforted her, but with no other statement could he have
told the truth.  He failed also in his effort to persuade her to go to
bed; he had breakfast with Caleb, and she refused to eat.  And she was
still there in her chair, asking only to be let alone, when Garry
Devereau and Fat Joe arrived.  She rose and ran to meet the latter, but
the doctor who knew how many such situations the pudgy riverman had
weathered, summoned him immediately, and Barbara had to wait an hour
before Joe came back downstairs.  By the lapels of his coat she clung
to him then.

"He's mighty sick," reluctantly Joe, too, told the truth.

"The doctor said that it was worse than he expected," she droned.
"They sent me away, but if he isn't going to live I won't let them keep
me from him!"

Joe's sympathy was unspoiled by professionalism.

"Sick is one thing,"--his confidence was almost convincing,--"and dyin'
is another.  And----  Shucks!  I ain't going to let no book-taught
medico worry me yet!  Men get well because they are bound to get well,
or they die because it's their time to die--and he's got too much to
live for now!"

Her hopeless face made deception impossible, but Joe comforted her,
just the same.  He persuaded her to eat with him, and when he found
that his conversation made the waiting easier for her, he waxed quite
garrulous.

"Why, he's been hurt almost as bad as this, once before," he rambled
on, "but he's still alive, ain't he?"

The girl's eyes livened at that.

"Once, down on the island, he mixed in an affair in which most men
would not have meddled.  And he got it from behind that time, too, only
it was with a knife."

"He never told me," murmured the girl.

"It ain't likely he would," the other stated with finality.  "It was
over a woman, and not a particularly pretty story, any way you look at
it."

Her dark eyes widened.  She bit her lip.  It came to her how little of
his life she had shared.

"Oh!" she barely breathed.  And again, falteringly: "Oh!"

From that halting monosyllable Joe judged that something was amiss.
Observation had never been a slow or painful process of concentration
with him.

"He didn't even know who she was.  He'd never even seen her before,"
quickly he put her right.  "She was just a public dancer, that was all.
But a man--mistreated her--and Steve, he just interfered----"

Indeed, Joe had found the way to comfort her and still tell the truth,
even though he found it foolishly difficult to swallow food and watch
at the same time the warmth which his words kindled.  So for an hour he
lingered at table and told her many things concerning the man she loved
which she would never have learned from his own lips.  And it was Joe's
jocularity which in the end subdued her rebel spirit.  She yielded at
last and promised to go home and rest, but only after he had promised
first in a fashion which could leave no doubt in her heart, that he
would come for her if things grew worse.

Before she left him that morning she told Joe of Big Louie, whom she
had had to leave in the road; but he interrupted her before she could
finish.  They had already found Big Louie.  Then she gave him the note
which she had discovered crushed beneath Steve's body.  This Joe
scanned ferociously; he flashed a strange glance at her from bleached
blue eyes.

"Some one traced your name," he put into words the first thought that
had been hers.  "Some one who had your signature to copy."

She nodded, whitely, in horror.  Joe folded the paper and tucked it
into a pocket.

"We can touch nobody," he averred regretfully, "unless we catch
Harrigan!"

Caleb himself took Barbara home, and on the way across the lawn she
giggled suddenly at the funny way in which the distance seemed to
increase and then lessen between her eyes and her feet.  The ground
persisted in rising to meet her, she said, until she had to cling to
Caleb's arm.  And the outer steps proved difficult to negotiate.  But
at the sight of her father, sunk in silence Upon his desk in the ground
floor "office," she drew her hand from the crook of Caleb's arm and
went swiftly across to him.

"Barbara," he beseeched her brokenly, the moment her cheek touched his.
"You mustn't believe that I----"

She hushed him with gentle fingers laid upon his lips.

"I have been a very foolish and hysterical child," she said.  "I'll try
to behave more like a woman now.  And you and Uncle Cal have been
only--absurd!"

She had to laugh again at the behavior of her feet as she climbed
upstairs; but her head seemed steady enough.  It was only after she had
reached her own room that she complained querrulously of the failing
lights.  Miriam had to help Cecile undress and put her to bed.

On the floor below, her father had turned again to his desk, his head
bowed upon his arms.  And total breakdown was imminent for Dexter
Allison when a hand touched, awkwardly, his shoulder.  He looked up
heavily to meet this time the eyes of Caleb Hunter.  Caleb stuttered
furiously at first, for sentimentality shamed him.  Then a happy
thought showed the way.

"Dexter, I secured a few sprigs of very superior mint, yesterday," he
made of it a ceremonial.  "Do you think you would--care to join me,
sir?"

They had been friends for close to forty years, not because of common
tastes, but in spite of innate dissimilarity.  Dexter came to his feet;
he reached out and crushed the other man's hand within his soft, white
fingers.  Nor was his reply quite according to formula.

"I don't mind if I do, Cal," he accepted fervidly, "Thank God . . . I
don't mind if I do!"

Arm in arm, they recrossed to the white-columned house.  And they kept
close, each to the other, throughout the hours of suspense that
followed, finding a potent though unconfessed reassurance in such
companionship.

Delirium came again upon the sick man who lay in the room which Miss
Sarah had always kept waiting for him.  Fever strode upon him, while
the girl who had brought him home slept in complete exhaustion.   At
times Steve lay quiescent, only muttering fitfully; the next moment he
called crisply for Fat Joe--he feared for his bridge--and Joe had to
exert every iron muscle to hold him down.  And always he spoke
Barbara's name, with a poignant gentleness that left Miss Sarah on the
verge of collapse.  But he continued to live, through that day and the
next night, even when the doctor shook his head and Fat Joe rose to go
for the girl, as he had promised he would, in the last extremity.  He
continued to live, and with the coming of the second dawn suddenly he
was no longer delirious.  Stephen O'Mara opened his eyes and gazed
feebly but very understandingly into the eyes of Fat Joe, who was
watching at that moment.

Joe tried to hush him, but he would talk a little.

"I know," he pronounced each word with calculated effort.  "I have been
very sick, and I must not waste my strength.  But I have to be clear,
first, on one point.  Have I dreamed it, Joe, or--or did she bring me
home?"

With his voice alone, when all else seemed failing, Joe had kept his
friend alive.  The doctor believed it; Miss Sarah knew it to be so.
And first of all Joe had to voice his thankfulness, for it was an
explosive thing.

"Didn't I tell her so?" he demanded in his whining tenor.  "Didn't I
say so, all along?  And I let that doctor worry _me_, just because he's
got a diploma in a frame, hanging on his wall!"

Then he answered Steve's question.

"She found you," he said.  "She brought you home."

A long time the sick man lay and pondered.  And finally he found it
possible to smile.

"I have not cared whether I lived or died," he said in little more than
a whisper.  "All along I have seemed to know how near I was--to going
across; and I have been near to quitting--at times.  For I was happier
than I'd ever dared let myself be, before--and then, with the first
shot that dropped Big Louie, I knew----"  He shook his head, still
smiling vaguely.  "I have not wanted to live, but I am looking at
things--more like a man now. . . .  You need not worry any longer, Joe.
I'll sleep a little while, I think; and then I'll put my mind hard on
getting well, when I awake."

That marked the end of delirium, and with sleep which came almost while
he was talking, the fever began to abate.  He "put his mind on getting
well," when he awoke, twelve hours later.  Strength was flowing in a
steady tide back into his body long before Barbara's knees would again
bear her weight.  For she had squandered her endurance without counting
the cost, and she paid the full penalty.  She lay three days and three
nights railing at her weakness before she could get up at all; and even
then Cecile, her little maid, clucked discreetly at the dark circles
beneath her eyes.

Joe was several days absent on that errand which had all but emptied
the seething town of men; he returned the same day Barbara was about
again, forced to admit that Harrigan and Fallon and Shayne had won
clear.  And there was nothing left to the disgruntled groups which
straggled in behind him, save tall and heated conjecture.  Some said
that they must have managed to cross the border; others maintained that
they had found sanctuary in the lumber-camps of the lake country to the
west, but no matter which guess was right the net result stood
unchanged.  For it is upon the one who runs away that the blame is
always laid, and Archibald Wickersham knew fully as well as did Caleb
and Allison and Fat Joe that, without Harrigan, they could not hope to
touch him.  Harrigan had disappeared from the ken of men, and
Wickersham delayed only until his departure could no longer be
construed as flight.  Then one evening modestly he boarded a train.

After she had rested Barbara proved almost humbly amenable to reason;
until it was best for her to go to him, she would wait as patiently as
she was able.  And in the meantime, in a luxury of loneliness, wisely
the girl spent her days out of doors, climbing oftenest to that
hill-top where they had stood together, in the snow, the night of Miss
Sarah's Christmas party.  From that point she could see Morrison and
the river basin, and even the steam that jetted ever and again from the
whistles of the engines clattering over his railroad which lanced into
the north.

But no discordant note of haste could reach her ears from so great a
distance.  That whole vast panorama, suggestive least of all of
violence, lay blanketed in a sleepy silence that matched the subdued
security of her mood.

Miss Sarah ordered a week of unbroken quiet and rest for her patient;
and Steve, and not Barbara, proved the difficult one to manage during
that period.  For with returning strength there came to him
recollection of many things which required his attention.  He fretted
over his work; he swore humorously at Fat Joe, who, coming to make
daily reports as soon as Miss Sarah realized that the good in such
visits far exceeded the benefits of sleep and solitude, assured his
chief that they had accomplished much, unhampered as they were by
carping authority.

But he lay and brooded, no humor in his eye, when he was left alone.
Fat Joe had assured him that she had brought him home; but Fat Joe, who
was ever averse to anti-climax, had told him no more than that.  His
efforts at entertainment were only the more spontaneous those days
because of the soberness of his friend's face.  And then, the same day
that Joe raised him against the pillows so that he might watch a string
of flat-cars, high piled with logs, roll into the yards, they let her
go to him.

Steve was listening to the shrill salute of the whistle which he knew
was McLean's paen of victory; he was smiling a little wistfully over
the memory which, with McLean, always recurred to him, when he turned
and saw her standing on the threshold.  She had come on diffident,
mouse-like feet.  She was watching him.  And before he believed it
really was she, Barbara faltered his name.

"Steve!"

It was only a wisp of a sound--an aching, throbbing bit of tenderness
lighter even than the breath that bore it.

"Steve!" she breathed again.

But thereupon, with a headlong little rush that scattered spools of
bandage and rolls of lint, and set the bottles upon his table jingling
dangerously, she flew to him and came, somehow, into his arms.

They had not told him--at first he could not speak.  Dumbly he sat, his
face bowed upon that brown head pillowed in his arms.  She had told
herself that she was a woman now--yet her first words were all girl.

"Tell me just once that I'm pretty," she quavered.  "Say that I am
still--half boy--to you!"

His tongue unsteadied with joy, he told her again, as he had told her
on that other day; and watching the old, old wonder of her grow in his
eyes, she listened as though she were taking the words, one by one,
from his lips.  But there was nothing boyish in the crooked little arch
of her mouth--nothing boyish in the depths of her dark and brimming
eyes.  She remembered his wincing shoulder then; her arms crept higher
about his neck.  And now her face was uplifted and there was no more
need for words.

Afterward, when they spoke of Big Louie, she loved him more for the
sorrow which he did not try to hide.  From Fat Joe he had already
learned of Big Louie's last dereliction.  Out of a deeper silence,
Steve spoke gravely--an epitaph for the man to whom he had been
unfailingly kind.

"Most any kind of a failure can live," he said, "but it takes a man--to
smile and die."


He let himself marvel aloud at her littleness.

Their first hour together was only the happier for that moment of
sadness they shared.




CHAPTER XXV

IN REAL LIFE TOO

There was no longer any objection raised by Miss Sarah; and Barbara
spent every hour of her days with him.  It grew warmer with aging
spring--and almost immediately he was able to sit with her and watch
the stream of logs coming in over the line from Thirty-Mile and beyond.

Miriam and Garry were married in that week which followed directly
Steve's first days of convalescence.  The former had returned with
Garry to the northern valley, and already a note had come from her to
the younger girl, in which she bewailed the servant question, as
represented by the cook-boy whom her husband had inherited, along with
the cabin at headquarters.

Over that particular paragraph Barbara allowed herself to show
amusement.  She tilted her nose, however, in vast disdain at the tenor
of the rest of the letter.

"From the way Miriam raves on and on," she exclaimed, "one would think
that Garry had saved the day."

They were at the window together on this occasion, Steve outwardly
still a little pale and haggard, but for the rest his old serene self
again.  He managed not to smile at her small and serious face.

"It certainly has not strengthened my vanity a little bit, either,"
said he, "to learn how smoothly things can move along without me."

Day by day the girl was finding her way deeper into that innermost
heart of him which he had never shared with other woman or man.  Hour
by hour she was learning to know him better, and yet his whimsical
gravity still could deceive her--she was sometimes thoughts behind his
thoughts.  Hard upon his reply her eyes flashed with indignation.

"Pooh!" she scoffed, "Pooh!  Most any old clock will run, after
somebody's wound it up!"

It was a trick of speech that she had learned from him, but his
employment of parallel, lazily amiable for the most part, had never
been so hotly partisan as was hers at that moment.  And suddenly
self-conscious--suddenly confused and warmly disconcerted at the
quality of his gaze--she had to hide her head.  But she hid it upon a
shoulder most conveniently at hand.

Spring gave way to early summer--and now Steve was able to be on his
feet again, so absurdly uncertain of balance at first, however, that
she ridiculed him unmercifully one moment, only to rush to him in a
panic of solicitude the next.  There came long walks, and longer trips
in the saddle; came hours of silence that were the more wonderful for
want of words--hours in which, in a hushed voice, she gave him shyly of
her plans.  But always, too, the interruptions grew more and more
frequent and insistent.  Fat Joe and McLean, and even Hardwick Elliott,
made more and more pressing demands upon his time, until finally he
insisted that he could no longer play, shamelessly, the invalid.  He
must look in upon the works up-river, if only for the moral effect
which it would have upon the men.  She assented, grudgingly; it would
be but a day or two.  And then--then he would come back to her.

The next morning, at the moment when Barbara and Steve were mounting
their horses, for she wanted to ride with him a little way, Dexter
Allison chose to disclose something which had been but lately in the
process of preparation.  He joined them at the edge of the lawn, before
the white-columned house on the hill.

"Easing back into harness, I understand," he began, not quite
comfortably, however, for he was aware of a gleam of disapproval in his
daughter's eyes, at this interruption.  "Well, there's no great rush,
but it's wise, no doubt, to see that things don't lag."  He hesitated,
and shifted heavily to the other foot.  "We'll want to start through to
the border by fall, I suppose?"

"We'll be ready," Steve had to laugh at his lack of ease.

"No doubt--no doubt!"  Again Dexter hesitated, momentarily.  And then
there came to the surface that proneness to accept men for what they
were, in a man's world, which had long before convinced Caleb Hunter of
Allison's inherent bigness.

"Elliott resigned the Presidency of the East Coast Company last night."
The statement was brief to actual crispness.  "I merely tell you this
so that you can begin to lay tentative plans accordingly.  Because, in
view of the immediate need of filling that vacancy, I feel sure that
there will be too many demands upon your time, here at the Morrison
office, for you to plan on much field work for yourself in the future."

To Barbara, at the beginning, the speech seemed merely another of her
father's rather involved, entirely labored attempts at the facetious.
But when she saw the blood steal up and stain Stephen O'Mara's face,
she realized that it was the very sort of a suggestion from which, on
her lips, he had turned roughly away.  Coming from the lips of her
father, Steve accepted gravely, with a matching briefness that could
not hide a surge of triumph.  A month before Barbara would have been
unable to understand why there was any difference, simply because the
suggestion came from another.  Now, when it could no longer make or mar
her happiness, she understood very well indeed.

She rode with him that day until he told her that it was time for her
to turn back.  With Ragtime standing quiet, she laid her face against
his, and complained that he had promised her she should never be
allowed to go more than arms' length away from him, once she was his.

"This is the last time," he told her, in a voice vibrant and low.
"This is the last time--for you and me."

He held her closer for a moment.

"You will be ready when I come back?"

She bobbed her head.

"Ready--and waiting," she said.

She sat and put up a hand to him, wistfully disconsolate, before he
disappeared beyond a twist in the trail.



The next night, in the cabin up-river, after Miriam had left them alone
to what she termed their complacent silence, Garry Devereau and Steve
sat a long while before the former raised a face alight with his rare
mirth.

"Remember Joe's one proposed journey into the realms of romance?" he
asked suddenly.

Openly Steve grinned, and nodded.

"Remember how Joe threatened to close the last chapter?"

Steve nodded again.

"Well, here we are!" chuckled Garry.  "I, poor but honest, already in
the toils of matrimony; and you, a plutocrat in sudden danger of a
government investigation, I'm told, and hovering on the brink!"

"Here we are!" echoed Steve.

And that was as close as either of them came to outspoken emotion.
With a lightness somewhat self-conscious, Garry had alluded to the
property which Caleb Hunter had turned over to Steve.  There was a
trace of like humor in the latter's reply.

"I certainly am oppressed with the cares of sudden wealth," said he.

They were silent again, and then they heard lifted at a distance a thin
and reedy tenor.  Joe was still humming his inevitable ballad, when he
entered and closed the door behind him, with an alarming flourish.

"Evenin', folks," he saluted, but he did not seek a chair.

Before then they had seen him primed for a sensation; never until that
moment had he failed to aggravate their curiosity.  He circled the room
but once, before he confronted them in a fashion that would have been
challenging, had it not been for his fiery face.

"Well, you may as well congratulate me," he invited, "and have done
with it.  Because the suspense is over for me!"

Both men straightened in their chairs; both understood instantly.  But
Garry was the quicker in speech.

"Not Cecile?" he inquired, in feigned consternation.

"Why not?" Joe was quickly belligerent.

"Oh, dear!" mourned Garry.  "Oh, dear!  I wish you had consulted me--or
some other married man first.  Compatibility and common tastes, you
know, Joe, and all that sort of thing.  She's a little Parisienne, and
you--well, you're only a riverman, like me!"

Joe condescended to draw up a chair.  And his verbal condescension was
large.

"Sometimes you're fair," he spoke with scornful superiority, "and
sometimes you are so amateurish you make me homesick for Steve to come
back."



She was waiting for him at the twist in the road.  She was ready, two
days later, as she had promised to be.

Only her father and Miss Sarah and Caleb were present when they were
married.  And then, and not alone because she knew he wished it, but
because it was the dearest wish of her own heart, they turned their
faces towards the cabin on the balsam knoll.

That day was theirs alone to be shared with no other living thing, save
the lesser brethren of the wilderness.  Noon found them far north of
the foothills, deep in the hushed and higher ridges; twilight had come
and gone and the first of the stars were already blurred points of
light in the riffles, when they raised the river ahead.  And there he
checked his horse, to point out the cabin, white-streaked with clay
chinking against a wall of green--he dismounted and lifted her to the
ground, for suddenly she wanted to go the rest of the way on foot.

She let her weight lie against him, the top of her head scarce higher
than his chin, and sighed a little.

"Tired?" he asked with that gentleness he saved for her alone.

The bright head shook.

"Happy?" he asked again, as gently.

She swung around and clung to him then.

"I'm so happy!" she whispered.  "Do you suppose that anyone will ever
be as happy again?"

There was ineffable content in her question.  Whimsically her own
phrase rose to his lips.

"Maybe," he said, "maybe sometime--in books!"

She lifted her face then.  He had the dusky glory of her eyes.

"Maybe," she echoed, her voice tremulous,--"sometime.  But this time in
real life, too."