"Meanwhile, the Tanzimat reforms remained unfulfilled under Abdul 
Hamid's reactionary regime. How effective had all these reforms been 
by the turn of the century? How bad was life for Christian peasants 
in the Balkans? In a 1904 book called 'Macedonia: Its Races and 
Their Future', H. N. Brailsford, an English relief worker, describes 
lawless conditions in Macedonia, the central Balkan district  
between Greece, Serbia, Albania and Bulgaria. In the areas 
Brailsford knew, the authorities had little power. He writes: 
'An Albanian went by night into a Bulgarian village and fired into 
the house of a man whom he regarded as an enemy. ... The 
prefect...endeavored to arrest the murderer, but [his Albanian] 
village took up his cause, and the gendarmes returned empty-handed. 
The prefect ... marched upon the offending village at the head of 
three hundred regular troops. ... The village did not resist, but it 
still refused to give evidence against the guilty man. The prefect 
returned to Ochrida with forty or fifty prisoners, kept them in gaol 
for three or four days, and then released them all. ... To punish a 
simple outbreak of private passion in which no political element was 
involved [the prefect] had to mobilize the whole armed force of his 
district, and even then he failed.' 



Robbers and brigands operated with impunity: 'Riding one day upon 
the high-road ..., I came upon a brigand seated on a boulder ... in 
the middle of the road, smoking his cigarette, with his rifle across 
his knees, and calmly levying tribute from all the passers-by." 
Extortionists, not police, were in control: "A wise village ... 
[has] its own resident brigands. ... They are known as rural guards. 
They are necessary because the Christian population is absolutely 
unarmed and defenceless. To a certain extent they guarantee the 
village against robbers from outside, and in return they carry on a 
licensed and modified robbery of their own.' 
Self-defense by Orthodox peasants was dangerous: 'The Government 
makes its presence felt ... when a 'flying column' saunters out to 
hunt an elusive rebel band, or ... to punish some flagrant act of 
defiance ... The village may have ... resented the violence of the 
tax-collector ... [or] harboured an armed band of insurgents ... or 
... killed a neighbouring civilian Turk who had assaulted some girl 
of the place ... At the very least all the men who can be caught 
will be mercilessly beaten, at the worst the village will be burned 
and some of its inhabitants massacred.' 



It was not surprising that peasants hated their rulers. 'One enters 
some hovel ... something ... stirs or groans in the gloomiest corner 
on the floor beneath a filthy blanket. Is it fever, one asks, or 
smallpox? ... the answer comes ..., 'He is ill with fear.' ... 
Looking back ... , a procession of ruined minds comes before the 
memory--an old priest lying beside a burning house speechless with 
terror ... a woman who had barked like a dog since the day her 
village was burned; a maiden who became an imbecile because her 
mother buried her in a hole under the floor to save her from the 
soldiers ... children who flee in terror at the sight of a stranger, 
crying 'Turks! Turks!' These are the human wreckage of the hurricane 
which usurps the functions of a Government.' 
Four things are worth noting in Brailsford's account as we consider 
the prospects for a reform solution to Balkan problems. First, 
revolutionary politics was not the foremost issue for the Christian 
population: nationalism addressed the immediate problems in their 
daily lives only indirectly, by promising a potential better state. 
Second, loyalties were still local and based on the family and the 
village, not on abstract national allegiances. If criminal abuses 
ended, the Ottoman state might yet have invented an Ottoman 
"nationalism" to compete with Serbian, Greek, Romanian, or Bulgarian 
nationalism. 
Third, villagers did not cry out for new government departments or 
services, but only for relief from corruption and crime. The 
creation of new national institutions was not necessary, only the 
reform of existing institutions. 
Fourth, and on the other hand, mistrust and violence between the two 
sides was habitual. So many decades of reform had failed by this 
time. The situation was so hopeless and extreme that few people on 
either side can have thought of reform as a realistic option." 
During the 1890s, IMRO's main sources of income were voluntary (and 
later, less voluntary) taxation of the rural population, bank 
robberies, train robberies (which won handsome world media coverage) 
and kidnapping for ransom (like the kidnapping of the American 
Protestant Missionary Ellen Stone - quite a mysterious affair). The 
IMRO developed along predictable lines into an authoritarian and 
secretive organization - a necessity if it were to fight the Turks 
effectively. It had its own tribunals which exercised - often fatal 
- authority over civilians who were deemed collaborators with the 
Turkish enemy. It must be emphasized that this was NOT unusual or 
unique at that time. This was the modus operandi of all military-
organized ideological and political groups. And, taking everything 
into account, the IMRO was fighting a just war against an abhorrent 
enemy. 
Moreover, to some extent, its war was effective and resulted in 
reforms imposed on the Sublime Port (the Turkish authorities) by the 
Great Powers of the day. We mentioned the peacekeeping force which 
replaced the local gendarmerie. But reforms were also enacted in 
education, religious rights and tolerance, construction, farm policy 
and other areas. The intractable and resource-consuming Macedonian 
question led directly to the reform of Turkey itself by the 
Macedonia-born officer Ataturk. And it facilitated the 
disintegration of the Ottoman empire - thus, ironically, leading to 
the independence of almost everyone except its originators. 
The radicalization of IMRO and its transformation into the infamous 
organization it has come to be known as, started after the Second 
Balkan war (1913) and, more so, after the First World War (1918). It 
was then that disillusionment with Big Power politics replaced the 
naive trust in the inevitable triumph of a just claim. The 
Macedonians were never worse off politically, having contributed no 
less - if not more - than any other nation to the re-distribution of 
the Ottoman Empire. The cynicism, the hypocrisy, the off-handedness, 
the ignorance, the vile interests, the ulterior motives - all 
conspired to transform the IMRO from a goal-orientated association 
to a power hungry mostrosity. 
In 1912 Bulgaria, Serbia, and Greece - former bitter foes - formed 
the Balkan League to confront an even more bitter foe, the Ottoman 
Empire on the thin pretext of an Albanian uprising. The brotherhood 
strained in the Treaty of London (May 1913) promptly deteriorated 
into internecine warfare over the spoils of a successful campaign - 
namely, over Macedonia. Serbs, Greeks, Montenegrins and Romanians 
subdued Bulgaria sufficiently to force it to sign a treaty in August 
1913 in Bucharest. "Aegean Macedonia" went to Greece and "Vardar 
Macedonia" (today's Republic of Macedonia) went to Serbia. The 
smaller "Pirin Macedonia" remained Bulgarian. The Bulgarian gamble 
in World War I went well for a while, as it occupied all three parts 
of Macedonia. But the ensuing defeat and dismemberment of its 
allies, led to a re-definition of even "Pirin Macedonia" so as to 
minimize Bulgaria's share.  Vardar Macedonia became part of a new 
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes (later renamed 
Yugoslavia). 
These political Lego games led to enormous population shifts - the 
politically correct term for refugees brutally deprived of their 
land and livelihood. All of them were enshrined in solemn treaties. 
The Treaty of Lausanne (1923) led to the expulsion of 375,000 Turks 
from  Aegean Macedonia. 640,000 Greek refugees from Turkey replaced 
them. Each of the actual occupiers and each of the potential ones 
opened its own schools to indoctrinate the future generations of the 
populace. Conflicts erupted over ecclesiastical matters, the 
construction of railways and railway stations. Guerilla fighters 
soon realized that being pawns on this mad hatter's chessboard could 
be a profitable vocation. The transformation from freedom fighters 
to mercenaries with no agenda was swift. And pecuniary 
considerations bred even more terror and terrorists where there were 
none before. 
In the meantime, Greece enacted a land reform legislation in "Aegean 
Macedonia" - in effect, the confiscation of arable land by thousands 
of Greek settlers, refugees from Turkey. Much of the land thus "re-
distributed" was owned by Turkish absentees, now refugees 
themselves. But a lot of land was simply impounded from its 
rightful, very much present and very Macedonian owners. The Serb 
authorities coerced the population to speak the Serb language, 
changed Macedonian names to Serb ones in brutally carried campaigns 
and imposed a corrupt and incompetent bureaucracy upon the suffering 
multitudes. 



IMRO never gave up its proclaimed goal to liberate both occupied 
parts of Macedonia - the Aegean and the Vardar ones. But, as time 
passed and as the nature of its organization and operation evolved, 
the perfunctoriness of its proclamations became more and more 
evident. The old idealists - the intellectuals and ideologues, the 
Goce Delcev types - were removed, died in battle, or left this 
mutation of their dream. The IMRO insignia - skull and crossbones - 
linked it firmly to the Italian Balckshirts and the Nazi brown ones. 
The IMRO has developed into a fascist organization. It traded opium. 
It hired out the services of its skilled assassins (for 20 dollars a 
contract). It recruited members among the Macedonian population in 
the slums of Sofia. Finally, they openly collaborated with the 
Fascists of Mussolini (who also supported them financially), with 
the Ustashe (similarly supported by Italy) and with the Nazis (under 
Ivan Mihailov, who became the nominal quisling ruler of Vardar 
Macedonia). It was an IMRO man ("Vlado the Chauffeur") who murdered 
King Alexander of Yugoslavia in 1934. 
All this period, the IMRO continued to pursue its original agenda. 
IMRO terrorists murdered staff and pupils in Yugoslav schools in 
Vardar Macedonia. In between 1924-34, it killed 1,000 people. 
Tourists of the period describe the Yugoslav-Bulgarian frontier as 
the most fortified in Europe with "entanglements, block houses, 
redoubts and searchlight posts". Throughout the twenties and the 
thirties, the IMRO maintained a presence in Europe, publishing 
propaganda incessantly and explaining its position eloquently 
(though not very convincingly). 



It was not very well liked by both Bulgarians and Macedonians who 
got increasingly agitated and exhausted by the extortion of ever 
increasing taxes and by the seemingly endless violence. But the IMRO 
was now a force to reckon with: organized, disciplined, lethal. Its 
influence grew by the day and more than one contemporary describes 
it as a "state within a state". In Bulgaria it collaborated with 
Todor Alexandrov in the overthrow and murder of the Prime Minister, 
Alexandur Stamboliyski (June 1923) and in the appointment of a right 
wing government headed by Alexandur Tsankov. 
Stamboliyski tried to appease Yugoslavia and, in the process, 
sacrifice inconvenient elements, such as the IMRO, as expediently as 
he could. He made too many powerful enemies too fast: the army (by 
cutting their inflated budget), the nationalists (by officially 
abandoning the goal of military expansion), the professional 
officers (by making them redundant), the Great Powers (by making 
THEM redundant as well) and the opposition (by winning the elections 
handsomely despite all the above). By signing the Treaty of Nis 
(allowing Serb forces the right of hot pursuit within Bulgarian 
territory), he in effect sealed his own death warrant. The IMRO 
teamed up with the Military League (an organization of disgruntled 
officers, both active duty and reserve) and with the tacit blessing 
of Tsar Boris and the forming National Alliance (later renamed the 
Democratic Alliance), they did away with the hated man. 



Following the murder, the IMRO was given full control of the region 
of Petric (Petrich). It used it as a launching pad of its hit and 
run attacks against Yugoslavia with the full - though clandestine - 
support of the Bulgarian Ministry of War and Fascist Italy. From 
Pirin, they attacked Greece as well. These were exactly the kind of 
international tensions the murdered Prime Minister was keen to 
terminate and the IMRO no less keen to foster. In the meanwhile, 
Alexandrov came to an end typical of many a Bulgarian politician and 
was assassinated only a year after the coup d'etat. 
The decade that followed did not smile upon the IMRO. It fragmented 
and its shreds fought each other in the streets of Sofia, Chicago-
style. By 1934, the IMRO was a full-fledged extortionist mafia 
organization. They ran protection rackets ("protecting" small shop-
owners against other gangs and "insuring" them against their own 
violence). Hotels in Sofia always had free rooms for the IMRO. The 
tobacco industry paid the IMRO more than a million British pounds of 
that time in six years of "taxation". Robberies and assassinations 
were daily occurrences. So were street shoot-outs and outright 
confiscation of goods. The IMRO had no support left anywhere. 



In 1934, it was disbanded (together with other parties) by Colonel 
Kimron Georgiev, the new Prime Minister of Bulgaria and a senior 
figure in the Zveno association of disgruntled citizenry. His rule 
was brief (ended the next year) but the IMRO never recovered. It 
brought its own demise upon itself. Colonel Velcev (Velchev), the 
perpetrator of the coup, was swept to power on the promise to end 
all terrorist activities - a promise which he kept. 
The modern Republic of Macedonia is today ruled by a party called 
VMRO-DPMNE. It is one of a few political parties to carry this name 
and the biggest and weightiest amongst them by far. It is founded on 
the vision and ideals of Goce Delcev and has distanced itself from 
the "Terrorist-IMRO". The picture of Delcev adorns every office in 
both Macedonia and Bulgaria and he is the closest to a saint a 
secular regime can have. In 1923, the Greeks transferred his bones 
to Bulgaria. Stalin, in a last effort to placate Tito, ordered 
Bulgaria to transfer them to Macedonia. Even in his death he knew no 
peace. Now he is buried in his final resting place, in the tranquil 
inner yard of the Church of Sveti Spas (Saint Saviour). A marble 
slab bearing a simple inscription with his name under a tree, in a 
Macedonia which now belongs to the Macedonians. 

Return


The Black Hand 

"I live and shall die for federalism; it is the sole salvation for 
the monarchy, if anything can save it." 
Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria 

The IMRO was a populist organization established by intellectuals 
(as such groups often do) but staffed by peasant, lumpenproletariat 
and dwellers of the slums formed by Macedonian refugees all over the 
Balkans and especially in Sofia. Its members swore allegiance on a 
bible and a gun - two universally potent symbols. The nationalist-
terrorist movement which bore the improbable by-name of "The Black 
Hand" was no such thing. It was elitist - only members of the 
officer corps and government officials could join. But the two 
shared an ethos and methods of operation. The IMRO sought to 
liberate the parts of Macedonia which were under Greek and Serb 
control - and the Black Hand (official name: "Union or Death") 
sought to do the same for Serbs under Ottoman or Habsburg rule. The 
Black Hand was the precursor of the Great Serbia dream. But whereas 
the IMRO - at least until 1913 - did not enjoy the support of the 
state and its mechanisms, the Black Hand was, for a long time, the 
long arm of the Serb government and the Serb state. To the 
generation of post-Yugoslavia It is a familiar story. In human 
affairs, the dream of a Greater Serbia is no less a recurrent 
nightmare than the numerable German Reichs and Serbia erupted upon 
the world stage no less frequently and regularly than its northern 
equivalent. 
Serbia, Montenegro and Russia fought a war against Turkey in an 
effort to capitalize on a Serb peasants' revolt in Bosnia in 1875. 
The latter were mightily and rather inhumanly oppressed by the local 
Moslem nobility (enmity has long roots in the Balkans). It was a 
holy war for the protection of holy (Orthodox) mother church. It was 
this conflict that led to the Turkish capitulation embedded in the 
San Stefano Treaty of 1878. It was not the first time that Balkan 
borders were re-drawn but, with the creation of Bulgaria, extending 
all the way to lake Ohrid, a few taboos were broken. A new state was 
created, Russia was introduced as a major player and the Sick Man of 
Europe (the Ottoman Empire) was in death throes. It also generated a 
new problem, the Macedonian one. The treaty of Berlin sought to 
restore the balance but to no avail. The inexorable germination of 
the nationalistic ideal has commenced. When the Treaty placed 
Bosnia-Herzegovina under Austro-Hungarian administration and allowed 
Habsburg garrisons to camp inside Serbia (effectively severing it 
from Montenegro) - the seeds of discontent blossomed into the evil 
flowers of violence. 
No one cared what the local populace had to say. The Austrian 
brought roads and railways and modern mining and forestry and 
industry to this hitherto European backwater. Reversing the Ottoman 
infliction was no mean feat. Yet, the Austrians chose to rule by 
division, to motivate through hate and to buy the love of their 
subjects rather than to earn it. 



They befriended the Moslem landlords and pitted the Serbs against 
each across a denominational divide. This volatile state of affairs 
was only aggravated by the abolition in 1881 of the Military 
Frontier, which brought hundreds of thousands of Serbs into the 
remit of an increasingly and virulently nationalistic Croatia. The 
Hungarians used this to their advantage by fanning Croat-Serb 
hostility. After all, they had a historical account to settle with 
the Serbs who quashed an Hungarian rebellion not 40 years before (in 
1848-9) and were awarded with the half autonomous Duchy of 
Vojvodina, an integral part of the Kingdom of Hungary. 
The Ausgleich of 1867 (which divided the loot between Austria and 
Hungary) deprived Vojvodina of its autonomy. The Magyars rushed back 
in with German and Austrian settlers and immediately embarked upon a 
massive campaign of forced assimilation. Thus, as Vojvodina 
prospered with roads and railways and large commercial farms ("the 
breadbasket of the empire") - it became more hate-riven and 
explosive. In the Balkans, affluence and commerce seem only to 
encourage envy and belligerence and neighbourly relations are no 
barrier to mutual slaughter. 
A self-appointed "guardian of all Serbs", the Serbian state 
willingly engaged in agitation and confronted both other ethnicities 
and the Dual Monarchy in its quest to safeguard the well-being, 
welfare, prosperity and equal treatment of the Serbs, all noble 
goals, no doubt. 



Yet instability is contagious, a lesson not learn by Serb 
politicians. Even as the Bosnian uprising was in progress, King 
Milan stuck an Austrian knife unto its back. He agreed to not foment 
rebellion in Bosnia-Herzegovina, in return for a free hand in 
Macedonia and some export concessions for some agricultural produce. 
In 1885, he acted upon his grandiosity to disastrous outcome. Four 
years later, he abdicated in disgrace. Not till 1893 was order 
restored in the person of King Alexander whose most important act 
was marrying his concubine, Draga Masin in 1900. They were both 
massacred in June 1903 by disgruntled officers in their own palace 
and that was the end of one dynasty (the Obrenovic's) and the 
beginning of another (the Karadjordjevic's). A young officer, a 
member of the general staff of the army, by the name of Dragutin 
Dimitrijevic ("Apis" - the "Holy Bull" was his endearing nickname, 
or, perhaps, the bee, from the Latin root, as Petrovic, the attache 
to the Serbia legation in London has it in "Black Hand Over Europe" 
by Heneri Pozzi) planned it all in 1901. Remember this name, his 
role in our history has only just begun. 
As is usually the case, the honeymoon looked both passionate and 
auspicious. The new King was of the reforming kind and keen on 
economic progress and wealth formation. Regretfully, his 
implementation fell short of his intentions. Serbian agriculture 
lagged behind its more commercialized and industrialized 
competitors, the population grew relentlessly and rural debts buried 
the semi-feudal rustic peasantry under its increasing burden. 



It is against this background of mounting and mercurial discontent 
that the "Black Hand" was formed. Attesting to the spreading of the 
rot throughout the Karadjordjevicean state, was its cancerous 
metastasis through all levels of the army and the government. Apis 
the regicide was appointed chief of intelligence of the general 
staff, no less. He later confessed to planning the murders of King 
Nicholas of Montenegro, King Constantine of Greece, the German 
Kaiser and King Ferdinand of Bulgaria. How much of it was Balkan 
delusions and how much reality is still open to debate - but the man 
relished death and firmly believed in its transforming and 
catalysing powers. The Black Hand became a state within a state (a 
feat later emulated by the IMRO). Those bureaucrats and politicians 
not already members of the shady outfit, obeyed its express or 
perceived wishes out of terror, more imagined than exercised. The 
army was entirely in thrall. The accelerated advance of Dimitrijevic 
through the ranks serves proof of the growing influence of his 
cankerous outfit. He became professor of tactics at the Military 
Academy where he taught subversion and terror more than military 
strategy. By 1913, he was chief of intelligence, as we mentioned and 
by 1916 he was attained the rank of colonel at the age of 40. 
Though formally established only in 1911- the Black Hand cast its 
shadow long before. It engaged mostly in propaganda and in the 
seeding of armed bands in Macedonia prior to the two Balkan wars. 
Its biggest achievement was probably the inception of numerous 
revolutionary cells among the Serbs of Bosnia. 
The longer and more thorough the meddling, the more the languid 
relationship between Austria and Serbia deteriorated. The former 
imposed tariffs on the exports of the latter in an aptly named "Pig 
War". As Serb subversion intensified in Bosnia, Austria annexed it 
and Herzegovina outright discarding the pretence of autonomy it has 
maintained. Stymied in one border - the Serbs reverted to another. 
The Illinden uprising ignited Slav imagination. Serbia has long 
hungered after its slice of a dismembered Macedonia and Thrace in a 
banquet attended by both Bulgaria and Greece. But the fresh 
atrocities - not devoid of religious and ethnic dimensions - endowed 
the whole endeavour with an aura of a holy war. This delirium was 
further stoked by the apparent disintegration of the Ottoman Empire 
following the revolution of the Young Turks in 1908. Yet, in its 
drang nach suden, Serbia found itself once more entangled with the 
Austrians who had their own designs on Macedonia and Novi Pazar. The 
risk of losing Kosovo and Metohija was very real and the conflict 
assumed the robes of a crusade, both cultural and religious. To the 
Serbs the very maintenance of their self-identity and civilization 
was at stake. 
This was the background to the onslaught of the Balkan Wars. 



Serbia collaborated with the more potent of its potential enemies 
(Greece, Bulgaria) in the Balkan League. To cleanse the Balkans of 
all Turks was the explicit goals of hush-hush treaties and 
clandestine encounters. The hidden agenda bespoke of Austria. The 
initial triumphs against the Turkish army (reversing a trend three 
centuries old) lent an air of inevitable invincibility and divine 
justice to the whole endeavour. It is interesting to mention that it 
was little Montenegro which was the first to declare war in almost 
all Balkan conflicts. Whether as Serbian proxies or because of the 
contentious nature of the Montenegrins remains unclear. Whatever the 
case may be, a second war among the winners of the first left Serbia 
with its agenda fulfilled and with its territory almost doubled. It 
gained part of the Sandzak, all Kosovo and Metohija and the bulk of 
Macedonia. Its tax paying population increased by half as much in 
less than two years. Had it not been for Austria's minacious 
insistence, Albania would have never been born on Serb occupied 
territory. The creation of this (artificial, so the Serbs felt) 
Albanian state deprived Serbia - alone among the victors - from 
access to the sea. It had another cause for paranoid delusions and 
deepening sense of victimization at the hands of vast conspiracies. 
Relegated to the geopolitical sidelines, denuded of their conquests, 
coerced by a Big Power, the Serbs felt humiliated, stabbed in the 
back, discriminated against, inferior and wrathful. Frustration 
breeds aggression we are taught and this true lesson was never more 
oft-repeated than in the Balkans. 



The raging rivalry between an eastward-bound Austria and a defiant 
Serbia was bound to boil over. The Black Hand was there to provoke 
the parties into a final test of strengths and willpower. Dame 
Rebecca West voices her doubts regarding the true intent of the 
Black Handers in their involvement (which she does not dispute) in 
the events that followed. Based on all manner of circumstantial 
evidence and the testimonies of mysterious friends of furtive 
conspirators she reaches the conclusion that they did not believe in 
the conspiracy to which they lent their support. The Black Hand went 
along with the planning and execution of the assassination of 
Archduke, heir to the throne Franz (Francis) Ferdinand in 1914, 
disbelieving all the way both the skills and the commitment of the 
youthful would be assassins. 
Perhaps so. Yet there can be little doubt and, indeed, there is no 
dispute that The Black Hand was introduced to a cabal of plotters 
called "Mlada Bosna" (Young Bosnia), headed by one Illich and that 
this introduction was effected by the 22 year old influential 
Bosnian revolutionary Gacinovic (Gachinovich) who lived in Lausanne 
in Switzerland. The Black Hander Ciganovic (Tsiganovitch) made 
contact with one Gavrilo Princip and Chabrinovich and together with 
another Bosnian, Tankosic (Tankosich). The latter - a self 
proclaimed sharpshooter - immediately set about testing the sniping 
skills of his co-schemers in a secluded wood. With the mild 
exception of Princip, they were no good. 



Despite this disheartening display of incompetence (Princip claimed 
at his trial to have aimed at a general sitting next to the 
Archduke), the Black Hand equipped them with bombs (of the wrong 
kind, points West correctly), pistols and suicidal Prussic acid 
(which didn't work). They were smuggled to Sarajevo by two 
collaborating border guards. As opposed to rumours, Gavrilo Princip 
was not a member of the Black Hand, nor was the Black Hand involved 
in his training. Moreover, the connection between Mlada Bosna and 
Crna Ruka (Black Hand) was made only a short time before the 
eventful June 28, 1914. 
It was a challenge and on Serbia's national day at that. The 
Austrians were elated having been handed the excuse to educate 
Serbia and cut it to size. They issued an ultimatum and the rest is 
the history of the first truly global conflict, the First World War. 
In 1917, in a surprising turn of events, Alexander, the Commander in 
Chief of the Expatriate Serbian Army in collusion with the Serb 
premier, Nikola Pasic, arrested Apis and 200 of his collaborators, 
thus shattering the Black Hand irreversibly. It is always surprising 
how really brittle and vulnerable these apparently invincible 
organizations of terror are. The IMRO, after having terrorized 
Bulgaria for decades and decimated its political elite, was reduced 
to rubble, bloodlessly, in a matter of a few weeks in 1934. 



The same happened with the omnipotent and all-pervasive Black Hand. 
It vanished in a whimper. In May 1917, Dragutin Dimitrijevic (Apis) 
was executed together with 2 or 6 of his Black Hand colleagues. 
Finally it was death, not union that caught up with them. The trial 
was closed to the public, opaque and hurried. The King apparently 
believed - or claimed he did - that the prisoners conspired on his 
life. West testifies in her great opus "Black Lamb Grey Falcon" that 
transcripts of the trial were banned and that it was forbidden to 
mention the mere historic fact either in speech or in print. The 
members of the Black Hand lived secretly and dies mysteriously and 
meaninglessly. 
But the Black Hand - like the IMRO - was a child of the times. The 
Balkans was perceived to be the gate to the crumbling Ottoman 
Empire, The coveted prizes were not dirt poor Macedonia or Albania. 
It was the stepping stone and the springboard that they represented 
to much vaster territories, to the riches of the orient, to the 
exotic realms of Asia. All Big Powers and would be Big Powers 
engaged in the pugilistics of self-positioning. The demise of the 
Ottomans was imminent and this imminence exerted subtle but 
verifiable pressure on all the participant in this grubby grabbing 
game. Additionally, in this fin de siecle, all involved felt doomed. 
The rumblings of counter-revolutionary Russia, the drang nach Osten 
of Austria - all were attempts at self re-definition and self-
preservation. 



Perhaps this explains the outlandish and disproportionate reaction 
of Austria to the needling of Bosnian terrorism. assertive 
minorities constituted a direct threat to the very cohesion of 
Empire. And Serbia blocked the hitherto unhindered path to eastern 
territories - depriving Austria of lebensraum and raison d'etre. 
Faced with a limiting event horizon, Austria imploded like a black 
hole, unto itself. 
The driving force behind it all was really Austria and its growing 
existential angst. It struck a modus vivendi of mutual paralysis in 
the Balkan with Russia as early as 1897. It lasted ten years in 
which only Austria and Russia stood still but history defied them 
both. To its horror, Austria discovered that in its pursuit of 
glorious and condescending isolation, it was left only with Germany 
as an ally, the very Germany whose Weltpolitik put it on a clear 
collusion course with the moribund Sublime Port. Russia, on the 
other hand, teamed up with a rising power, with Britain, at least 
implicitly. The abrupt and involuntary departure of the pliable and 
easily corruptible Obrenovic's in Serbia bode ill to the checks and 
balances Austria so cultivated in its relationship with the 
recalcitrant Serbs. Karageorgevic was much less enamoured with 
Austrian shenanigans. The final nail in the ever more crowded coffin 
of Austrian foreign policy was hammered in in 1908 when the Young 
Turks effectively re-opened the question of the administration of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina by Austria. 


These territories were always under Turkish sovereignty, the 
Austrians "discovered" to growing alarm.  One solution was to annex 
the administered units, as Austria's Minister of Foreign affairs 
suggested. He further offered a trade-off: recognition of Russia's 
rights of passage through the Dardanelles. The Russians accepted 
only to be abandoned by the Austrians in the crucial vote. Austria 
annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina unilaterally - but Russia was still 
prevented from crossing into the warm waters, its ambition and 
obsession. Russia learned a lesson: always back your client 
(Serbia), never back down. 
Elsewhere, tensions between the Big Powers were growing and eroded 
their capability to institute a system of efficacious self-
regulation. Armed conflict erupted between Germany and France in 
Morocco more than once. Britain and Germany were engaged in a naval 
arms race which depleted the coffers and the social cohesion of 
both. Italy declared war on Turkey in 1911 and even invaded the 
Dardanelles. Serbia and Bulgaria struck a bargain to expel the 
Ottomans from Europe (see above, the Balkan Wars). Thus, with the 
field narrowing and getting more crowded, an Austrian-Serb 
Armageddon was all but inevitable. 
The irony of it all is that Austria presented the only viable 
solution to the problem of multi-ethnicity and muti-culturalism. The 
history of the Balkans in the 20th century can be effectively summed 
up in terms of the contest between the Serb and Hungarian model of 
co-existence and its Austrian anathema. 



The Serbs and Hungarians aspired to ethnically and culturally 
homogenous states and were willing to apply violence towards the 
achievement of this goal either by forced assimilation of minorities 
or by their expulsion or worse. The Austrians proposed federalism. 
They envisaged a federation of politically, culturally and 
religiously autonomous entities. This peaceful vision constituted a 
direct threat on the likes of the Black Hand. Peaceful, content 
citizens do not good rebels make. The Encyclopaedia Britannica says: 
"Such is the logic of terrorism: Its greatest enemies are the 
peacemakers". 
The Black Hand did not operate in empty space and was not alone. In 
1908 Serbia formed "The National Defence". Its main function was to 
agitate against the Austrians and to conduct propaganda for the Serb 
cause. There were other organizations but all of them were 
contemptuously labelled "intellectual" by Apis, who craved violence. 
Ironically, one of the original band of conspirators against King 
Alexander in 1901-3 was Petar Zivkovic (Zhivkovitch). But he soon 
separated himself from the Black Hand and joined the White Hand, 
another group of officers, more moderate, though no less 
authoritarian. Another King Alexander (who was also murdered but in 
1934), King of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later renamed 
"Yugoslavia"), appointed him Commander of the Palace Guards in 1921 
and Prime Minister eight years thereafter. 



Zivkovic lost no time in disbanding all political parties and 
(elected) municipalities. He embarked upon an endless string of show 
trials of opponents of his dictatorship, communists and anti-
monarchists. He introduced a one-party, government-controlled 
electoral system. 
Thus, in an ironic twist of history, the Black Hand came to its own, 
after all. One of its former members a Prime Minister, a dictator, 
under a king installed by its slaughterous coup. Black Hand or White 
Hand - the means disputed, the ends were always in consensus. A 
Great Serbia for the Great Serbian people. 

Return


The Insurgents and the Swastika

"Even going back ten years it was easy to see something gripping 
Yugoslavia by the throat. But in the years since then the grip has 
been tightened, and tightened in my opinion by the dictatorship 
established by King Alexander Karageorgevitch. 
This dictatorship, however much it may claim a temporary success, 
must inevitably have the effect of poisoning all the Yugoslav 
organism. Whether the poisoning is incurable or not is the question 
for which I have sought an answer during two months in Yugoslavia, 
Bulgaria and central Europe." 
"Black Hand over Europe" by Henri Pozzi, 1935 

THE SIN 
Yugoslavia was born in sin and in sin it perished. The King of 
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Alexander I, a freshly self-proclaimed 
dictator, declared it on October 1929. It was a union of East and 
West, the Orthodox and the Catholic, Ottoman residues with Austro-
Hungarian structures, the heart and the mind. Inevitably, it stood 
no chance. The Croats and the Slovenes - formerly fiery proponents 
of a Yugo (Southern) Slav federation - were mortified to find 
themselves in a Serb-dominated "Third World", Byzantine polity. 



This was especially galling to the Croats who fiercely denied both 
their geography and their race to cling to the delusion of being a 
part of "Europe" rather than the "Balkans". To this very day, they 
hold all things Eastern (Serbs, the Orthodox version of 
Christianity, Belgrade, the Ottoman Empire, Macedonia) with 
unmitigated contempt dipped in an all-pervasive feeling of 
superiority. This is a well known defence mechanism in nations 
peripheral. Many a suburban folk wish to belong to the city with 
such heat and conviction, with such ridiculous emulation, that they 
end up being caricatures of the original. 
And what original! The bloated, bureaucracy-saddled, autocratic and 
sadistic Habsburg empire. Hitler's Germany. Mussolini's Italy. 
Unable to ignore the common ethnic roots of both Serbs and Croats - 
one tribe, one language - the Croats chose to believe in a vast 
conspiracy imposed upon the Serbs by corrupt and manipulative 
rulers. The gullible and self-delusional Cardinal Stepinac of Zagreb 
wrote just before the Second World War erupted, in a curious 
reversal of pan-Serbist beliefs: "If there were more freedom... 
Serbia would be Catholic in twenty years. The most ideal thing would 
be for the Serbs to return to the faith of their fathers. That is, 
to bow the head before Christ's representative, the Holy Father. 
Then we could at last breathe in this part of Europe, for Byzantium 
has played a frightful role ... in connection with the Turks." 



The same Turks that almost conquered Croatia and, met by fierce and 
brave resistance of the latter, were confined to Bosnia for 200 
years. The Croats came to regard themselves as the last line of 
defence against an encroaching East - against the manifestations and 
transmutations of Byzantium, of the Turks, of a vile mix of 
Orthodoxy and Islam (though they collaborated with their Moslem 
minority during the Ustashe regime). Besieged by this siege 
mentality, the back to the literal wall, desperate and phobic, the 
Croats developed the paranoia typical of all small nations encircled 
by hostility and impending doom. It was impossible to reconcile 
their centrifugal tendency in favour of a weak central state in a 
federation of strong local entities - with the Serb propensity to 
create a centralist and bureaucratic court. When the Croat delegates 
of the Peasant Party withdrew from the fragmented Constituent 
Assembly in 1920 - Serbia and the Moslem members voted for the 
Vidovdan Constitution (June 1921) which was modelled on the pre-war 
Serbian one. 
While a minority with limited popular appeal, the Ustashe did not 
materialize ex nihilo. They were the logical and inescapable 
conclusion of a long and convoluted historical process. They were 
both its culmination and its mutation. And once formed, they were 
never exorcised by the Croats, as the Germans exorcised their Nazi 
demon. In this, again, the Croats, chose the path of unrepentant 
Austria. 



Croat fascism was not an isolated phenomenon. Fascism (and, less so, 
Nazism) were viable ideological alternatives in the 1930s and 1940s. 
Variants of fascist ideology sprang all over the world, from Iraq 
and Egypt to Norway and Britain. Even the Jews in Palestine had 
their own fascists (the Stern group). And while Croat fascism (such 
as it was, "tainted" by Catholic religiosity and pagan nationalism) 
lasted four tumultuous years - it persisted for a quarter of a 
century in Romania ("infected" by Orthodox clericalism and peasant 
lores). While both branches of fascism - the Croat and the Romanian 
- shared a virulent type of anti-Semitism and the constipated 
morality of the ascetic and the fanatic - Codreanu's was more 
ambitious, aiming at a wholesale reform of Romanian life and a re-
definition of Romanianism. The Iron Guard and the Legion (of the 
Archangel Michael, no less) were, therefore and in their deranged 
way, a force for reform founded on blood-thirsty romanticism and 
masochistic sacrifices for the common good. Moreover, the Legion was 
crushed in 1941 by a military dictatorship which had nothing to do 
with fascism. It actually persecuted the fascists who found refuge 
in Hitler's Germany. 
Fascism in Hungary developed similarly. It was based on reactionary 
ideologies pre-dating fascism by centuries. Miklos Horty, the 
Austro-Hungarian Admiral was consumed by grandiose fantasies of an 
Hungarian empire. He had very little in common with the fascists of 
the "white terror" of 1919 in Budapest (an anti-communist 
bloodshed). 



He did his best to tame the Hungarian fascist government of Gyula 
Gombos (1932). The untimely death of the latter brought about the 
meteoric rise of Ferenc Szalasi and his brand of blood-pure racism. 
But all these sub-species of fascism, the Romanian, the Slovakian 
(Tiso) and the Hungarian (as opposed to the Italian and the 
Bulgarian) were atavistic, pagan, primal and romanticist - as was 
the Croat. These were natural - though nefarious - reactions to 
dislocation, globalization, economic crisis and cultural pluralism. 
A set of compensatory mechanisms and reactions to impossible, 
humiliating and degrading circumstances of wrathful helplessness and 
frustration. "Native fascism" attributed a divine mission or divine 
plan to the political unit of the nation, a part of a grand design. 
The leader was the embodiment, the conveyor, the conduit, the 
exclusive interpreter and the manifestation of this design (the 
Fuhrerprinzip). Proof of the existence of such a transcendental plan 
was the glorious past of the nation, its qualities and conduct 
(hence the tedious moralizing and historical nitpicking). The 
definition of the nation relied heavily of the existence of a 
demonized and dehumanized enemy (Marxists, Jews, Serbs, Gypsies, 
homosexuals, Hungarians in Romania, etc.). Means justified the end 
and the end was stability and eternity ("the thousand years Reich"). 
Thus, as opposed to the original blueprint, these mutants of fascism 
were inert and aspired to a state of rest, to an equilibrium after a 
spurt of cleansing and restoration of the rightful balance. 



When Serb domination (Serb ubiquitous military, Serbs in all senior 
government positions even in Croatia) mushroomed into the "Kingdom 
of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes", it was only natural for dissenting 
and dissident Croats to turn to their "roots". Unable to 
differentiate themselves from the hated Serbs racially - they 
appealed to religious heterogeneity. Immediately after the political 
hybrid was formed, the Croats expressed their discontent by handing 
election victories to the "Croatian Peasant Party" headed by Radic. 
The latter was a dour and devout anti-Yugoslav. He openly agitated 
for an independent - rustic and pastoral - Croatia. But Radic was a 
pragmatist. He learned his lesson when - having boycotted the 
Constituent Assembly in Belgrade - he facilitated the imposition of 
a pro-Serb, pro-central government constitution. Radic moderated his 
demands, if not his rhetoric. The goal was now a federated 
Yugoslavia with Croat autonomy within it. There is poetic justice in 
that his death - at the hand of a Montenegrin deputy on the floor of 
the Skupstina in 1928 - brought about the dictatorship that was to 
give rise to Macek and the Sporazum (Croat autonomy). The irony is 
that a peasant-favouring land reform was being seriously implemented 
when a deadlock between peasant parties led to King Alexander's 
fateful decision to abolish the parliamentary system. 



King Alexander I was a good and worthy man forced by circumstances 
into the role of an abhorrent tyrant. He was a great believer in the 
power of symbols and education. He changed the name of his loose 
confederacy into a stricter "Yugoslavia". In an attempt to defuse 
internal divisions, he appealed to natural features (like rivers and 
mountains) as internal borders. Croatia vanished as a political 
entity, replaced by naturally-bounded districts and provinces. The 
majority of Croats still believed in a federal solution, albeit less 
Serb-biased. They believed in reform from the inside. The Ustashe 
and Pavelic were always a minority, the Bolsheviks of Croatia. But 
King Alexander's authoritarian rule was hard to ignore: the torture 
of political opponents and their execution, the closure of patriotic 
sports societies, the flagrant interference in the work of the 
ostensibly independent judiciary, the censorship. There was bad 
blood growing between the King and more of his subjects by the day. 
The Croats were not the only "minority" to be thus maltreated. The 
Serbs maintained an armed presence in Macedonia, Kosovo, the Sandzak 
and even in Slovenia. They deported thousands of "Turks" (actually, 
all manner of Muslims) under the guise of a "re-patriation" scheme. 
They confiscated land from religious institutions, from the 
deportees, from big landowners, from the Magyars in Vojvodina and 
"re-distributed" it to the Serbs. Ethnic homogenization (later to 
become known as "ethnic cleansing") was common practise in that era. 
The Turks, the Bulgars, the Germans, the Greeks were all busily 
purifying the ethnic composition of their lands. But it made the 
King and the Serbs no friends. 
The Serbs seemed to have been bent on isolating themselves from 
within and on transforming their Yugo Slav brethren into sworn 
adversaries. This was true in the economic sphere as well as in the 
political realm. Serbia declared a "Danubian orientation" (in lieu 
of the "Adriatic orientation") which benefited the economies of 
central and northern Serbia at the expense of Croatia and Slovenia. 
While Serbia was being industrialized and its agriculture reformed, 
Croatia and Slovenia did not share in the spoils of war, the 
reparations that Yugoslavia received from the Central Powers. 
Yugoslavia was protectionist which went against the interest of its 
trading compatriots. When war reparations ceased (1931) and 
Germany's economy evaporated, Yugoslavia was hurled into the 
economic crisis the world has been experiencing since 1929. The Nazi 
induced recovery of Germany drew in Yugoslavia and its firms. It was 
granted favourable export conditions by Hitler's Germany and many of 
its companies participated in cartels established by German 
corporate giants. 
King Alexander I must have known he would be assassinated. Someone 
tried to kill him as he was taking the oath to uphold the 
constitution on June 28, 1921. For 8 long years he had to endure a 
kaleidoscope of governments, a revolving door of ministers, violence 
in the Assembly and ever-escalating Croat demands for autonomy. 
After the hideous slaughter on the floor of parliament, all its 
remaining Croat members withdrew.



They refused to go back and parliament had to be dissolved. 
Alexander went further, taking advantage of the constitutional 
crisis. He abolished the constitution of 1921, outlawed all 
ethnically, religiously or nationally based political parties (which 
basically meant most political parties, especially the Croat ones), 
re-organized the state administration, standardized the legal 
system, school syllabi and curricula and the national holidays. He 
was moulding a nation single handedly, carving it from the slab of 
mutual hatred and animosity. The Croats regarded all this as yet 
another Serb ploy, proof of Serb power-madness and insatiable desire 
to dominate. In an effort to placate the bulk of his constituency, 
the peasantry, King Alexander established rural credit unions and 
provided credit lines to small farmers and rural processing plants. 
To no avail. The insecurity of this hastily foisted regime was felt, 
its hesitation, the cruelty that is the outcome of fear. The 
scavengers were gathering. 
It was this basic shakiness that led the King to look for sustenance 
from neighbours. In rapid succession, he made his state a friend of 
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Romania (the last two in the frame of 
the Little Entente). Another Entente followed (the Balkan one) with 
Greece, Turkey and Romania. The King was frantically seeking to 
neutralize his enemies from without while ignoring the dangers from 
within. 



His death lurked in Zagreb but he was travelling to Marseilles to 
meet it. A vicious secret police, a burgeoning military, a new 
constitution to legalize his sanguinous regime conspired with a 
global economic crisis to make him a hated figure, even by Serb 
Democrats. Days before his death, he earnestly considered to return 
to a parliamentary form of government. But it was too late and too 
little for those who sought his end. 
The Ustasha movement ("insurgence" or "insurrection", officially the 
"Croatian Ustasha Movement") was a product of the personal rebellion 
of Ante Pavelic and like-minded others. Born in Bosnia, he was a 
member of the Croat minority there, in a Serb-infused environment. 
He practised as a lawyer in Zagreb and there joined the Nationalist 
Croatian Party of Rights. He progressed rapidly and by 1920 (at the 
age of 31), he was alderman of Zagreb City and County. He was a 
member of the Skupstina when anti-Croat sentiment peaked with the 
triple murder of the Croat deputies. When Alexander the King 
dissolved parliament and assumed dictatorial powers, he moved (or 
fled) to Italy, there to establish a Croat nationalist movement, the 
Ustasha. Their motto was "Za Dom Spremny" ("Ready for Home" or 
"Ready for the Fatherland"). Italy the fascist was a natural choice 
- both because of its ideological affinity and because it opposed 
Yugoslavia's gradual drift towards Germany. Italy was worried about 
an ultimate anschluss ("unification or incorporation") between the 
Reich and Austria - which will have brought Hitler's Germany to 
Austria's doorstep. 



Thus, the Ustasha established training centres (more like refugee 
camps, as they included the family members of the would be 
"warriors") in Italy and Hungary (later to be expelled from the 
latter as a result of Yugoslav pressure). Having mainly engaged in 
the dissemination of printed propaganda, they failed at provoking a 
peasant rebellion in north Dalmatia (promised to Italy by the 
Ustasha). But they did better at assassinating their arch-foe, King 
Alexander  in 1934 (having failed earlier, in 1933). In this the 
Ustasha was reputed to have collaborated with the fascist IMRO 
(Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization) under Ivan Mihailov 
in Bulgaria. By joining forces with the IMRO, the Ustasha has 
transformed itself into a link in the chain of terrorist 
organizations that engulfed the world in blood and flames prior to 
the onslaught of the greatest terrorist of all, of Hitler. While 
some versions of the unholy alliance between the Bulgarian-
Macedonian outfit and the Croats are unsubstantiated (to put it 
gently), it is clear that some assistance was provided by both lower 
Italian ranks and the IMRO. The actual murderer of the King was 
Mihailov's Macedonian chauffeur, Vlado Georgiev-Kerin. The Ustasha 
was also known for blowing trains and for attempting to do so on 
more than one occasion both in Croatia and in Slovenia. King 
Alexander seemed to have ordered the systematic annihilation of the 
Ustasha just before his own untimely Ustasha-assisted annihilation. 
Lt. Colonel Stevo Duitch "committed suicide" in Karlsbad and there 
were attempts - some successful, some less - on Pavelic in Munich, 
Percevic in Vienna, Servaci (Servatsi) in Fiume and Percec in 
Budapest. It was made abundantly clear to the Ustasha that it was an 
all-out war with no prisoners taken. The King had to go. 
It was a strange movement, the Ustashe. Claiming the continuous 
"rights of state" of the Great Croatian Kingdom under Peter Kresimir 
and Zvonimir in the 11th century - they nonetheless gave up Slovenia 
and Bosnia-Herzegovina to Italy and, later, accepted a German 
occupation of eastern Croatia. Composed of frugal ascetics and 
avaricious operators, merciless romanticists and hard nosed 
pragmatists, murderous sadists and refined intellectuals, 
nationalist Croats and Serb-haters who had no coherent national 
agenda bar the mass slaughter of the Serbs. Thus, it was a social 
movement of the dispossessed, a cesspool of discontent and rage, of 
aggression too long suppressed but never sublimated, of justified 
social and political grievances irradiated by racism, national 
chauvinism, militarism and sadism. A grassroots reaction turned 
cancerous, led by a second hand, third rate Hitler-clone. A 
terrorist organization displaying the trappings of a state in the 
making. This is not to say that it lacked popular support. Tensions 
ran so high between Serbs and Croats that daily brawls broke in pubs 
and restaurants, trains and public places between Serb soldiers and 
Croat citizens in Croatia. The Ustashe fed on real friction, were 
charged by escalating tensions, mushroomed on growing violence. 
Prince Paul, who acted as regent for 12 years old Peter II, 
permitted the operation of political parties but did not reinstate 
parliament. All this time, a Yugoslav opposition of democratic 
forces included Croat as well as Serb intellectuals and wannabe 
politicians. Vladko Macek himself - later, the epitome of Croat 
separatism and the most successful promoter of this cause - was a 
member. In the 1938 elections, his party - the Peasant Party - won 
an astounding 80% of the votes in Croatia. 



The regent, now much humbled by years of strife and paralysis - 
bowed to popular opinion so eloquently and convincingly expressed. 
He backed negotiations with Macek which led to a declaration of 
Croat independence in everything but name. The Sporazum of August 
1939, a few days before the outbreak of World War II, granted 
Croatia self-government except in matters of national defence and 
foreign affairs. The Serbs were now disgruntled. The Serb Democrats 
felt abandoned and betrayed by Macek and his Faustian deal with the 
dictatorship. All other Serbs felt humiliated by what they regarded 
as a capitulation to irredentism, bound to have a disintegrative 
domino effect on the rest of Serbia's possessions. It is a 
surrealistic thing, to read the transcripts of these vehement and 
sincere arguments just four days before the world as all the 
conversants knew it, came to a shrieking end. 
When German planes were pulverizing Warsaw, Yugoslavia declared its 
mock-neutrality. Everybody knew that Paul was pro-German. Even King 
Alexander before him signed a few secret pacts with the rising, 
ignore at your peril, Central European force. The Austrian national 
socialists who were implicated in the murder of the Austrian prime 
minister, Dolfus, in July 1934, escaped to Yugoslavia and resided 
openly (though disarmed by the Yugoslav police) in army barracks in 
Varadzin. In 1935, a fascist movement was established in Serbia 
("Zbor"). Fascism and Nazism were not without their attractions to 
Serbs and Croats alike. 



This is the great theatre of the absurd called the Balkans. Pavelic 
and the Ustasha were actually closer in geopolitical orientation to 
the Yugoslav monarchy (until Paul was deposed by the Yugoslav army) 
- than to Mussolini's fascist Italy. They were worried by the 
latter's tendency to block German designs on Austria. In a region 
known for its indefinite historical memory and lack of statute of 
limitations, they recalled how the Italians treated Montenegrin 
refugees in 1923 (returning them to Yugoslavia in cattle cars). They 
wondered if the precedent might be repeated, this time with Croat 
passengers. The Italians did, after all, arrest "Longin" 
(Kvaternik), Jelic and others in Torino following the assassination 
of the King. In the paranoid twilight zone of European Big Power 
sponsored terrorism, these half hearted actions and dim memories 
were enough to cast a pall of suspicion and of guilt over the 
Italian regime. Mussolini called Pavelic his "Balkan Pawn" but in 
that he was mistaken. There are good reasons to believe that he was 
shocked by the murder of King Alexander. In any event, the free 
movement of Pavelic and the Ustasha was afterwards severely 
restricted. 
On March 1941, the Crown Council of Yugoslavia decided to accede to 
the Tripartite Pact of the Axis, though in a watered down form. 
Yugoslavia maintained the prerogative to refuse the right of passage 
in its territory to foreign powers. 



Yet, no one believed this would be the case if confronted with such 
a predicament. This decision - to give up Yugoslavia's main asset 
and only protection - its neutrality - was taken under pressure from 
the Croats in power at the time. The Pact was already joined by 
Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary. Two days after the Yugoslav Prime 
Minister (Dragisa Cvetkovic) and his foreign minister signed the 
Pact in Vienna - they were deposed together with the Regent Paul. 
The precocious Peter was made King of Yugoslavia by the rebellious 
officers, headed by General Dusan Simovic. The generals now in 
charge reverted to Yugoslavia's neutrality and refused to join the 
British-Greek naval treaty, for example. But what appeared to be 
spontaneous demonstrations in favour of the conspirators and against 
the Tripartite Pact erupted all over Serbia. It was a challenge to 
Germany which it could not ignore. The Supreme Command of the 
Wehrmact (OKW) issued "Undertaking 25" (against Yugoslavia) and 
"Case Marita" (against Greece). The Yugoslavs mobilized (albeit with 
a surprising procrastination), the Germans invaded (on April 6, 
1941) and, within 10 days it was all over. The Croats did their best 
to assist the new forces of occupation, disrupting and sabotaging 
the best they could army operations as well as civilian defence. It 
was clear that many of them (though by no means the majority) 
regarded the Serbs as the real occupiers and the Germans as long 
awaited liberators. 



On April 10, 1941, six days into the invasion, the Germans declared 
the Independent State of Croatia (NDH, after the initials of its 
name in Croatian - Nezavisna Drzava Hrvatska). Vladimir Mecak, 
leader of the Peasant Party and Deputy Prime Minister of Yugoslavia 
called on the people to collaborate with the new government. 
Overnight, a fringe terrorist organization, (erroneously) considered 
to be more a puppet of Italy that a true expression of Croat 
nationalism, found itself at the helm of government in circumstances 
complicated by internecine rivalries, inter-ethnic tensions, an 
history of hate and mutual resentment, a paranoia stoked by sporadic 
violence. The Serbs were evidently a fifth column and so were the 
Jews. Indeed, Croatia's Serbs wasted no time in joining resistance 
movements against the Nazis and the NDH. Anyhow, the vacuum created 
by Macek's surprising passivity and by the Church's abstention - was 
filled by the Ustashe. The new state included a part of Dalmatia 
(the rest went to Italy), the region of Srem and the entirety of 
Bosnia Herzegovina. It was the closest Croatia ever got to re-
creating Great Croatia of a millennium ago. Fearful of Croat 
encroachment, the Slovenes hurried to discuss the declaration of 
their own state modelled after the NDH - only to discover that their 
country was split between Italy and Germany.  In Zagreb, the 
enthusiasm was great. The 200 nor so returning Ustashe were greeted 
back even by their political rivals. People thronged the streets, 
throwing flowers and rice at the advancing former terrorist and 
German convoys. 



The NDH existed for four years. It had 7 governments - only 5 of 
which were headed by Ante Pavelic. As opposed to popular opinion, 
the Ustashe were not a puppet regime, far from it. Both the Italians 
and the Germans express their continued frustration at being unable 
to control and manipulate the Ustashe. Despite their military 
presence and economic support - both Axis powers lacked real 
leverage over the ever more frantic activities of the Ustashe. Even 
when it was clear that the Croat NDH - in its genocidal activities - 
is alienating the Serbs and adding to the ranks of resistance 
movements throughout Yugoslavia, there was precious little the 
Germans or Italians could do. They held polite and less polite talks 
with the top echelons of their own creation but like the fabled Dr. 
Frankenstein found that the NDH had a life very much of its own and 
an agenda it pursued with vigour and conviction. 
It is impossible - nor is it desirable - to avoid the issue of the 
mass killings of Serbs, Jews and Gypsies. Some Croats claim that 
"only" 60-70,000 were killed in Jasenovac and other camps. The very 
use of the word "only" in this context ought to send a frisson of 
repulsion down the spines of civilized men. The Serbs, Jewish 
scholars and many international scholars claim the number was 
between 300-600,000 people. The reason for the disparity in numbers 
is that - despite their "German" pretensions, the Croats acted like 
the least of the barbarous Balkanians in their mass slaughters. This 
was no industrial affairs, replete with bureaucracy and statistics. 
The massacres were atavistic, primitive, the call of blood and guts 
and scattered brains. It was an orgy, not an operation. 
There is nothing much to tell about the NDH. The regime was busy 
enacting laws against deadly sins and minor vices (such as 
pornography). The collaboration with the Catholic Church proceeded 
smoothly. Laws were passed against the Jews. The NDH army fought the 
partisans and the Allied Forces. When it tried to surrender to the 
British army in 1945 - it refused to accept their capitulation and 
turned them over to the partisans. In a series of death marches army 
soldiers and civilian collaborators with the Ustashe were 
deliberately exterminated. The Balkans knows no mercy. Victims 
become butchers and butchers victims in nauseating turns. By 1944, 
the NDH lost half its territory either to the Germans or to the 
partisans. The rump state survived somehow, its leaders deserting in 
droves. Pavelic himself escaped to Austria, from there to Italy and 
Argentina. He survived an attempt on his life in 1957 and then fled 
to Paraguay and Spain where he died in 1959. 
THE DEAD 
"After all, if the Croat state wishes to be strong, a nationally 
intolerant policy must be pursued for fifty years, because too much 
tolerance on such issues can only do harm." 
Adolf Hitler to Ante Pavelic in their meeting, June 6, 1941 



"For the rest - Serbs, Jews and Gypsies - we have three million 
bullets. We shall kill one third of all Serbs. We shall deport 
another third, and the rest of them will be forced to become Roman 
Catholic." 
Mile Budak, Minister of Education of Croatia, July 22, 1941 
"There are limits even to love... (It is) stupid and unworthy of 
Christ's disciples to think that the struggle against evil could be 
waged in a noble way and with gloves on." 
Archbishop of Sarajevo, Ivan Saric, 1941 
"Croats no longer think that German troops are present merely to 
provide peace and security, but that they are here to support the 
Ustasha regime [...] The Ustashas promote the impression that they 
act not only in agreement with German instances, but actually on 
their orders. [...] There is here today a deep mistrust of Germany, 
because it is supporting a regime that has no moral or political 
right to exist, which is regarded as the greatest calamity that 
could have happened to the Croat people. That regime is based 
entirely on the recognition by the Axis powers, it has no popular 
roots, and depends on the bayonets of robbers who do more evil in a 
day than the Serbian regime had done in twenty years." 
Captain Haffner to General Edmund Glaise von Horstenau, 
Plenipotentiary of the Wehrmacht in Zagreb, Croatia, 1941 



"Our troops have to be mute witnesses of such events; it does not 
reflect well on their otherwise high reputation... I am frequently 
told that German occupation troops would finally have to intervene 
against Ustasha crimes. This may happen eventually. Right now, with 
the available forces, I could not ask for such action Ad hoc 
intervention in individual cases could make the German Army look 
responsible for countless crimes which it could not prevent in the 
past." 
General Edmund Glaise von Horstenau to the OKW, July 10, 1941 
"The horrors that the Ustashi have committed over the Serbian small 
girls is beyond all words. There are hundreds of photographs 
confirming these deeds because those of them who have survived the 
torture: bayonet stabs, pulling of tongues and teeth, nails and 
breast tips - all this after they were raped. Survivors were taken 
in by our officers and transported to Italian hospitals where these 
documents and facts were gathered." 
Commander of the Italian Sassari Division in Croatia, 1941 



"Increased activity of the bands is chiefly due to atrocities 
carried out by Ustasha units in Croatia against the Orthodox 
population. The Ustashas committed their deeds in a bestial manner 
not only against males of conscript age, but especially against 
helpless old people, women and children. The number of the Orthodox 
that the Croats have massacred and sadistically tortured to death is 
about three hundred thousand." 
Report to Reichsfuhrer SS Heinrich Himmler from the Geheime 
Staatspolizei - GESTAPO - dated February 17, 1942 
"From the founding [of the NDH] until now the persecution of Serbs 
has not stopped, and even cautious estimates indicate that at least 
several hundred thousand people have been killed. The irresponsible 
elements have committed such atrocities that could be expected only 
from a rabid Bolshevik horde." 
German foreign ministry plenipotentiary representative in Belgrade 
Felix Benzler to Joachim von Ribbentrop, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
of the Reich 
" (In Croatia under the Ustasha) ...over half a million [Serbs] were 
murdered, about a quarter of a million were expelled from the 
country, and another quarter of a million were forced to convert to 
Catholicism." 
Encyclopaedia of the Holocaust 



(All quotes from "The Real Genocide in Yugoslavia: Independent 
Croatia of 1941 Revisited"