THE DUSK OF THE GODS.

Third day of the Nibelungen Ring by WAGNER.


This is the end of the great and beautiful tragedy and really it may be
called both a sublime and grand conclusion, which unites once again all
the dramatic and musical elements of the whole and presents to us a
picture the more interesting and touching, as it is now purely human.
The Gods who, though filled with passions and faults like mortals,
never can be for us living persons, fall into the background, and human
beings, full of high aspirations, take their places.  The long and
terrible conflict between the power of gold and that of love is at last
fought out and love conquers.

In the Dusk of the Gods we see again the curse, which lies on gold, and
the sacred benediction of true love.  Can there be anything more noble,
more touching, than Bruennhilde's mourning for Siegfried and the grand
sacrifice of herself in expiation of her error?

The third day opens with a prelude, in which we see three Norns,
weaving world's fate.  When the cord breaks, they fly; the dawn of
another world is upon them.

{69}

In the first act Siegfried bids Bruennhilde fare well.  His active soul
thirsts for deeds, and Bruennhilde having taught him all she knows does
not detain him.  He gives her the fatal ring in token of remembrance,
confiding her to the care of Loge.  Then we are transported to the
Gibichung's hall on the Rhine.  Gunther and his sister Gutrune sit
there, together with their gloomy half-brother Hagen.  The latter
advises his brother to marry, telling him of the beautiful woman,
guarded by the flames.  When he has sufficiently excited Gunther's
longing, he suggests that, as Siegfried is the only one able to gain
Bruennhilde, Gunther should attach him to his person by giving him
Gutrune as wife.  This is to be achieved by a draught, which has the
power of causing oblivion.  Whoever drinks it forgets that ever a woman
has existed beside the one, who has tended the potion.  Hagen well
knows of Siegfried's union with Bruennhilde, but Gunther and Gutrune are
both ignorant of it.

Siegfried arrives and is heartily welcomed.  All turns out as Hagen has
foretold.  By the fatal potion Siegfried falls passionately in love
with Gutrune, so that he completely forgets Bruennhilde.  He swears
blood-brothership to Gunther, and promises to win Bruennhilde for him.
Then the two depart on their errand.

Meanwhile the Walkyrie Waltraute comes to Bruennhilde and beseeches her
to render Siegfried's ring to the Rhine-daughters, in order to save the
Gods from destruction.  Bruennhilde refuses to part {70} with the token
of her husband's love, and hardly has Waltraute departed, than fate
overtakes her in the person of Siegfried, who ventures through the
flames in Gunther's shape.  She vainly struggles against him, he
snatches the ring from her, and so she is conquered.  Siegfried holds
vigil through the night, his sword separating him and the woman he
wooed, and in the early dawn he leads her away to her bridegroom, who
takes Siegfried's place unawares.

In the second act Alberich appears to Hagen.  He tells his son of the
story of the ring and bids him kill Siegfried and recover the stolen
treasure for its owner.--Siegfried appears, announcing Gunther's and
Bruennhilde's arrival.  The bridal pair is received by all their men,
but the joy is soon damped by Bruennhilde recognizing in the bridegroom
of Gutrune her own husband.  Siegfried does not know her, but she
discovers her ring on his hand, and asserting that Gunther won it from
her, this hero is obliged to acknowledge the shameful role he
played.--Though Siegfried swears that his sword Nothung guarded him
from any contact with Gunther's bride, Bruennhilde responds in a most
startling manner, and both swear on Hagen's spear that it may pierce
them, should their words prove false.  All this makes a dreadful
impression on the weak mind of Gunther.

When Siegfried has withdrawn in high spirits with his bride Gutrune,
Hagen hoping to gain the ring offers to avenge Bruennhilde on the
faithless {71} Siegfried.  Bruennhilde in her deadly wrath betrays to
him the only vulnerable spot beneath Siegfried's shoulder.  Gunther
consents reluctantly to their schemes.

The third act opens with a scene on the Rhine.  The Rhine-daughters try
to persuade Siegfried to render them the ring.  He is about to throw it
into the water, when they warn him of the evil which will befall him,
should he refuse their request.  This awakens his pride, and laughing
he turns from them, he, the fearless hero.  His fellow-hunters overtake
him, and while he relates to them the story of his life, Hagen mixes a
herb with his wine, which enables him to remember all he has forgotten.
Hagen then treacherously drives his spear into Siegfried's back,
killing him.  He dies with Bruennhilde's praise on his lips.  The
funeral-march which here follows is one of the most beautiful ever
written.  When the dead hero is brought to the Giebichung's hall,
Gutrune bewails him loudly.  A dispute arises between Hagen and Gunther
about the ring, which ends by Hagen slaying Gunther.  But lo, when
Hagen tries to strip the ring off the dead hand, the fingers close
themselves, and the hand raises itself, bearing testimony against the
murderer.  Bruennhilde appears, to mourn for the dead; she drives away
Gutrune, who sees too late that under the influence of the fatal
draught, Siegfried forgot his lawful wife, whom she now recognizes in
Bruennhilde.  The latter, taking a long farewell of her dead husband,
orders a funeral pile {72} to be erected.  As soon as Siegfried's body
is placed on it, she lights it with a firebrand, and when it is in full
blaze, she mounts her faithful steed, leaping with it into the flames.

When the fire sinks, the Rhine-daughters are seen to snatch the ring,
which is now purified from its curse by Bruennhilde's death.

Hagen, trying to wrench it from them, is drawn into the waves and so
dies.

A dusky light, like that of a new dawn spreads over heaven, and through
a mist, Walhalla, with all the Gods sleeping peacefully, may be
perceived.




EURYANTHE.

Grand romantic Opera by C. M. VON WEBER.

Text by HELMINA VON CHEZY.


This opera has not had the success of Oberon or Freischuetz, a fact to
be attributed to the weakness of its libretto, and not to its music,
which is so grand and noble, that it cannot but fill the hearer with
admiration and pleasure.

The overture is one of the finest pieces ever written, and the choruses
and solos are equally worthy of admiration.

The plot is as follows:

Adolar, Count of Nevers and Rethel, is betrothed to Euryanthe of Savoy,
and the wedding is to take place, when one day, in the King's presence
Lysiart, Count of Forest and Beaujolais, suggests that all women are
accessible to seduction.  He provokes Adolar so much, that he succeeds
{73} in making him stake his lands and everything he possesses on his
bride's fidelity.  Lysiart on the other hand promises to bring a token
of Euryanthe's favor.

In the following scene we find Euryanthe in the company of Eglantine de
Puiset.  This lady is a prisoner, who has taken refuge in the castle of
Nevers, and has ingratiated herself so much with Euryanthe, that the
latter tenderly befriends the false woman.  Asking Euryanthe, why she
always chooses for her recreation the dreary spot of the park, where
Adolar's sister Emma lies buried, she is told by her in confidence,
that she prays for Emma, who poisoned herself after her lover's death
in battle.  Her soul could find no rest, until the ring, which
contained the venom should be wet with the tears of a faithful and
innocent maid, shed in her extreme need.  No sooner has Euryanthe
betrayed her bridegroom's secret that she repents doing so, foreboding
ill to come.  Lysiart enters to escort her to the marriage festival,
but he vainly tries to ensnare her innocence, when Eglantine comes to
his rescue.  She loves Adolar, and her passion not being returned, she
has sworn vengeance.  Stealing the fatal ring from the sepulchre, she
gives it to Lysiart as a token of Euryanthe's faithlessness, and
Lysiart, after having brought Euryanthe to Adolar, shows the ring in
presence of the whole court, pretending to have received it from
Euryanthe.  The poor maiden denies it, but as Lysiart reveals the
mystery of the grave, she cannot deny that she has broken her promise
of never telling the secret.

{74}

Adolar full of despair surrenders everything to his rival, leading
Euryanthe, whom he believes to be false, into the wilderness to kill
her.  A serpent is about to sting him, when his bride throws herself
between.  He kills the reptile, but after her sacrifice he is unable to
raise his arm against her and so leaves her to her fate.

She is found by the King and his hunters, and to them she relates the
whole story of her error of confiding in the false Eglantine.  The King
promises to inform Adolar and takes her back with him.  Meanwhile
Adolar returning once more to his grounds, is seen by his people.  One
of them, Bertha, tells him that Euryanthe is innocent, and that
Eglantine, who is about to marry Lysiart and to reign as supreme
mistress over the country, has been the culprit.

Eglantine, appearing in bridal attire, led by Lysiart, suddenly becomes
a prey to fearful remorse, she sees Emma's ghost, and in her anxiety
reveals the whole plot.  Her bridegroom stabs her in his fury, but is
at once seized by order of the King who just then comes upon the scene.
Adolar, believing Euryanthe dead, demands a meeting with Lysiart.  But
the King declares, that the murderer must incur the penalty of the
laws.  He renders up to Adolar his possessions and his bride, who the
more easily pardons her repentant bridegroom, that she has saved his
sister's soul by the innocent tears of her misfortune.




{75}

FALSTAFF.

A lyric Comedy in three acts by GIUSEPPE VERDI.

Text by ARRIGO BOITO.


Nobody who hears this opera would believe, that it has been written by
a man in his eightieth year.  So much freshness, wit and originality
seem to be the privilege of youth alone.  But the wonder has been
achieved, and Verdi has won a complete success with an opera,--which
runs in altogether different lines from his old-ones, another wonder of
an abnormally strong and original mind.

Falstaff was first represented in Milan in February 1893; since then it
has made its way to all theatres of renown, and it is now indisputable
that we have in it a masterpiece of composition and orchestration.
Those who only look for the easy-flowing melodies of the younger Verdi
will be disappointed; art is predominant, besides an exuberant humour
full of charm for every cultivated hearer.  The numbers which attract
most are the gossiping scene between the four women in the first act,
Falstaffs air "Auand'ero paggio del Duca di Norfolk era sottile" in the
second, and the fairy music in the last act.

The text is so well known to all readers of Shakespeare, that it may be
recorded quite shortly.  It is almost literally that of the Merry Wives
of Windsor.  The first scene is laid in the Garter Inn of that town.
After a quarrel with the French Physician Dr. Cajus, who has been
robbed while drunk by Falstaff's servants Bardolph and Pistol, {76}
Falstaff orders them off with two love-letters for Mrs. Alice Ford and
Mrs. Meg Page.  The Knaves refusing indignantly to take the parts of
go-betweens Falstaff sends them to the devil and gives the letters to
the page Robin.

In the second act the two ladies having shown each other the
love-letters, decide to avenge themselves on the old fat fool.

Meanwhile Falstaff's servants betray their master's intentions towards
Mrs. Ford to her husband, who swears to guard his wife, and to keep a
sharp eye on Sir John.  Then ensues a love-scene between Fenton and Mr.
Ford's daughter Anna, who is destined by her father to marry the rich
Dr. Cajus, but who by far prefers her poor suitor Fenton.

After a while the merry Wives assemble again, in order to entice
Falstaff into a trap.  Mrs. Quickley brings him an invitation to Mrs.
Ford's house in absence of the lady's husband, which Sir John accepts
triumphantly.

Sir John is visited by Mr. Ford, who assumes the name of Mr. Born, and
is nothing loth to drink the bottles of old Cypros-wine, which the
latter has brought with him.  Born also produces a purse filled with
sovereigns, and entreats Falstaff to use it in order to get admittance
to a certain Mrs. Ford, whose favour Born vainly sought.  Falstaff
gleefully reveals the rendez-vous, which he is to have with the lady
and thereby leaves poor disguised Mr. Ford a prey to violent jealousy.

{77}

The next scene contains Falstaff's well-known interview with
mischievous Alice Ford, which is interrupted by Mrs. Meg's announcement
of the husband.

Falstaff is packed into a washing-basket, while husband and neighbours
search for him in vain.  This scene, in which Falstaff, half
suffocated, alternately sighs and begs to be let out, while the women
tranquilly sit on the basket and enjoy their trick, is extremely comic.
The basket with Falstaff, full wash and all is turned over into a
canal, accompanied by the women's laughter.

In the third act Mrs. Quickley succeeds once more to entice the old
fool.  She orders him to another rendez-vous in the Park at midnight,
and advises him to come in the disguise of Herne the black hunter.  The
others hear of the joke and all decide to punish him thoroughly for his
fatuity.  Ford, who has promised Dr. Cajus, to unite Anna to him the
very night, tells him to wear a monk's garb, and also reveals to him,
that Anna is to wear a white dress with roses.  But his wife,
overhearing this, frustrates his designs.  She gives a black monk's
garb to Fenton, while Anna chooses the costume of the Fairy-Queen
Titania.  When Falstaff appears in his disguise he is attacked on all
sides by fairies, wasps, flies and mosquitos and they torment him so
long, until he cries for mercy.  Meanwhile Cajus, in a grey monk's garb
looks for his bride everywhere until a tall veiled female in flowing
white robes (Bardolph) falls into his arms; on {78} the other side Anna
appears with Fenton.  Both couples are wedded, and only when they
unveil, the mistake is discovered.  With bitter shame the men see how
they have all been duped by some merry and clever women, but they have
to make the best of a bad case, and so Ford grants his benediction to
the happy lovers, and embraces his wife, only too glad to find her true
and faithful.




FIDELIO.

Opera in two acts by L. van BEETHOVEN.


This opera, the only one by the greatest of German composers, is also
one of the most exquisite we possess.  The music is so grand and
sublime, so passionate and deep, that it enters into the heart of the
hearer.  The libretto is also full of the highest and most beautiful
feeling.

Florestan, a Spanish nobleman, has dared to blame Don Pizarro, the
governor of the state-prison, a man as cruel as he is powerful.
Pizarro has thus become Florestan's deadly foe, he has seized him
secretly and thrown him into a dreadful dungeon, reporting his death to
the Minister.

But this poor prisoner has a wife, Leonore, who is as courageous as she
is faithful.  She never believes in the false reports, but disguising
herself in male attire, resolves not to rest until she has found her
husband.

In this disguise we find her in the first act; she has contrived to get
entrance into the fortress {79} where she supposes her husband
imprisoned, and by her gentle and courteous behaviour, and readiness
for service of all kinds has won not only the heart of Rocco, the
jailer, but that of his daughter Marcelline, who falls in love with the
gentle youth and neglects her former lover Jaquino.  Fidelio persuades
Rocco to let her help him in his office with the prisoners.  Quivering
with mingled hope and fear she opens the prison gates, to let the state
prisoners out into the court, where they may for once have air and
sunshine.

But seek as she may, she cannot find her husband and in silent despair
she deems herself baffled.

Meanwhile Pizarro has received a letter from Sevilla, announcing the
Minister's forthcoming visit to the fortress.  Pizarro, frightened at
the consequences of such a call, resolves to silence Florestan for
ever.  He orders the jailer to kill him, but the old man will not
burden his soul with a murder and refuses firmly.  Then Pizarro himself
determines to kill Florestan, and summons Rocco to dig a grave in the
dungeon, in order to hide all traces of the crime.

Rocco, already looking upon the gentle and diligent Fidelio as his
future son-in-law, confides to him his dreadful secret, and with
fearful forebodings she entreats him to accept her help in the heavy
work.  Pizarro gives his permission, Rocco being too old and feeble to
do the work quickly enough if alone; Pizarro has been rendered furious
by the {80} indulgence granted to the prisoners at Fidelio's entreaty,
but a feeling of triumph overcomes every other, when he sees Rocco
depart for the dungeon with his assistant.

Here we find poor Florestan chained to a stone; he is wasted to a
skeleton as his food has been reduced in quantity week by week by the
cruel orders of his tormentor.  He is gradually losing his reason; he
has visions and in each one beholds his beloved wife.

When Leonore recognizes him, she well-nigh faints, but with a
supernatural effort of strength she rallies, and begins her work.  She
has a piece of bread with her, which she gives to the prisoner and with
it the remainder of Rocco's wine.  Rocco, mild at heart, pities his
victim sincerely, but he dares not act against the orders of his
superior, fearing to lose his position, or even his life.

While Leonore refreshes the sick man, Rocco gives a sign to Pizarro,
that the work is done, and bids Fidelio leave; but she only hides
herself behind a stone-pillar, waiting with deadly fear for the coming
event and decided to save her husband or to die with him.

Pizarro enters, secretly resolved to kill not only his foe, but also
both witnesses of his crime.  He will not kill Florestan however
without letting him know, who his assailant is.  So he loudly shouts
his own much-feared name, but while he raises his dagger, Leonore
throws herself between him and Florestan, shielding the latter with her
breast.  {81} Pizarro, stupefied like Florestan, loses his presence of
mind.  Leonore profits by it and presents a pistol at him, with which
she threatens his life, should he attempt another attack.  At this
critical moment the trumpets sound, announcing the arrival of the
Minister, and Pizarro, in impotent wrath is compelled to retreat.  They
are all summoned before the Minister, who is shocked at seeing his old
friend Florestan in this sad state, but not the less delighted with and
full of reverence for the noble courage of Leonore.

Pizarro is conducted away in chains, and the faithful wife with her own
hands removes the fetters, which still bind the husband for whom she
has just won freedom and happiness.

Marcelline, feeling inclined to be ashamed of her mistake, returns to
her simple and faithful lover Jaquino.




LA FIGLIA DEL REGGIMENTO.

Comic Opera in two acts by GAETANO DONIZETTI.

Text by ST. GEORGE and BAYARD.


This opera is one of the few of Donizetti's numerous works, which still
retain their attraction for the theatre-visitor, the others are his
Lucrezia Borgia and Lucia di Lammermoor.

The "Daughter of the Regiment" happily combines Italian richness of
melody with French "esprit" and French sallies, and hence the continued
charm of this almost international music.

The libretto can be accounted good.

{82}

The scene in the first act is laid near Bologna in the year 1815, the
second act in the castle of the Marchesa di Maggiorivoglio.

Mary, a vivandiere, has been found and educated by a French sergeant,
named Sulpice, and therefore belongs in a sense to his regiment, which
is on a campaign in Italy.  She is called the "daughter" of the
regiment, which has adopted her, and she has grown up, a bright and
merry girl, full of pluck and spirit, the pet and delight of the whole
regiment.

Tonio, a young Swiss, who has fallen in love with Mary, is believed by
the grenadiers to be a spy, and is about to be hanged.  But Mary,
knowing that he has only come to see her, tells them that he lately
saved her life, when she was in danger of falling over a precipice.
This changes everything and on his expressing a desire to become one of
them, the grenadiers suffer the Swiss to enlist into their company.
After the soldiers' departure he confesses his love to Mary, who
returns it heartily.  The soldiers agree to give their consent, when
the Marchesa di Maggiorivoglio appears, and by a letter once affixed to
the foundling Mary, addressed to a Marchesa of the same name and
carefully kept by Sulpice, it is proved that Mary is the Marchesa's
niece.  Of course this noble lady refuses her consent to a marriage
with the low-born Swiss and claims Mary from her guardian.  With tears
and laments Mary takes leave of her regiment and her lover, who at once
decides to follow her.  But he {83} has enlisted as soldier and is
forbidden to leave the ranks.  Sulpice and his whole regiment curse the
Marchesa, who thus carries away their joy.

In the second act Mary is in her aunt's castle.  She has masters of
every kind for her education in order to become a lady comme il faut,
but she cannot forget her freedom, and her dear soldiers, and instead
of singing solfeggios and cavatinas, she is caught warbling her
"Rataplan", to the Marchesa's grief and sorrow.  Nor can she cease to
think of Tonio, and only after a great struggle has she been induced to
promise her hand to a nobleman, when she suddenly hears the
well-beloved sound of drums and trumpets.  It is her own regiment with
Tonio as their leader, for he has been made an officer on account of
his courage and brave behaviour.  Hoping that his altered position may
turn the Marchesa's heart in his favor, he again asks for Mary, but his
suit is once more rejected.  Then he proposes flight, but the Marchesa
detecting his plan, reveals to Mary that she is not her niece, but her
own daughter, born in early wedlock with an officer far beneath her in
rank, who soon after died in battle.  This fact she has concealed from
her family, but as it is now evident that she has closer ties with
Mary, the poor girl dares not disobey her, and, though broken-hearted,
consents to renounce Tonio.

The Marchesa invites a large company of guests to celebrate her
daughter's betrothal to the son of a neighboring duchess.  But Mary's
faithful {84} grenadiers suddenly appear to rescue her from those
hateful ties, and astonish the whole company by their recital of Mary's
early history.  The obedient maiden however, submissive to her fate, is
about to sign the marriage contract, when at last the Marchesa, touched
by her obedience and her sufferings, conquers her own pride and
consents to the union of her daughter with Tonio.  Sulpice and his
soldiers burst out into loud shouts of approbation, and the highborn
guests retire silently and disgusted.




DER FLIEGENDE HOLLAeNDER.

(THE FLYING DUTCHMAN.)

Romantic Opera in three acts by WAGNER.


This fine opera is Wagner's second work, which he composed in direst
need, when living at Paris with his young wife.  The songs, which so
well imitate the hurricane and the howling of the ocean, he himself
heard during an awful storm at sea.  The whole opera is exceedingly
characteristic and impressive.  Wagner arranged the libretto himself,
as he did for all his operas which succeeded this one.  He found the
substance of it in an old legend, which dates from the 16th century.
The flying Dutchman is a sort of wandering Jew, condemned to sail
forever on the seas, until he has found a woman, whose love to him is
faithful unto death.

In the first act we find ourselves on the high seas.  Daland, a
Norwegian skipper, has met with {85} several misfortunes on his way
home, and is compelled to anchor on a deserted shore.  There he finds
the flying Dutchman, who vainly roves from sea to sea to find death and
with it peace.  His only hope is dooms day.  He has never found a
maiden faithful to him, and he knows not how often and how long he has
vainly tried to be released from his doom.  Once, every seven years, he
is allowed to go on shore, and take a wife.  This time has now come
again, and hearing from Daland, that he has a daughter, sweet and pure,
he begins to hope once more, and offers all his wealth to the father
for a shelter under the Norwegian's roof and for the hand of his
daughter Senta.--Daland is only too glad to accept for his child, what
to him seems an immense fortune and so they sail home together.

In the second act we find Senta in the spinning-room.  The servants of
the house are together spinning and singing.  Senta is amongst them,
but her wheel does not turn, she is dreamily regarding an old picture.
It is that of the flying Dutchman, whose legend so deeply touches her,
that she has grown to love its hero, without having in reality seen him.

Senta has a wooer already in the person of Erick the hunter, but she
does not care much for him.  With deep feeling she sings to the
spinning maidens the ballad of the doomed man, as she has heard it from
Mary, her nurse:

An old captain wanted to sail round the Cape {86} of Good Hope, and as
the wind was against him, he swore a terrible oath, that he never would
leave off trying.  The devil heard him and doomed him to sail on to
eternity, but God's angel had pity on him and showed him, how he could
find deliverance through a wife, faithful unto the grave.

All the maidens pray to God, to let the maiden be found at last, when
Senta ecstatically exclaims: "I will be his wife!"  At this moment her
father's ship is announced.  Senta is about to run away to welcome him,
but is detained by Erick, who tries to win her for himself.  She
answers evasively; then Daland enters and with him a dark and gloomy
stranger.  Senta stands spell-bound: she recognizes the hero of her
picture.  The Dutchman is not less impressed, seeing in her the angel
of his dreams and as it were his deliverer, and so, meeting by the
guidance of a superior power, they seem created for each other and
Senta, accepting the offer of his hand, swears to him eternal fidelity.

In the third act we see the flying Dutchman's ship; everybody
recognizes it by its black mast and its blood-red sail.  The Norwegian
sailors call loudly to the marines of the strange ship, but nothing
stirs, everything seems dead and haunted.  At last the unearthly
inhabitants of the Dutch ship awake; they are old and gray and
wrinkled, all doomed to the fate of their captain.  They begin a wild
and gloomy song, which sends a chill into the hearts of the stout
Norwegians.

{87}

Meanwhile Erick, beholding in Senta the betrothed of the Dutchman, is
in despair.  Imploring her to turn back, he calls up old memories and
at last charges her with infidelity to him.

As soon as the Dutchman hears this accusation, he turns from Senta,
feeling that he is again lost.  But Senta will not break her faith.
Seeing the Dutchman fly from her, ready to sail away, she swiftly runs
after him and throws herself from the cliff into the waves.

By this sacrifice the spell is broken, the ghostly ship sinks for ever
into the ocean, and an angel bears the poor wanderer to eternal rest,
where he is re-united to the bride, who has proved faithful unto death.




THE FOLKUNGS.

Grand Opera in five acts by EDMUND KRETSCHMER.

Text by MOSENTHAL.


The composer of this opera evidently belongs to the most talented of
our days, and it is no wonder that his two operas "Henry the Lion" and
"The Folkungs", have rapidly found their way to every stage of
importance.  Particularly "The Folkungs" is such a happy combination of
modern orchestration, abundance of fine melody, and northern
characteristical coloring, that it charms the connoisseur as well as
the unlearned.

The scene is laid in Sweden, in the 13th century.

The first act represents the convent Nydal on the snowy heights of the
Kyoeles.  Sten Patrik, the confidant and abettor of Bengt, Duke of
Schoonen, {88} has allured Prince Magnus, second son of King Erick of
Sweden, to follow him out of his convent, and has brought him hither by
ruse and force.  He now announces to the Prince, that he may choose
between death and a nameless life in the convent Nydal, and Magnus,
having no choice, swears on Sten's sword that he, Prince Magnus, will
be forever dead to the world.

The monks receive him into their brotherhood, as he answers to the
Abbot Ansgar's questions, that he is an orphan, homeless, abandoned,
seeking peace only.  The Abbot first subjects Magnus to a trial of his
constancy, by letting him hold the night-vigil in storm and snow.--The
monks retire, leaving the unhappy Prince outside the gates.  While he
sinks into deep reverie, Lars Olafson, the castellan of the King's
castle of Bognaes, and son of the Prince's nurse, appears.  He seeks his
Prince, who so mysteriously disappeared from the world, and relates to
Magnus, that King Erick is dead, as well as his eldest son, and that
Prince Magnus is called to come and claim his throne and bride.
Princess Maria, the only surviving Folkung, is already being wooed by
their enemy, Duke Bengt of Schoonen, and now the listener understands
the vile plot against himself.  And as Lars calls him to defend his
country and his Princess against the Duke and his confederates the
Danes, Magnus considers it a sign from heaven that he is to die for his
country, a course of action, which his oath does not prohibit.

When the Abbot calls his new guest, he has {89} disappeared, and Sten
Patrik consoles himself with the thought that the fugitive must have
perished in the raging snow-storm.

The second act shows us Princess Maria in her castle Bognaes on the lake
of Maelar.  She is the King's niece and successor to the throne.  She
takes a last farewell from her people, and Bengt appears to lead her to
Upsala for the coronation.

The nurse Kariri and her son Olaf assure her of her folk's fidelity,
and when she has departed, Lars calls the men together, and presenting
the youth from Skoelen as their leader, makes them take oath of faith on
their standard.--Karin recognizes the Prince in the stranger, but he
firmly denies his identity, and with glowing words calls the people to
rise against their common foe.

The next scene begins with the act of coronation.--The crowned Queen
Maria is to announce her choice of a husband from the Mora-stone, when
her words are arrested by a look from Magnus, in whom she recognizes
the youth she loved.

But, though almost mad with longing and torment, Magnus, mindful of his
oath, still denies himself, and the Duke with his friend Sten, who both
believed themselves lost, impetuously demand the impostor's arrest.
But the Queen asserts her right to judge him herself.

In the fourth act Magnus is brought to his mother's sleeping room.  The
charm of youthful remembrances surround him, and hearing an old ballad,
which Karin sings, he forgets himself and so {90} proves his identity
beyond any doubt to the hidden listeners.  Maria rushes forward; he
folds her to his breast in a transport of love, and only when Karin
greets him as her King, he remembers that he has broken his oath, and
without more reflection precipitates himself from the balcony into the
sea.  Maria sinks back in a swoon.

In the last act Sten Patrik comes, to remind Bengt of his promise to
give him Schoonen.  The Duke refuses to pay him, now that Sweden is in
revolt and the Prince living.  Sten threatens to reveal his treachery
against Magnus.  Bengt is about to kill the only accomplice in his
deed, when Maria, who has heard all, arrests his arm, and accuses him
of murder.  Then she rushes to the balcony to call her people to
vengeance.  Bengt draws his sword to stab her, but the people throng
in, seize and throw him into the sea.  Now Maria hears with rapture
that Magnus lives and has driven away the Danes.  With him enter the
monks, whose Abbot releases the Prince from his oath.  Maria lovingly
embracing him, places her crown on her bridegroom's head and all cry
hail! to their King Magnus Ericson.




FRA DIAVOLO.

Comic Opera in three acts by AUBER.

Text by SCRIBE.


This nice little opera, though not equal in beauty and perfection to
the "Muette de Portici" by the same author, is notwithstanding, a happy
{91} invention of Auber's, particularly because the local tints are so
well caught.  The banditti are painted with bright and glowing colors,
and the part of the heroine, Zerline is the most grateful ever written
for a soubrelte.  The text by Scribe abounds in happy sallies and
lively details.  It is laid at Terracina in Italy.  Fra Diavolo is a
celebrated and much feared chief of brigands.  The Roman court of
justice has set a price of 10,000 piastres on his head.  In the first
act we meet with the Roman soldiers who undertake to win the money.
Their captain Lorenzo has a double aim in trying to catch the brigand.
He is Zerline's lover, but having no money, Zerline's father Matteo,
the owner of a hotel, threatens to give her to a rich farmer's son.
Meanwhile Fra Diavolo has forced his society on a rich English lord,
Cookburn by name, who is on his wedding-tour with his fair young wife
Pamella.  Lord Cookburn looks jealously at Fra Diavolo, though he does
not recognize in him a brigand.  The English are robbed by Diavolo's
band.  Disgusted with the insecurity of "la bella Italia" they reach
the inn at Terracina, where the dragoons, hearing the account of this
new robbery, believe that it was Fra Diavolo with his band, and at once
decide to pursue him.

Shortly afterwards Fra Diavolo arrives at the inn, disguised as the
Marquis of San Marco, under which name the English lord has already
made his acquaintance.  He is not enchanted by the arrival of this
Marquis; he fears a new flirtation {92} with his own fair wife.
Pamella wears most valuable diamonds, and these strike the eye of Fra
Diavolo.

He sees that the English have been clever enough to conceal the greater
part of their wealth and resolves to put himself speedily into
possession of it.

He is flirting desperately with Pamella and looking tenderly at the
pretty Zerline, when the soldiers return, having captured twenty of the
brigands and retaken the greater part of Lord Cookburn's money and
jewels.  Lorenzo, the captain of dragoons is rewarded by the
magnanimous Lord with 10,000 Lire, and may now hope to win Zerline's
hand.  But Fra Diavolo vows to avenge the death of his comrades on
Lorenzo.

In the second act he conceals himself behind the curtains in Zerline's
sleeping-room, and during the night he admits his two companions Beppo
and Giacomo.  Zerline enters and is about to retire to rest, after
praying to the Holy Virgin for protection.--During her sleep Giacomo is
to stab her, while the two others are to rob the English Milord.

But Zerline's prayer, and her innocence touch even the robbers, the
deed is delayed, and this delay brings Lorenzo upon them.  Fra
Diavolo's two companions hide themselves, and the false Marquis alone
is found in Zerline's room.  He assures Lorenzo, that he had a
rendez-vous with his bride, and at the same time whispers into Milord's
ear, that he came by appointment with Milady, showing {93} her
portrait, of which he had robbed her the day before, as proof.  The
consequence of these lies is a challenge from Lorenzo, and a meeting
with Diavolo is fixed.  The latter is full of triumphant glee; he has
arranged a deep-laid plan with the surviving members of his band and
hopes to ensnare not only Lorenzo but his whole company.  Ordinarily
Diavolo is a noble brigand; he never troubles women, and he loads poor
people with gifts, taking the gold out of rich men's purses only, but
now he is full of ire and his one thought is of vengeance.

Finally he is betrayed by the carelessness of his own helpmates.  Beppo
and Giacomo, seeing Zerline, recognize in her their fair prey of the
evening before and betray themselves by repeating some of the words
which she had given utterance to.  Zerline, hearing them, is now able
to comprehend the wicked plot, which was woven to destroy her
happiness.  The two banditta are captured and compelled to lure their
captain into a trap.  Diavolo appears, not in his disguise as a
Marquis, but in his own well-known dress, with the red plume waving
from his bonnet, and being assured by Beppo, that all is secure, is
easily captured.  Now all the false imputations are cleared up.  Milord
is reconciled to his wife and Lorenzo obtains the hand of the lovely
Zerline.




{94}

FRAUENLOB.

Opera in three acts by REINHOLD BECKER.

Text by FRANZ KOPPEL-ELLFELD.


Becker, the well-known Dresden composer, has long won name and fame by
his beautiful songs, which may be heard all over the continent.  He is
a first-rate "Liedermeister", and great was the excitement, with which
his friends looked forward to his first opera.

Their expectations were not deceived, for the opera was put on the
stage in Dresden on Dec. 8th 1892, and was received with unanimous
applause.

Becker is not one of those high-flown artists who elevate us to the
skies; he rather lacks dramatic strength; the lyric element is his
strong point.  By the Lied he finds his way direct to the hearts of his
hearers, and where ever this could be woven into the action of his
opera, he has done it with subtle taste.  Tilda's dancing-air in the
first act, the evening-song, sung while the people are gliding down the
Rhine in boats, whose lovely variations remind us of quaint old airs of
bye-gone days,--the chorus of the stone-masons in the second act, and
the love-duet in the third are brilliant gems in Becker's music.

The libretto rivals the best of its kind.

The scene is laid near and in Maintz in the year 1308; it takes place
during the reign of Ludwig, Emperor of Bavaria.

Heinrich Frauenlob, the famous minstrel, who had won his name by his
songs in women's praise, {95} is by birth a knight, Dietherr zur Meise.
Years ago he slew the Truchsess of Maintz in self-defence, and having
therefore become an outlaw, had entered the service of the Emperor.  In
the beginning of the opera we find him however near Maintz, where he
stays as a guest at his friend's Wolf's castle.  He takes part in the
people's festival on Midsummer day, deeming himself unknown.

When the customary St. John's fire is lighted, no one dares leap over
it for fear of an old gipsy's prophesy, which threatened with sudden
death the first who should attempt it.  Frauenlob, disregarding the
prophesy, persuades Hildegund, Ottker von Scharfenstein's fair ward, to
venture through the fire with him.  Hildegund is the slain Truchsess'
daughter, and has sworn, to wed the avenger of her father's death, but
each lover is unconscious of the other's name.  The gipsy Sizyga alone,
who had been betrayed in her youth by Frauenlob's father, recognizes
the young knight, and though he has only just saved the old hag from
the people's fury, she wishes to avenge her wrongs on him.  To this end
she betrays the secret of Frauenlob's birth to Hildegund's suitor,
Servazio di Bologna, who is highly jealous of this new rival, and
determines to lay hands on him, as soon as he enters the gates of
Maintz.--Frauenlob, though warned by Sizyga, enters Maintz attracted by
Hildegund's sweet graces; he is determined to confess everything, and
then to fly with her, should she be willing to follow him.

{96}

The second act opens with a fine song of the warder of the tower.  The
city awakes, the stonemasons assemble, ready to greet the Emperor,
whose arrival is expected.  Tilda, Hildegund's friend, and daughter to
Klas, chief of the stone-masons is going to church, but on her way she
is accosted by the knight Wolf, who has lost his heart to her, and now,
forgetting his plan to look for Frauenlob, follows the lovely
damsel.--When Frauenlob comes up, and sees again the well-known places
of his youth, he is deeply touched, but seeing his lady love step on
the balcony and soon after come down to enter the dome, he waylays her,
imploring her, to fly with him.  At this moment Servazio, who has lain
in wait, steps forth with officers, who capture Frauenlob.  Servazio
now reveals the singer's secret and Hildegund hears that her lover is
her father's murderer.  Though Frauenlob tells Hildegund, that he
killed her father in self-defence, she turns from him shuddering.
Feeling that all hopes of his future happiness are at an end, he wishes
to atone for his deed by death, refusing the help of Wolf, who comes up
with his men, to release him.  But the stone-masons, having recognized
the celebrated minstrel, with whose song they are about to greet the
Emperor, decide to invoke the latter's clemency.

In the third act the citizens of Maintz hail the Emperor, after which
Frauenlob's cause is brought before him.  The whole population demands
his pardon, and the monarch, who loves the singer, {97} would fain
liberate him, had not Servazio roughly insisted on the culprit's
punishment.  Uncertain, what to do, the Emperor receives a long
procession of ladies with Tilda at its head, who all beseech pardon for
Frauenlob.  At last the Emperor calls for Hildegund, leaving in her
hands the destiny of the prisoner.  Left alone with him the latter,
prepared to die, only craves her pardon.  After a hard struggle with
her conscience, love conquers and she grants him pardon.  When the
Emperor reenters with his suite, to hear the sentence, they find the
lovers in close embrace.  To the joy of everybody the Monarch sanctions
the union and orders the nuptials to be celebrated at once.  Another
pair, Wolf and Tilda are also made happy.  But Servazio vows vengeance.
Sizyga, having secretly slipped a powder into his hands, he pours it
into a cup of wine, which he presents to Frauenlob as a drink of
reconciliation.  The Emperor handing the goblet to Hildegund, bids her
drink to her lover.  Testing it, she at once feels its deadly effect.
Frauenlob, seeing his love stagger, snatches the cup from her emptying
it at one draught.  He dies, still praising the Emperor and women,
breathing the name of his bride with his last breath.  Servazio is
captured, and while Hildegund's body is strewn with roses, the wailing
women of Maintz carry their beloved minstrel to his grave.--




{98}

DER FREISCHUeTZ.

Romantic Opera in three acts by C. M. VON WEBER.

Text by FRIEDRICH KIND.


This charming opera done at Dresden 1820, is the most favored of
Weber's compositions.  It is truly German, being both fantastic and
poetic.  The libretto is an old German legend and runs thus:

A young huntsman, Max, is in love with Agathe,' daughter of Cuno, the
chief-ranger of Prince Ottocar of Bohemia.  Max woos her, but their
union depends on a master-shot, which he is to deliver on the following
morning.

During a village-festival he has all day been unlucky in shooting, and
we see him full of anger and sorrow, being mocked at by peasants, more
lucky than he.

His comrade, Caspar, one of the ranger's older huntsmen is his evil
genius.  He has sold himself to the devil, is a gloomy, mysterious
fellow, and hopes to save his soul by delivering some other victim to
the demon.  He wants to tempt Max to try enchanted bullets, to be
obtained at the cross-road during the midnight-hour, by drawing a magic
circle with a bloody sword and invoking the name of the mysterious
huntsman.  Father Cuno, hearing him, drives him away, begging Max to
think of his bride and to pray to God for success.

But Max cannot forget the railleries of the peasants; he broods over
his misfortunes and when {99} he is well-nigh despairing, Caspar, who
meanwhile calls Samiel (the devil in person) to help, encourages him to
take refuge in stimulants.  He tries to intoxicate the unhappy lover by
pouring drops from a phial into his wine.  When Max has grown more and
more excited, Caspar begins to tell him of nature's secret powers,
which might help him.  Max first struggles against the evil influence,
but when Caspar, handing him his gun, lets him shoot an eagle, soaring
high in the air, his huntman's heart is elated and he wishes to become
possessed of such bullet.  Caspar tells him that they are enchanted and
persuades him to a meeting in the Wolf's-glen at midnight, where the
bullets may be moulded.

In the second act Agathe is with her cousin Aennchen.  Agathe is the
true German maiden, serious and thoughtful almost to melancholy.  She
presents a marked contrast to her gay and light-hearted cousin, who
tries to brighten Agathe with fun and frolic.  They adorn themselves
with roses, which Agathe received from a holy hermit, who blessed her,
but warned her of impending evil.  So Agathe is full of dread
forebodings, and after Aennchen's departure she fervently prays to
Heaven for her beloved.  When she sees him come to her through the
forest with flowers on his hat, her fears vanish, and she greets him
joyously.  But Max only answers hurriedly, that having killed a stag in
the Wolf's-glen, he is obliged to return there.  Agathe, filled with
terror at the mention {100} of this ill-famed name wants to keep him
back, but ere she can detain him, he has fled.  With hurried steps Max
approaches the Wolf's-glen, where Caspar is already occupied in forming
circles of black stones, in the midst of which he places a skull, an
eagle's wing, a crucible and a bullet-mould.  Caspar then calls on
Samiel, invoking him to allow him a few more years on earth.  To-morrow
is the day appointed for Satan to take his soul, but Caspar promises to
surrender Max in exchange.  Samiel, who appears through the cleft of a
rock, agrees to let him have six of the fatal balls, reserving only the
seventh for himself.

Caspar then proceeds to make the bullets, Max only looking on, stunned
and remorseful at what he sees.  His mother's spirit appears to him,
but he is already under the influence of the charm, he cannot move.
The proceeding goes forward amid hellish noise.  A hurricane arises,
flames and devilish forms flicker about, wild and horrible creatures
rush by and others follow in hot pursuit.  The noise grows worse, the
earth seems to quake, until at length after Caspar's reiterated
invocations Samiel shows himself at the word, "seven".  Max and Caspar
both make the sign of the cross, and fall on their knees more dead than
alive.

In the third act we find Agathe, waiting for her bridesmaids.  She is
perturbed and sad, having had frightful dreams, and not knowing what
has become of Max.  Aennchen consoles her, diverting her with a merry
song, until the bridesmaids {101} enter, bringing flowers and gifts.
They then prepare to crown her with the bridal wreath, when lo, instead
of the myrtle, there lies in the box a wreath of white roses, the
ornament of the dead.

Meanwhile everybody is assembled on the lawn near Prince Ottocar's
tent, to be present at the firing of the master-shot.  The Prince
points out to Max a white dove as an object at which to aim.  At this
critical moment Agathe appears, crying out: "Don't shoot Max, I am the
white dove!"  But it is too late; Max has fired, and Agathe sinks down
at the same time as Caspar, who has been waiting behind a tree and who
now falls heavily to the ground, while the dove flies away unhurt,
Everybody believes that Max has shot his bride, but she is only in a
swoon; the bullet has really killed the villain Caspar.  It was the
seventh, the direction of which Samiel reserved for himself, and Satan
having no power over the pious maiden, directed it on Caspar, already
forfeited to him.  Max confesses his sin with deep remorse.  The Prince
scornfully bids him leave his dominions for ever.  But Agathe prays for
him, and at last the Prince follows the hermit's advice, giving the
unhappy youth a year of probation, during which to prove his
repentance, and grow worthy of his virtuous bride.




{102}

FRIEND FRITZ.

A lyric Comedy in three acts by PIETRO MASCAGNI

Text after ERCKMANN-CHATRIAN'S novel of the same name.


After the immense success of Cavalleria Rusticana, the first
representation of Amico Fritz was awaited with feverish impatience by
the whole musical world.

But the high-strung expectations were not fulfilled.  Though many
pretended that the music was nobler and more artistic than that of the
author's first work, the success was by no means as great as Mascagni's
friends anticipated.  In Vienna and Berlin it was even received with
partial coolness.  But lo, the first representation in Dresden on June
2nd 1892 took place with a marked and decided success.

The artistically trained orchestra brought out to perfection all the
finesses, all the delightful shades of the music, and since that day
the opera has not failed to bring a full house.

The subject in itself is too simple for Mascagni's strong dramatic
talent, hence the lack of interest, hence the disillusion of so many.

Granting this, we cannot but admire the genius, which can compose an
opera so full of refined and noble sentiment, based on such a simple
plot.

No music more charming than the march, taken as well as the Pastorale
from a national Alsacian song, none more sweet and melodious, than the
Intermezzo and the cherry-duet.  The {103} finely depicted details in
the orchestra are a delight for musical ears.

The simple text follows strictly the French original.

Fritz Kobus, a well to do landowner receives the felicitations of his
friends on his fortieth birthday.  At the same time his old friend
Rabbi David, as consumate a match-maker, as Fritz is an inveterate
bachelor receives from the latter a loan of 1200 francs which is to
enable a poor girl to marry her lover.  Fritz gives it very graciously,
congratulating himself, that he is free from hymen's bonds.

He treats his friends to a hearty dinner, in which Susel, his tenant's
daughter, who comes to present her landlord with a nosegay of violets,
joins.  Fritz makes her sit beside him, and for the first time remarks
the growing loveliness of the young maiden.  While they are feasting a
gipsy, Seppel, plays a serenade in honor of the birthday, which makes a
deep impression on fair Susel.  When the latter has departed, the
joviality of the company increases.  Hanczo and Friedrich, two friends
laughingly prophesy to the indignant Fritz, that he will soon be
married, and David even makes a bet, which, should he prove right will
make him owner of one of his friend's vineyards.  At the end of the
first act a procession of orphans hail the landlord as their benefactor.

In the second act we find our friend Fritz as guest in the house of his
tenant.  Susel is sedulously engaged in selecting flowers and cherries
for her {104} landlord, who, coming down into the garden, is presented
by her with flowers.  Soon she mounts a ladder, and plucking cherries,
throws them to Fritz, who is uncertain which are the sweeter, the
maiden's red lips or the ripe cherries, which she offers him.  In the
midst of their enjoyment the sound of bells and cracking of whips is
heard, Fritz's friends enter.  He soon takes them off for a walk, only
old David stays behind with Susel, pleading fatigue.  Taking occasion
of her presenting him with a drink of fresh water, he makes her tell
him the old story of Isaac and Rebecca and is quite satisfied to guess
at the state of her feelings by the manner in which she relates the
simple story.  On Fritz's return he archly communicates to him that he
has found a suitable husband for Susel, and that he has her father's
consent.  The disgust and fright, which Fritz experiences at this news
reveals to him something of his own feelings for the charming maiden.
He decides to return home at once, and does not even take farewell of
Susel, who weeps in bitter disappointment.

In the third act Fritz, at home again, can find no peace anywhere.
When David tells him that Susel's marriage is a decided fact he breaks
out, and in his passion downright forbids the marriage.  At this moment
Susel appears, bringing her landlord a basket of fruit.  She looks pale
and sad, and when Fritz sarcastically asks her whether she comes to
invite him to her wedding, she bursts into tears.  Then the real state
of her heart is {105} revealed to him, and with passionate avowal of
his own love, amico Fritz takes her to his heart.  So David wins his
wager, which however he settles on Susel as a dowry, promising at the
same time to procure wives before long for the two friends standing
by.--




GENOVEVA.

Opera in four acts by ROBERT SCHUMANN.

Text after HEBBEL and TIECK.


The music of this opera is surpassingly delightful.  Though Schumann's
genius was not that of a dramatist of a very high order, this opera
deserves to be known and esteemed universally.  Nowhere can melodies be
found finer or more poetical and touching than in this noble musical
composition, the libretto of which may also be called interesting,
though it is faulty in its want of action.

It is the old legend of Genoveva somewhat altered.  Siegfried, Count of
the Palatinate, is ordered by the Emperor Charles Martell to join him
in the war with the infidels, who broke out of Spain under Abdurrhaman.
The noble Count recommends his wife Genoveva and all he possesses, to
the protection of his friend Golo, who is however secretly in love with
his master's wife.  After Siegfried has said farewell she falls into a
swoon, which Golo takes advantage of to kiss her, thereby still further
exciting his flaming passion.  Genoveva finally awakes and goes away to
mourn in silence for her husband.

{106}

Golo being alone, an old hag Margaretha, whom he takes for his nurse,
comes to console him.

She is in reality his mother and has great schemes for her son's future
happiness.  She insinuates to him that Genoveva, being alone, needs
consolation and will easily be led on to accept more tender attentions,
and she promises him her assistance.  The second act show Genoveva's
room.  She longs sadly for her husband and sees with pain and disgust
the insolent behavior of the servants, whose wild songs penetrate into
her silent chamber.

Golo enters to bring her the news of a great victory over Abdurrhaman,
news, which fill her heart with joy.

She bids Golo sing and sweetly accompanies his song, which so fires his
passion that he falls upon his knees and frightens her by glowing
words.  Vainly she bids him leave her; he only grows more excited, till
she repulses him with the word "bastard".  Now his love turns into
hatred, and when Drago, the faithful steward comes to announce that the
servants begin to be more and more insolent, daring even to insult the
good name of the Countess, Golo asserts that they speak the truth about
her.  He persuades the incredulous Drago to hide himself in Genoveva's
room, the latter having retired for the night's rest.

Margaretha, listening at the door, hears everything.  She tells Golo
that Count Siegfried lies wounded at Strassbourg; she has intercepted
his {107} letter to the Countess and prepares to leave for that town,
in order to nurse the Count and kill him slowly by some deadly poison.
Then Golo calls quickly for the servants, who all assemble to penetrate
into their mistress' room.  She repulses them full of wounded pride,
but at last she yields, and herself taking the candle to light the room
proceeds to search, when Drago is found behind the curtains and at once
silenced by Golo, who runs his dagger through his heart.  Genoveva is
led into the prison of the castle.

The third act takes place at Strassbourg, where Siegfried is being
nursed by Margaretha.  His strength defies her perfidy, and he is full
of impatience to return to his loving wife, when Golo enters bringing
him the news of her faithlessness.

Siegfried in despair bids Golo kill her with his own sword.  He decides
to fly into the wilderness, but before fulfilling his design, he goes
once more to Margaretha, who has promised to show him all that passed
at home during his absence.  He sees Genoveva in a magic looking-glass,
exchanging kindly words with Drago, but there is no appearance of guilt
in their intercourse.  The third image shows Genoveva sleeping on her
couch, and Drago approaching her.  With an imprecation Siegfried starts
up, bidding Golo avenge him, but at the same instant the glass flies in
pieces with a terrible crash, and Drago's ghost stands before
Margaretha, commanding her to tell Siegfried the truth.

{108}

In the fourth act Genoveva is being led into the wilderness by two
ruffians, who have orders to murder her.  Before this is done, Golo
approaches her once more, showing her Siegfried's ring and sword, with
which he has been bidden kill her.  He tries hard to win her, but she
turns from him with scorn and loathing, preferring death to dishonor.
At length relinquishing his attempts, he beckons to the murderers to do
their work and hands them Count Siegfried's weapon.  Genoveva in her
extreme need seizes the cross of the Saviour, praying fervently, and
detains the ruffians till at the last moment Siegfried appears, led by
the repentant Margaretha.  There ensues a touching scene of
forgiveness, while Golo rushes away to meet his fate by falling over a
precipice.




THE GOLDEN CROSS.

Opera in two acts by IGNAZ BRULL.

Text by MOSENTHAL.


Brull, born at Prossnitz in Moravia, Nov. 7th, 1846, received his
musical education in Vienna and is well known as a good pianist.  He
has composed different operas, of which however the above-mentioned is
the only popular one.

This charming little opera, which rendered its composer famous, has
passed beyond the frontiers of Germany and is now translated into
several languages.

The text is skillfully arranged, and so combined as to awaken our
interest.

{109}

The scene is laid in a village near Melun in the years between 1812 and
15.

Nicolas (or Cola) Pariset, an innkeeper, is betrothed to his cousin
Therese.  Unfortunately just on his wedding-day a sergeant, named
Bombardon, levies him for the army, which is to march against the
Russians.  Vainly does Therese plead for her betrothed, and equally in
vain is it that she is joined in her pleading by Nicolas' sister
Christine.  The latter is passionately attached to her brother, who has
hitherto been her only care.  Finally Christine promises to marry any
man who will go as substitute for her brother.  Gontran de l'Ancry, a
young nobleman, whose heart is touched by the maiden's tenderness and
beauty, places himself at Bombardon's disposal and receives from him
the golden cross, which Christine has placed in his hands, to be
offered as a pledge of fidelity to her brother's deliverer.  Christine
does not get to know him, as Gontran departs immediately.  The act
closes with Cola's marriage.

The second act takes place two years later.  Cola, who could not be
detained from marching against the enemy, has been wounded, but saved
from being killed by an officer, who received the bullet instead.  Both
return to Cola's house as invalids and are tended by the two women.
The strange officer, who is no other than Gontran, loves Christine and
she returns his passion, but deeming herself bound to another, she does
not betray her feeling.  Gontran is about to bid her farewell, but
{110} when in the act of taking leave, he perceives her love and tells
her that he is the officer, who was once substitute for her brother in
the war.

Christine is full of happiness; Gontran when asked for the token of her
promise, tells her, that the cross was taken from him, as he lay
senseless on the field of battle.  At this moment Bombardon, returning
also as invalid, presents the cross to Christine, and she believing
that Gontran has lied to her and that Bombardon is her brother's
substitute, promises her hand to him, with a bleeding heart, but
Bombardon relates that the true owner of the cross has fallen on the
battle-field and that he took it from the dead body.  Christine now
resolves to enter in a convent, when suddenly Gontran's voice is heard.
Bombardon recognizes his friend, whom he believed to be dead,
everything is explained and the scene ends with the marriage of the
good and true lovers.




THE TWO GRENADIERS.

Comic Opera in three acts by ALBERT LORTZING.

Text adapted from the French.


After a long interval of quiet Lortzing's charming music seems to be
brought to honor again and no wonder.--The ears of the public grow
overtired, or may we say over-taxed by Wagner's grand music, which his
followers still surpass, though only in noise and external effects;
they long for simplicity, for melody.  Well, Lortzing's operas overflow
with real, true, simple melody, and {111} generally in genuine good
humour.--For many years only two of his operas have been performed,
viz, "Undine" and "Czar and Zimmermann".--Now Hamburg has set the good
example, by representing a whole cyclus (seven operas of Lortzing's),
and Dresden has followed with the "Two Grenadiers."

The opera was composed in the year 1837 and is of French origin and
though its music breathes German humour and naivete, the French
influence may be felt clearly.  The persons show life and movement, the
music is light-hearted, graceful and truly comic.

The scene takes place in a little country-town, where we find Busch, a
wealthy inn-keeper, making preparations for the arrival of his only
son.  The young man had entered a Grenadier regiment at the age of
sixteen, ten years before, so the joyful event of his home-coming is
looked forward to with pleasure by his father and sister Suschen, but
with anxiety by a friend of hers, Caroline, to whom young Busch had
been affianced before joining his regiment.

Enter two young Grenadiers from the regiment on leave, the younger of
whom falls in love with Suschen at first sight.  However as the elder
Grenadier, Schwarzbart, dolefully remarks, they are both almost
pennyless and he reflects how he can possibly help them in their need.
His meditations are interrupted by the arrival of the landlord, who,
seeing the two knapsacks, and recognizing one of them as that of his
son, naturally supposes the owner to be his offspring, in which belief
he is {112} confirmed by Schwarzbart, who is induced to practice this
deceit, partly by the desire of getting a good dinner and the means of
quenching his insatiable thirst, partly by the hope of something
turning up in favour of his companion in arms, Wilhelm.  As a matter of
fact the knapsack does not belong to Wilhelm at all.  On leaving the
inn, at which the banquet following the wedding of one of their
comrades, had been held, the knapsacks had inadvertently been exchanged
much to Wilhelm's dismay, his own containing a lottery ticket which, as
he has just learnt, had won a great prize.  The supposed son is of
course received with every demonstration of affection by his fond
parent, but though submitting with a very good grace to the endearments
of his supposed sister--the maiden, with whom he had fallen in love so
suddenly--he resolutely declines being hugged and made much of by the
old landlord, this double-part being entirely distasteful to his
straightforward nature.  Nor does his affianced bride, the daughter of
the bailiff, fare any better, his affections being placed elsewhere,
and their bewilderment is only somewhat appeased by Schwarzbart's
explanation that his comrade suffers occasionally from weakness of the
brain.

In the next act Peter, a youth of marvellous stupidity and cousin of
the bailiff, presents himself in a woful plight, to which he has been
reduced by some soldiers at the same wedding festivities, and shortly
after Gustav, the real son appears on the scene.  He is a manly fellow,
full of tender {113} thoughts for his home.  Great is therefore his
surprise at finding himself repulsed by his own father, who not
recognizing him, believes him to be an impostor.  All the young man's
protestations are of no avail, for in his knapsack are found the papers
of a certain Wilhelm Stark, for whom he is now mistaken.--When silly
Peter perceives him, he believes him to be the Grenadier, who had so
ill-treated him at the wedding, though in reality it was Schwarzbart.
Gustav is shut up in a large garden-house of his father's; the small
town lacking a prison.

In the third act the Magistrate has found out that Wilhelm's papers
prove him to be the bailiff's son, being the offspring of his first
love ----, who had been with a clergyman, and who, after the death of
the bailiff's wife is vainly sought for by his father.  Of course this
changes everything for the prisoner, who is suddenly accosted
graciously by his gruff guardian Barsch, and does not know what to make
of his mysterious hints.

Meanwhile Caroline's heart has spoken for the stranger, who had
addressed her so courteously and chivalrously; she feels that, far from
being an impostor, he is a loyal and true-hearted young fellow and
therefore decides to liberate him.  At the same time enter Wilhelm with
Schwarzbart, seeking Suschen; Peter slips in for the same reason,
seeking her, for Suschen is to be his bride.  Gustav, (the prisoner)
hearing footsteps, blows out the candle, in order to save Caroline from
being recognized {114} and so they all run about in the dark, playing
hide and seek in an infinitely droll manner.  At last the bailiff,
having heard that his son has been found, comes up with the
inn-keeper.--The whole mystery is cleared up, and both sons embrace
their respective fathers and their brides.




HAMLET.

Grand Opera in five acts by AMBROISE THOMAS.

Text taken from SHAKESPEARE by MICHEL CARRE and JULES BARBIER.


Hamlet was first reproduced in Paris in 1868, a year after the
representation of Mignon, but it never reached the latter's popularity.
This is not due to the music, which is very fine, and even nobler than
in Mignon, but to the horrid mutilation of Shakespeare's glorious
tragedy, which almost turns into ridicule the most sublime thoughts.

The text is soon explained.  We find the Shakespearean name with their
thoughts and deeds turned into operatic jargon.

The first act shows Hamlet's disgust and pain at his mother's early
wedding with Claudius, King of Denmark, only two months after her first
husband's death.  Ophelia vainly tries to divert his somber thoughts,
he finds her love very sweet however, and when her brother Laertes,
before starting on a long journey commends her to his friends'
protection, Hamlet swears to be true to her unto death.

In the interview at midnight with his father's ghost, Hamlet
experiences great revulsion of feeling, when he discovers that his
mother's second {115} husband, is his father's murderer.  The ghost
urges Hamlet, to avenge his parent, which he swears to do.

In the second act we find Hamlet quite changed.  He not only avoids his
father and mother, but also shuns Ophelia, who vainly tries to
understand his strange behaviour.  Determined to find out the truth
about Claudius' guilt, Hamlet has paid some actor, to play the old
tragedy of Gonzaga's murder.  When the actor pours the poison into the
sleeping King's mouth Claudius sinks back half fainting, and Hamlet,
keenly observant, loudly accuses him of his father's death.  But he is
unable to act and after the King's escape he seeks his mother's room to
ponder on his wrongs.  Hidden behind a pillar he overhears from
Claudius' own lips that Ophelia's father, old Polonius is the King's
accomplice.  This destroys the last spark of his belief in humanity.
Thrusting the weeping Ophelia from him, he advises her to shut herself
into convent and to bid farewell to all earthly joys.  Left alone with
his mother he wildly reproaches her, and at last so far forgets
himself, that he is about to kill her, had not his father's ghost
appeared once more, exhorting him to take vengeance but to spare his
mother.

This scene is very powerful, the music of strange and weird beauty.--

In the fourth act poor demented Ophelia takes part in the plays of the
village-maidens.  The Swedish song she sings to them is full of sweet
pathos.  When her playmates leave her, she hides {116} among the
willows, enticed into the water by the "Neck" (Swedish for Sirens),
whose own song she has sung.  Slowly floating out on the waves her
voice dies away softly.  With her death the interest in the opera ends;
however a fifth act takes us to her grave, where the whole funeral
procession arrives.  The ghost once more appeals to Hamlet for
vengeance, until he rouses himself and runs his sword through Claudius,
after which the ghost disappears, while Hamlet is elected King of
Denmark on the spot.

The audience in German theatres is spared this last piece of absurdity
and the play is brought to a more appropriate close by Hamlet's
stabbing himself on his bride's bier.




HANSEL AND GRETEL.

A Fairytale in three pictures by ADELHEID WETTE.

Music by ENGELBERT HUMPERDINCK.


After a long period of "Sturm und Drang" we have an opera so fresh and
simple, that any child will delight in it!  It not only captivates
children and people of simple tastes; but, the most blases must
acknowledge its charms.  No thrilling drama, but a simple fairytale,
known in every nursery has achieved this wonder.  It is a revelation.
True music finds its way to the hearts, and how wonderfully refreshing
are these simple nursery songs, recalling days of sweet childhood, how
droll and truly realistic are these children in {117} their natural and
naive sauciness!  Here is no display of human passions; simply and
clearly the old fairytale goes on, embellished by the masterly way in
which the musician handles the modern orchestra.

The first act represents the miserable little hut of a broom-maker.
Hansel is occupied in binding brooms, Gretel is knitting and singing
old nursery-songs, such as "Susy, dear Susy, what rattles in the
straw."  Both children are very hungry, and wait impatiently for the
arrival of their parents.  Hansel is particularly bad-tempered, but the
merry and practical Gretel finding some milk in a pot, soon soothes his
ruffled feelings by the promise of a nice rice-pap in the evening.
Forgetting work and hunger, they begin to dance and frolic, until they
roll on the ground together.  At this moment their mother enters, and
seeing the children idle, her wrath is kindled, and she rushes at them
with the intention of giving them a sound whipping.  Alas instead of
Hansel she strikes the pot and upsets the milk.  The mother's vexation
cools and only sorrow remains, but she quickly puts a little basket
into Gretel's hands, and drives the children away, bidding them look
for strawberries in the woods.  Then sinking on a chair utterly
exhausted, she falls asleep.  She is awakened by her husband, who comes
in singing and very gay.  She sees that he has had a drop too much and
is about to reproach him, but the words die on her lips, when she sees
him unfold his treasures, consisting of eggs, bread, butter and coffee.
He tells her that he has {118} been very fortunate at the church-ale
(Kirmes), and bids her prepare supper at once.  Alas, the pot is
broken, and the mother relates, that finding the children idle, anger
got the better of her, and the pot was smashed to pieces.  He
goodnaturedly laughs at her discomfiture, but his merriment is changed
to grief, when he hears that their children are still in the forest,
perhaps even near the Ilsenstein, where the wicked fairy lives, who
entices children in order to bake and devour them.  This thought so
alarms the parents that they rush off, to seek the children in the
forest.

The second act is laid near the ill-famed Ilsenstein.  Hansel has
filled his basket with strawberries, and Gretel is winding a garland of
red hips, with which Hansel crowns her.  He presents her also with a
bunch of wild flowers and playfully does homage to this queen of the
woods.  Gretel enjoying the play, pops one berry after another into her
brother's mouth; then they both eat, while listening to the cuckoo.
Before they are aware of it, they have eaten the whole contents of the
basket and observe with terror, that it has grown too dark, either to
look for a fresh supply, or to find their way home.  Gretel begins to
weep and to call for her parents, but Hansel, rallying his courage,
takes her in his arms and soothes her, until they both grow sleepy.
The dustman comes, throwing his dust into their eyes, but before their
lids close, they say their evening-prayer; then they fall asleep and
the fourteen guardian-angels, whose {119} protection they invoked, are
seen stepping down the heavenly ladder to guard their sleep.

In the third act the morning dawns.  Crystal drops are showered on the
children by the angel of the dew, Gretel opens her eyes first and wakes
her brother with a song.  They are still entranced by the beautiful
angel-dream they have had, when suddenly their attention is aroused by
the sight of a little house, made entirely of cake and sugar.
Approaching it on tiptoe, they begin to break off little bits, but a
voice within calls out "Tip tap, tip tap, who raps at my house?"  "The
wind, the wind, the heavenly child" they answer continuing to eat and
to laugh nothing daunted.  But the door opens softly and out glides the
witch, who quickly throws a rope around Hansel's throat.  Urging the
children to enter her house, she tells her name, Rosina sweet-tooth.
The frightened children try to escape, but the fairy raises her staff
and by a magic charm keeps them spellbound.  She imprisons Hansel in a
small stable with a lattice-door, and gives him almonds and currants to
eat, then turning to Gretel, who has stood rooted to the spot, she
breaks the charm with a juniper bough, and compels her to enter the
house and make herself useful.

Believing Hansel to be asleep, she turns to the oven, and kindles the
fire, then breaking into wild glee she seizes a broom and rides on it
round the house singing, Gretel all the while observing her keenly.
Tired with her exertions the witch awakes {120} Hansel and bids him
show his finger, at which command Hansel stretches out a small piece of
wood.  Seeing him so thin, the witch calls for more food and while she
turns her back, Gretel quickly takes up the juniper bough, and speaking
the formula, disenchants her brother.  Meanwhile the witch turning to
the oven, tells Gretel, to creep into it, in order to see, if the
honey-cakes are ready, but the little girl, affecting stupidity begs
her, to show, how she is to get in.  The witch impatiently bends
forward and at the same moment Gretel assisted by Hansel, who has
escaped from his prison pushes her into the hot oven and slams the iron
door.--The wicked witch burns to ashes, while the oven cracks and roars
and finally falls to pieces.  With astonishment the brother and sister
see a long row of children, from whom the honey-crust has fallen off,
standing stiff and stark.  Gretel tenderly caresses one of them, who
opens his eyes and smiles.  She now touches them all, and Hansel,
seizing the juniper bough works the charm and recalls them to new life.
The cake-children thank them warmly, and they all proceed to inspect
the treasures of the house, when Hansel hears their parents calling
them.  Great is the joy of father and mother at finding their
beloved-ones safe and in the possession of a sweet little house.  The
old sorceress is drawn out of the ruins of the oven in form of an
immense honey-cake, whereupon they all thank Heaven for having so
visibly helped and protected them.




{121}

HANS HEILING.

Romantic Opera in three acts with a prelude, by HEINRICH MARSCHNER.

Text by EDUARD DEVRIENT.


The text to this opera, which was written by the celebrated actor and
sent to Marschner anonymously, so struck the composer by its beauty
that he adapted music to it, music which ought to be heard much oftener
on our stages, on account of its freshness and of its healthy dramatic
action, which never flags, but continues to interest and move the
hearer with ever-increasing effect till the end is reached.

The contents are as follows:

Hans Heiling, King of the gnomes, has fallen in love with a daughter of
the earth; the charming Anna.  This maiden, a poor country-girl in the
first freshness of youth, has been induced by her mother to consent to
a betrothal with the rich stranger, whom she esteems, but nothing more,
her heart not yet having been touched by love.

In the prelude we are introduced into the depths of earth, where the
gnomes work and toil incessantly carrying glittering stones, gold and
silver and accumulating all the treasures, on which men's hearts are
set.

Their King announces to them, that he will no longer be one of theirs;
he loves, and therefore he resigns his crown.  All the passionate
entreatings of his mother and of the gnomes are of no avail.  {122} At
the Queen's bidding he takes with him a magic book, without which he
should lose his power over the gnomes, and after giving to her beloved
son a set of luminous diamonds mother and son part, Heiling with joy in
his heart, the mother in tears and sorrow.

In the first act Heiling arises from the earth, for ever closing the
entrance to the gnomes.

Anna greets him joyously and Gertrud, her mother, heartily seconds the
welcome.  Heiling gives to his bride a golden chain, and Anna adorning
herself, thinks with pleasure, how much she will be looked at and
envied by her companions.  She fain would show herself at once and begs
Heiling to visit a public festival with her.  But Heiling by nature
serious and almost taciturn, refuses her request.  Anna pouts, but she
soon forgets her grief, when she sees the curious signs of erudition in
her lover's room.  Looking over the magic book, the leaves begin to
turn by themselves, quicker and quicker, the strange signs seem to
grow, to threaten her, until stricken with horrible fear Anna cries
out, and Heiling, turning to her, sees too late what she has done.
Angry at her curiosity, he pushes her away, but she clings to him with
fervent entreaties to destroy the dreadful book.  His love conquers his
reason; and he throws the last link which connects him with his past
into the fire.  A deep thunder-peal is heard.  Anna thanks him
heartily, but from this hour the seed of fear and distrust grows in her
heart.

{123}

Heiling, seeing her still uneasy, agrees to visit the festival with her
upon condition that she refrains from dancing.  She gladly promises,
but as soon as they come to the festival, Anna is surrounded by the
village-lads, who entreat her to dance.  They dislike the stranger, who
has won the fairest maiden of the village, and Conrad the hunter, who
has long loved Anna, is particularly hard on his rival.  He mocks him,
feeling that Heiling is not what he seems, and tries to lure Anna away
from his side.  At last Heiling grows angry, forbidding Anna once more
to dance.  She is wounded by his words and telling him abruptly, that
she is not married yet and that she never will be his slave, she leaves
him.

In despair Heiling sees her go away with Conrad, dancing and frolicking.

In the second act we find Anna in the forest.  She is in a deep
reverie; her heart has spoken, but alas, not for her bridegroom, whom
she now fears; it only beats for Conrad, who has owned his love to her.
Darkness comes on and the gnomes appear with their Queen, who reveals
to the frightened girl the origin of her bridegroom and entreats her to
give back the son to his poor bereft mother.  When the gnomes have
disappeared, Conrad overtakes Anna, and she tells him all, asking his
help against her mysterious bridegroom.  Conrad, seeing that she
returns his love, is happy.  He has just obtained a good situation and
will now be able to wed her.

{124}

He accompanies her home, where Gertrud welcomes them joyously, having
feared that Anna had met with an accident in the forest.

While the lovers are together, Heiling enters, bringing the bridal
jewels.  Mother Gertrud is dazzled, but Anna shrinks from her
bridegroom.  When he asks for an explanation, she tells him that she
knows of his origin.  Then all his hopes die within him, but determined
that his rival shall not be happy at his cost, he hurls his dagger at
Conrad and takes flight.

In the last act Heiling is alone in a ravine in the mountains.  He has
sacrificed everything and gained nothing.  Sadly he decides to return
to the gnomes.  They appear at his bidding, but they make him feel that
he no longer has any power over them, and by way of adding still
further to his sorrows they tell him that his rival lives and is about
to wed Anna.  Then indeed all seems lost to the poor dethroned King.
In despair and repentance he casts himself to the earth.  But the
gnomes, seeing that he really has abandoned all earthly hopes, swear
fealty to him once more and return with him to their Queen, by whom he
is received with open arms.

Meanwhile Conrad, who only received a slight wound from Heiling's
dagger and has speedily recovered, has fixed his wedding-day and we see
Anna, the happy bride in the midst of her companions, prepared to go to
church with her lover.  But when she looks about her, Heiling is at her
{125} side, come to take revenge.  Conrad would fain aid her, but his
sword breaks before it touches Heiling, who invokes the help of his
gnomes.  They appear, but at the same moment the Queen is seen,
exhorting her son to pardon and to forget.  He willingly follows her
away into his kingdom of night and darkness, never to see earth's
surface again.  The anxious peasants once more breathe freely and join
in common thanks to God.




HENRY THE LION.

Opera in four acts by EDMUND KRETSCHMER.


This opera has not had the same success as "The Folkungs", which may be
attributed in part to the subject, which is less attractive.
Nevertheless it has great merit, and has found its way to the larger
stages of Germany.  The libretto is written by Kretschmer himself.  The
background is in this instance also historical.

The scene which takes us back to the middle of the 12th century is
laid, in the first act, in Rome, in the second and fourth in Henry the
Lion's castle and in the third act on the coast of Ancona.

In the first act Henry's praise is sung; he has gained the victory for
his Emperor, Frederick Barbarossa, over the Italians.  Frederick
enters, thanking the Duke heartily for his fidelity and fortitude.  A
stranger, named Astoc, comes, prophesying an unhappy end to the
Emperor, if he continues to seek his laurels in strange lands.  To the
anger {126} of everybody Henry seconds him, entreating his Master to
return into his own country, where his presence is necessary.  The
Emperor rebukes him sternly, Henry grows hot, and is finally by order
of Frederick fettered and led away.

The second act shows the park in Henry's castle.  His lovely wife
Clementina, whose veil he wears on his helmet as a talisman, receives
the country-people, who come to congratulate her on the first
anniversary of her wedding-day.  Irmgard, sister-in-law of Duke Henry,
sees with envy how much Clementina is loved by everyone; she had
herself hoped to become Duchess of Saxony, and from the time when Henry
brought home his lovely bride, Irmgard has hated her.  Conrad von
Wettin, Henry's friend, appears in pilgrim's garb, to announce to the
lonely wife the sad news of her husband's captivity and she at once
resolves to travel to Ancona in order to entreat the Emperor's pardon.

Irmgard, thinking she sees in the disguised pilgrim, whose gait she
recognizes to be that of a knight, a lover of Clementina's, believes
that already the day of revenge is dawning.

In the third act the Emperor mourns the loss of his bravest hero, who
firmly refuses to retract his rash words.  A German song is heard, and
Conrad von Wettin presents a young minstrel to the homesick Prince.
The former begs for the favor of celebrating the coming festival in a
German song.  This is permitted and the festival begins.  {127} The
Anconites, whom Frederick delivered from their captivity, appear, to
thank him, then Henry the Lion is conducted to his presence and ordered
to ask his forgiveness.  But Henry repeats that he did nothing wrong in
telling the truth.  The Emperor decides to give him an hour for
reflection, after which if Henry does not bend his will, he shall be
banished.

When this hard sentence is heard, Clementina in minstrel's guise sings
her song of the German's fidelity to his Prince and his country, and of
his wife's faithfulness, and her highest glory.

The song so touches the Emperor, that he bids her ask a favor.  She
takes Henry the Lion's sword and buckler, which are lying near, and
handing them to the captive, entreats the Emperor to give him his
liberty and to pardon him.  Her request is granted by Frederick; and
Henry, shamed by his Prince's magnanimity, bends his knee, swearing
eternal fidelity to him.  From Henry the young minstrel only asks a
piece of the veil fastened round his helmet, in memory of his
deliverance.

The last act carries us back to Henry's castle, where the wife receives
her husband full of joy.  Clementina asks for the missing piece of
veil, and Henry tells her how he gave it away.  In the midst of this
intercourse horns sound and the Emperor appears with his whole suite.
He comes to recompense his hero, who has again won for him honor and
glory, with the duchy of Bavaria.  Henry presents his consort, as the
best and most {128} faithful of wives, when Irmgard steps forth,
accusing her sister-in law of faithlessness, and relating that she left
the castle with a young knight in pilgrim's attire, and only returned
when the news spread, that the Duke would come home victorious.
Clementina is too proud, to defend herself and forbids even Conrad von
Wettin to speak.

Everybody is convinced of her innocence, but her husband, always rash
and violent, turns from her, when she refuses to say nay, and banishing
her from his castle, casts his glove before Conrad von Wettin.

Clementina silently goes away, but soon reappears in her minstrel's
garb; with the piece of veil in her hand she sings the song, which they
heard in Ancona.  Now she is at once recognized and the opera ends with
a paean of praise to the faithfulness of German wives.




HERRAT.

Grand Opera in three acts by FELIX DRAESEKE.


The first representation of Herrat took place in Dresden on the 10th of
March 1892.  Its author is long known as one of the first living
composers, but his music is so serious, so extremely difficult in its
execution, that this is probably the cause, why his operas have been
almost unknown hitherto.  Like Wagner he did the libretto himself, like
him he chose his subject from the old "Heldensaga", but here all
likeness ends; there is no relation {129} between Draeseke and Wagner;
each goes his own way, each is an original genius.

The Amelungenlied a translation of which has appeared from Simrock,
bears great likeness to the Nibelungen; we even find in part the same
persons.  The subject is a bloody-one; love and heroism are the poles
which move it.  The music is grand, stern, sometimes sublime, but we
look vainly for grace and sweetness.  The libretto is rather poor, the
rhymes unmelodious and uneven; nevertheless the musical effect is deep
and lasting; the breath of a master-genius has brought it to life.

The first scene is laid in Etzel's (Attila's) castle Gran.  The King of
the Hun's best vassal, Dietrich of Bern has been severely wounded, and
sent by his Sire to Gran, that he might be tended by Queen Heike,
Etzel's wife.  Instead of taking care of the hero, she leaves him to
her maid Herlinde, who has nought but water at her disposition, while
the Queen nurses her kinsman Dietrich der Reusse, a prisoner of war.
The consequence of this is, that Etzel coming home finds his friend
sicker than before, while his enemy is well and strong.  Full of wrath
he orders the Queen to keep Dietrich den Reussen prisoner, without
leaving her any guards; should he escape, she is to be beheaded.

After Etzel's departure to the army Dietrich der Reusse escapes
notwithstanding the Queen's entreaties.--In her distress Heike turns to
the sore wounded Dietrich von Bern, who, though {130} bitterly cursing
her ingratitude rises from his sick-bed in order to pursue the fugitive.

In the second act Dietrich of Reuss arrives on foot at Saben's castle
in Esthonia.  (Saben is a usurper, who has dispossessed King Nentwin
and taken possession of his castle and his daughter Herrat.)
Dietrich's steed is dead, but hearing his pursuer close upon his heels
he takes refuge in an adjacent wood.  Herrat standing on a balcony, has
recognized him.  She sees him vanish with regret, because a prediction
told her, that a Dietrich would be her deliverer, but when another hero
comes up, she directs him to the wood, to which Dietrich has flown.
She hears the combat going on between the two, and soon the pursuer
comes back, telling her that his enemy is dead and begging for rest and
shelter.  When he tells her his name, she starts back, well knowing
that Saben, who has slain Dietrich's relatives, will not receive him
graciously.  She however accompanies him to a room, and determined to
protect him against Saben's wiles, she binds up his wounds and nurses
him tenderly.  Saben entering recognizes the Berner by his celebrated
helmet; he leaves the room telling Herrat to look well after such a
famous guest.  But Herrat's mind misgives her, she tries to rouse the
hero, who has sunk into the sleep of exhaustion, and not succeeding,
places his arms well within his reach.  When she is about to withdraw,
she sees Saben return with a band of assassins.  Their murmurs rouse
Dietrich, who defends himself bravely, {131} slaying one after another.
But his strength is failing, when suddenly a disguised youth rushes to
his assistance with eight well-armed companions.  Saben's men are
slain, Saben himself falls a victim to Dietrich's sword.  When the
youth unmasks Dietrich recognizes in his deliverer Herrat his sweet
nurse, whose likeness to his own dead wife Gotlinde has moved him from
the first.  She offers him her father's kingdom, which he though full
of love and gratitude, is loth to accept, as he only claims her heart
and hand.  But ambition urges him to accept her offer, and so he not
only obtains her hand but is proclaimed King of Esthonia.

The third act presents the camp of the Huns, pitched southwards of Gran
near the Danube.  Etzel has already twice granted respite to the Queen,
but as there is no trace of the two Dietrichs, Heike is now to be
executed.  Old Hildebrand, one of the Berner's followers is
particularly inimical to her, because he believes her to be the cause
of his beloved master's death.

Suddenly everybody's attention is attracted to a ship approaching the
camp.  Hildebrand, perceiving on it a hero in disguise, wearing
Dietrich's helmet, with Waldemar and Ilias, Etzel's enemies on his
side, calls the people to arms.  But when the foreign knight disembarks
and unmasking shows the face of Dietrich von Bern, everybody is full of
joy.  He brings the two hostile Kings as prisoners to Etzel and lays
the two crowns of Esthonia and of the Wiking country at his feet.

{132} Etzel's brow however remains somber; he sternly asks after
Dietrich von Reuss.  The Berner unwilling to sing his own praise, is
silent, when his wife Herrat steps forth, relating how her hero killed
his antagonist in Saben's woods.  Now at last Etzel relents; he draws
his wife to his breast in forgiveness, and all sing hail to Etzel and
Dietrich and to their Queens.




HOCHZEITSMORGEN.

(WEDDING'S MORNING.)

Opera in one act by KARL VON KASKEL.

Text by FRANZ KOPPEL-ELLFELD.


This opera, which was represented for the first time at the Royal Opera
in Dresden on April 29th, 1893, is the first attempt of its young
composer, and as such shows considerable talent, even genius.

Indeed it sins rather in too much than in too little invention; it
would seem that Kaskel's brain, overflowing with musical ideas, wanted
to put them all into this one first child of his muse.  This promises
well for the future, but it explains, why it lacks the great attraction
of Cavalleria with which it has some relation, without imitating it in
the least.  The hearer's attention is tired by too much and divided by
lack of unity.  Nevertheless the composer has understood how to make
the most of a somewhat weak libretto, and the manner in which the
musical interest increases from scene to scene is admirable in a
beginner.

{133}

The scene is laid in an Italian Frontier Fortress near Mentone at the
foot of Col di Tenda.  It may be added here, that the national
colouring is particularly well hit.

Giovanna, the daughter of Regina Negri an inn-keeper is betrothed to
Pietro Montalto, Captain of the Bersaglieri; and the wedding is fixed
for the following morning.  Before her betrothal Giovanna has carried
on a flirtation with Paolo Tosta, a wild fellow, who unfortunately took
the girl's play seriously, and seeing the friend of his childhood
estranged from him, has turned smuggler and head of a band of
Anarchists.  Giovanna is afraid of him, and trembles for her
bridegroom, whom she loves truly.

However, when she sees Paolo taken captive and sentenced to death by
her own lover, she implores the latter to deal mercifully with the
miscreant.  She has neglected to tell him of her early friendship for
the captive, and so Pietro, who does not understand her softness for
the ruffian refuses, his soldierly honour being at stake.  But at last
love conquers and Giovanna extracts a promise from him, to let the
prisoner escape during the night.

Left alone, Pietro's keen sense of duty reawakes and he leaves the
place without freeing the captive.

However Toto, a dealer in tobacco, Paolo's friend and helpmate in
smuggling arrives and releases him.  Instead of escaping Paolo seeks
Giovanna, and when she turns from him with loathing, he swears, either
to possess her, or to destroy her bridegroom.

{134}

On the following morning Pietro hears from Bastiano, the Bersaglieri
Sergeant, that the keys of the prison have been stolen, and the
prisoner has escaped.  Pietro rejoices, that this happened without his
own intervention and turns full of happiness to his bride, who stands
ready for the wedding.  The wedding-procession is slowly moving towards
church, when it is suddenly arrested by Paolo, who throws himself
between the lovers.  "Mine she was, before she knew you," he cries out,
"to me she swore eternal faith, which she has now falsely broken."
Giovanna, struck dumb by terror, is unable to defend herself.--Pietro
orders his men to recapture the ruffian, but quick as thought Paolo has
deprived the soldier nearest to him of his sabre and with the words
"Thou shalt die first," has thrust it towards Pietro.  Alas, it is
Giovanna's breast, he pierces; she has shielded her lover with her own
body.--With a sweet smile she turns to Pietro, who implores her to
speak.  "Pardon me," she sighs faintly, "he was long a stranger to my
heart; thee alone I loved, to thee I was faithful unto death."  With
those loving words she sinks back expiring.




LES HUGUENOTS.

Grand Opera in five acts by GIACOMO MEYERBEER.

Text by SCRIBE.


This is the best opera of this fertile composer, and one with which
only his "Robert le diable" can compare.  The music is not only
interesting, but highly {135} dramatic; the "mise en scene", the
brilliant orchestration, the ballet, everything is combined to
fascinate the hearer.  We find such an abundance of musical ideas, that
we feel Berlioz but spoke the truth, when he said that it would do for
twenty others of its kind.

The scene is laid in France, at the time of the bloody persecutions of
the Protestants or Huguenots by the Catholics.  The Duke of Medicis has
apparently made peace with Admiral Coligny, the greatest and most
famous of the Huguenots, and we are introduced into the castle of Count
Nevers, where the catholic noblemen receive Raoul de Nangis, a
protestant, who has lately been promoted to the rank of captain.
During their meal they speak of love and its pleasures, and everybody
is called on to give the name of his sweetheart.  Raoul begins, by
telling them, that once when taking a walk, he surprised a band of
students, molesting a lady in a litter.  He rescued her and as she
graciously thanked him for his gallant service, he thought her more
beautiful than any maiden he had ever before seen.  His heart burnt
with love for her, though he did not know her name.  While Raoul drinks
with the noblemen, Marcel, his old servant warns him of the danger of
doing so.

Marcel is a strict old protestant and sings a ballad of the Huguenots
to the young people, a song wild and fanatic.  They laugh at his
impotent wrath, when a lady is announced to Count Nevers, in whom Raoul
recognizes the lady of his dreams.

{136}

Of course he believes her false and bad, while as a matter of fact she
only comes to beseech Nevers, her destined bridegroom, to set her free.
Nevers does so, though not without pain.  When he returns to his
companions, he conceals the result of the interview, and presently
Urbain, a page, enters with a little note for Raoul de Nangis, in which
he is ordered to attend a lady, unknown to him.  The others recognize
the seal of Queen Margarita of Valois, and finding him so worthy, at
once seek to gain his friendship.

In the second act we find Raoul with the beautiful Queen, who is trying
to reconcile the Catholics with the Protestants.  To this end the Queen
has resolved to unite Raoul with Valentine, her lady of honor, and
daughter of the Count of St. Bris, a staunch catholic.  Valentine tells
her heart's secret to her mistress, for to her it was that Raoul
brought assistance, and she loves him.  The noble Raoul, seeing
Margarita's beauty and kindness, vows himself her knight, when suddenly
the whole court enters to render her homage.  Recognizing her at last
to be the Queen, Raoul is all the more willing to fulfil her wishes and
offers his hand in reconciliation to the proud St. Bris, promising to
wed his daughter.  But when he perceives in her the unknown lady, whom
he believes to be so unworthy, he takes back his word.  All are
surprised, and the offended father vows bloody vengeance.

In the third act Marcel brings a challenge to {137} St. Bris, which the
latter accepts, but Maurevert, a fanatical catholic nobleman, tells him
of other ways in which to annihilate his foe.  Valentine though deadly
offended with her lover, resolves to save him.  Seeing Marcel, she bids
him tell his master not to meet his enemy alone.  Meanwhile Raoul is
already on the spot, and so is St. Bris with four witnesses.  While
they fight, a quarrel arises between the catholic and the protestant
citizens, which is stopped by Queen Margarita.  The enemies accuse each
other, and when the Queen is in doubt as to whom she shall believe,
Valentine appears to bear witness.  Then Raoul hears that her interview
with Nevers had been but a farewell, sought for but to loosen forever
the ties which her father had formed for her against her will; but the
knowledge of his error comes too late, for St. Bris has once more
promised his daughter to Nevers, who at this moment arrives with many
guests, invited for the wedding.  The presence of the Queen preserves
peace between the different parties, but Raoul leaves the spot with
death in his heart.

In the fourth act the dreadful night of St. Bartholomew is already
beginning.

We find Valentine in her room despairing.  Raoul comes to take a last
farewell, but almost immediately St. Bris enters with a party of
Catholics and Raoul is obliged to hide in the adjoining room.  There he
hears the whole conspiracy for the destruction of the Protestants,
beginning with their leader, Admiral Coligny.  The Catholics all assent
{138} to this diabolical plot; Nevers alone refuses to soil his honor,
and swears only to fight in open battle.  The others, fearing treason,
decide to bind and keep him prisoner until the next morning.  Raoul
prepares to save his brethren or die with them.  Vain are Valentine's
entreaties; though she confesses to her love for him, he yet leaves
her, though with a great effort, to follow the path of duty.

In the last act Raoul rushes pale and bloody into the hall, where Queen
Margarita sits with her husband, Henry of Navarre, surrounded by the
court; He tells them of the terrific events, which are going on
outside, and beseeches their help.  It is too late however, Coligny has
already fallen, and with him most of the Huguenots.

Raoul meets Valentine once more; she promises to save him, if he will
go over to her faith.  But Marcel reminds him of his oath, and
Valentine, seeing that nothing can move her lover's fortitude and
firmness, decides to remain with him.  She accepts his creed and so
they meet death together, Valentine falling by the side of her deadly
wounded lover, both praising God with their last breath.




IDLE HANS.

(DER FAULE HANS.)

Opera in one act by A. RITTER.

Text after a poetic tale by FELIX DAHN.


The composer of this hitherto unknown opera is no young man.  He is
over sixty, and his well deserved fame reaches him but tardily.
Alexander {139} Ritter, a relation and a true friend of Wagner's, was
one of the few, who gave his help to the latter when he fled to
Switzerland poor and abandoned.  Though a warm admirer of Wagner's
music, Ritter is not his echo.  His music, saturated with the modern
spirit is absolutely independant and original.  His compositions are
not numerous; two operas and a few songs are almost all he did for
immortality, but they all wear the stamp of a remarkable talent.  "Idle
Hans" is a dramatic fairy-tale of poetical conception.  Its strength
lies in the orchestra, which is wonderfully in tune with the different
situations.  After having been represented in Weimar ten years ago, the
opera fell in oblivion, from which it has now come forth, and was given
on the Dresden stage on Nov. 9th 1892.  It has met with unanimous
approval from all those, who understand fine and spiritual music.

The plot is soon told.

Count Hartung has seven sons, all grown up after his own heart except
the youngest, Hans, called the Idle, who prefers basking in the
sunshine and dreaming away his life to hunting and fighting.  He is a
philosopher, and a true type of the German, patient, quiet and
phlegmatic, who does not deem it worth his while to move a finger for
all the shallow doings of the world in general, and his brothers in
particular.  The son's idleness so exasperates his father, that he
orders him to be chained like a criminal to a huge oaken post standing
in the courtyard, forbidding anybody under {140} heavy penalty, to
speak to him.  His brothers pity him, but they obey their father.

Left alone, Hans sighs after his dead mother, who so well understood
him, and who had opened his eyes and heart to an ideal world, with all
that is good and noble.  Far from loathing his father, he only bewails
the hardness of him, for whose love he craves in vain.  At last he
falls asleep.  Seeing this the maid servants come to mock him (by the
bye a delightful piece of music is this chatter-chorus).  When Hans has
driven away the impudent hussies, his brother Ralph the Singer
approaches to assure him of his unvarying love.--He is the only-one who
believes in Hans' worth, and now tries hard to rouse him into activity,
for he has heard, that the Queen is greatly oppressed by her enemies,
the Danes.  But Hans remains unmoved, telling him quietly to win his
laurels without him.  In the midst of their colloquy the Herald's voice
announces that the battle is lost, and that the Queen is coming to the
castle, a fugitive.  The old Count descends from his tower to assemble,
his sons and his vassals.  Hardly are they ready, when the Queen rides
up to ask for protection.  The gate closes behind her and the old Count
does homage, while Hans, still lying idle on his straw, stares at her
beauty with new awakened interest.  But the enemy is coming nearer; all
the Count's well-trained soldiers are defeated, and already Harald, the
Danish King peremptorily orders them to surrender.  Now Hans {141}
awakes.  His effort to break his chain excites the Queen's attention,
who asks the old Count, for what crime the beautiful youth is punished
so severely.  The father disowns his son but at this moment the gate
gives way and in rushes Harald, who is met by old Hartung.  Alas the
Count's sword breaks in pieces.  With the cry, "Now it is worth while
acting" Hans breaks his fetters and brandishing the oaken post to which
he was chained, he fells Harald to the ground with one mighty stroke.
Konrad the valet fetters the giant, and Hans slays every one, who tries
to enter; then rushing out, delivers his brothers and puts the whole
army to flight.  Then he returns to the Queen who has witnessed his
deeds with a heart full of deep admiration and swears allegiance.
Heartily thanking him, she only now hears, that the young hero is
Hartung's son, and full of gratitude she offers him one half of her
kingdom.  But Hans the Idler does not care for a crown; it is her own
sweet self he wants, and boldly he claims her hand.  Persuaded to have
found in him a companion for life as true and loyal as ever lived, she
grants him her heart and kingdom.




IDOMENEUS.

Opera in three acts by W. A. MOZART.

Text by ABBATE GIANBATTISTA VARESCO.


This opera, which Mozart composed in his twenty-fifth year for the
Opera-seria in Munich, was represented in the year 1781, and won
brilliant success.

{142}

It is the most remarkable composition of Mozart's youthful age, and
though he wrote it under Gluck's influence, there is many a spark of
his own original genius, and often he breaks the bonds of conventional
form and rises to heights hitherto unanticipated.  The public in
general does not estimate the opera very highly, in consequence
Idomeneus was only represented in Dresden, after the long interval of
21 years, to find the house empty and the applause lukewarm.  But the
true connoisseur of music ought not to be influenced by public opinion,
for though the action does not warm the hearer, the music is at once
divinely sweet and harmonious; no wild excitement, no ecstatic
feelings, but music pure and simple, filling the soul with sweet
content.

The scene takes place in Cydonia, on the isle of Crete soon after the
end of the Trojan war.--

In the first act Ilia, daughter of Priam, bewails her unhappy fate, but
won by the magnanimity of Idamantes, son of Idomeneus, King of Crete,
who relieves the captive Trojans from their fetters, she begins to love
him, much against her own will.  Electra, daughter of Agamemnon, who
also loves Idamantes perceives with fury his predilection for the
captive princess and endeavours to regain his heart.

Arbaces, the High-Priest enters, to announce that Idomeneus has
perished at sea in a tempest.  All bewail this misfortune and hasten to
the strand to pray to the gods for safety.

{143}

But Idomeneus is not dead.  Poseidon, whose help he invoked in his
direst need, has saved him, Idomeneus vowing to sacrifice to the God
the first mortal whom he should encounter on landing.--Unfortunately it
is his own son, who comes to the strand to mourn for his beloved
father.--Idomeneus, having been absent during the siege of Troy for ten
years, at first fails to recognize his son.  But when the truth dawns
on both, the son's joy is as great as the father's misery.  Terrified
the latter turns from the aggrieved and bewildered Idamantes.
Meanwhile the King's escort has also safely landed and all thank
Poseidon for their delivery.

In the second act Idomeneus takes counsel with Arbaces, and resolves to
send his son away, in order to save him from the impending evil.  The
King speaks to Ilia, whose love for Idamantes he soon divines.  This
only adds to his poignant distress.--Electra, hearing that she is to
accompany Idamantes to Argos is radiant, hoping that her former lover
may then forget Ilia.  They take a tender farewell from Idomeneus, but
just when they are about to embark, a dreadful tempest arises, and a
monster emerges from the waves, filling all present with awe and terror.

In the third act Idamantes seeks Ilia to bid her farewell.  Not
anticipating the reason of his father's grief, which he takes for hate,
he is resolved to die for his country, by either vanquishing the
dreadful monster, sent by Poseidon's wrath, or by perishing in the
combat.

{144}

Ilia, unable to conceal her love for him any longer, bids him live,
live for her.  In his new-found happiness Idamantes forgets his grief,
and when his father surprises the lovers, he implores him to calm his
wrath, and rushes away, firmly resolved to destroy the monster.--

With terrible misgivings Idomeneus sees Arbaces approach, who announces
that the people are in open rebellion against him.  The King hastens to
the temple, where he is received with remonstrances by the High-Priest,
who shows him the horrid ravages, which Poseidon's wrath has achieved
through the monster; he entreats him to name the victim for the
sacrifice and to satisfy the wishes of the God.  Rent by remorse and
pain Idomeneus finally names his son.

All are horror-stricken, and falling on their knees, they crave
Poseidon's pardon.--While they yet kneel, loud songs of triumph are
heard, and Idamantes returns victorious from his fight with the monster.

With noble courage he throws himself at his father's feet, imploring
his benediction and--his death.  For having heard of his father's
unhappy vow, he now comprehends his sorrow, and endeavours to lessen
his grief.

Idomeneus, torn by conflicting feelings at last is about to grant his
son's wish, but when he lifts his sword, Ilia throws herself between,
imploring him to let her be the victim.  A touching scene ensues
between the lovers, but Ilia gains her point.  {145} Just when she is
about to receive her death-stroke, Poseidon's pity is at last aroused.
In thunder and lightning he decrees, that Idomeneus is to renounce his
throne in favor of Idamantes, for whose spouse he chooses Ilia.

In a concluding scene we see Electra tormented by the furies of hate
and jealousy.  Idomeneus fulfils Poseidon's request, and all invoke the
God's benediction on the happy Royal house of Crete.




JEAN DE PARIS.

Comic Opera in three acts by ADRIEN BOIELDIEU.

Text by St. JUST.


After a lapse of many years this spirited little opera has again been
put upon the stage and its success has shown, that true music never
grows old.

Next to the "Dame blanche" Jean de Paris is decidedly the best of
Boieldieu's works; the music is very graceful, fresh and lively, and
the plot, though simple and harmless is full of chivalric honor and
very winning.

The scene takes us back to the 17th century and we find ourselves in an
inn of the Pyrenees.

The young and beautiful Princess of Navarre being widowed and her year
of mourning having passed, is induced by her brother, the King of
Navarre, to marry again.  The French Crown-Prince has been selected by
the two courts as her future husband, but both parties are of a
somewhat romantic turn of mind and desire to know each other, before
being united for life.

{146}

For this purpose the Prince undertakes a journey to the Pyrenees, where
he knows the Princess to be.

In the first scene we see preparations being made for the reception of
the Princess, whose arrival has been announced by her Seneshal.  In the
midst of the bustle there enters a simple Page to demand rooms for his
master.  As he is on foot the host treats him spitefully, but his
daughter Lorezza, pleased with his good looks, promises him a good
dinner.  While they are still debating, the numerous suite of the
Prince comes up and without further ado takes possession of the house
and stables, which have been prepared for the Princess and her people.
The host begins to feel more favorably inclined towards the strange
Seigneur, though he does not understand, how a simple citizen of Paris
(this is the Prince's incognito), can afford such luxury.

By the time "Monsieur Jean de Paris" arrives the host's demeanour has
entirely changed and seeing two large purses with gold, he abandons the
whole house to the strange guest, hoping that he shall have prosecuted
his journey before the arrival of the Princess.  But he has been
mistaken, for no sooner are Jean de Paris' people quartered in the
house, than the Seneshal, a pompous Spanish Grandee arrives, to
announce the coming of the Princess.  The host is hopelessly
embarrassed and the Seneshal rages at the impudence of the citizen, but
Jean de Paris quietly intimates, that the house {147} and everything in
it are hired by him, and courteously declares, that he will play the
host and invite the Princess to his house and dinner.

While the Seneshal is still stupefied by such unheard-of impudence, the
Princess arrives, and at once takes everybody captive by her grace and
loveliness.  Jean de Paris is fascinated and the Princess who instantly
recognizes in him her future bridegroom, is equally pleased by his
appearance, but resolves to profit and to amuse herself by her
discovery.

To the Seneshal's unbounded surprise she graciously accepts Jean's
invitation.

In the second act the preparations for the dinner of the honored guests
have been made.  Olivier the Page shows pretty Lorezza the minuets of
the ladies at court, and she dances in her simple country-fashion,
until Olivier seizes her and they dance and sing together.

Jean de Paris stepping in, sings an air in praise of God, beauty and
chivalry and when the Princess appears, he leads her to dinner, to the
unutterable horror of the Seneshal.  Dinner, service, plate, silver,
all is splendid and all belongs to Jean de Paris, who sings a tender
minstrel's-song to the Princess; she sweetly answers him, and telling
him, that she has already chosen her knight, who is true, honest and of
her own rank, makes him stand on thorns for a while, lest he be too
late,--until he perceives that she only teazes in order to punish him
for his own comedy.  Finally they are {148} enchanted with each other,
and when the people come up, the Prince, revealing his true name,
presents the Princess as his bride, bidding his suite render homage to
their mistress.  The Seneshal humbly asks forgiveness, and all unite in
a chorus in praise of the beautiful pair.




JESSONDA.

Opera in three acts by LOUIS SPOHR.

Text by HENRY GEHE.


Spohr wrote this opera by way of inauguration to his charge as master
of the court-chapel at Cassel, and with it he added to the fame, which
he had long before established as master of the violin and first-rate
composer.  His music is sublime, and sheds a wealth of glory on the
somewhat imperfect text.

The story introduces us to Goa on the coast of Malabar at the beginning
of the 16th century.

A Rajah has just died and is bewailed by his people, and Jessonda, his
widow, who was married to the old man against her will, is doomed to be
burnt with him, according to the country's laws.  Nadori, a young
priest of the God Brahma is to announce her fate to the beautiful young
widow.  But Nadori is not a Brahmin by his own choice; he is young and
passionate, and though it is forbidden to him to look at women, he at
once falls in love with Jessonda's sister Amazili, whom he meets when
on his sad errand.  He promises to help her in saving her beloved
sister from a terrible death.

{149}

Jessonda meanwhile hopes vainly for the arrival of the Portuguese
General, Tristan d'Acunha, to whom she pledged her faith long ago, when
a cruel fate separated her from him.  She knows that the Portuguese are
at this moment besieging Goa, which formerly belonged to them.
Jessonda is accompanied by her women through the Portuguese camp, to
wash away in the floods of the Ganges the last traces of earthliness.
She sacrifices a rose to her early love.

Turning back into the town, she is recognized by Tristan, but alas, a
truce forbids him to make an assault on the town in order to deliver
his bride.  Jessonda is led back in triumph by the High-priest Daudon,
to die an untimely death.

In the third act Nadori visits Tristan in secret, to bring the welcome
news that Daudon himself broke the truce, by sending two spies into the
enemy's camp to burn their ships.  This act of treachery frees Tristan
from his oath.  Nadori conducts him and his soldiers through
subterranean passages into the temple, where he arrives just in time to
save Jessonda from the High-priest's sword.  She gives him hand and
heart, and Nadori is united to her sister Amazili.




INGRID.

Opera in two acts by KARL GRAMANN.

Text by T. KERSTEN.


Ingrid is a musical composition of considerable interest, the local
tone and colouring being so well {150} hit.  It is a Norwegian picture
with many pretty and original customs, to which the music is well
adapted and effective, without being heart-stirring.

The scene is laid in Varoe in Norway.  Helga the rich Norwegian peasant
Wandrup's daughter is to wed Godila Swestorp, her cousin, and the most
desirable young man in the village.  She entertains but friendly
feelings for him while her heart belongs to a young German traveller,
and Godila, feeling that she is different from what she was, keeps
jealous watch over her, and swears to destroy his rival.

In the second scene Ingrid, a young girl (coach-maid), whose business
it is to direct the carioles from station to station, drives up with
the German Erhard, who meeting with a severe accident in the mountains,
is saved by her courage.  Full of tenderness she dresses his wounds; he
thanks her warmly, and presents her with a miniature portrait of his
mother.  She mistakes her gratitude for love, and it fills her with
happiness, which is instantly destroyed, when Helga appears and sinks
on the breast of her lover.  Ingrid, a poor orphan, who never knew
father or mother, is deeply disappointed and bitterly reproaches heaven
for her hard fate.  The scene is witnessed by old father Wandrup, in
whose heart it arouses long buried memories and he tries to console
Ingrid.  But when she claims the right to hear more of her parents he
only says, that she was found a babe at his threshold {151} twenty-five
years ago, and that nothing was ever heard of her father and mother.

The second act opens with a pretty national festival, in which the
youths and maidens, adorned with wild carnations wend their way in
couples to Ljora (love's-bridge in the people's mouth), from whence
they drop their flowers into the foaming water.  If they chance to be
carried out to sea together, the lovers will be united, if not, woe to
them, for love and friendship will die an untimely death.--Godila tries
to offer his carnations to Helga, but she dextrously avoids him, and
succeeds in having a short interview with Erhard, with whom she is to
take flight on a ship, whose arrival is just announced.  Erhard goes
off to prepare everything, and a few minutes afterwards Helga comes out
of the house in a travelling dress.  But Godila, who has promised
Wandrup to watch over his daughter, detains her.

Wild with love and jealousy he strains her to his breast and drags her
towards the Ljora-bridge.  Helga vainly struggles against the madman,
but Ingrid, who has witnessed the whole occurence, waves her white
kerchief in the direction of the ship, and calls back Erhard, who is
just in time to spring on the bridge, when its railing gives way, and
Godila, who has let Helga fall at the approach of his enemy, is
precipitated into the waves.  Erhard tries to save him, but is
prevented by Ingrid, who intimates that all efforts would be useless.
Helga in a swoon is carried to the House, when Wandrup, {152} seeing
his child wounded and apparently lifeless, calls Godila, and hears with
horror that his body has been found dashed to pieces on the rocks.  Now
the father's wrath turns against Erhard, in whom he sees Godila's
murderer, but Ingrid, stepping forth, relates how the catastrophe
happened, and how Godila seemed to be punished by heaven for his attack
on Helga.  Everybody is touched by poor despised Ingrid's
unselfishness, she even pleads for Helga's union with Erhard, nobly
renouncing her own claims on his love and gratitude.  Wandrup relents
and the happy lovers go on the Ljora-bridge, whence their carnations
float out to sea side by side.  The ship's departure is signalled, and
all accompany the lovers on board.  Only Ingrid remains.  Her strength
of mind has forsaken her; a prey to wild despair she resolves to
destroy herself.  Taking a last look at Erhard's gift, the little
medallion-picture, she is surprised by Wandrup, who recognizes in it
his own dead love.  "She is thy mother too Ingrid", he cries out.  "My
mother, she, and Erhard my brother!"--This is too much for Ingrid; with
an incoherent cry she rushes on the bridge intending to throw herself
over.  But Wandrup beseechingly stretches out his arms, crying "Ingrid,
stay, live for thy father".  At first the unhappy girl shrinks back,
but seeing the old man's yearning love she sinks on her knees, then
slowly rising, she returns to her father, who folds her in loving
embrace.




{153}

IPHIGENIA IN AULIS.

Grand Opera in three acts by GLUCK.

Text of the original rearranged by R. WAGNER.


This opera, though it does not stand from the point of view of the
artist on the same level with Iphigenia in Tauris, deserves
nevertheless to be represented on every good stage.  It may be called
the first part of the tragedy, and Iphigenia in Tauris very beautifully
completes it.  The music is sure to be highly relished by a cultivated
hearer, characterized as it is by a simplicity which often rises into
grandeur and nobility of utterance.

The first scene represents Agamemnon rent by a conflict between his
duty and his fatherly love; the former of which demands the sacrifice
of his daughter, for only then will a favorable wind conduct the Greeks
safely to Ilion.  Kalchas, the High-priest of Artemis, appears to
announce her dreadful sentence.  Alone with the King, Kalchas vainly
tries to induce the unhappy father to consent to the sacrifice.

Meanwhile Iphigenia, who has not received Agamemnon's message, which
ought to have prevented her undertaking the fatal journey, arrives with
her mother Klytemnestra.  They are received with joy by the people.
Agamemnon secretly informs his spouse, that Achilles, Iphigenia's
betrothed, has proved unworthy of her, and that she is to return to
Argos at once.--Iphigenia gives way to her feelings.  Achilles appears,
the lovers are soon reconciled and prepare to celebrate their nuptials.

{154}

In the second act Iphigenia is adorned for her wedding and Achilles
comes to lead her to the altar, when Arkas, Agamemnon's messenger,
informs them that death awaits Iphigenia.

Klytemnestra in despair appeals to Achilles and the bridegroom swears
to protect Iphigenia.  She alone is resigned in the belief, that it is
her father's will that she should face this dreadful duty.  Achilles
reproaches Agamemnon wildly and leaves the unhappy father a prey to
mental torture.  At last he decides to send Arkas at once to Mykene
with mother and daughter and to hide them there, until the wrath of the
goddess be appeased.  But it is too late.

In the third act the people assemble before the Royal tent and with
much shouting and noise demand the sacrifice.  Achilles in vain
implores Iphigenia to follow him.  She is ready to be sacrificed, while
he determines to kill anyone, who dares touch his bride.  Klytemnestra
then tries everything in her power to save her.  She offers herself in
her daughter's stead and finding it of no avail at last sinks down in a
swoon.  The daughter, having bade her an eternal farewell, with quiet
dignity allows herself to be led to the altar.  When her mother awakes,
she rages in impotent fury; then she hears the people's hymn to the
goddess, and rushes out to die with her child.--The scene changes.--The
High-priest at the altar of Artemis is ready to pierce the innocent
victim.  A great tumult arises, Achilles with his native Thessalians
makes his way through {155} the crowd, in order to save Iphigenia, who
loudly invokes the help of the goddess.  But at this moment a loud
thunder-peal arrests the contending parties, and when the mist, which
has blinded all, has passed, Artemis herself is seen in a cloud with
Iphigenia kneeling before her.

The goddess announces that it is Iphigenia's high mind, which she
demands and not her blood, she wishes to take her into a foreign land,
where she may be her priestess and atone for the sins of the blood of
Atreus.

A wind favorable to the fleet has risen, and the people filled with
gratitude and admiration behold the vanishing cloud and praise the
goddess.




IPHIGENIA IN TAURIS.

Opera in four acts by GLUCK.

Text by GUILLARD.


Gluck's Iphigenia stands highest among his dramatic compositions.  It
is eminently classic and so harmoniously finished, that Herder called
its music sacred.

The libretto is excellent.  It follows pretty exactly the Greek
original.

Iphigenia, King Agamemnon's daughter, who has been saved by the goddess
Diana (or Artemis) from death at the altar of Aulis, has been carried
in a cloud to Tauris, where she is compelled to be High-priestess in
the temple of the barbarous Scythians.  There we find her, after having
performed her cruel service for fifteen years.--Human {156} sacrifices
are required, but more than once she has saved a poor stranger from
this awful lot.

Iphigenia is much troubled by a dream, in which she saw her father
deadly wounded by her mother and herself about to kill her brother
Orestes.  She bewails her fate, in having at the behest of Thoas, King
of the Scythians, to sacrifice two strangers, who have been thrown on
his shores.  Orestes and his friend Pylades, for these are the
strangers, are led to death, loaded with chains.

Iphigenia, hearing that they are her countrymen, resolves to save at
least one of them, in order to send him home to her sister Electra.
She does not know her brother Orestes, who having slain his mother, has
fled, pursued by the furies, but an inner voice makes her choose him as
a messenger to Greece.  A lively dispute arises between the two
friends; at last Orestes prevails upon Iphigenia to spare his friend,
by threatening to destroy himself with his own hands, his life being a
burden to him.  Iphigenia reluctantly complies with his request, giving
the message for her sister to Pylades.

In the third act Iphigenia vainly tries to steel her heart against her
victim.  At last she seizes the knife, but Orestes' cry: "So you also
were pierced by the sacrificial steel, O my sister Iphigenia!" arrests
her; the knife falls from her hands, and there ensues a touching scene
of recognition.

Meanwhile Thoas, who has heard that one of the strangers was about to
depart, enters the temple with his body-guard, and though Iphigenia
tells {157} him, that Orestes is her brother and entreats him so spare
Agamemnon's son, Thoas determines to sacrifice him and his sister
Iphigenia as well.  But his evil designs are frustrated by Pylades,
who, returning with several of his countrymen, stabs the King of
Tauris.  The goddess Diana herself appears and helping the Greeks in
their fight, gains for them the victory.  Diana declares herself
appeased by Orestes' repentance and allows him to return to Mykene with
his sister, his friend and all his followers.




JOSEPH IN EGYPT.

Opera in three acts by ETIENNE HENRY MEHUL.

Text after ALEXANDER DUVAL.


This opera, which has almost disappeared from the French stage, is
still esteemed in Germany and always will be so, because, though clad
in the simplest garb, and almost without any external outfit, its music
is grand, noble and classic; it equals the operas of Gluck, whose
influence may be traced, but it is free from all imitation.  Here we
have true music, and the deep strain of patriarchal piety so touching
in the Biblical recital finds grand expression.

Joseph, the son of Jacob, who was sold by his brothers, has by his
wisdom saved Egypt from threatening famine; he resides as governor in
Memphis under the name of Cleophas.  But though much honored by the
King and all the people, he never ceases to long for his old father,
whose favorite child he was.

{158}

Driven from Palestine by this same famine, Jacob's sons are sent to
Egypt to ask for food and hospitality.  They are tormented by pangs of
conscience, which Simeon is hardly able to conceal, when they are
received by the governor, who at once recognized them.  Seeing their
sorrow and repentance, he pities them, and promises to receive them all
hospitably.  He does not reveal himself but goes to meet his youngest
brother Benjamin and his blind father, whose mourning for his lost son
has not been diminished by the long years.  Joseph induces his father
and brother to partake in the honors, which the people render to him.
The whole family is received in the governor's palace, where Simeon
consumed by grief and conscience-stricken at last confesses to his
father the selling of Joseph.  Full of horror Jacob curses and disowns
his ten sons.  But Joseph intervenes.  Making himself known, he grants
full pardon and entreats his father to do the same.

The old man yields, and together they praise God's providence and
omnipotence.




IRRLICHT.

(WILL-O'-THE WISP.)

Opera in one act by KARL GRAMANN.

Text by KURT GEUCKE.


With "Irrlicht" the composer takes a step towards verisme; both,
subject and music are terribly realistic, though without the last shade
of triviality.  The music is often of brilliant dramatic effect, {159}
and the fantastic text, well matching the music, is as rich in
thrilling facts as any modern Italian opera.  Indeed this seems to be
by far the best opera, which the highly gifted composer has written.

The scene is laid on a pilot's station on the coast of Normandy.  A
pilot-boat has been built and is to be baptized with the usual
ceremonies.  Tournaud, an old ship-captain expects his daughter
Gervaise back from a stay in Paris.  He worships her, and when she
arrives, he is almost beside himself with joy and pride.  But Gervaise
is pale and sad, and hardly listens to gay Marion, who tells her of the
coming festival.--Meanwhile all the fisher-people from far and near
assemble to participate in the baptism, and Andre, who is to be captain
of the boat, is about to choose a god-mother amongst the fair maidens
around, when he sees Gervaise coming out of the house, where she has
exchanged her travelling garb for a national-dress.  Forgotten are all
the village-lasses, and Andre chooses Gervaise, who reluctantly
consents to baptize the boat, and is consequently received very
ungraciously by the maidens and their elders.  She blesses the boat
which sails off among the cheers of the crowd with the simple words:
"God bless thee".  Andre, who loves Gervaise with strong and
everlasting affection turns to her full of hope.  He is gently but
firmly rebuked, and sadly leaves her, while Gervaise is left to her own
sad memories, which carry her back to the short happy time, when she
was loved and won and alas {160} forsaken by a stranger of high
position.  Marion, who loves Andre hopelessly, vainly tries to brighten
up her companion.  They are all frightened by the news of a ship being
in danger at sea.  A violent storm has arisen, and when Maire Grisard,
the builder of the yacht pronounces her name "Irrlicht," Gervaise
starts with a wild cry.  The ship is seen battling with the waves,
while Andre rushes in to bring Gervaise a telegraphic dispatch from
Paris.  It tells her, that her child is at death's door.  Tournaud,
catching the paper, in a moment guesses the whole tragedy of his
daughter's life.  In his shame and wrath he curses her, but all her
thoughts are centered on the ship, on which the count, her child's
father is struggling against death.  She implores Andre to save him,
but he is deaf to her entreaties.  Then she rushes off to ring the
alarm-bell, but nobody dares to risk his life in the storm.  At last,
seeing all her efforts vain, she looses a boat, and drives out alone
into night and perdition.  As soon as Andre perceives her danger, he
follows her.  At this moment a flash of lightning which is followed by
a deafening crash shows the Yacht rising out of the waves for the last
time, and then plunging down into a watery grave forever.--The whole
assembly sink on their knees in fervent prayer, which is so far
granted, that Andre brings back Gervaise unhurt.  She is but in a deep
swoon, and her father, deeply touched, pardons her.  When she opens her
eyes, and shudderingly understands that her sacrifice was fruitless,
she takes a little {161} flask of poison from her bosom and slowly
empties it.  Then, taking a last farewell of the home of her childhood
and of her early love, she recommends Marion to Andre's care.  By this
time the poison has begun to take effect and the poor girl, thinking
that in the waving willow branches she sees the form of her lover,
beckoning to her, sighs "I come beloved" and sinks back dead.




LA JUIVE (THE JEWESS).

Grand Opera in five acts by HALEVY.

Text by EUGENE SCRIBE.


This opera created a great sensation when it first appeared on the
stage of the Grand Opera at Paris in the year 1835, and it has never
lost its attraction.  It was one of the first grand operas to which
brilliant mise en scene, gorgeous decorations etc., added success.

Halevy's great talent lies in orchestration, which is here rich and
effective; his style, half French, half Italian, is full of beautiful
effects of a high order.

The libretto is one of the best which was ever written by the dexterous
and fertile Scribe.

The scene of action is laid in Constance, in the year 1414 during the
Council.

In the first act the opening of the Council is celebrated with great
pomp.

The Catholics, having gained a victory over the Hussites, Huss is to be
burnt, and the Jews, equally disliked, are oppressed and put down still
{162} more than before.  All the shops are closed, only Eleazar, a rich
Jewish jeweller has kept his open, and is therefore about to be
imprisoned and put to death, when Cardinal de Brogni intervenes, and
saves the Jew and his daughter Recha from the people's fury.  The
Cardinal has a secret liking for Eleazar, though he once banished him
from Rome.  He hopes to gain news from him of his daughter, who was
lost in early childhood.  But Eleazar hates the Cardinal bitterly.
When the mob is dispersed, Prince Leopold, the Imperial
Commander-in-Chief, approaches Recha.  Under the assumed name of Samuel
he has gained her affections, and she begs him to be present at a
religious feast, which is to take place that evening at her father's
house.  The act closes with a splendid procession of the Emperor and
all his dignitaries.  Ruggiero, the chief judge in Constance seeing the
hated Jew and his daughter amongst the spectators, is about to seize
them once more, when Prince Leopold steps between and delivers them, to
Recha's great astonishment.

In the second act we are introduced to a great assembly of Jews, men
and women, assisting at a religious ceremony.  Samuel is there with
them.  The holy act is however interrupted by the Emperor's niece,
Princess Eudora, who comes to purchase a golden chain, which once
belonged to the Emperor Constantin, and which she destines for her
bride-groom, Prince Leopold.  Eleazar is to bring it himself on the
following day.  Samuel overhearing {163} this is full of trouble.  When
the assembly is broken up and all have gone, he returns once more to
Recha, and finding her alone, confesses that he is a Christian.  Love
prevails over Recha's filial devotion, and she consents to fly with her
lover, but they are surprised by Eleazar.  Hearing of Samuel's
falseness, he first swears vengeance, but, mollified by his daughter's
entreaties, he only bids him marry Recha.  Samuel refuses and has to
leave, the father cursing him, Recha bewailing her lover's falseness.

In the third act we assist at the Imperial banquet.  Eleazar brings the
chain, and is accompanied by Recha, who at once recognizes in Eudora's
bridegroom, her lover, Samuel.  She denounces the traitor, accusing him
of living in unlawful wedlock with a Jewess, a crime, which is
punishable by death.

Leopold (alias Samuel) is outlawed, the Cardinal Brogni pronounces the
anathema upon all three, and they are put into prison.

In the fourth act Eudora visits Recha in prison, and by her prayers not
only overcomes Recha's hate, but persuades her to save Leopold by
declaring him innocent.  Recha, in her noblemindedness, pardons Leopold
and Eudora, and resolves to die, alone.

Meanwhile the Cardinal has an interview with Eleazar, who tells him
that he knows the Jew, who once saved the Cardinal's little daughter
from the flames.  Brogni vainly entreats him to reveal {164} the name.
He promises to save Recha, should Eleazar be willing to abjure his
faith, but the latter remains firm, fully prepared to die.

In the fifth act we hear the clamors of the people who furiously demand
the Jew's death.

Ruggiero announces to father and daughter the verdict of death by fire.
Leopold is set free through Recha's testimony.  When in view of the
funeral pile, Eleazar asks Recha, if she would prefer to live in joy
and splendor and to accept the Christian faith, but she firmly answers
in the negative.  Then she is led on to death, and she is just plunged
into the glowing furnace, when Eleazar, pointing to her, informs the
Cardinal, that the poor victim is his long-lost daughter; then Eleazar
follows Recha into the flames, while Brogni falls back senseless.




JUNKER HEINZ (SIR HARRY).

Opera in three acts by KARL VON PERFALL.

Text after Hertz's poem: Henri of Suabia by FRANZ GRANDOUR.


This opera composed recently by the Superintendent of the Royal Opera
in Munich, has made its way to the most renowned stages in Germany,
which proves that the composition is not a common one.

Indeed, though it is not composed in the large style to which we are
now accustomed from hearing so much of Wagner, the music is
interesting, particularly so, because it is entirely original and free
from reminiscenses.--There are some little {165} masterpieces in it,
which deserve to become popular on account of their freshness; wit and
humor however are not the composer's "forte" and so the first act, in
which the vagabonds present themselves, is by far the least interesting.

The libretto is very well done; it has made free use of Hertz's pretty
poem.

The scene is laid in the beginning of the 11th century.  The first act
lands us near Esslingen in Suabia, the two following near Speier.

Three swindlers concoct a plot to acquire wealth by robbing the
Emperor's daughter.  To this end, one of them, Marudas, a former clerk,
has forged a document, in which the Emperor of Byzantium asks for the
hand of Agnes, daughter of Conrad, Emperor of Germany, who just
approaching with his wife Gisela, is received with acclamation by the
citizens of Esslingen.  Soon after, the three vagabonds appear in
decent clothes, crying for help; they pretend to have been attacked and
robbed by brigands.  Boccanera, the most insolent of them wears a
bloody bandage round his head.  The document is presented to the
Emperor, who turns gladly to his wife and tells her of the flattering
offer of the Greek Prince.  After he has ordered that the ambassador be
taken good care of, the Emperor is left alone with his wife.  She
tenderly asks him why he always seems so sorrowful and gloomy, and
after a first evasive answer, he confides to his faithful wife what
oppresses him.

Twenty years ago he gave orders to kill a {166} little infant, the son
of his deadliest enemy, Count of Calw, his astronomer Crusius having
prophesied, that this child would wed the Emperor's daughter and reign
after him.  The remembrance of this cruelty now torments him, but
Gisela consoles her husband, hoping and praying that God will pardon
the repentant sinner.  During this intercourse, a young man comes up,
entreating the Emperor to read a document, which was given to the youth
by his dying uncle and destined for the Emperor.  As Conrad reads it,
he learns that this youth is the child, he would have had killed years
ago and who was carried to the forester-house and brought up there.
The Emperor and his wife thank Heaven that they have been spared so
dreadful a sin, but Conrad, afraid of the prophesy, determines to send
the young man, who is called Junker Heinz, away.  He gives him a
document, in which he orders Count Gerold, governor of Speier, to give
his daughter to the three ambassadors of the Emperor of Byzantium.

In the second act we see Agnes, the Emperor's daughter, working and
singing with her damsels.  She is well guarded by old Hiltrudis, but
the worthy lady is obliged to leave for some days and departs with many
exhortations.  Hardly has she gone, than all the working-material
disappears, and the maidens begin to sing and frolic.  The appearance
of Junker Heinz frightens them away.  Heinz, who has ridden long,
thinks to take a little rest, now that he sees the towers of Speier
before {167} him.  He stretches himself on a mossy bank and is soon
asleep.--Shortly afterwards the Princess Agnes peeps about with her
companion Bertha.  She is highly pleased with the appearance of the
strange hunter, and seeing him asleep, she gazes at him, until she
insensibly falls in love with him.  Observing the document which the
stranger has in his keeping, she takes and reads it, and disgusted with
its contents throws it into the fountain, quickly fetching another
parchment which was once given to her by her father, and which contains
both permission to wish for something and her father's promise to grant
her wish.

When Heinz awakes, and finds the loveliest of the maidens beside him,
he falls as deeply in love as the young lady, but their tender
interview is soon interrupted by the blowing of hunter's horns.

In the third act Count Gerold, who has come with a suite, to accompany
the Princess on a hunt, is presented with the Emperor's document by
Heinz, who cannot read and who is wholly ignorant of the change which
Agnes has made.  Though greatly astonished at the Emperor's command to
wed Agnes to the bringer of his letter, Count Gerold is accustomed to
obey, and Heinz, who first refuses compliance with the strange command,
at once acquiesces, when he sees that his lady-love and the Princess
are one and the same person.  About to go to church, they are detained
by the Emperor, who scornfully charges Heinz with fraud.

But when Count Gerold presents the document, {168} his scorn turns on
Agnes and he orders her to a convent.  Heinz fervently entreats the
Emperor to pardon Agnes, and takes a tender farewell of her.  On the
point of departing for ever, he sees the three ambassadors, whom he
recognizes and loudly denounces as robbers and swindlers.  Boccanera is
obliged to own that his wound came from Junker Heinz, who caught him
stealing sheep.  They are led to prison, while the Emperor, grateful to
Heinz for his daughter's delivery from robbers, gives her to him and
makes Heinz Duke of Suabia, persuaded that it is useless to fight
against that which the stars have prophesied.




A KING AGAINST HIS WILL.

(DER KONIG WIDER WILLEN.)

Comic Opera in three acts by EMANUEL CHABRIER.

Text after a comedy written by ANCELOT, from EMILE DE NAJAC and PAUL
BURANI.


The composer has recently become known in Germany by his opera
Gwendoline, performed at Leipsic a short time ago.  His latest opera,
"A King against his will", was represented on the Royal Opera in
Dresden, April 26th 1890, and through its wit, grace and originality
won great applause.--Indeed, though not quite free from "raffinement",
its melodies are exquisitely interesting and lovely.  Minka's Bohemian
song, her duet with De Nangis, her lover, as well as the duet between
the King and Alexina are master-pieces, and the {169} national coloring
in the song of the Polish bodyguard is characteristic enough.

The libretto is most amusing, though the plot is complicated.  The
scene is laid at Cracow in the year 1574.--Its subject is derived from
a historical fact.  Henry de Valois has been elected King of Poland,
through the machinations of his ambitious mother, Catarina di Medici,
to whom it has been prophesied, that all her sons should be crowned.

The gay Frenchman most reluctantly accepts the honor, but the delight
of his new Polish subjects at having him, is not greater than his own
enchantment with his new Kingdom.

The first act shows the new King surrounded by French noblemen, gay and
thoughtless like himself; but watching all his movements by orders of
his mother, who fears his escape.  By chance the King hears from a
young bondwoman Minka, who loves De Nangis, his friend, and wishes to
save him a price, that a plot had been formed by the Polish noblemen,
who do not yet know him personally, and he at once decides to join the
conspiracy against his own person.--Knowing his secretary, Fritelli to
be one of the conspirators, he declares that he is acquainted with
their proceedings and threatens him with death, should he not silently
submit to all his orders.--The frightened Italian promises to lead him
into the house of Lasky, the principal conspirator, where he intends to
appear as De Nangis.  But before this, in order to prevent discovery he
{170} assembles his guard and suite, and in their presence accuses his
favorite De Nangis with treachery, and has him safely locked up in
apparent deep disgrace.

The second act opens with a festival at Lasky's, under cover of which
the King is to be arrested and sent over the frontier.  Now the King,
being a total stranger to the whole assembly, excepting Fritelli,
presents himself as De Nangis and swears to dethrone his fickle friend,
the King, this very night.  But meanwhile De Nangis, who, warned by
Minka's song, has escaped from his confinement through the window,
comes up, and is at once presented by the pretended De Nangis as King
Henry.  The true De Nangis complying with the jest, at once issues his
Kingly orders, threatening to punish his antagonists and proclaiming
his intention to make the frightened Minka his Queen.  He is again
confined by the conspirators, who, finding him so dangerous, resolve to
kill him.  This is entirely against King Henry's will, and he at once
revokes his oath, proclaiming himself to be the true King and offering
himself, if need shall be as their victim.  But he is not believed; the
only person, who knows him, Fritelli, disowns him, and Alexina, the
secretary's wife, a former sweetheart of the King in Venice, to whom he
has just made love again under his assumed name, declares, that he is
De Nangis.--Henry is even appointed by lot to inflict the death-stroke
on the unfortunate King.  Determined to destroy himself rather than let
his friend suffer, he opens the door to De Nangis' {171} prison, but
the bird has again flown.  Minka, though despairing of ever belonging
to one so highborn has found means to liberate him, and is now ready to
suffer for her interference.  She is however protected by Henry, who
once more swears to force the King from the country.

The third act takes place in the environs of Crakow, where preparations
are made for the King's entry.  No one knows who is to be crowned,
Henry de Valois or the Arch-Duke of Austria, the pretender supported by
the Polish nobles, but Fritelli coming up assures the innkeeper, that
it is to be the Arch-Duke.  Meanwhile the King enters in hot haste
asking for horses, in order to take himself away as quickly as
possible.  Unfortunately there is only one horse left and no driver,
but the King orders this to be got ready, and declares that he will
drive himself.  During his absence Alexina and Minka, who have
proceeded to the spot, are full of pity for the unfortunate King, as
well as for his friend De Nangis.  Alexina resolves to put on servant's
clothes, in order to save the fugitive, and to drive herself.  Of
course Henry is enchanted when recognizing his fair driver and both set
about to depart.

Minka, left alone, bewails her fate and wants to stab herself,
whereupon De Nangis suddenly appears in search for the King.  At the
sight of him, Minka quickly dries her tears, being assured that her
lover is true to her.  Fritelli however, who at first had rejoiced to
see his wife's admirer depart, {172} is greatly dismayed at hearing
that his fair wife was the servant-driver.  He madly rushes after them,
to arrest the fugitives.  But the faithful guard is already on the
King's track, and together with his Cavaliers, brings them back in
triumph.

Finding that, whether her will or no, he must abide by his lot, and
hearing further, that the Arch-Duke has renounced his pretentions to
the crown of Poland, the King at last submits.  He unites the faithful
lovers, De Nangis and Minka, sends Fritelli as Ambassador to Venice
accompanied by his wife Alexina, and all hail Henry de Valois as King
of Poland.




LOHENGRIN.

Romantic Opera in three acts by RICHARD WAGNER.


This is the most popular of all Wagner's operas.  No need to say more
about its music, which is so generally known and admired, that every
child in Germany knows the graceful aria, where Lohengrin dismisses the
swan, the superb bridal chorus etc.

Wagner again took his material from the old legend, which tells us of
the mystical knight Lohengrin, (Veron of Percifal), Keeper of the "Holy
Grail".

The scene is laid near Antwerp, where "Heinrich der Vogler," King of
Germany, is just levying troops amongst his vassals of Brabant, to
repulse the Hungarian invaders.  The King finds the people {173} in a
state of great commotion, for Count Frederick Telramund accuses Elsa of
Brabant, of having killed her young brother Godfrey, heir to the Duke
of Brabant, who died a short time ago, leaving his children to the care
of Telramund.  Elsa was to be Telramund's wife, but he wedded Ortrud of
Friesland and now claims the deserted Duchy of Brabant.

As Elsa declares her innocence, not knowing what has become of her
brother, who was taken from her during her sleep, the King resolves to
decide by a tourney in which the whole matter shall be left to the
judgment of God.  Telramund, sure of his rights, is willing to fight
with any champion, who may defend Elsa.  All the noblemen of Brabant
refuse to do so, and even the King, though struck by Elsa's innocent
appearance, does not want to oppose his valiant and trustworthy warrior.

Elsa alone is calm, she trusts in the help of the heavenly knight, who
has appeared to her in a dream, and publicly declares her intention of
offering to her defender the crown and her hand.  While she prays,
there arrives a knight in silver armor; a swan draws his boat.  He
lands, Elsa recognizes the knight of her dream and he at once offers to
fight for the accused maiden on two conditions, first that she shall
become his wife, and second, that she never will ask for his name and
his descent.

Elsa solemnly promises and the combat {174} begins.  The strange knight
is victorious, and Telramund, whose life the stranger spares is with
his wife Ortrud outlawed.

The latter is a sorceress; she has deceived her husband, who really
believes in the murder of Godfrey, while as a matter of fact she has
abducted the child.  In the second act we see her at the door of the
Ducal palace, where preparations for the wedding are already being
made.  She plans vengeance.  Her husband, full of remorse and feeling
that his wife has led him on to a shameful deed, curses her as the
cause of his dishonor.  She derides him and rouses his pride by calling
him a coward.  Then she pacifies him with the assurance, that she will
induce Elsa to break her promise and ask for the name of her husband,
being sure, that then all the power of this mysterious champion will
vanish.

When Elsa steps on the balcony to confide her happiness to the stars,
she hears her name spoken in accents so sad, that her tender heart is
moved.  Ortrud bewails her lot, invoking Elsa's pity.  The Princess
opens her door, urging the false woman to share her palace and her
fortune.  Ortrud at once tries to sow distrust in Elsa's innocent heart.

As the morning dawns, a rich procession of men and women throng to the
Muenster, where Elsa is to be united to her protector.  Telramund tries
vainly to accuse the stranger; he is pushed back and silenced.  As Elsa
is about to enter the church, Ortrud steps forward, claiming the right
of {175} precedence.  Elsa, frightened, repents too late having
protected her.  Ortrud upbraids her with not even having asked her
husband's name and descent.  All are taken aback, but Elsa defends her
husband, winning everybody by her quiet dignity.

She turns to Lohengrin for protection, but, alas, the venom rankles in
her heart.

When they are all returning from church, Telramund once more steps
forth, accusing Lohengrin and demanding from the King to know the
stranger's name.  Lohengrin declares that his name may not be told,
excepting his wife asks.  Elsa is in great trouble, but once more her
love conquers, and she does not put the fatal question.

But in the third act, when the two lovers are alone she knows no rest.
Although her husband asks her to trust him, she fears that he may once
leave her as mysteriously, as he came, and at last she cannot refrain
from asking the luckless question.  From this moment all happiness is
lost to her.  Telramund enters to slay his enemy, but Lohengrin, taking
his sword, kills him with one stroke.  Then he leads Elsa before the
King and loudly announces his secret.  He tells the astounded hearers,
that he is the Keeper of the Holy-Grail.  Sacred and invulnerable to
the villain, a defender of right and virtue, he may stay with mankind
as long as his name is unknown.  But now he is obliged to reveal it.
He is Lohengrin, son of Percival, King of the Grail, and is now
compelled to leave his wife and return to his home.  The swan appears,
from whose neck {176} Lohengrin takes a golden ring, giving it to Elsa
together with his sword and golden horn.

Just as Lohengrin is about to depart Ortrud appears, triumphantly
declaring, that it was she, who changed young Godfrey into a swan, and
that Lohengrin would have freed him too, had Elsa not mistrusted her
husband.--Lohengrin, hearing this, sends a fervent prayer to Heaven and
loosening the swan's golden chain, the animal dips under water and in
his stead rises Godfrey, the lawful heir of Brabant.  A white dove
descends to draw the boat in which Lohengrin glides away and Elsa falls
senseless in her brother's arm.




LORLE.

Opera in three acts by ALBAN FOERSTER.

Text by HANS HEINRICH SCHEFSKY.


With this opera its composer has made a lucky hit; it stands far higher
than the "Maidens of Schilda", by dint of the charming subject, founded
on Auerbach's wonderful village-story: Die Frau Professorin.  This
romance is so universally known and admired all over Germany, that it
ensures the success of the opera.  The music is exceedingly well
adapted to the subject; its best parts are the "Lieder" (songs) which
are often exquisitely sweet, harmonious and refined.  They realize
Foerster's prominent strength, and nowhere could they be better placed
than in this sweet and touching story.

Though the libretto is not very carefully written, it is better than
the average performances of this {177} kind, and with poetical
intuition Schefsky has refrained from the temptation, to make it turn
out well, as Charlotte Birch-Pfeiffer has done in her play of L'orle,
which is a weak counterpart of Auerbach's village-tragedy.

The first representation of the opera took place in Dresden on June
18th of 1891; it won the success it truly deserves.

The first act which is laid in a village of the Black Forest,
represents the square before the house of the wealthy Lindenhost.  He
wishes his only daughter Lorle to marry a well to do young peasant,
named Balder, who loved her from her childhood.  But Lorle rejects him,
having lost her heart to a painter, who had stayed in her father's
house, and who had taken her as a model for a picture of the Madonna,
which adorns the altar of the village church.  Lorle's friend Baerbele
guesses her secret, and advises her to consult fate, by wreathing
secretly a garland of blue-bells and reed grass.  This wreath she is to
throw into the branches of an oak calling aloud the name of her lover.
If the garland is stopped by the boughs, her wishes are fulfilled, if
it falls back into the girl's hands, she must give up hope for the year.

Both maidens resolve to try their fate on the very same night, which
happens to be St. John's (midsummer-night) the true night for the
working of the charm.

Meanwhile the Hussars arrive, to carry away the newly enlisted
peasants.  The sergeant willingly {178} permits a last dance, and all
join in it heartily, but when the hour of parting comes the frightened
Balder hides in an empty barrel.  Unfortunately his officer happens to
choose this one barrel for himself, deeming it filled with wine.  When
it is laid on the car, the missing recruit is promptly apprehended.

The scene changes now to one of sylvan solitude, through which two
wanderers are sauntering.  They are artists, and one of them,
Reinhardt, is attracted to the spot by his longing for the sweet
village-flower, whom he has not forgotten in the whirl of the great
world.  Already he sees the windows of his sweet-heart glimmer through
the trees, when suddenly light footsteps cause the friends to hide
behind a large oak-tree.  The two maidens who appear are Lorle and
Baerbele.  The former prays fervently, then throwing her garland she
shyly calls her lover's name Reinhardt.  The latter stepping from
behind the tree skillfully catches the wreath--and the maiden.  This
moment decides upon their fates; Reinhardt passionately declares his
love, while Walter amuses himself with pretty Baerbele, whose naive
coquetry pleases him mightily.

The following act introduces us to Reinhardt's studio in a German
residence.  A year has gone by since he wooed and won his bride; alas,
he is already tired of her.  The siren Maria countess of Matran, with
whom he was enamoured years ago and whose portrait he has just
finished, has again completely bewitched him.

{179}

In vain Lorle adorns herself in her bridal attire at the anniversary of
their wedding; the infatuated husband has no eye for her loveliness,
and roughly pushes her from him.  Left alone the poor young wife gives
vent to her feelings in an exquisite sigh of longing for her native
country.  "Haett' ich verlassen nie dich, meine Haiden."  (Would I had
never left thee, o my heath.)

A visit from her dear Baerbele somewhat consoles her and delights
Walter, the faithful house-friend.  Balder, Lorle's old play mate,
still recruit, also comes in and gladdens her by a bunch of
heath-flowers.  But hardly have they enjoyed their meeting, when the
prince is announced, who desires to have a look at the countess'
portrait.  The rustic pair are hastily hidden behind the easel, and
Lorle receives his Royal Highness with artless gracefullness,
presenting him with the flowers she has just received.  Her husband is
on thorns, but the prince affably accepts the gift and invites her to a
festival, which is to take place in the evening.  Then he looks at the
picture, expressing some disappointment about its execution, which so
vexes the sensitive artist that he roughly pushes the picture from the
easel thereby revealing the two innocents behind it.  Great is his
wrath at his wife's imprudence, while the prince exits with the
countess, unable to repress a smile at the unexpected event.

There now ensues a very piquant musical intermezzo, well making up for
the missing overture.  The rising curtain reveals a brilliant court
{180} festival.  Reinhardt has chosen the countess for his shepherdess,
while Lorle, standing a moment alone and heart-sore, is suddenly chosen
by the Prince as queen of the fete.  After a charming gavotte the
guests disperse in the various rooms.  Only the countess stays behind
with Reinhardt and so enthralls him, that he forgets honor and wife,
and falls at her feet, stammering words of love and passion.
Unfortunately Lorle witnesses the scene; she staggers forward, charging
her husband with treason.  The guests rush to her aid, but this last
stroke is too much for the poor young heart, she sinks down in a dead
faint.

The closing act takes place a year later.  Walter and Baerbele are
married, and only Lorle's sad fate mars their happiness.  Lorle has
returned to her father's home broken-hearted, and this grief for his
only child has changed the old man sadly.

Again it is midsummernight, and the father is directing his tottering
steps to the old oak, when he is arrested by a solitary wanderer, whom
sorrow and remorse have also aged considerably.  With disgust and
loathing he recognizes his child's faithless husband, who comes to
crave pardon from the wife he so deeply wronged.  Alas, he only comes,
to see her die.

Lorle's feeble steps are also guided by her friends to the old oak, her
favorite resting-place.  There she finds her last wish granted; it is
to see Reinhardt once more, before she dies and to pardon him.  The
luckless husband rushes to her feet {181} and tries vainly to restrain
the fast-ebbing life.  With the grateful sigh "he loves me", she sinks
dead into his arms, while a sweet and solemn choir in praise of St.
John's night concludes the tragedy.




LOVE'S BATTLE.

(DER LIEBESKAMPF.)

Opera in two acts.

Music and Text by ERIK MEYER-HELMUND.


This young composer, whose first opera was brought on the stage in
Dresden in the spring of 1892, has been known for several years to the
musical world by his most charming and effective songs.  That he has
talent, even genius is a fact which this opera again demonstrates, but
the "making" is somewhat too easy not to say negligent, and it reminds
us of Mascagni, whose laurels are an inducement to all our young
genius' to "go and do likewise".  Even the plot with its Corsican
scenery has a strong resemblance to Cavalleria Rusticana.  Its brevity,
both acts last but fifty minutes, is a decided advantage, for the
easy-flowing melodies, which come quite naturally to the composer
cannot fail to attract the public, without being able to tire
them.--One of the most delightful, a really exquisite piece of music is
the duet between Giulietta and Giovanni.

The text, which is likewise written by the musician himself, has a very
simple plot.--

{182}

Pietro, a sailor returns from a long voyage, only to find his promised
bride Maritana the wife of another.--

After having waited three years for his return, she fell into dire
distress, which was still augmented by the report, that Pietro's ship
"Elena" had been wrecked and her lover drowned.  An innkeeper Arrigo
came to her aid, and not only rescued her from misery, but also adopted
her child, the offspring of Maritana's love for Pietro, after which she
promised him her hand in gratitude.

Not long after their marriage the "Elena" returns with Pietro, who
never doubts his sweetheart's constancy.  Great is his dismay, when he
hears from Arrigo and his father, that Maritana is lost to him.  Pietro
endeavours to persuade Maritana to fly with him, but the young wife,
although conscious of her affections for him, denies that she ever
loved him.

The second act begins with the wedding festival of Giovanni and
Giulietta, Arrigo's niece.  After the charming love-duet above
mentioned, Pietro once more offers his love to Maritana, but in vain.

In the midst of the turmoil of frolic, in which Pietro seems one of the
wildest and gayest, Arrigo takes him aside, whispering: "There is no
room here for both of us, unless you leave Maritana in peace.  Quit
this place; there are more girls in the world to suit you."--Pietro
promises, and in his passion he at once turns to the bride Giulietta,
whom he embraces.--Of course her bridegroom {183} Giovanni is not
willing to put up with this piece of folly; a violent quarrel ensues,
in which the men rush upon Pietro with daggers drawn.

Maritana, willing to sacrifice herself in a quarrel, for which she
feels herself alone responsible, rushes between the combatants.  Then
Pietro, fully awake to her love, but seeing that she is lost to him,
quickly ascends a rock and calling out "O Sea eternal, I am thine,
farewell Maritana, we shall meet in Heaven" he precipitates himself
into the waves, while Maritana falls back in a faint.




LUCIA DI LAMMERMOOR.

Tragic Opera in three acts by GAETANO DONIZETTI.

Text from Scott's romance by SALVATORE CAMMERANO.


This opera is Donizetti's master-piece and except his "Figlia del
reggimento" and "Lucrezia Borgia" is the only one of his fifty operas,
which is still given on all stages abroad.  The chief parts, those of
Lucia and Edgardo, offer plenty of scope for the display of brilliant
talent and Lucia in particular is a tragic heroine of the first rank.

In the libretto there is not much left of Scott's fine romance.
Edgardo, the noble lover is most sentimental, and generally English
characteristics have had to give place to Italian coloring.

Henry Ashton, Lord of Lammermoor has discovered that his sister Lucia
loves his mortal enemy, Sir Edgardo of Ravenswood.  He confides {184}
to Lucia's tutor, Raymond, that he is lost, if Lucia does not marry
another suitor of his (her brother's) choice.

Lucia and Edgardo meet in the park.  Edgardo tells her, that he is
about to leave Scotland for France in the service of his country.  He
wishes to be reconciled to his enemy, Lord Ashton, for though the
latter has done him all kinds of evil, though he has slain his father
and burnt his castle, Edgardo is willing to sacrifice his oath of
vengeance to his love for Lucia.  But the lady, full of evil
forebodings, entreats him to wait and swears eternal fidelity to him.
After having bound himself by a solemn oath, he leaves her
half-distracted with grief.

In the second act Lord Ashton shows a forged letter to his sister,
which goes to prove that her lover is false.  Her brother now presses
her more and more to wed his friend Arthur, Lord Bucklaw, declaring,
that he and his party are lost and that Arthur alone can save him from
the executioner's axe.  At last when even her tutor Raymond beseeches
her to forget Edgardo and, like the others, believes him to be
faithless, Lucia consents to the sacrifice.  The wedding takes place in
great haste, but just as Lucia has finished signing the
marriage-contract, Edgardo enters to claim her as his own.

With grief and unbounded passion he now sees in his bride a traitress,
and tearing his ring of betrothal from her finger, he throws it at her
feet.

Henry, Arthur and Raymond order the raving {185} lover to leave the
castle and the act closes in the midst of confusion and despair.

The third act opens with Raymond's announcement that Lucia has lost her
reason and has killed her husband in the bridal room.  Lucia herself
enters to confirm his awful news; she is still in bridal attire and in
her demented condition believes that Arthur will presently appear for
the nuptial ceremony.  Everybody is full of pity for her, and her
brother repents his harshness, too late, alas!--Lucia is fast dying and
Eliza leads her away amid the lamentations of all present.

Edgardo, hearing of these things, while wandering amid the tombs of his
ancestors, resolves to see Lucia once more.  When dying she asks for
him, but he comes too late.  The funeral-bells toll, and he stabs
himself, praying to be united to his bride in heaven.




LUCREZIA BORGIA.

A tragic Opera in three acts by DONIZETTI.

Text by FELICE ROMANI after Victor Hugo's drama.


Donizetti's Lucrezia was one of the first tragic operas to command
great success, notwithstanding its dreadful theme and its light music,
which is half French, half Italian.  It is in some respects the
predecessor of Verdi's operas, Rigoletto, Trovatore etc., which have
till now held their own in many theatres because the subject is
interesting and the music may well entertain us for an evening, {186}
though its value often lies only in the striking harmonies.  The
libretto cannot inspire us with feelings of particular pleasure, the
heroine, whose part is by far the best and most interesting, being the
celebrated murderess and poisoner Lucrezia Borgia.  At the same time
she gives evidence in her dealings with her son Gennaro of possessing a
very tender and motherly heart, and the songs, in which she pours out
her love for him are really fine as well as touching.

Lucrezia, wife of Don Alfonso, Duke of Ferrara, goes to Venice in
disguise, to see the son of her first marriage, Gennaro.  In his
earliest youth he was given to a fisherman, who brought him up as his
own son.--Gennaro feels himself attracted towards the strange and
beautiful woman, who visits him, but hearing from his companions, who
recognize and charge her with all sorts of crimes, that she is Lucrezia
Borgia, he abhors her.  Don Alfonso, not knowing the existence of this
son of an early marriage, is jealous, and when Gennaro comes to Ferrara
and in order to prove his hatred of the Borgias, tears off Lucrezia's
name and scutcheon from the palace-gates, Rustighello, the Duke's
confidant is ordered to imprison him.  Lucrezia, hearing from her
servant Gubella of the outrage to her name and honor complains to the
Duke, who promises immediate punishment of the malefactor.

Gennaro enters, and terror-stricken Lucrezia recognizes her son.
Vainly does she implore the {187} Duke to spare the youth.  With
exquisite cruelty he forces her to hand the poisoned golden cup to the
culprit herself, and, departing, bids her accompany her prisoner to the
door.  This order gives her an opportunity to administer an antidote by
which she saves Gennaro's life, and she implores him to fly.  But
Gennaro does not immediately follow her advice, being induced by his
friend Orsini to assist at a grand festival at Prince Negroni's.

Unhappily all those young men, who formerly reproached and offended
Lucrezia so mortally in presence of her son, are assembled there by
Lucrezia's orders.  She has mixed their wine with poison, and herself
appears to announce their death.  Horror-stricken she sees Gennaro, who
was not invited, among them.  He has partaken of the wine like the
others, but on her offering him an antidote, he refuses to take it; its
quantity is insufficient for his friends, and he threatens to kill the
murderess.  Then she reveals the secret of his birth to him, but he
only turns from this mother, for whom he had vainly longed his whole
life, and dies.  The Duke coming up to witness his wife's horrible
victory, finds all either dead or dying and Lucrezia herself expires,
stricken down by deadly remorse and pain.




{188}

THE MACCABEES.

Opera in three acts by ANTON RUBINSTEIN.

Text by MOSENTHAL, taken from Otto Ludwig's drama of the same name.


This opera when it appeared, created a great sensation in the musical
world.  In it the eminent pianist and composer has achieved a splendid
success.  The music belongs to the noblest and best and is in most
masterly fashion adapted to the Jewish character.  Ludwig and
Mosenthal, both names of renown in Germany, have given a libretto
worthy of the music.

The hero is the famous warrior of the Old Testament.  The scene takes
place 160 years before Christ, partly at Modin, a city in the mountains
of Judah and partly in Jerusalem and its environs.

The first act shows Leah with three of her sons, Eleazar, Joarim and
Benjamin.  Eleazar is envious of Judah, the eldest son, whose courage
and strength are on everybody's lips, but his mother consoles him by a
prophesy, that Eleazar shall one day be High-priest and King of the
Jews.

The fete of the sheep-shearing is being celebrated, and Noemi, Judah's
wife, approaches Leah with garlands of flowers, asking for her
benediction.  But she is repulsed by her mother-in-law, who is too
proud to recognize the low-born maid as her equal, and slights her son
Judah for his love.  She tries to incite him into rebellion against the
Syrians, when Jojakim, a priest appears.  He {189} announces the death
of Osias, High-priest of Zion and calls one of Leah's sons to the
important office.--As Judah feels no vocation for such a burden,
Eleazar, his mother's favorite is chosen, and so Leah sees her dream
already fulfilled.  They are about to depart, when the approaching army
of the Syrians is announced.  Terror seizes the people, as Gorgias, the
leader of the enemy marches up with his soldiers and loudly proclaims,
that the Jews are to erect an altar to Pallas Athene, to whom they must
pray henceforth.  Leah seeks to inflame Eleazar's spirit, but his
courage fails him.  The altar is soon erected, and as Gorgias sternly
orders that sacrifices are to be offered to the goddess, Boas, Noemi's
father is found willing to bow to the enemy's commands.  But the
measure is full, Judah steps forth and striking Boas, the traitor to
their faith, dead, loudly praises Jehova.  He calls his people to arms,
and repulses the Syrians and Leah, recognizing her son's greatness,
gives him her benediction.

The second act represents a deep ravine near Emaus; the enemy is beaten
and Judah is resolved to drive him from Zion's walls, but Jojakim warns
him not to profane the coming Sabbath.

Judah tries to overrule the priests and to excite the people, but he is
not heard, and the enemy is able to kill the psalm-singing soldiers
like lambs.

The next scene shows us Eleazar with Cleopatra, daughter of King
Antiochus of Syria.

{190}

They love each other, and Eleazar consents to forsake his religion for
her, while she promises to make him King of Jerusalem.

In the next scene Leah in the city of Modin is greeted with
acclamations of joy, when Simei, a relative of the slain Boas appears
to bewail Judah's defeat: Other fugitives coming up, confirm his
narrative of the massacre.--Leah hears that Judah fled and that
Antiochus approaches conducted by her own son Eleazar.  She curses the
apostate.--She has still two younger sons, but the Israelites take them
from her to give as hostages to the King Antiochus.  Leah is bound to a
cypress-tree by her own people, who attribute their misfortunes to her
and to her sons.  Only Noemi, the despised daughter-in-law remains to
liberate the miserable mother, and together they resolve to ask the
tyrant's pardon for the sons.

In the third act we find Judah, alone and unrecognized in the deserted
streets of Jerusalem.  Hearing the prayers of the people that Judah may
be sent to them, he steps forth and tells them who he is, and all sink
at his feet, swearing to fight with him to the death.  While Judah
prays to God for a sign of grace, Noemi comes with the dreadful news of
the events at Modin, which still further rouses the anger and courage
of the Israelites.  Meanwhile Leah has succeeded in penetrating into
Antiochus' presence to beg the lives of her children from him.
Eleazar, Gorgias and Cleopatra join their prayers to those of the poor
mother, and at last {191} Antiochus consents, and the two boys are led
into the room.

But the King only grants their liberty on condition that they renounce
their faith.  They are to be burnt alive, should they abide by their
heresy.  The mother's heart is full of agony, but the children's noble
courage prevails.  They are prepared to die for their God, but the
unhappy mother is not even allowed to share their death.  When Eleazar
sees his brother's firmness, his conscience awakens, and
notwithstanding Cleopatra's entreaties he joins them on their way to
death.  The hymns of the youthful martyrs are heard, but with the sound
of their voices there suddenly mingles that of a growing tumult.
Antiochus falls, shot through the heart, and the Israelites rush in,
headed by Judah, putting the Syrians to flight.  Leah sees her people's
victory, but the trial has been too great, she sinks back lifeless.
Judah is proclaimed King of Zion, but he humbly bends his head, giving
all glory to the Almighty God.




THE MAGIC FLUTE.

(DIE ZAUBERFLOeTE.)

Opera in two acts by MOZART.

Text by SCHIKANEDER.


This last opera of Mozart's, written only a few months before his
death, approaches so near to perfection, that one almost feels in it
the motion of the spirit-wings which were so soon alas! to bear {192}
away Mozart's genius from earth, too early by far, for he died at the
age of 35, having accomplished in this short space of time more than
other great composers in a long life.

The Magic Flute is one of the most remarkable operas known on the
stage.  It is half fictitious, half allegorical.--The text, done by the
old stage-director Schikaneder was long mistaken for a fiction without
any common sense, but Mozart saw deeper, else he would not have adapted
his wonderful music to it.--It is true that the tales of old Egypt are
mixed up in a curious manner with modern freemasonry, but nobody,
except a superficial observer, could fail to catch a deep moral sense
in the naive rhymes.

The contents of the opera are the following: Prince Tamino, a youth as
valiant as he is noble and virtuous, is implored by the Queen of Night,
to save her daughter, whom the old and sage High-priest Sarastro has
taken from her by force.  The bereaved mother pours forth her woe in
heart-melting sounds and promises everything to the rescuer of her
child.  Tamino is filled with ardent desire to serve her.--On his way
he meets the gay Papageno, who at once agrees to share the Prince's
adventures.  Papageno is the gay element in the opera; always cheerful
and in high spirits, his ever-ready tongue plays him many a funny
trick.  So we see him once with a lock on his mouth by way of
punishment for his idle prating.  As he promises never to tell a lie
any more, the lock is taken {193} away by the three Ladies of the Queen
of Night.  Those Ladies present Tamino with a golden flute, giving at
the same time an instrument made with little silver bells to Papageno,
both of which are to help them in times of danger.  The Queen of Night
even sends with them three boy-angels.  These are to point out to them
the ways and means by which they may attain their purpose.

Now the young and beautiful Princess Pamina is pursued by declarations
of love from a negro-servant of Sarastro.  Papageno comes to her
rescue, frightening the negro Monostatos with his feathery dress.
Papageno, on the other hand fears the negro on account of his
blackness, believing him to be the devil in person.  Papageno escapes
with Pamina, but the negro overtakes him with his servants.  Then
Papageno shakes his bells, and lo, all forgetting their wrath forthwith
begin to dance.

Meanwhile Tamino reaches 'Sarastro's castle, and at once asks for the
High-priest, poor Pamina's bitter enemy.  The Under-priests do not
allow him to enter, but explain that their Master Sarastro is as good
as he is sage, and that he always acts for the best.  They assure
Tamino, that the Princess lives and is in no danger.  Full of thanks,
the Prince begins to play on his flute; and just then he hears
Papageno's bells.  At this juncture Sarastro appears, the wise Master,
before whom they al bow.  He punishes the wicked negro; but Tamino and
his Pamina are not to be united without first having given ample proof
of their love and constancy.  {194} Tamino determines to undergo
whatever trials may await him, but the Queen of Night, knowing all,
sends her three Ladies, to deter Tamino and his comrade from their
purpose.  But all temptation is gallantly set aside; they have given a
promise to Sarastro which they will keep.

Even the Queen of Night herself is unable to weaken their strength of
purpose; temptations of every kind overtake them, but Tamino remains
firm.  He is finally initiated into the mysteries of the goddess Isis.

In the interval Pamina deems Tamino faithless.  She would fain die, but
the three celestial youths console her, by assuring her that Tamino's
love is true, and that he passes through the most severe trials solely
on her behalf.

On hearing this Pamina at once asks to share in the trials, and so they
walk together through fire and water, protected by the golden flute, as
well as by their courage and constancy.  They come out purified and
happy.

Papageno, having lost his companion, has grown quite melancholy and
longs for the little wife, that was promised to him and shown to him
only for a few moments.  He resolves at last to end his life by hanging
himself, when the celestial youths appear, reminding him of his bells.
He begins to shake them, and Papagena appears in feathery dress, the
very counter-part of himself.  All might now be well, were it not that
the Queen of Night, a somewhat unreasonable lady, broods vengeance.
{195} She accepts the negro Monostatos as her avenger, and promises to
give him her daughter.  But already Sarastro has done his work; Tamino
is united to his Pamina, and before the sunny light of truth everything
else vanishes and sinks back into night.




THE MAIDENS OF SCHILDA.

Comic Opera in three acts by ALBAN FORSTER.

Text by RUDOLF BUNGE.


The first work of this composer was produced on the stage of the Royal
Dresden theatre on the twelfth of October 1889 and was received with
great applause.  This surprising success is due firstly to the great
popularity, which Forster enjoyed as former Director of the renowned
"Liedertafel" (Society for vocal music) and as teacher, and then to the
numerous pretty melodies intermixed with national airs, in which
particularly the old "Dessauer march" is skilfully interwoven, then the
wellknown student air "Was kommt dort von der Hoeh'", which of course
gladdens the heart of every student old or young.

Nevertheless it might be called an Operette rather than an Opera.  The
text at least does not range any higher, it is often almost silly, the
rhymes bad and unequal.

Nevertheless those who like to be amused by a light and agreeable flow
of music may pass a merry evening, listening to the droll exploits of
the two Schilda maidens.--Schilda and {196} Schildburghers are in
Germany synonymous with narrow mindedness, which is indeed strongly
marked in the inhabitants of this out-of-the way town.

The scene is laid in the last century.

In the first act an order of the Prince of Dessau calls all the
youngsters of Schilda to arms.--The chief magistrate with the
characteristic name of Ruepelmei (Ruepel=Clown), who has already given to
the town so many wise laws, as for instance the one, which decrees that
the Schilda maidens under thirty are not allowed to marry--now
demonstrates to his two nieces, Lenchen and Hedwig, the benefit of his
legislation, in as much as they might otherwise be obliged to take
leave of their husbands.  He wants to marry one of them himself, but
they have already given their hearts to two students and only laugh at
their vain uncle.  This tyrant now orders all the maidens to be locked
up in a place of safety every evening, in order to guard them from
outsiders; further the worthy Schildaers resolve to build a wall, which
is to shut them out from the depraved world.

While Ruepelmei is still reflecting upon these ingenious ideas, a French
Courier, the Marquis de Maltracy enters, imploring the Burgomaster to
hide him from the Prussian pursuers, who are on his track.  He promises
a cross of honor to the ambitious Ruepelmei, who at once hides him in
the Town-hall.--Meanwhile a chorus of students approaches, who have
left Halle to avoid being enlisted in the army.  Lenchen and Hedchen,
recognizing {197} their sweet-hearts among them, greet them joyfully,
and when Ruepelmei appears, they propitiate him by flattery.

A lively scene of student-life ensues, in which the maidens join, after
their old night-guardian Schlump has been intoxicated.

Ruepelmei returning and seeing this spectacle, orders the police to
seize the students, but instead of doing so, they thrust him into the
very same barrel, which he has invented for the punishment of male
citizens, and so he is obliged to be as impotent spectator of their
merry-making.

In the second act he has been liberated by his faithful citizens; the
students have escaped and the maidens are waiting to be locked up in
their place of refuge.--But in the shades of evening the two students,
Berndt and Walter return and are hidden by their sweet-hearts, Lenchen
and Hedchen among the other maidens, after having put on female
garments.--They all have hardly disappeared in the Town-hall, when the
Prince of Dessau arrives with his Grenadiers to seize the students, of
whose flight to Schilda he has been informed.--Ruepelmei tells him, that
he has captured and killed many of them, but the Prince, disbelieving
him, orders his soldiers to search the houses beginning with the
Town-hall.  Ruepelmei, remembering the Marquis, implores him to desist
from his resolution, the Town-hall being the nightly asylum for
Schilda's daughters, but in vain.  Schlump, the snoring guardian is
awakened and ordered to open {198} the door to the room, where the
maidens are singing and frolicking with their guests.--The Marquis de
Maltracy has also introduced himself, but perceiving that he is a spy,
they all turn from him in disdain; when the Prussian Grenadiers are
heard, they quickly hide him in a large trunk.

The Prince, finding all those pretty girls, is quite affable, and a
general dancing and merry-making ensues, during which the students
vainly try to escape, when suddenly two of the Grenadiers perceive that
their respective beauties have beards.--The students are discovered and
at once ordered to be put into the uniform, while Ruepelmei is arrested
and handcuffed notwithstanding his protestations.

When the third act opens, drilling is going on in the town, and Walter
and Berndt are among the recruits.

Lenchen and Hedwig arrive with the other girls to free the
students.--They flatter the drill-sergeant, and soon the drilling is
forgotten--and they are dancing merrily, when the Prince of Dessau
arrives in the midst of the fun and threatens to have the officer shot
for neglect of duty and the students as deserters.  While the maidens
are entreating him to be merciful, Berndt suddenly remembers the French
Courier.  He quickly relates to the Prince, that they have captured a
French Marquis, who has a most important document in his possession,
the plan of war.  The Prince promising to let them free, if that proves
to be true, the Marquis is conducted before the {199} Prince, and the
latter discovers that he is a messenger to the King of France, and that
his letter is to show how the French army might attack the Prussians
unawares.  By this discovery the Germans are saved, for Dessau has time
to send an officer to Saxony with orders to occupy Dresden before the
arrival of the enemy.

Of course, the students are set free, and each of them obtains an
office and the hand of his maiden besides.  The luckless Ruepelmei is
also liberated, being too much of a fool, to deserve even the Prince's
scorn, who further decrees that the foolish town may keep their
Burgomaster, as best suited to their narrow-mindedness.




MARGA.

Opera in one act by GEORG PITTRICH.

Text by ARNO SPIESS.


The first performance of this highly interesting little opera took
place in Dresden in February 1894 and awakened the interest of every
music lover in the hitherto quite unknown composer.  Scenery and Music
are of the colouring now common to modern composers, for whom
unfortunately Mascagni is still the God, at whose shrine they worship.

The scene is laid in a Bulgarian village at the foot of the
Schipka-Pass.  Marga the heroine, a Roumanian peasant-girl has had a
sister Petrissa, who, suffering cruel wrong at the hands of Vasil
Kiselow, has cursed her seducer and sought death {200} in the waves.
Marga, who had vowed to avenge her sister, is wandering through the
world in vain search of Vasil.  When the curtain opens she has just
reached the village, where Vasil occupies the most auspicious position
of Judge.  Thoroughly exhausted she sinks down at the foot of a cross
and falls asleep.

Vasil's son Manal, finding her thus, detects a wonderful likeness
between the sleeping beauty and a picture, which he had found some time
ago in the miraculous Sabor Cave, and which for him is the ideal of
love and beauty.--This picture, a likeness of Petrissa had been hung
there by Vasil in order to exorcise the curse of the unhappy virgin,
but Manal has no knowledge of his father's misdeed.

When Marga awakes, the young people of course fall in love with each
other, and Marga discovers too late, that Manal is the son of her
sister's destroyer.  Hesitating between love and her vow of vengeance
she wildly reproaches Vasil who falls at her feet in deep contrition
beseeching her forgiveness, which she grants at last.--Full of
penitence he relinquishes his property to the young people, and
exhorting Manal to be a just and clement Judge, he betakes himself to
the mountains, resolved to join in the war against the Turks.

{201}

MARGUERITE (OR FAUST).

Opera in five acts by CHARLES GOUNOD.


The subject of this piece is taken from the first part of Goethe's
greatest drama--"Faust".

Faust, a celebrated old Doctor, is consumed by an insatiable thirst for
knowledge, but, having already lived through a long life devoted to the
acquirement of learning and to hard work as a scholar, without having
his soul-hunger appreciably relieved, is dissatisfied and in his
disappointment wishes to be released from this life, which has grown to
be a burden to him.  At this moment Mephistopheles, the incarnation of
the Evil One, appears and persuades him to try life in a new shape.
The old and learned Doctor has only known it in theory, Mephisto will
now show it to him in practice and in all the splendor of youth and
freshness.  Faust agrees, and Mephisto endows him with youth and
beauty.  In this guise he sees earth anew.  It is Easter-time, when all
is budding and aglow with freshness and young life and on such a bright
spring-day he first sees Margaretha and at once offers her his arm.

But this lovely maiden, pure and innocent, and well guarded by a
jealous brother, named Valentin, refuses his company somewhat
sharply.--Nevertheless she cannot help seeing the grace and good
bearing of the fine cavalier, and the simple village-maiden is inwardly
pleased with his flattery.  A bad fate wills it, that her brother
Valentin, who is {202} a soldier, has to leave on active service and
after giving many good advices and warnings for his beautiful sister's
wellfare he goes and so Mephisto is able to introduce Faust to the
unprotected girl by means of a message, which he is supposed to have
received for an old aunt of Margaretha's "Frau Marthe Schwertlein".
This old gossip, hearing from Mephisto that her husband has been killed
in battle, lends a willing ear to the flatteries of the cunning Devil;
and Margaretha is left to Faust, who wins her by his love and easy
manners.  She is only a simple maiden, knowing nothing of the world's
ways and wiles, and she accepts her lover's precious gifts with
childish delight.

By and bye, her brother Valentin returns victorious from the war, but
alas! too late!  He challenges his sister's seducer; Mephisto however
directs Faust's sword, and the faithful brother is much against Faust's
own will slain, cursing his sister with his last breath.

Now Margaretha awakes to the awful reality of her situation and she
shrinks from her brother's murderer.  Everybody shuns her, and she
finds herself alone and forsaken.  In despair she seeks refuge in
church, but her own conscience is not silenced; it accuses her more
loudly than all the pious songs and prayers.  Persecuted by evil
spirits, forsaken and forlorn, Margaretha's reason gives way, and she
drowns her new-born child.

Meanwhile Mephisto has done everything to stifle in Faust the pangs of
conscience.  Faust never {203} wills the evil, he loves Margaretha
sincerely, but the bad spirit urges him onward.  He shows him all the
joys and splendors of earth, and antiquity in its most perfect form in
the person of Helena, but in the midst of all his orgies Faust sees
Margaretha.  He beholds her, pale, unlike her former self, in the white
dress of the condemned, with a blood-red circle round the delicate
neck.  Then he knows no rest, he feels that she is in danger, and he
bids Mephisto save her.

Margaretha has actually been thrown into prison for her deed of madness
and now the executioner's axe awaits her.  She sits on the damp straw,
rocking a bundle, which she takes for her baby, and across her poor
wrecked brain there flit once more pictures of all the scenes of her
short-lived happiness.  Then Faust enters with Mephisto, and tries to
persuade her to escape with them.  But she instinctively shrinks from
her lover, loudly imploring God's and the Saint's pardon.  God has
mercy on her, for, just as the bells are tolling for her execution; she
expires, and her soul is carried to Heaven by angels, there to pray for
her erring lover.  Mephisto disappears into the earth.




MARTHA

Comic Opera in four acts by FLOTOW.

Text by W. FRIEDRICH.


This charming opera finally established the renown of its composer, who
had first found his way to public favor through "Stradella".--It {204}
ranks high among our comic operas, and has become as much liked as
those of Lortzing and Nicolai.

Not the least of its merits lies in the text, which Friedrich worked
out dexterously, and which is amusing and interesting throughout.

Lady Harriet Durham, tired of the pleasures and splendours of Court,
determines to seek elsewhere for a pastime, and hoping to find it in a
sphere different from her own, disguises herself and her confidant
Nancy as peasant-girls, in which garb they visit the Fair at Richmond,
accompanied by Lord Tristan, who is hopelessly enamoured of Lady
Harriet and unwillingly complies with her wish to escort them to the
adventure in the attire of a peasant.--They join the servant-girls, who
are there to seek employment, and are hired by a tenant Plumkett and
his foster-brother Lionel, a youth of somewhat extraordinary behaviour,
his air being noble and melancholy and much too refined for a
country-squire, while the other, though somewhat rough, is frank and
jolly in his manner.

The disguised ladies take the handsel from them, without knowing that
they are bound by it, until the sheriff arrives to confirm the bargain.
Now the joke becomes reality and they hear that they are actually hired
as servants for a whole year.

Notwithstanding Lord Tristan's protestations, the ladies are carried
off by their masters, who know them under the names of Martha and Julia.

In the second act we find the ladies in the company of the tenants, who
set them instantly to {205} work.  Of course they are totally ignorant
of household-work, and as their wheels will not go round, Plumkett
shows them how to spin.  In his rough but kind way he always commands
and turns to Nancy, with whom he falls in love, but Lionel only asks
softly when he wishes anything done.  He has lost his heart to Lady
Harriet and declares his love to her.  Though she is pleased by his
gentle behaviour, she is by no means willing to accept a country-squire
and wounds him by her mockery.  Meanwhile Plumkett has sought Nancy for
the same purpose, but she hides herself and at last the girls are sent
to bed very anxious and perplexed at the turn their adventure has
taken.  But Lord Tristan comes to their rescue in a coach and they take
flight, vainly pursued by the tenants.--Plumkett swears to catch and
punish them, but Lionel sinks into deep melancholy, from which nothing
can arouse him.

In the third act we meet them at a Court-hunt, where they recognize
their hired servants in two of the lady-hunters.  They assert their
right, but the Ladies disown them haughtily, and when Lionel, whose
reason almost gives way under the burden of grief and shame, which
overwhelms him at thinking himself deceived by Martha, tells the whole
story to the astonished Court, the Ladies pronounce him insane and Lord
Tristan sends him to prison for his insolence, notwithstanding Lady
Harriet and Nancy's prayer for his pardon.

Lionel gives a ring to Plumkett, asking him {206} to show it to the
Queen, his dying father having told him that it would protect him from
every danger.

In the fourth act Lady Harriet feels remorse for the sad consequences
of her haughtiness.  She visits the prisoner to crave his pardon.  She
tells him that she has herself carried his ring to the Queen and that
he has been recognized by it as Lord Derby's son, once banished from
Court, but whose innocence is now proved.

Then the proud Lady offers hand and heart to Lionel, but he rejects
her, believing himself duped.  Lady Harriet, however who loves Lionel,
resolves to win him against his will.  She disappears, and dressing
herself and Nancy in the former peasant's attire, she goes once more to
the Fair at Richmond, where Lionel is also brought by his friend
Plumkett.  He sees his beloved Martha advance towards him, promising to
renounce all splendors and live only for him; then his melancholy
vanishes; and he weds her, his name and possessions being restored to
him, while Plumkett obtains the hand of pretty Nancy, alias Julia.




THE MASTER-SINGERS OF NUeREMBERG.

Opera in three acts by WAGNER.


This opera carries us back to the middle of the 16th century and the
persons whom we meet are all historical.

{207}

Amongst the tradesmen, whose rhyme-making has made them famous, Hans
Sachs, the shoemaker is the most conspicuous.

The music is highly original, though not precisely melodious and is
beautifully adapted to its characteristically national subject.

In the first act we see St. Catharine's church in Nueremberg, where
Divine Service is being celebrated, in preparation for St. John's Day.
Eva, the lovely daughter of Master Pogner the jeweller, sees the young
knight Walter Stolzing, who has fallen in love with Eva, and who has
sold his castle in Franconia to become a citizen of Nueremberg.  She
tells him that her hand is promised to the winner of the prize for a
master-song, to be sung on the following morning.

We are now called to witness one of those ancient customs still
sometimes practiced in old German towns.  The master-singers appear,
and the apprentices prepare everything needful for them.  Walter asks
one of them, called David, an apprentice of Sachs, what he will have to
do in order to compete for the prize.  He has not learnt poetry as a
profession like those worthy workmen, and David vainly tries to
initiate him into their old-fashioned rhyming.  Walter leaves him,
determined to win the prize after his own fashion.

Pogner appears with Beckmesser the clerk, whom he wishes to have as
son-in-law.  Beckmesser is so infatuated that he does not doubt of his
success.  Meanwhile Walter comes up to them, {208} entreating them to
admit him into their corporation as a master-singer.

Pogner consents, but Beckmesser grumbles, not at all liking to have a
nobleman among them.--When all are assembled, Pogner declares his
intention of giving his daughter to the winner of the master-song on
the day of St John's festival, and all applaud his resolution.  Eva
herself may refuse him, but never is she to wed another than a crowned
master-singer.  Sachs, who loves Eva as his own child, seeks to change
her father's resolution, at the same time proposing to let the people
choose in the matter of the prize, but he is silenced by his
colleagues.  They now want to know where Walter has learnt the art of
poetry and song, and as he designates Walter von der Vogelweide and the
birds of the forest, they shrug their shoulders.

He begins at once to give a proof of his art, praising Spring in a song
thrilling with melody.  Beckmesser interrupts him; he has marked the
rhymes on the black tablet, but they are new and unintelligible to this
dry verse-maker, and he will not let them pass.  The others share his
opinion; only Hans Sachs differs from them, remarking that Walter's
song, though new and not after the old use and wont rules of Nueremberg,
is justified all the same, and so Walter is allowed to finish it, which
he does with a bold mockery of the vain poets, comparing them to crows,
oversounding a singing-bird.  Sachs alone feels that Walter is a true
poet.

{209}

In the second act David the apprentice tells Magdalene, Eva's nurse,
that the new singer did not succeed, at which she is honestly grieved,
preferring the gallant younker for her mistress, to the old and
ridiculous clerk.  The old maid loves David; she provides him with food
and sweets and many are the railleries which he has to suffer from his
companions in consequence.

The evening coming on we see Sachs in his open work-shop; Eva, his
darling, is in confidential talk with him.  She is anxious about
to-morrow, and rather than wed Beckmesser she would marry Sachs, whom
she loves and honors as a father.  Sachs is a widower, but he rightly
sees through her schemes and resolves to help the lovers.

It has now grown quite dark, and Walter comes to see Eva, but they have
not sat long together, when the sounds of a lute are heard.

It is Beckmesser trying to serenade Eva, but Sachs interrupts him by
singing himself and thus excites Beckmesser's wrath and despair.  At
last a window opens, and Beckmesser, taking Magdalene for Eva addresses
her in louder and louder tones, Sachs all the time beating the measure
on a shoe.  The neighboring windows open, there is a general alarm, and
David, seeing Magdalene at the window apparently listening to
Beckmesser, steals behind this unfortunate minstrel and begins to slap
him.  In the uproar which now follows, Walter vainly tries to escape
from his refuge under the lime-tree, but Sachs comes to his rescue, and
takes him into {210} his own work-shop, while he pushes Eva unseen into
her father's house, the door of which has just been opened by Pogner.

In the third act we find Sachs in his room.  Walter enters, thanking
him heartily for the night's shelter.  Sachs kindly shows him the rules
of poetry, encouraging him to try his luck once more.  Walter begins
and quite charms Sachs with his love-song.  After they have left the
room, Beckmesser enters, and reading the poetry, which Sachs wrote
down, violently charges the shoemaker with wooing Eva himself.  Sachs
denies it and allows Beckmesser to keep the paper.  The latter who has
vainly ransacked his brains for a new song, is full of joy, hoping to
win the prize with it.

When he is gone, Eva slips in to fetch her shoes, and she sees Walter
stepping out of his dormitory in brilliant armor.  He has found a third
stanza to his song; which he at once produces.--They all proceed to the
place where the festival is to be held and Beckmesser in the first to
try his fortunes, which he does by singing the stolen song.  He sadly
muddles both melody and words, and being laughed at, he charges Sachs
with treachery, but Sachs quietly denies the authorship, pushing
forward Walter, who now sings his stanzas, inspired by love and poetry.
No need to say that he wins the hearer's hearts as he has won those of
Eva and Sachs, and that Pogner does not deny him his beloved daughter's
hand.

{211}

THE MASTER-THIEF.

A German Legend in three parts by EUGEN LINDNER.

After Fitger's poem by GUSTAV KASTROPP and the composer.


The young composer has hitherto been little heard of by the public,
though he has a good name in the musical world, as he had already
written an opera called "Ramiro", which was put on the stage in Leipsic
and excited considerable controversy among his admirers and his
opponents.  Lindner then left Leipsic for Weimar, where he studied
zealously and composed the above-mentioned opera which was at once
accepted on the small but celebrated stage of this town and has now
appeared on the greater one of Dresden.  This opera is half romantic
half lyric, neither does it lack the humorous elements.  It abounds in
melody, a great rarity in our times, and the romance (Lied) is its best
part.

Though the music is not precisely overpowering, it is very sweet and
pleasing; one sees that a great talent has been at work, if not a
genius.

The libretto is very nice on the whole, in some parts even charmingly
poetical and melodious.

The scene is laid in an Earldom on the Rhine.

The master-thief Wallfried, a young nobleman, who ten years before had
been put into a convent as younger son, has fled from it, and has since
then been the companion of roving minstrels and Bohemians.  Having
heard of his elder brother's death, he comes home to claim his rights.
There he sees Waldmuthe, the only daughter of Count {212} Berengar, the
Seigneur of the Earldom.  As her features are as sweet as her voice,
and as the father guards his treasures better than his daughter,
Wallfried falls in love with her, and after artfully robbing her of her
necklace, he even steals a kiss from her rosy lips.  At first she
reproaches him, but at last willingly leaves her ornament in his hands,
which he keeps as a token of seeing her again.

At a fair, where Wallfried for the last time makes merry with his
companions and sings to them the song of the pretty Aennchen,--by the
bye a pearl of elegance and delicacy,--he sees Count Berengar and his
daughter, and at once reclaims his own name and castle as Heir von
Sterneck from the Seigneur.--But Waldmuthe's companion, Hertha sees her
mistress's chain on Wallfried's neck and as our hero will not tell how
he came by it, he is considered a thief.  His friend Marquard now
pleads for him, intimating that he took the chain only to show his
adroitness as a master-thief.  Count Berengar hearing this, orders him
to give three proofs of his skill.  First he is to rob the Count of his
dearest treasure, which is guarded by his soldiers and which then will
be his own, secondly he is to steal the Count himself from his palace,
and finally he must rob the Count of his own personality.  Should he
fail in one of these efforts, he is to be hanged.

These tests seem to be very difficult, but Wallfried promises to
fulfill his task on the very same day.

{213}

In the second act Wallfried arrives with two friends at the Count's
castle.  All three are in pilgrim's garb and bring a beautiful
wassail-horn to the Count in token of friendship from the Sire of
Rodenstein.  The sentry and the Count consider these pious guests
harmless, and the Count, being a great amateur of good wine, drinks and
sings with them and soon gets drunk.  The roundelays are full of wit
and humor and particularly Wallfried's song, with the charming
imitation of the spinning-wheel in the orchestra, is of great
effect.--At last one of the pilgrims intimates, that though the wine be
good, they have drunk a far better at the clergyman's in the village.
This seems incredible to the Count and he is willing to put it to the
test.  He goes with his guests out of his castle and so the second of
his orders, to steal his own person, is already accomplished.

Wallfried however stays behind to rob the Count of his most valuable
treasure, which he deems to be the young Countess herself.  While the
soldiers carefully guard the jewels and diamonds in the tower,
Waldmuthe steps on her balcony and confides her love to the
moon.--Wallfried, hearing her confession, easily persuades her to
follow him, as she hopes thereby to save his life and so the first
condition is likewise fulfilled.

In the third act the Bohemians (Wallfried's companions) have carried
the Count into the forest, and having robbed him of his clothes, dress
him in the clergyman's cassock.  The Count, awaking {214} from his
inebriety, is quite confused.  His misery after the debauch is most
funnily and expressively depicted in the orchestration.  His confusion
increases, when the Bohemians, dressed as peasants, greet him as
"Seigneur Pastor", and when even Benno, the warden of Sterneck calls
him by this name,--for everybody is in the plot,--he storms and rages,
but grows the more troubled.  At last Wallfried makes his appearance in
the mask of Count Berengar, speaking of his presumed daughter and of
her love.  Then the mists of the wine gather thicker around the Count's
tortured brain, he repeats Wallfried's words and when alone says aloud
"There goes Count Berengar, now I believe myself to be the
pastor."--Thus too the third order is fulfilled; he is robbed of
himself.

Waldmuthe, stealing up to him, roguishly laughing repeats the tests and
now the Count at once becomes sober.--Of course he is in wrath at first
and most unwilling to give his only child to one, who has passed part
of his life with Bohemians.  But Waldmuthe reminds him of his own
youth, how audaciously he had won his wife, her mother, and how he had
promised her to care for their daughter's happiness.  The tender father
cannot resist her touching and insinuating appeal, but resolves to try
Wallfried's sincerity.  When the latter reminds him, that he has only
executed the Count's own orders, though in a somewhat different sense,
Berengar willingly grants him the tide and domains of Sterneck, but
refuses his {215} daughter, telling him to choose instead his finest
jewels.  Wallfried haughtily turns from him to join his old comrades,
and refuses name and heritage, which would be worthless to him without
his bride.  But the maiden is as noble as her lover; she rushes up to
him, ready to brave her father's scorn as well as the world's dangers.
Then the Count, persuaded of the young fellow's noble heart, folds him
in his embrace and readily gives his benediction to the union.




DER MAURER.

(THE MASON.)

Opera in three acts by AUBER.

Text by SCRIBE.


This charming little work is one of the best semi-comic operas ever
composed, from the time of its first representation in Paris until now
it has never lacked success.

The libretto is founded on a true anecdote, and is admirably suited to
the music.

The scene is laid in Paris in the year 1788.

The first act represents the merry wedding of Roger, a mason, with
Henrietta, sister of Baptiste, a locksmith.  A jealous old hag,
Mistress Bertrand, who would fain have married the nice young man, is
wondering, whence the poor mason has the money for his wedding, when
suddenly a young nobleman, Leon de Merinville, appears, greeting Roger
warmly.  He relates to the astonished hearers, that Roger saved his
life, but would not {216} take any reward, nor tell his name.  Roger
explains that the nobleman put so much money into his pocket, that it
enabled him to marry his charming Henrietta, but Merinville is
determined to do more for him.  Meanwhile Roger tries to withdraw from
the ball with his young wife; but Henrietta is called back by her
relations according to custom.--Roger, being left alone, is accosted by
two unknown men, who, veiling his eyes, force him to follow them to a
spot unknown to him, in order to do some mason-work for them.  It is to
the house of Abdallah, the Turkish ambassador, that he is led.  The
latter has heard that his mistress Irma, a young Greek maiden, is about
to take flight with a French officer, who is no other than de
Merinville.

The lovers are warned by a slave, named Rica, but it is too late;
Abdallah's people overtake and bind them.  They are brought into a
cavern, the entrance to which Roger is ordered to mure up.  There,
before him, he finds his friend and brother-in-law, Baptiste, who was
likewise caught and is now forced to help him.

Recognizing in the officer his benefactor, Roger revives hope in him by
singing a song, which Leon heard him sing at the time he saved his life.

Meanwhile Henrietta has passed a dreadful night, not being able to
account for her husband's absence.  In the morning Mistress Bertrand
succeeds in exciting the young wife's sorrow and jealousy to a shocking
degree, so that when Roger {217} at last appears, she receives him with
a volley of reproaches and questions.

Roger, unhappy about Merinville's fate and ignorant of where he has
been in the night, scarcely listens to his wife's complaints, until
Henrietta remarks that she well knows where he has been, Mistress
Bertrand having recognized the carriage of the Turkish ambassador, in
which he was wheeled away.

This brings light into Roger's brain and without more ado he rushes to
the police, with whose help the poor prisoners are delivered.  Roger
returns with him to his wife's house, where things are cleared up in
the most satisfactory manner.




MELUSINE.

Romantic Opera in three acts by CARL GRAMMANN.

Text after C. CAMP'S poem of the same name.

Tableaux and mise en scene after SCHWIND'S composition.


The composer of this opera is known in the musical world as the author
of many other fine works.  He has given us several operas worthy of
mention, "St. Andrew's Night", and "Thusnelda" among others, which were
brought on the stage in Dresden some years ago.--

Melusine was first represented in Wiesbaden in 1874 with but small
success.--Since then the opera has been rewritten and in part
completely changed by the author, and in this new garb has found its
first representation in the Dresden Opera-house, on the 23rd of May
1891.

{218}

Neither music nor libretto are strikingly original; both remind vividly
of Wagner.--Nevertheless the opera met with warm applause, the
principal part being splendidly rendered by Teresa Malten, and the mise
en scene justifying the highest expectations.  The beauty of the music
lies principally in its coloring which is often very fine.  Its best
parts are the tender songs of the nymphs, those parts which lead into
the realm of dream and of fairy-land.--Once only it soars to a higher
dramatic style; it is in the second act (the one which has undergone an
entire revision), when Bertram, the natural son, bewails his father.--

On the whole the weak libretto forbids every deeper impression.  It is
neither natural nor dramatic, and leaves our innermost feelings as cold
as the watery element, from which it springs.

The scene is laid in a French Department on the Upper Rhine, where a
Duchy of Lusignan can never have existed, about the time of the first
Crusade.--The first act shows a forest, peopled by water-nymphs and
fairies, who enjoy their dances in the light of the
full-moon.--Melusine, their princess emerges from her grotto.  While
they sing and dance, a hunter's bugle is heard and Count Raymond of
Lusignan appears with Bertram, his half-brother, seeking anxiously for
their father.--Both search on opposite sides; Bertram disappears, while
Raymond, hearing a loud outcry for help, rushes into the bushes whence
it comes, not heeding Melusine's warning, who watches the {219}
proceedings half hidden in her grotto.  The nymphs, foreseeing what is
going to happen, break out into lamentations, while Melusine sings an
old tale of the bloody strife of two brothers.  She is already in love
with Raymond, whose misfortune she bewails.  When he hurries back in
wild despair at having slain his father, whose life he tried to save
from the tusks of a wild boar,--his sword piercing the old man instead
of the beast, (a deed decreed by fate,)--he finds the lovely nymph
ready to console him.  She presents him with a draught from the magic
well, which instantly brings him forgetfulness of the past (compare
Nibelung's-ring).--The Count drinks it, and immediately glowing with
love for the beautiful maiden wooes her as his wife.  Melusine consents
to the union under the condition that he pledges himself by a solemn
oath, never to blame her, nor to spy her out, should she leave him in
the full-moon nights.  Raymond promises, and the sun having risen, the
hunters find him in his bride's company.  He presents their future
mistress to them, and all render homage; only Bertram, struck to the
heart by Melusine's loveliness, which is not for him, stands scornfully
aside.

The first scene of the second act represents the sepulchral crypt of
the Lusignan family.  The old Duke has been found dead in the forest,
and a choir of monks sings the Requiem.  Bertram's mournful song and
the lament of the women are of surpassing beauty; also the contrasting
sounds {220} from merry music of Raymond's wedding procession, now and
then heard, cause an excellent musical effect.  A hermit, Peter von
Amiens, now entering comforts the widowed Duchess and warns them all of
Melusine.  He relates the legend of the water-fairy, who with sweet
voice and mien entices and seduces human beings.  The poor mother
implores Heaven to save her son, while Bertram invokes Hell to avenge
his father on the murderer.

The scene changes into the park belonging to Raymond's palace.  Raymond
and Melusine enjoy their nuptial bliss, until the rising of the
full-moon awakes in Melusine the irresistible longing for her native
element.  Notwithstanding her husband's entreaties, she tears herself
from him, and Raymond, mindful of his oath, retires.  But Melusine's
steps are interrupted by Bertram, who has tracked her and now declares
his love.  She scornfully rejects him, and he, enraged and jealous,
threatens to betray Raymond, whose bloody sword he has found at the
spot, where their father was murdered.  But Melusine escapes to the
gray temple in the garden and she prophesies, that Raymond will be
happy as long as he keeps her faith, and then vanishes into the
interior.  Bertram remains motionless and stunned, until he hears
Raymond's voice, who is waiting for his wife.--Spurred by every evil
feeling of hate and envy he peremptorily asks Raymond to surrender all
his possessions, his wife Melusine, even his life, deeming that his
brother has forfeited every right through the murder.--But {221}
Raymond oblivious of the deed through the effect of the magic draught,
draws his sword, when his mother interferes.  The Duchess repeats to
her son the suspicion expressed by the hermit in regard to Melusine and
Raymond anxiously calls for her to refuse the accusation.--But instead
of his wife, sweet songs are heard from the temple, he forgets his
oath, spies into its interior through a cleft and perceives the place
of the nixies, with Melusine in their midst.  Recognizing his fate,
Raymond sinks back with a despairing cry.

In the third act the fishermen and women assemble on the banks of the
Rhine at day-break, preparing for their daily work.  They also know the
Count's wife to be a mer-maid, and they sing a ballad of the
water-nymph.  Suddenly Melusine appears and they take flight.
Melusine, finding the gates of her husband's castle closed, vainly
calls for him.--His mother answers in his stead, charging her with
witchcraft and refusing to admit her.  Melusine, sure of Raymond's love
undauntedly answers that only Raymond's want of faith could undo
her.--In the meantime a herald announces the arrival of Crusaders with
Peter von Amiens.--The latter exhorts Count Raymond to join the holy
army in order to expiate his father's murder.  Raymond is willing to
go, when Melusine entreats him not to leave her.  All present press
around to insult her, only Bertram steps forth as her protector, once
more showing Raymond's bloody sword, an act, which she alone
understands.  She kneels {222} to him, in order to save her husband,
but Raymond, misunderstanding her movements, accuses her of secret
intercourse with Bertram and in a fit of jealousy disowns her.
Scarcely have the luckless words escaped his lips, than a violent sound
of thunder is heard.  Melusine curses the palace, and throws her
husband's ring at his feet.  She disappears in the Rhine, Bertram
leaping after her, the stream overflows its banks, and a flash of
lightning destroys the castle.  Gradually the scene changes to the one
of sylvan solitude in the first act.  Raymond appears in pilgrim's garb
to seek for his lost love (see Tannhaeuser), Melusine once more emerges
from her grotto to comfort him, but also to bring him death.  Happy, he
dies in her embrace, she buries him under water-lilies and returns to
her watery domains.




MERLIN.

Opera in three acts by CHARLES GOLDMARK.

Text by SIEGFRIED LIPINER.


This latest creation of the talented composer at once proved itself a
success, when produced for the first time in the Opera-House in Vienna.
Since then it has quickly passed to all the larger stages.

Merlin surpasses the Queen of Sheba in dramatic value and is equal to
it in glowing coloring and brilliant orchestration.  Goldmark is quite
the reverse of Wagner.  Though equally master of modern
instrumentation, he abounds in melodies.  {223} Airs, duets and
choruses meet us of surpassing beauty and sweetness.  The text is
highly fantastic, but interesting and poetical.

King Artus is attacked by the Saxons and almost succumbs.--In his need
he sends Lancelot to Merlin, an enchanter and seer, but at the same
time the King's best friend and a Knight of his table.

Merlin, offspring of the Prince of Hell and of a pure virgin, has power
over the demons, whom however he only employs in the service of Heaven,
his good mother's spirit protecting him.  Merlin calls up a demon, whom
he forces to blind the heathen Saxons, so that the Britons may be
victorious.  The demon obeys unwillingly and after Merlin's departure
he calls up the fairy Morgana who knows all the secrets of the world.
Morgana tells the demon, that if Merlin loves an earthly woman, his
power will be gone and the demon resolves to tempt Merlin with the most
beautiful woman on earth.  He vanishes and the Britons return
victorious, Merlin with prophetic insight recognizing the knight, who
had betrayed his people to the Saxons.  While he sings a passionate
chant in honor of his King and his country, Vivien, a Duke's daughter,
appears and they are at once attracted to each other.  But Merlin
vanquishes his love and refuses to accept the crown of oak-leaves,
which his King offers him by the hand of Vivien.  Then Artus takes his
own crown and puts it on Merlin's curls.

{224}

The second act begins with a conspiracy headed by Modred, Artus'
nephew, against his uncle.  Lancelot openly accuses him of treason, and
the King sends to Merlin, for judgment.  But alas, Merlin's love has
already blinded his understanding; he fails to detect the culpable
Modred, and declares that he is not able to find fault in him.  King
Artus and his knights depart to seek new laurels, leaving the country
in Modred's hands.  Merlin stays in his sanctum, to where the demon now
leads Vivien who has lost her way.  The doors of the temple open by
themselves at Vivien's request, and she finds a rosy, glittering veil,
which, thrown into the air, causes various charming apparitions to
present themselves.--When Merlin comes, the whole charm vanishes into
air.  Vivien tells him of her delightful adventure, but Merlin,
frightened, informs her that who ever is touched by the veil, will be
in the power of demons, chained to a rock for ever.  Love conquers, and
the short hour succeeding is for both filled with earth's greatest
bliss.  The news of Modred's treachery to King Artus awakes Merlin from
his dream.  He tears himself from his love, vowing to shun her for ever
and to return to the well of grace.  But Vivien, finding all her
prayers vain, throws the fatal veil over him to hinder his flight.  The
dreadful effect becomes instantly apparent; the rose-garden disappears,
mighty rocks enclose the vale on all sides, and Merlin is held down by
burning chains.

While Vivien is consumed by self-reproach and {225} pain, the fairy
Morgana appears, telling her that love, which is stronger than death,
can bring Merlin eternal grace.  Vivien is led away by her maid, and
Lancelot enters with the knights to seek Merlin's help against the
treacherous Modred.

Seeing Merlin in this pitiful state, he sadly turns from him, but
Merlin in despair promises his soul to the demon, if he but assist to
deliver his King and his country.  The demon breaks the chains and
Merlin rushes with the knights into battle.  During his absence Vivien
prepares herself to receive her hero, but though she sees him return
victorious he is wounded to death.  The demon comes up to claim his
victim, but Vivien, remembering Morgana's words, sacrifices herself
piercing her heart at Merlin's feet.  The demon disappears cursing
heaven and earth, while Artus and his knights, though they sadly mourn
for their hero, yet praise the victory of true love.




THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR.

Comic Opera in three acts by OTTO NICOLAI.

Text by MOSENTHAL.


This charming opera has achieved the fame of its composer, of whom very
little is known, except that he is the author of this really admirable
musical composition, which is valued not only in Germany but all over
Europe.  Its overture is played by almost every orchestra, and the
choruses and songs are both delightful and original.  As {226} may be
gathered from the title, the whole amusing story is taken from
Shakespeare's comedy.

Falstaff has written love-letters to the wives of two citizens of
Windsor, Mrs. Fluth and Mrs. Reich.  They discover his duplicity and
decide to punish the infatuated old fool.

Meanwhile Mr. Fenton, a nice but poor young man asks for the hand of
Miss Anna Reich.  But her father has already chosen a richer suitor for
his daughter in the person of silly Mr. Spaerlich.

In the following scene Sir John Falstaff is amiably received by Mrs.
Fluth, when suddenly Mrs. Reich arrives, telling them that Mr. Fluth
will be with them at once, having received notice of his wife's doings.
Falstaff is packed into a washing-basket and carried away from under
Mr. Fluth's nose by two men, who are bidden to put the contents in a
canal near the Thames, and the jealous husband, finding nobody,
receives sundry lectures from his offended wife.

In the second act Mr. Fluth, mistrusting his wife, makes Falstaff's
acquaintance, under the assumed name of Bach, and is obliged to hear an
account of the worthy Sire's gallant adventure with his wife and its
disagreeable issue.  Fluth persuades Falstaff to give him a rendezvous,
swearing inwardly to punish the old coxcomb for his impudence.

In the evening Miss Anna meets her lover Fenton in the garden, and
ridiculing her two suitors, Spaerlich and Dr. Caius, a Frenchman, she
{227} promises to remain faithful to her love.  The two others, who are
hidden behind some trees, must perforce listen to their own dispraise.

When the time has come for Falstaff's next visit to Mrs. Fluth, who of
course knows of her husband's renewed suspicion, Mr. Fluth surprises
his wife and reproaches her violently with her conduct.  During this
controversy Falstaff is disguised as an old woman and when the
neighbors come to help the husband in his search, they find only an old
deaf cousin of Mrs. Fluth's who has come from the country to visit her.
Nevertheless the hag gets a good thrashing from the duped and angry
husband.

In the last act everybody is in the forest, preparing for the festival
of Herne the hunter.  All are masked, and Sir John Falstaff, being led
on by the two merry wives is surprised by Herne (Fluth), who sends the
whole chorus of wasps, flies and mosquitos on to his broad back.  They
torment and punish him, till he loudly cries for mercy.  Fenton in the
mask of Oberon has found his Anna in Queen Titania, while Dr. Caius and
Spaerlich, mistaking their masks for Anna's, sink into each other's
arms, much to their mutual discomfiture.

Mr. Fluth and Mr. Reich, seeing that their wives are innocent and that
they only made fun of Falstaff, are quite happy and the whole scene
ends with a general pardon.




{228}

MIGNON.

Opera in three acts by AMBROISE THOMAS

Text by MICHEL CARRE and JULES BARBIER.


This opera is full of French grace and vivacity, and has been favorably
received in Germany.  The authors have used for their libretto Goethe's
celebrated novel "Wilhelm Meister", with its typical figure Mignon as
heroine, though very much altered.  The two first acts take place in
Germany.

Lothario, a half demented old man, poorly clad as a wandering minstrel,
seeks his lost daughter Sperata.  Mignon comes with a band of gipsies,
who abuse her because she refuses to dance.  Lothario advances to
protect her, but Jarno, the chief of the troop, only scorns him, until
a student, Wilhelm Meister steps forth and rescues her, a young actress
named Philine compensating the gipsy for his loss by giving him all her
loose cash.  Mignon, grateful for the rescue, falls in love with
Wilhelm and wants to follow and serve him, but the young man, though
delighted with her loveliness and humility is not aware of her love.
Nevertheless he takes her with him.  He is of good family, but by a
whim just now stays with a troop of comedians, to whom he takes his
protegee.  The coquette Philine loves Wilhelm and has completely
enthralled him by her arts and graces.  She awakes bitter jealousy in
Mignon who tries to drown herself, but is hindered by the sweet strains
of Lothario's harp which appeal to the nobler feelings of her nature.
The latter always keeps near her, watching {229} over the lovely child.
He instinctively feels himself attracted towards her; she recalls his
lost daughter to him and he sees her as abandoned and lonely as
himself.  Mignon, hearing how celebrated Philine is, wishes that the
palace within which Philine plays, might be struck by lightning, and
Lothario at once executes her wish by setting the house on fire.

While the guests rush into the garden, Philine orders Mignon to fetch
her nosegay, the same flowers, which the thoughtless youth offered to
his mistress Philine.  Mignon, reproaching herself for her sinful wish,
at once flies into the burning house, and only afterwards does her
friend Laertes perceive that the theatre has caught fire too.
Everybody thinks Mignon lost, but Wilhelm, rushing into the flames, is
happy enough to rescue her.--

The third act carries us to Italy, where the sick Mignon has been
brought.  Wilhelm, having discovered her love, which she reveals in her
delirium, vows to live only for her.  Lothario, no longer a minstrel,
receives them as the owner of the palace, from which he had been absent
since the loss of his daughter.  While he shows Mignon the relics of
the past, a scarf and a bracelet of corals are suddenly recognized by
her.  She begins to remember her infantine prayers, she recognizes the
hall with the marble statues and her mother's picture on the
wall.--With rapture Lothario embraces his long-lost Sperata.  But
Mignon's jealous {230} love has found out that Philine followed her,
and she knows no peace until Wilhelm has proved to her satisfaction,
that he loves her best.

At last Philine graciously renounces Wilhelm and turns to Friedrich,
one of her many adorers, whom to his own great surprise she designates
as her future husband.  Mignon at last openly avows her passion for
Wilhelm.  The people, hearing of the arrival of their master, the
Marquis of Cypriani, alias Lothario, come to greet him with loud
acclamations of joy, which grow still louder, when he presents to them
his daughter Sperata and Wilhelm, her chosen husband.




LA MUETTE DE PORTICI.

Grand historical Opera in five acts by AUBER.

Text by SCRIBE.

This opera was first put on the stage in the Grand Opera-House at Paris
in the year 1828, and achieved for its author universal celebrity; not
only, because in it Auber rises to heights, which he never reached
either before or after, but because it is purely historical.  The
"Muette" is like a picture, which attracts by its vivid reproduction of
nature.  In the local tone, the southern temper, Auber has succeeded in
masterly fashion, and the text forms an admirable background to the
music.  Its subject is the revolution of Naples in the year 1647 and
the rise and fall of Masaniello, the fisherman-King.

In the first act we witness the wedding of {231} Alfonso, son of the
Viceroy of Naples, with the Spanish Princess Elvira.  Alfonso, who has
seduced Fenella, the Neapolitan Masaniello's dumb sister and abandoned
her, is tormented by doubts and remorse, fearing that she has committed
suicide.  During the festival Fenella rushes in to seek protection from
the Viceroy, who has kept her a prisoner for the past month.  She has
escaped from her prison and narrates the story of her seduction by
gestures, showing a scarf which her lover gave her.  Elvira promises to
protect her and proceeds to the altar, Fenella vainly trying to follow.
In the chapel Fenella recognizes her seducer in the bridegroom of the
Princess.  When the newly married couple come out of the church, Elvira
presents Fenella to her husband and discovers from the dumb girl's
gestures, that he was her faithless lover.  Fenella flies, leaving
Alfonso and Elvira in sorrow and despair.

In the second act the fishermen, who have been brooding in silence over
the tyranny of their foes, begin to assemble.  Pietro, Masaniello's
friend, has sought for Fenella in vain, but at length she appears of
her own accord and confesses her wrongs.  Masaniello is infuriated and
swears to have revenge, but Fenella, who still loves Alfonso, does not
mention his name.  Then Masaniello calls the fishermen to arms and they
swear perdition to the enemy of their country.

In the third act we find ourselves in the marketplace in Naples, where
the people go to and fro, selling and buying, all the while concealing
their {232} purpose under a show of merriment and carelessness.  Selva,
the officer of the Viceroy's body-guard, from whom Fenella has escaped,
discovers her and the attempt to rearrest her is the sign for a general
revolt, in which the people are victorious.

In the fourth act Fenella comes to her brother's dwelling and describes
the horrors, which are taking place in the town.  The relation fills
his noble soul with sorrow and disgust.  When Fenella has retired to
rest, Pietro enters with comrades and tries to excite Masaniello to
further deeds, but he only wants liberty and shrinks from murder and
cruelties.

They tell him that Alfonso has escaped and that they are resolved to
overtake and kill him.  Fenella, who hears all, decides to save her
lover.  At this moment Alfonso begs at her door for a hiding-place.  He
enters with Elvira, and Fenella, though at first disposed to avenge
herself on her rival, pardons her for Alfonso's sake.  Masaniello,
reentering, assures the strangers of his protection and even when
Pietro denounces Alfonso as the Viceroy's son, he holds his promise
sacred.  Pietro with his fellow-conspirators leaves him full of rage
and hatred.

Meanwhile the magistrate of the city presents Masaniello with the Royal
crown and he is proclaimed King of Naples.

In the fifth act we find Pietro with the other fishermen before the
Viceroy's palace.  He confides to Moreno, that he has administered
poison to {233} Masaniello, in order to punish him for his treason, and
that the King of one day will soon die.  While he speaks, Borella
rushes in to tell of a fresh troop of soldiers, marching against the
people with Alfonso at their head.  Knowing that Masaniello alone can
save them, the fishermen entreat him to take the command of them once
more and Masaniello, though deadly ill and half bereft of his reason,
complies with their request.  The combat takes place, while an eruption
of Vesuvius is going on.  Masaniello falls in the act of saving
Elvira's life.  On hearing these terrible tidings Fanella rushes to the
terrace, from which she leaps into the abyss beneath, while the
fugitive noblemen take again possession of the city.




NACHTLAGER VON GRANADA.

(A NIGHT'S REST AT GRANADA.)

Romantic Opera in two acts by CONRADIN KREUTZER.

Text taken from Kind's drama of the same name by Freiherr K. VON BRONN.


This little opera, which literally overflows with charming songs and
true German melody, has never passed the bounds of the country which
gave it birth, for notwithstanding, its beauties, which endear it to
the German people, it lacks dramatic life and action.  But in Germany
its melodies have penetrated into the hearts of the people, and will
never be taken thence.

The tale is very simple and treats of Spanish life in the middle of the
16th century.

{234}

The Crown-prince of Spain has strayed from his train, and, disguised as
a simple hunter, has found some shepherds, who grant him a night's rest
in an old castle.  He excites their jealousy however by kissing the
pretty shepherdess Gabriela, and they resolve to kill and rob him.
Gabriela has two suitors, the kind shepherd Gomez, whom she loves, and
Vasco, a wild youngster, who calls her his bride against her wish and
will.  In her distress she turns to the hunter, who promises to apply
to the Crown-Prince on her and her lover's behalf.

Gabriela, hearing of the plot against the hunter, becomes his
guardian-angel, for just as the Prince is about to succumb to the
ruffians, she brings on his followers, who have been found out by her
lover Gomez.  The robbers are punished, and Gabriela, being allowed to
ask for a boon, begs to be united to Gomez.  The Crown-Prince himself
joins their hands, granting them rich presents, and takes leave of the
peasants amid loud acclamations and benedictions.




NORMA.

Tragic Opera in two acts by BELLINI.

Text by ROMANI.


Few operas can boast of as good and effective a libretto as that, which
Romani wrote for Bellini's Norma.  He took his subject from a French
tragedy and wrote it in beautiful Italian verse.

With this work Bellini won his fame and {235} crowned his successes.
Again it is richness of melody in which Bellini excels; highly finished
dramatic art and lofty style he does not possess, and it is this very
richness of melody, which make him and specially his Norma such a
favorite in all theatres.  His music is also particularly well suited
to the human voice, and Norma was always one of the most brilliant
parts of our first dramatic singers.

The contents are as follows:

Norma, daughter of Orovist, chief of the Druids and High-priestess
herself, has broken her vows and secretly married Pollio, the Roman
Proconsul.  They have two children.  But Pollio's love has vanished.
In the first act he confides to his companion Flavius, that he is
enamoured of Adalgisa, a young priestess in the temple of Irminsul, the
Druid's god.

Norma, whose secret nobody knows but her friend Clothilde, is
worshipped by the people, being the only one able to interpret the
oracles of their god.  She prophesies Rome's fall, which she declares
will be brought about, not by the prowess of Gallic warriors, but by
its own weakness.  She sends away the people to invoke alone the
benediction of the god.  When she also is gone, Adalgisa appears and is
persuaded by Pollio to fly with him to Rome.  But remorse and fear
induce her to confess her sinful love to Norma, whom she like the
others adores.  Norma however, seeing the resemblance to her own fate,
promises to {236} release her from her vows and give her back to the
world and to happiness, but hearing from Adalgisa the name of her
lover, who, as it happens, just then approaches, she of course reviles
the traitor, telling the poor young maiden, that Pollio is her own
spouse.  The latter defies her, but she bids him leave.  Though as he
goes he begs Adalgisa to follow him, the young priestess turns from the
faithless lover, and craves Norma's pardon for the offence she has
unwittingly been guilty of.

In the second act Norma, full of despair at Pollio's treason, resolves
to kill her sleeping boys.  But they awake and the mother's heart
shudders as she thinks of her purpose; then she calls for Clothilde,
and bids her fetch Adalgisa.

When she appears, Norma entreats her to be a mother to her children,
and to take them to their father Pollio, because she has determined to
free herself from shame and sorrow by a voluntary death.  But the
noble-hearted Adalgisa will not hear of this sacrifice and promises to
bring Pollio back to his first love.  After a touching duet, in which
they swear eternal friendship to each other, Norma takes courage again.
Her hopes are vain however, for Clothilde enters to tell her that
Adalgisa's prayers were of no avail.--Norma distrusting her rival,
calls her people to arm against the Romans and gives orders to prepare
the funeral pile for the sacrifice.  The victim is to be Pollio, who
was captured in the act of carrying Adalgisa off by force.  Norma
orders her father and the Gauls {237} away, that she may speak alone
with Pollio, to whom she promises safety, if he will renounce Adalgisa
and return to her and to her children.  But Pollio, whose only thought
is of Adalgisa, pleads for her and for his own death.  Norma, denying
it to him, calls the priests of the temple, to denounce as victim a
priestess, who, forgetting her sacred vows, has entertained a sinful
passion in her bosom and betrayed the gods.  Then she firmly tells them
that she herself is this faithless creature, but to her father alone
does she reveal the existence of her children.

Pollio, recognizing the greatness of her character, which impels her to
sacrifice her own life in order to save him and her rival, feels his
love for Norma revive and stepping forth from the crowd of spectators
he takes his place beside her on the funeral pile.  Both commend their
children to Norma's father Orovist, who finally pardons the poor
victims.




LE NOZZE DI FIGARO.

Comic Opera in four acts by MOZART.

Text by LORENZO DA PONTE.


This opera may be said to be the continuation of Rossini's "Barbiere di
Seviglia".  The text too is taken from Beaumarchais' Figaroade, and the
principal persons in it, we find to be old acquaintances.  It is the
same Count Almaviva, now married to Rosina; Figaro, the cunning barber,
has entered the Count's service and is about to marry Rosina's {238}
maid, Susanna.  We meet among the others old Doctor Bartolo and
Basilio.  Even in the management of the subject, and in the music we
find some resemblance.  "Figaro's wedding" has the same character of
gaiety; no storms, very few clouds; there prevails throughout an
atmosphere of sunshine and brightness.  After Don Juan, Figaro was
Mozart's darling, and it shines radiantly in the crown of his fame.
There is no triviality in it, as we find in most of the comic operas of
Offenbach and others; it is always noble as well as characteristic in
every part.

The text may be paraphrased thus:

Count Almaviva, though married to Rosina and loving her ardently,
cannot bring himself to cease playing the role of a gallant cavalier;
he likes pretty women wherever he finds them, and not withstanding his
high moral principles, is carrying on a flirtation with Rosina's maid,
the charming Susanna.  This does not hinder him from being jealous of
his wife, who is here represented as a character both sweet and
passive.  He suspects her of being overfond of her Page,
Cherubino.--From the by-standers, Doctor Bartolo and Marcellina, we
hear, that their old hearts have not yet ceased to glow at the touch of
youth and love; Bartolo would fain give his affections to Susanna,
while Marcellina pretends to have claims on Figaro.

These are the materials which are so dexterously woven into the
complicated plot and which furnish to many funny qui-pro-quos.

{239}

In the second act we find Cherubino the Page in the rooms of the
Countess, who, innocent and pure herself, sees in him only a child; but
this youth has a passionate heart and he loves his mistress ardently.
Mistress and maid have amused themselves with Cherubino, putting him
into women's dresses.  The Count, rendered suspicious by a letter,
given to him by Basilio, bids his wife open her door.  The women,
afraid of his jealousy, detain him a while, and only open the door,
when Cherubino has got safely through the window and away over the
flower-beds.  The Count, entering full of wrath, finds only Susanna
with his wife.  Ashamed of his suspicions, he asks her pardon and
swears never to be jealous again.  All blame in the matter of the
letter is put on Figaro's shoulders, but this cunning fellow lies
boldly, and the Count cannot get the clue to the mystery.  Figaro and
Susanna, profiting by the occasion, entreat the Count at last to
consent to their wedding, which he has always put off.  At this moment
the gardener Antonio enters, complaining of the spoilt flower-beds.
Figaro taking all upon himself, owns that he sprang out of the window,
having had an interview with Susanna and fearing the Count's anger.
All deem themselves saved, when Antonio presents a document, which the
fugitive has lost.  The Count, not quite convinced, asks Figaro to tell
him the contents; but the latter, never at a loss and discovering that
it is the Page's patent, says, that the document was given to him by
the Page, the seal {240} having been forgotten.  The Count is about to
let him off, when Bartolo appears with Marcellina, who claims a
matrimonial engagement with Figaro.  Her claim is favored by the Count,
who wishes to see Susanna unmarried.  Out of this strait however they
are delivered by finding that Figaro is the son of the old couple, the
child of their early love; and all again promises well.  But the
Countess and Susanna have prepared a little punishment for the jealous
husband as well as for the flighty lover.

They have both written letters, in which they ask the men to an
interview in the garden.  Susanna's letter goes to the Count, Rosina's
to Figaro.  Under the wings of night the two women meet, each, her own
lover, but Susanna wears the Countess' dress, while Rosina has arrayed
herself in Susanna's clothes.--

The Countess, not usually given to such tricks, is very anxious.  While
she awaits her husband, Cherubino approaches, and taking her for
Susanna, he, like a little Don Juan as he is, makes love to her.
Hearing the Count's steps, he disappears.  Almaviva caresses the
seeming Susanna, telling her nice things and giving her a ring, which
she accepts.  They are observed by the other couple and the sly Figaro,
who has recognized Susanna, notwithstanding her disguise, denounces the
Count to her, vows eternal love and generally makes his bride burn with
wrath.  In her anger she boxes his ears, upon which he confesses to
having known {241} her from the first, and at once restores her good
humor.

Seeing the Count approach, they continue to play their former roles,
and the false Countess makes love to Figaro, till the Count accosts her
as "traitress".  For a while she lets him suffer all the tortures of
jealousy, then the lights appear and the Count stands ashamed before
his lovely wife, recognizing his mistake.  The gentle Countess forgives
him, and the repenting husband swears eternal fidelity.  He speedily
unites the lovers Figaro and Susanna and forgives even the little Page
Cherubino.




THE NUREMBERG DOLL.

(DIE NUeRNBERGER PUPPE.)

Comic Opera in one act by A. ADAM.

Text by LEUVEN and BEAUPLAN, translated into German by ERNST PASQUE.


This Operette, though almost buried in oblivion, has been revived by
merit of its true comic humor, which is so rare now-a-days.  The music
is very simple, but melodious and natural and in Bertha's part offers
ample scope to a good songstress.

The scene takes place in a toy-shop at Nuremberg.  Cornelius the owner,
has an only son Benjamin, whom he dearly loves, notwithstanding his
stupidity, while he is most unjust to his orphan nephew, Heinrich, whom
he keeps like a servant, after having misappropriated the latter's
inheritance.

The old miser wants to procure a wife for his {242} darling, a wife
endowed with beauty and every virtue, and as he is persuaded, that such
a paragon does not exist in life, he has constructed a splendid doll,
which he hopes to endow with life by help of doctor Faust's magic book.

He only awaits a stormy night for executing his design.  Meanwhile he
enjoys life and when presented to us is just going with Benjamin to a
masked ball, after sending at the same time his nephew supperless to
bed.--When they have left Heinrich reappears in the garb of
Mephistopheles and clapping his hands, his fiancee Bertha, a poor
seamstress soon enters.

Sadly she tells her lover, that she is unable to go to the ball, having
given all her money, which she had meant to spend on a dress, to a poor
starving beggar-woman in the street.

Heinrich touched by his love's tender heart, goodhumoredly determines
to lay aside his mask, in order to stay at home with Bertha, when
suddenly a bright idea strikes him.  Remembering the doll, which his
uncle hides so carefully in his closet, which has however long been
spied out by Heinrich, he shows it to Bertha, who delightedly slips
into the doll's beautiful clothes which fit her admirably.--

Unfortunately Cornelius and his son are heard returning, while Bertha
is still absent dressing.  The night has grown stormy, and the old man
deems it favorable for his design; so he at once proceeds to open
Faust's book and to begin the charm.

{243}

Heinrich, who has hardly had time to hide himself in the chimney, is
driven out by his cousin's attempts to light a fire.  He leaps down
into the room and the terrified couple take him for no other than the
Devil in person, Heinrich wearing his mask and being besides blackened
by soot from the chimney.  Perceiving his uncle's terror, he profits by
it, and at once beginning a conjuration he summons the doll, that is to
say Bertha in the doll's dress.  Father and son are delighted by her
performances, but when she opens her mouth and reveals a very wilful
and wayward character, Cornelius is less charmed.  The doll
peremptorily asks for food, and Mephistopheles indicates, that it is to
be found in the kitchen.  While the worthy pair go to fetch it,
Mephistopheles hastily exchanging words with his lady-love, vanishes
into his sleeping room.

The doll now begins to lead a dance, which makes the toymaker's hair
stand on end.  She first throws the whole supper out of the window,
following it with plate, crockery, toys etc.  Then taking a drum, she
begins to drill them, like a regular tambour-major, slapping their
ears, mouths and cheeks as soon as they try to approach her.

At last, when they are quite worn out, she flies into the closet.  But
now the father's spirit is roused, he resolves to destroy his and the
Devil's work; however he is hindered by Heinrich, who now makes his
appearance, and seems greatly astonished at the uproar and disorder he
finds in {244} the middle of the night.  He only wants to gain time for
Bertha to undress and then escape.--

Resolutely the old man walks into the closet to slay the doll.  But he
returns pale and trembling, having destroyed her while asleep, and
believing to have seen her spirit escape through the window with
fiendish laughter.--Yet awed by his deed, he sees Heinrich returning
who confesses to his uncle, that he has found out his secret about the
doll, and that, having accidently broken it, he has substituted a young
girl.  Cornelius, half dead with fright, sees himself already accused
of murder; his only salvation seems to lie in his nephew's silence and
instant flight.  Heinrich is willing to leave the country, provided his
uncle give him back his heritage, which consists of 10,000 Thalers.
After some vain remonstrances, the old man gives him the gold.
Heinrich having gained his ends, now introduces Bertha, and the wicked
old fool and his son see too late, that they have been the dupes of the
clever nephew.--




OBERON.

Romantic Opera in three acts by WEBER.

English text by PLANCHE translated by TH. HELL.


Oberon is Weber's last work.  In the year 1824 he had the honor of
being commissioned to compose this opera for the Covent-garden theatre.
He began at once to study English, but, his health giving way, he
progressed slowly.  Notwithstanding his illness however, he worked on
and finished {245} the opera in the year 1826.  He had the happiness of
seeing it crowned with success, when he travelled to London in February
of that year, but he could not witness its triumphs in Germany, for he
died in the following July.

The text is most fantastic without any strict order of succession
either in the matter of time or locality.  It is taken from Wieland's
fairy-tale of the same name.

In the first act we find Oberon, the Elfin-king in deep melancholy,
which no gaiety of his subjects, however charming, avails to remove.
He has quarrelled with his wife Titania, and both have vowed never to
be reconciled, until they find a pair of lovers, faithful to each other
in all kinds of adversity.  Both long for the reunion, but the constant
lovers are not to be found.

Oberon's most devoted servant is little Puck, who has vainly roved over
the world to find what his master needs.  He has however heard of a
valiant knight in Burgundy, Hueon, who has killed Carloman, the son of
Charlemagne in a duel, having been insulted by him.  Charlemagne, not
willing to take his life for a deed of defence, orders him to go to
Bagdad, to slay the favorite, sitting to the left of the Calif, and to
wed the Calif's daughter Rezia.  Puck resolves to make this pair suit
his ends.  He tells Oberon the above-mentioned story, and by means of
his lily-sceptre shows Hueon and Rezia to him.  At the same-time these
two behold each other in a vision, so that when they awake both are
deeply in love.

{246}

Oberon wakes Hueon and his faithful shield-bearer Scherasmin, and
promises his help in every time of need.  He presents Hueon with a magic
horn, which will summon him at any time; Scherasmin receives a cup,
which fills with wine of itself.  Then he immediately transports them
to Bagdad.

There, we find Rezia with her Arabian maid Fatima.  The Calif's
daughter is to wed Babekan, a Persian Prince, but she has hated him
ever since she saw Hueon in her vision.  Fatima has discovered the
arrival of Hueon.  It is high time, for in the beginning of the second
act we see the Calif with Babekan, who wants to celebrate the nuptials
at once.  Rezia enters, but at the same time Hueon advances, recognizing
in Rezia the fair one of his dream.  He fights, and stabs Babekan.  The
Turks attack him, but Scherasmin blows his magic horn and compels them
to dance and laugh, until the fugitives have escaped.

In the forest they are overtaken, but Hueon and Scherasmin, who has come
after his master with Fatima, put the pursuers to flight.

Oberon now appears to the lovers, and makes them promise upon oath that
they will remain faithful to each other under every temptation.  He
immediately after transports them to the port of Ascalon, from which
they are to sail homeward.  Oberon now puts their constancy to the
proof.  Puck conjures up the nymphs and the spirits of the air, who
raise an awful tempest.  Hueon's ship sinks; the lovers are shipwrecked.
While Hueon seeks for {247} help, Rezia is captured by the pirates, and
Hueon, returning to save her, is wounded and left senseless on the
beach.  Oberon now causes him to fall into a magic sleep, which is to
last seven days.

In the third act we find Scherasmin and his bride, Fatima in Tunis
dressed as poor gardeners.

A corsair has saved the shipwrecked and sold them as slaves to the Emir
of Tunis.  Though poor and in captivity they do not lose courage and
are happy that they are permitted to bear their hard lot together.

Meanwhile the seven days of Hueon's sleep have passed.  Awaking, he
finds himself to his astonishment in Tunis, in the Emir's garden, with
his servant beside him, who is not less astonished at finding his
master.

Fatima, coming back, relates that she has discovered Rezia in the
Emir's harem.  Hueon, who finds a nosegay with a message, which bids him
come to the myrtle-bower during the night, believes that it comes from
Rezia and is full of joy at the idea of meeting his bride.  Great is
his terror, when the lady puts aside her veil, and he sees Roschana,
the Emir's wife.  She has fallen in love with the noble knight, whom
she saw in the garden, but all her desires are in vain; he loathes her
and is about to escape, when the Emir enters, captures and sentences
him to be consumed by fire.  Roschana is to be drowned.  Rezia, hearing
of her lover's fate, implores the Emir to pardon him.  But she has
already offended him by her {248} unwillingness to listen to his
protestations of love, and when he hears that Hueon is her husband, he
condemns them to be burnt together.  Their trials however are nearing
their end.  Scherasmin has regained his long-lost horn, by means of
which he casts a spell on everybody, until, blowing it with all his
might, he calls Oberon to their aid.  The Elfin-King appears
accompanied by Queen Titania, who is now happily reconciled to him and
thanking the lovers for their constancy, he brings them safely back to
Paris, where Charlemagne holds his court.  The Emperor's wrath is now
gone and he warmly welcomes Sir Hueon with his lovely bride, promising
them honor and glory for their future days.




ORFEO E EURYDICE.

Opera in three acts by GLUCK.

Text by RANIERO DI CALZABIGI.


This opera is the oldest of all we possess in our repertoire.  Gluck
had already written more than forty operas, of which we do not even
know the names now, when he composed his Orfeo, breaking with the old
Italian traditions and showing a new and more natural taste.  All the
charm of Italian melody is still to be found in this composition, but
it is blent with real feeling, united to great strength of expression
and its value is enhanced by a total absence of all those superfluous
warbles and artificial ornaments, which filled the Italian operas of
that time.  The libretto, taken from the old and beautiful Greek
tragedy, is as effective as the music.

{249}

Orpheus, the celebrated Greek musician and singer has lost his wife
Eurydice.  His mournful songs fill the groves where he laments, and
with them he touches the hearts not only of his friends but of the
gods.  On his wife's grave Amor appears to him, and bids him descend
into Hades, where he is to move the Furies and the Elysian shadows with
his sweet melodies, and win back from them his lost wife.

He is to recover her on a condition, which is, that he never casts a
look on her on their return to earth, for if he fail in this, Eurydice
will be for ever lost to him.

Taking his lyre and casque Orpheus promises obedience and with renewed
hope sallies forth on his mission.  The second act represents the gates
of Erebus, from which flames arise.  Orpheus is surrounded by furies
and demons, who try to frighten him; but he, nothing daunted, mollifies
them by his sweet strains, and they set free the passage to Elysium,
where Orpheus has to win the happy shadows.  He beholds Eurydice among
them, veiled, the happy shadows readily surrender her to him, escorting
the pair to the gates of their happy vale.

The third act beholds the spouses on their way back to earth.  Orpheus
holds Eurydice by the hand, drawing the reluctant wife on, but without
raising his eyes to her face, on and on through the winding and obscure
paths, which lead out of the infernal regions.  Notwithstanding his
protestations {250} of love and his urgent demands to her to follow
him, Eurydice never ceases to implore him to cast a single look on her,
threatening him with her death, should he not fulfil her wish.
Orpheus, forbidden to tell her the reason of his strange behaviour,
long remains deaf to her cruel complaints, but at last he yields, and
looks back, only to see her expire under his gaze.  Overwhelmed by
grief and despair Orpheus draws his sword to destroy himself, when Amor
appears, and stays the fatal stroke.

In pity for Orpheus' love and constancy he reanimates Eurydice
(contrary however to the letter of the Greek tragedy) and the act
closes with a beautiful chorus sung in Amor's praise.




OTHELLO.

Opera in four acts by GIUSEPPE VERDI.

Text by ARRIGO BOITO, translated into the German by MAX KALBECK.


In his seventy-third year the Maestro has given to his time an opera,
which surpasses his former compositions in many respects.  It proves,
that Verdi's genius has remained admirably fresh and that the new views
and revelations, which Wagner opened to the musical world have been
fully understood by the Italian.  He has now broken with the unnatural
traditions of the Italian opera, and has in Othello given us a work,
which secures to him an honored place among the best dramatic composers.

{251}

It must not be omitted, that Verdi had a splendid second in the person
of Boito, the high-minded and capable composer of "Mefistofele".  He
omits in his action all that is incidental, and as a consequence the
force of thought and expression is the more powerful.  It is written
strictly after Shakespeare's original.

The opera was put on the stage in Munich in the summer of 1888 with
great success.

The first scene represents the people, following excitedly the course
of Othello's ship, which battles with the waves.  After he has landed
and informed the assembly of his victory over the Turks, shouts of joy
and exultation rend the air.

Then follows a convivial chat between Cassio, Rodrigo and Jago, in the
course of which the latter makes Cassio drunk.  Jago's demoniacal
nature is masterfully depicted here, where he soon succeeds in ruining
Cassio, who loses his rank as captain.

In the third scene we see Desdemona with her husband, both rejoicing in
the felicity of their mutual love.

In the second act Jago proceeds to carry out his evil intents, by
sending Cassio to Desdemona, who is to intercede for him with Othello.
Jago then calls Othello's attention to the retiring Cassio and by
making vile insinuations inflames his deadly jealousy.  Desdemona
appears, surrounded by women and children, who offer her flowers and
presents.  She comes forward to plead for Cassio, and Othello
suspiciously refuses.--She takes out her {252} handkerchief to cool her
husband's aching forehead with it, but he throws it down and Emilia,
Jago's wife, picks it up.  Jago wrenches it from her and hides it.

In the next scene Jago's villainous insinuations work upon Othello, who
becomes wildly suspicious.  Jago relates a dream of Cassio's, in which
he reveals his love for Desdemona, then he hints that he has seen
Othello's first love-token, her lace-handkerchief in Cassio's hands,
and both swear to avenge Desdemona's infidelity.

In the third act Othello pretending to have a head-ache, asks for
Desdemona's lace-handkerchief.  She has lost it, she tells him, but he
is incredulous and charges her with infidelity.  All her protests are
useless, and at length he forces her to retire.  Meanwhile Jago has
brought Cassio and urges Othello to hide himself.  Cassio has a
lady-love named Bianca, and of her they speak, but Jago dexterously
turns the dialogue so as to make Othello believe that they are speaking
of his wife.  His jealousy reaches its climax, when Cassio draws forth
Desdemona's handkerchief which Jago has deposited in Cassio's house.
All his doubts now seem to be confirmed.  A cannon-shot announcing the
arrival of a galley interrupts the conversation and Cassio quickly
leaves.

In the following scene Jago advises Othello to strangle his wife.
Othello consents and gives Jago a captaincy.

Lodovico, an Ambassador of Venice, arrives {253} with other nobles to
greet their liberator Othello.  Desdemona once more asks pardon for
Cassio, but is roughly rebuked by her husband.  The latter reads the
order, which has been brought to him, and tells Cassio, that he is to
be General in his stead by will of the Doge of Venice, but while Cassio
is confounded by this sudden change of fortune, Jago secretly vows his
death, instigating his rival Rodrigo to kill him.  At last Othello
faints, overcome by conflicting emotions.

In the fourth act Desdemona filled with sad forebodings takes a
touching farewell of Emilia.  When she has ended her fervent prayer
(one of the most beautiful things in the opera), she falls into a
peaceful slumber.  Othello awakes her with a kiss, and tells her
immediately thereafter that she must die.  She protests her innocence,
but in vain, for Othello telling her that Cassio can speak no more,
smothers her.  Hardly has he completed his ghastly work than Emilia
comes up, announcing that Rodrigo has been killed by Cassio.  Desdemona
with her dying breath once more asserts her innocence, while Emilia
loudly screams for help.  When the others appear, Emilia discovers her
husband's villany.  Jago flies, and Othello stabs himself at the feet
of his innocent spouse.




{254}

PAGLIACCI.

(MERRY ANDREW.)

Musical Drama in two acts and a Prologue.

Music and Text by R. LEONCAVALLO.

Translated into the German by LUDWIG HARTMANN.


In the summer of the year 1892 a rumour was going through the musical
world, that Mascagni had found his equal, nay his superior in the
person of another young Italian composer.  When the "Pagliacci" by
Leoncavallo was executed in Italy, it excited a transport of enthusiasm
almost surpassing that of "Cavalleria", so that Berlin and Leipsic
brought the opera on the stage as quickly as possible, and Dresden
followed their example on January 22nd 1893, with the same great
success.

The opera is indeed eminently qualified to produce an impression.
Though less condensed in its tragic depths than Cavalleria, the music
is nobler without being less realistic.  In Leoncavallo the feeling of
artistic form is more developed.  Though of southern temper he never
lets passion get the better of the beautiful and true harmony, also he
is Mascagni's senior by four years.

Leoncavallo's excellent musical education is as unmistakable as the
influence of Wagner's music on his genius.--He, too, introduces the
"Leading Motives", but he is far from imitating his great predecessor.
Like Wagner he did his text himself, and it must be owned, that it is
very good.  The idea was suggested to him by an event, which {255} he
witnessed at Montalto in Calabria during the summer 1865, and which
impressed him deeply.

In the Prologue, a wonderful piece of music, Tonio the Fool announces
to the public the deep tragic sense which often is hidden behind a
farce, and prepares them for the sad end of the lovers in this comedy.

The introduction with its wonderful Largo is like a mournful
lamentation; then the curtain opens, showing the entry of a troop of
wandering actors, so common in southern Italy.  They are received with
high glee by the peasants, and Canio, the owner of the troop, invites
them all to the evening's play.  Canio looks somewhat gloomy, and he
very much resents the taunts of the peasants, who court his beautiful
wife Nedda, and make remarks about the Fool's attentions to her.
Nevertheless Canio gives way to his friends' invitation for a glass of
Chianti wine, and he takes leave of his wife with a kiss, which however
does not quite restore her peace of mind, Nedda's conscience being
somewhat disturbed.  But soon she casts aside all evil forebodings and
vies with the birds in warbling pretty songs, which, though reminding
the hearer of Wagner's Siegfried are of surpassing harmony and
sweetness.  Tonio the Fool, spying the moment to find Nedda alone,
approaches her with a declaration of love, but she haughtily turns from
him, and as he only grows more obtrusive and even tries to embrace her
she seizes a whip and slaps him in the face.  Provoked to fury he
swears to {256} avenge himself.  Hardly has he turned away when the
peasant Silvio appears on the wall.  He is Nedda's lover, and having
seen Canio sitting in the tavern, he entreats her to separate herself
from the husband she never loved and take flight with him.  Nedda
hesitates between duty and passion, and at last the latter prevails,
and she sinks into his arms.  This love-duet is wonderful in style and
harmony.  Tonio unfortunately has spied out the lovers and returns with
Canio.  But on perceiving the latter's approach Silvio has leapt over
the wall, his sweetheart's body covering his own person, so that Canio
is unable to recognize his rival; he once more reminds Nedda to be
ready that night and than takes flight.  With an inarticulate cry Canio
rushes after him and Nedda falls on her knees to pray for her lover's
escape, while Tonio the Fool triumphs over her misery.  The husband
however returns defeated; panting he claims the lover's name, and
Nedda's lips remaining sealed, he is about to stab his wife, when Beppo
the Harlequin intervenes, and, wrenching the dagger from his
unfortunate master's hands intimates, that it is time to prepare for
the play.  While Nedda retires, Canio breaks out into a bitter wail of
his hard lot, which compels him to take part in the farce, which for
him is bitter reality.  With this air the tragic height of the opera is
reached.

In the second act the spectators throng before the small stage, each of
them eager to get the best seat.  Nedda appears, dressed as Colombine,
{257} and while she is collecting the money, she finds time to warn
Silvio of her husband's wrath.  The curtain opens, and Nedda is seen
alone on the stage, listening to the sentimental songs of Arlequin, her
lover in the play.  Before she has given him the sign to enter, Tonio,
in the play called Taddeo the Fool enters, bringing the food which his
mistress has ordered for herself and Arlequin.  Just as it really
happened in the morning, the poor Fool now makes love to her in play;
but when scornfully repulsed he humbly retires, swearing to the
goodness and pureness of his lady-love.  Arlequin entering through the
window, the two begin to dine merrily, but Taddeo reenters in mocking
fright, to announce the arrival of the husband Bajazzo (Canio).  The
latter however is in terrible earnest, and when he hoarsely exacts the
lover's name, the lookers-on, who hitherto have heartily applauded
every scene, begin to feel the awful tragedy hidden behind the comedy.
Nedda remains outwardly calm and mockingly she names innocent Arlequin
as the one who had dined with her.  Then Bajazzo begins by reminding
her, how he found her in the street a poor waif and stray, whom he
nursed, petted and loved, and Nedda remaining cold, his wrath rises to
fury and he wildly curses her, shrieking "the name, I will know his
name!"  But Nedda, though false is no traitress.  "Should it cost my
life, I will never betray him" she cries, at the same time trying to
save her life, by hurrying from the stage amongst the spectators.  Too
late alas; Canio {258} already has reached and stabbed her, and Silvio,
who rushes forward, also receives his death-stroke from the hands of
the deceived husband, who has heard his name slip from the dying lips
of his wife.  All around stand petrified, nobody dares to touch the
avenger of his honor, who stands by his wife's corpse limp and
brokenhearted: "Go", says he, "go, the farce is ended."




PARSIFAL.

A festival Drama by RICHARD WAGNER.


Though Parsifal is never to be given on any stage except in Baireuth
(by Wagner's express wish), it must find its place here, by dint of
being the master's last and most perfect composition.

In Parsifal the heavenly greatness of the Christian idea of God, which
is at the foundation of the legend of the holy Grail, finds grand
expression.  There scarcely exists another composition of such lofty
and religious spirit, as finds expression in the Communion-scene.  It
is not possible to imagine a more vivid contrast than that between the
saintly melodies and those of the fascinating fairies, which latter,
glowing with poetry and ravishing music captivate all senses.

The contents are those of the ancient German legend.  The first scene
is laid in a forest on the grounds of the keepers of the Grail near
Castle Monsalvat.  Old Gurnemanz awakes two young Squires for their
morning prayer, and bids two {259} Knights prepare a bath for the sick
King Amfortas who suffers cruelly from a wound, dealt him by the
sorcerer Klingsor, the deadly foe of the holy Grail.  The Grail is a
sacred cup, from which Christ drank at the last Passover and which also
received his holy blood.  Titurel, Amfortas' father has built the
castle to shield it, and appointed holy men for its service.  While
Gurnemanz speaks with the Knights about their poor master's sufferings,
in rushes Kundry, a sorceress in Klingsor's service, condemned to laugh
eternally as a punishment for having derided Christ, while he was
suffering on the cross.  She it was who with her beauty seduced
Amfortas, and deprived him of his holy strength, so that Klingsor was
enabled to wring from the King his holy spear Longinus, with which he
afterwards wounded him.  Kundry is in the garb of a servant of the
Grail; she brings balm for the King, who is carried on to the stage in
a litter, but it avails him not: "a guileless fool" with a child's pure
heart; who will bring back the holy spear and touch him with it, can
alone heal his wound.

Suddenly a dying swan sinks to the ground, and Parsifal, a young
knight, appears.  Gurnemanz reproaches him severely for having shot the
bird, but he appears to be quite ignorant of the fact that it was
wrong, and, when questioned, proves to know nothing about his own
origin.  He only knows his mother's name "Herzeleid", (heart's
affliction), and Kundry, who recognizes him, relates, that his father
Gamuret perished in battle, and that {260} his mother reared him, a
guileless fool, in the desert.  When Kundry mentions that his mother is
dead, and has sent her last blessing to her son, Parsifal is almost
stunned by this, his first grief.  Gurnemanz conducts him to the
castle, where the Knights of the Grail are assembled in a lofty hall.
Amfortas is laid on a raised couch, and from behind, Titurel's voice is
heard, imploring his son to efface his guilt in godly works.  Amfortas,
writhing with pain, is comforted by the prophesy:

  "By pity lightened, the guileless fool"--
  "Wait for him,--my chosen tool."


The Grail is uncovered, the blessing given, and the repast of love
begins.  Amfortas' hope revives, but towards the end his wound bursts
out afresh.  Parsifal, on hearing Amfortas' cry of agony clutches at
his heart, without however understanding his own feelings.

The second act reveals Klingsor's magic castle.

Kundry, not as a demon now, but as a woman of imperious beauty, is
awakened by Klingsor to seduce Parsifal.  She yearns for pardon, for
sleep and death, but she struggles in vain against the fiendish
Klingsor.

The tower gradually sinks; a beautiful garden rises, into which
Parsifal gazes with rapture and astonishment.  Lovely maidens rush
towards him, accusing him of having destroyed their lovers.  Parsival
surprised answers, that he slew them, because they checked his approach
to their charms.  But when their tenderness waxes hotter, he gently
{261} repulses the damsels and at last tries to escape.  He is detained
however by Kundry, who tells him again of his beloved mother, and when
Parsifal is sorrow-stricken at having forgotten her in his thoughtless
rambles, she consoles him, pressing his lips with a fervent kiss.  This
rouses the dreamy youth, he awakes to his duty, he feels the King's
spear-wound burning; the unconscious fool is a fool no longer, but
conscious of his mission and distinguishing right from wrong.  He calls
to the Saviour to save him from a guilty passion, and at last he starts
up, spurning Kundry.  She tells him of her own crime, of Amfortas' fall
and curses all paths and ways, which would lead him from her.
Klingsor, appearing at her cry, flings the holy spear at Parsifal, but
it remains floating over his head, and the youth, grasping it, destroys
the magic by the sign of the cross.

In the third act Gurnemanz awakes Kundry from a death-like sleep, and
is astonished to find her changed.  She is penitent and serves the
Grail.  Parsifal enters from the woods.  Gurnemanz recognizes and
greets him, after his wanderings in search of the Grail which have
extended over long years.  Kundry washes his feet and dries them with
her own hair.  Parsifal, seeing her so humble, baptizes her with some
water from the spring, and the dreadful laugh is taken from her; then
she weeps bitterly.  Parsifal, conducted to the King, touches his side
with the holy spear and the wound is closed.  Old Titurel, brought on
the stage in his {262} coffin, revives once more a moment, raising his
hands in benediction.  The Grail is revealed, pouring a halo of glory
over all.  Kundry, with her eyes fixed on Parsival, sinks dead to the
ground, while Amfortas and Gurnemanz render homage to their new King.




PHILEMON AND BAUCIS.

Opera in two acts by CHARLES GOUNOD.

Text by JULES BARBIER and MICHEL CARRE, with an intermezzo.


This is a truly delightful musical composition and though unpretending
and not on the level of Gounod's "Margaretha", it does not deserve to
be forgotten.

The libretto is founded on the well-known legend.

In the first act Jupiter comes to Philemon's hut, accompanied by Vulkan
to seek refuge from a storm, which the god himself has caused.  He has
come to earth to verify Mercury's tale of the people's badness, and
finding the news only too true, besides being uncourteously received by
the people around, he is glad to meet with a kindly welcome at
Philemon's door.

This worthy old man lives in poverty, but in perfect content with his
wife Baucis, to whom he has been united in bonds of love for sixty long
years.  Jupiter, seeing at once, that the old couple form an exception
to the evil rule, resolves to spare them, and to punish only the bad
folks.  The gods partake of the kind people's simple meal, and {263}
Jupiter, changing the milk into wine, is recognized by Baucis, who is
much awed by the discovery.  But Jupiter reassures her and promises to
grant her only wish, which is, to be young again with her husband, and
to live the same life.  The god sends them to sleep, and then begins
the intermezzo.

Phrygians are seen reposing after a festival, bacchants rush in and the
wild orgies begin afresh.  The divine is mocked and pleasure praised as
the only god.  Vulcan comes, sent by Jupiter to warn them, but as they
only laugh at him, mocking Olympus and the gods, Jupiter himself
appears to punish the sinners.  An awful tempest arises, sending
everything to rack and ruin.--

In the second act Philemon's hut is changed into a palace; he awakes to
find himself and his wife young again.  Jupiter, seeing Baucis' beauty,
orders Vulkan to keep Philemon apart, while he courts her.  Baucis
though determined to remain faithful to her Philemon, feels
nevertheless flattered at the god's condescension, and dares not refuse
him a kiss.  Philemon, appearing on the threshold sees it, and
violently reproaches her and his guest, and though Baucis suggests who
the latter is, the husband does not feel in the least inclined to share
his wife's love even with a god.  The first quarrel takes place between
the couple, and Vulkan hearing it, consoles himself with the reflection
that he is not the only one, to whom a fickle wife causes sorrow.
Philemon bitterly curses Jupiter's gift; he wishes his wrinkles back,
and with them his {264} peace of mind.  Throwing down Jupiter's statue,
he leaves his wife to the god.  Baucis, replacing the image, which
happily is made of bronze, sorely repents her behaviour towards her
beloved husband.  Jupiter finds her weeping, and praying that the gods
may turn their wrath upon herself alone.  The god promises to pardon
both, if she is willing to listen to his love.  She agrees to the
bargain on the condition namely that Jupiter shall grant her a favor.
He consents, and she entreats him to make her old again.  Philemon,
listening behind the door, rushes forward to embrace the true wife and
joins his entreaties to hers.  Jupiter, seeing himself caught, would
fain be angry, but their love conquers his wrath.  He does not recall
his gift, but giving them his benediction, he promises never more to
cross their happiness.




THE THREE PINTOS.

Comic Opera in three acts by C. M. v. WEBER.

After WEBER'S manuscripts and designs, and TH. HELL'S textbook.  The
musical part completed by GUSTAV MAHLER, the dramatic part by CARL VON
WEBER.


Thanks to the incessant endeavours of Weber's grandson and of Gustav
Mahler, the gifted disciple of Weber, a real treasure in German music
has been disinterred from the fragments of the past, thus long after
its composer's death.  It is a striking illustration of the
universality of Weber's genius that aught like this should prove to
have been written by him, for his manuscript is a fragment {265} of a
comic opera of the best kind.  Although only seven parts were completed
by the composer himself, Mahler took the remaining ten mostly from
Weber's other manuscripts.  He completed them himself so adroitly, that
the best musicians cannot distinguish Weber from Mahler.  We owe a debt
of gratitude to both composer and poet, who have performed this act of
piety towards the great deceased and at the same time have preserved us
real musical pearls.  The text is well done, though not important
enough for three acts; two would have been quite sufficient.

The first scene takes us into a little village in Spain, where a
student, Don Gaston Piratos bids farewell to his fellows.  He is a gay
and gallant youth, whose money dwindles to a paltry sum before mine
host's long account.  But this cunning host has a charming daughter
Ines, and light-hearted Gaston flirts with the damsel, his servant
Ambrosio valiantly assisting him.

The Kater-romance sung by Ines is as gracefull as it is droll and
effective.

Don Pinto de Fonseca now arrives on horseback.  He is so corpulent,
that he is scarcely able to dismount, and he excites the curiosity and
amusement of all.  Having called for food and drink, he tells Gaston,
that he comes to marry a rich and noble lady, Donna Clarissa de
Pacheco.  Fonseca's father has once rendered a great service to Don
Pantaleone Roiz de Pacheco, and in reward he destined his only child
Clarissa for Fonseca's {266} son.  This promising young knight has a
letter of recommendation from his father.  He is in perplexity as to
his behaviour towards such a young lady and Gaston offers to instruct
him therein.  Ambrosio acts as bride, Gaston shows how she is to be
courted and Don Pinto gawkishly imitates his teacher's gestures.  This
scene is most irresistibly comic.  When wine and food are brought by
Ines and her servants, Don Pinto so entirely absorbs himself in
satisfying his hunger and thirst, that at last the wine gets the better
of him.  He falls asleep and Gaston, thinking it an injury to a noble
lady to be wooed by such a clown, takes away old Fonseca's letter and
departs with Ambrosio.  Don Pinto is carried into the house on a
grass-covered litter.

In the second act Don Pantaleone's servants are assembled in the
ancestral hall, where their master announces to them the approaching
arrival of Don Pinto, his daughter's future bridegroom.  Donna
Clarissa, who already loves Don Gomez Freiros, a knight of wealth,
noble birth and bearing is in despair, as is also her lover, but Laura,
her pretty maid promises to find ways and means to avert the dreaded
marriage.

In the third act Laura and the servants are decorating the hall with
flowers.  The majordomo sends them away, proclaiming Don Pinto's
arrival.  All go except Laura, who hides behind a bosquet.  Gaston,
entering with Ambrosio sees all those preparations with wonder.
Ambrosio detects Laura and according to his wont begins to court her.
{267} Gaston warns the damsel, and she entering into the joke mockingly
quits them.  Gay Ambrosio is consoling himself in a charming song of
which the burden is girls' fickleness, when Don Gomez enters and
touches Gaston's kind heart by the description of his love for
Clarissa.  Gaston tenders him Fonseca's letter, counselling Gomez to
play the part of Don Pinto, for Don Pantaleone has never seen either of
them.  Gomez accepts the letter gratefully from the supposed Don Pinto
and presents it to Don Pantaleone, who has entered with his daughter
and his whole suite.  Of course the father, struck by the knight's
noble bearing, gives his consent to the union with his daughter and
adds his benediction.  But their joy is disturbed by the entrance of
the real Don Pinto, who at once begins wooing in the manner he has
practised with Don Gaston.

The ridiculous fellow is thought mad and is about to be turned out,
when catching sight of Gaston, he loudly accuses him of treachery.
Gaston however draws his sword and menaces Don Pinto, upon which the
poor swain cries for mercy and is thereafter removed from the hall
amidst the laughter of the whole chorus.

Imagine the assistant's astonishment, when Gaston declares, that they
have turned out the true Don Pinto.  Gomez believing himself betrayed
challenges Gaston, and the father rages against the two pretenders.
But Clarissa pleads and Gaston quietly shows to Don Pantaleone the
contrast {268} between the two suitors, while Gomez is obliged to
acknowledge gratefully that he owes his lovely bride solely to Don
Gaston's joke.  So the lovers are united.




THE PIPER OF HAMELN.

Opera in five acts by VICTOR NESSLER.

Text by FR. HOFMANN from JULIUS WOLFF'S legend of the same name.


Without any preliminary introduction to the musical world Nessler wrote
this opera and at once became, not only known, but a universal
favorite; so much so that there is scarcely a theatre in Germany, in
which this work of his is not now given.

The subject of the libretto is a most favorable one, like that of
Nessler's later composition, "the Trumpeter of Saekkingen"; the
principal personage Singuf, being particularly well suited for a
first-rate stage hero.

Then Wolff's poetical songs are music in themselves, and it was
therefore not difficult to work out interesting melodies, of which as a
matter of fact we find many in this opera.

The scene of the following events is the old town of Hameln on the
Weser in the year 1284.  The citizens are assembled to hold council, as
to how the rat-plague of the town is to be got rid of.  No one is able
to suggest a remedy when suddenly the clerk of the senate, Ethelerus,
announces a stranger, who offers to destroy all the rats and mice in
the place, solely by the might of his pipe.  {269} Hunold Singuf, a
wandering Bohemian, enters and repeats his offer, asking one hundred
Marks in silver as his reward and forbidding anybody listen or to be
present, while he works his charm.

The senators comply with his request, promising him in addition a drink
from the town-cellar, when the last rat shall have disappeared, which
is to be when the moon is full.

In the following scene the Burgomaster's daughter Regina is with her
old cousin Dorothea.  She expects her bridegroom, the architect of the
town and son of the chief magistrate, Heribert Sunneborn, who has just
returned home from a long stay abroad.  While the lovers greet each
other, Ethelerus, who has wooed Regina in vain, stands aside greatly
mortified.

The second act opens in an inn, where Hunold makes the people dance and
sing to his wonderful melodies.  There he first sees the maid, who has
appeared to him in his dreams.  She is Gertrud, a fishermaiden and: To
look is to love--they are attracted to each other as by a magic spell.
Wulf, the smith, who loves Gertrud, sees it with distrust, but Hunold
begins to sing his finest songs.  In the evening the lovers meet before
Gertrud's hut, and full of anxious forebodings, she tries to turn him
from his designs and is only half-quieted, when he assures her that no
fiendish craft is at work and that he will do it for the last time.

In the third act Ethelerus holds council with magister Rhynperg as to
the means, by which they {270} can best succeed in teasing and
provoking the proud Sunneborn.  Hunold enters, and agreeable to an
invitation of theirs, sits down to drink a bottle of wine.  They make
him drink and sing a good deal, and he boasts of being able to make the
maidens all fall in love with him, if he chooses.  Rhynperg suggests
that he must omit the Burgomaster's daughter Regina, and he succeeds in
making Hunold accept a wager, that he will obtain a kiss from her
before his departure.

The following night Hunold accomplishes the exorcism of the rats, which
may be seen running towards him from every part of the town and
precipitating themselves into the river.  Unhappily, Wulf, standing in
a recess, has seen and heard all and coming forward to threaten Hunold,
the latter hurls his dagger after him, upon which Wulf takes flight.

In the fourth act the whole town is assembled to rejoice in its
deliverance from the awful plague, but when Hunold asks for his reward,
the Burgomaster tells him, that a so-called rat-king, a beast with five
heads, has been seen in his (the Burgomaster's) cellar, to which
complaint Hunold replies, that it is the smith's fault, who listened
against his express prohibition.  He promises to destroy the rat-king
on the same day and once more claims his due, together with the
promised parting gift, which he begs to be, not a drink of wine, but a
kiss from Regina's lips.  Of course everybody is astounded at his
insolence, and the angry {271} Burgomaster bids him leave the town at
once, without his money.  But Hunold, nothing daunted, begins to sing
so beautifully that the hearts of all the women yearn towards him, he
continues still more passionately, addressing himself directly to
Regina, and never stops, till the maiden, carried away by a passion
unconquerable, offers her lips for a kiss, swearing to be his own for
ever.  A great tumult arises and Hunold is taken to prison,
notwithstanding the remonstrances of Ethelerus, who bitterly repents
having had anything to do with Rhynperg's bad joke.

The fifth act takes us to the banks of the Weser, where Gertrud sits in
despair.  She deems herself betrayed by Hunold, but resolves
nevertheless to save his life.

Hunold is brought before the judges and condemned to be burnt alive as
a sorcerer, when Gertrud steps forth, claiming his life.  In pursuance
of an old privilege, Hunold is free when a maid of the town claims him,
but he is banished from the country and Gertrud with him.

Hunold promises never to return, but Gertrud throws herself into the
river.

Then Hunold swears to avenge the death of his bride.  While the
citizens are in church, he lures away their children by playing on his
pipe; all follow him, both great and small.  When he has led them
safely over the bridge, he calls the people from church.  All gather on
the banks of the stream, but they are only just in time to see {272}
the bridge fall into the river, while the mountain opposite opens,
swallowing up Hunold and the children for ever.




THE POACHER

or

"THE VOICE OF NATURE"

by LORTZING.

Text after a comedy by KOTZEBUE.


The music of this opera is so fresh, so full of gaiety and of charming
melodies, that it might be compared with Lortzing's "Czar and
Zimmermann", if only the text were as well done.  Unhappily it lacks
all the advantages which characterize the opera just named, as it is
frivolous, without possessing the grace and "esprit", which distinguish
French composition of a similar kind.

Nevertheless the good music prevails over the bad text, and the opera
holds its own with success in every German theatre.

The contents of the libretto are the following:

A schoolmaster, Baculus by name, has had the misfortune unintentionally
to shoot a roe-buck, belonging to the forest of his master, Count of
Eberbach.  Baculus, who is on the eve of his wedding with a young girl,
named Gretchen, is much afraid, when the consequences of his unlucky
shot show themselves in the shape of a summons to the castle, where he
is looked on as a poacher, and is in danger of losing his position.
His bride offers to entreat the Count to pardon him, but the jealous
{273} old schoolmaster will not allow it.  In this embarrassing
position the Baroness Freimann, a young widow appears, disguised in the
suit of a student, and accompanied by her chambermaid Nanette, who is
dressed as her famulus or valet.  Hearing of the schoolmaster's
misfortune, she proposes to put on Gretchen's clothes and to crave the
Count's pardon under the bride's name.  Baculus gladly accepts the
student's proposal and accompanies him to the castle.  Everybody is
charmed by the graces and naivete of the country-girl.  The Count tries
to make love to her, while Baron Kronthal, who is present, is so much
enamoured, that he thinks of marrying her despite her low birth.
Kronthal is the Countess of Eberbach's brother, but she does not know
him as such, though she feels herself greatly attracted by him.  In
order to save the girl from persecution, the Countess takes her with
her into her room.  Meanwhile the Count offers the sum of 5000 thalers
to Baculus for the renunciation of his bride.  The silly schoolmaster
accepts the offer, thinking that the Count wishes to win the real
Gretchen.  By waking the latter's vanity, he succeeds in turning her
affection to the Count, but great is his perplexity, when the Count
rejects his bride and scornfully asks for the other Gretchen.  Baculus
avows at last, that the latter is a disguised student.  Baron Kronthal,
full of wrath, asks for satisfaction, the student having passed the
night in his sister's room.  On this occasion the others for the first
time hear that the Countess is {274} the Baron's sister.  He demands an
explanation and then it is discovered that the student is the Baroness
Freimann, sister of the Count of Eberbach.  Everybody is content, for
the Count, who was detected in the act of kissing the country-girl,
declares, that with him it was the voice of nature that spoke, and the
Countess, to whom he now presents Kronthal as her brother, makes a like
statement.  The unhappy Baculus receives full pardon from the Count, on
condition that he will, henceforth teach the children of the village,
instead of shooting game.




THE POSTILION OF LONGJUMEAU.

Comic Opera in three acts by ADOLPHE ADAM.

Text by LEUVEN and BRUNSWICK.


This charming little opera is well worthy of being named among the best
of its kind, both on account of its delightful music and because the
text is so entertaining and funny as entirely to captivate the hearer's
interest.

The whole opera is essentially French in the best sense of the word and
we scarce can find a more graceful and witty composition.  Its subject,
written originally in good French verse is as follows:

Chapelou, stage-driver at Longjumeau is about to celebrate his marriage
with the young hostess of the post-house, Madelaine.  The wedding has
taken place and the young bride is led away by her friends, according
to an old custom, while her bridegroom is held back by his comrades,
who {275} compel him to sing.  He begins the romance of a young
postilion, who had the luck to be carried away by a Princess, having
touched her heart by his beautiful playing on the cornet.  Chapelou has
such a fine voice, that the Superintendent of the Grand Opera at Paris,
the Marquis de Corcy, who hears him, is enchanted, and being in search
of a good tenor, succeeds in winning over Chapelou, who consents to
leave his young wife in order to follow the Marquis' call to glory and
fortune.  He begs his friend Bijou, a smith, to console Madeleine, by
telling her that he will soon return to her.  While Madeleine calls for
him in tenderest accents, he drives away with his protectors and Bijou
delivers his message, determined to try his fortune in a similar way.
The desperate Madeleine resolves to fly from the unhappy spot, where
everything recalls to her her faithless husband.

In the second act we find Madeleine under the assumed name of Madame de
Latour.  She has inherited a fortune from an old aunt, and makes her
appearance in Paris as a rich and noble lady, with the intention of
punishing her husband, whom she however still loves.  During these six
years, that have passed since their wedding-day, Chapelou has won his
laurels under the name of St. Phar and is now the first tenor of the
Grand Opera and everybody's spoilt favorite.  Bijou is with him as
leader of the chorus, and is called Alcindor.  We presently witness a
comical rehearsal in which the principal singers are determined to do
as badly as possible.  {276} They all seem hoarse and instead of
singing, produce the most lamentable sounds.  The Marquis de Corcy is
desperate, having promised this representation to Mme. Latour, at whose
country-seat near Fontainebleau he is at present staying.  As soon as
St. Phar hears the name of this lady, his hoarseness is gone and all
sing their best.  We gather from this scene, that Mme. Latour has
succeeded in enthralling St. Phar; he has an interview with her, and,
won by his protestations of love, she consents to marry him.

St. Phar, not wishing to commit bigamy, begs his friend Bijou to
perform the marriage-ceremony in a priest's garb, but Mme. Latour locks
him in her room, along with Bourdon, the second leader of the chorus,
while a real priest unites the pair for the second time.

St. Phar enters the room in high spirits, when his companions, beside
themselves with fear, tell him that he has committed bigamy.  While
they are in mortal terror of being hanged, Mme. Latour enters in her
former shape as Madeleine, and blowing out the candle, torments St.
Phar, assuming now the voice of Mme. Latour, now that of
Madeleine.--After having sent her fickle husband into an abyss of
unhappiness and fear, the Marquis de Corcy, who had himself hoped to
wed the charming widow, appears with the police to imprison the
luckless St. Phar, who already considers himself as good as hanged, and
in imagination sees his first wife Madeleine rejoicing over his
punishment.  But he {277} has been made to suffer enough and at the
last moment Madelaine explains everything, and Chapelou obtains her
pardon.




PRECIOSA.

A Drama in four acts by ALEXANDER WOLFF.

Musical accompaniment by CHARLES MARIA VON WEBER.


Though Preciosa is not an opera, we may feel justified in admitting it
into our collection, as the music, which Weber wrote to it has alone
given celebrity to Wolff's drama, which would otherwise have long been
forgotten.

This musical composition is justly called one of the German nation's
jewels, and it shows all the best qualities of Weber's rich music.  It
was written after the Freischuetz and done in the incredibly short space
of nine days, and owed its success principally to the really national
coloring of melody, which has made some of its songs so popular.

The libretto is well done, the subject both attracting and interesting
to the hearer.  The scene is laid in Spain.  The first act introduces
us to Madrid and takes us into the house of a noble Spaniard, named Don
Francesco de Carcano.  His son, Don Alonzo has fallen violently in love
with a Bohemian girl, called Preciosa, whose beauty, virtue and charms
are on everybody's lips.  The father, wishing to know her, calls her
before him and she comes with her people, enchanting the old nobleman
as {278} well as his son by her noble bearing and her exquisite songs.

The second act represents a forest with the gipsies' camp.  Alonzo, who
has told his father that he followed the army, but has in reality been
seeking Preciosa, at length finds her out and tries to win her.  But
though she, returns his love, she is yet unwilling to follow him, and
he resolves to link his fate with that of the Bohemians, in order to
prove to Preciosa that his love is real and true.  Dressed as a common
hunter he follows his new friend, and the gipsies, who are all governed
by Preciosa's will swear, never to betray him.

The third act introduces us into the castle of Don Azevedo in Valencia,
a friend of Don Francesco's.  The former is about to celebrate his
silver-wedding.  Eugenio, his son, hearing that Preciosa is in the
neighborhood, resolves to win her for his father's festival having
heard of the latter's delight at seeing the gipsy-girl in his friend's
house at Madrid.  Eugenio rouses the jealousy of Alonzo, who begins a
quarrel which ends by Alonzo's being sent to prison.

The chief of the Bohemians and old mother Viarda who see too late, that
they have come into dangerous grounds, break up their camp, but
Preciosa, anxious about her lover, takes flight.

She is caught by the chief, but, seizing Alonzo's gun, which was left
lying under a tree and threatening to fire if he does not obey her, she
forces him to follow her into the castle.

{279}

The last act takes place in Azevedo's castle, where his wife, Donna
Clara, touched by Preciosa's loveliness, is willing to assist her in
liberating her lover.  Meanwhile mother Viarda comes with the other
gipsies to betray Alonzo's secret, asking one thousand scudi and her
chief's liberty.  At this moment the youth's father, Don Francesco,
comes to offer his congratulations at the silver-wedding of his friend.
He finds his son, whom he pardons, Preciosa having for his sake agreed
to renounce her bridegroom.  While bidding her hosts a sad farewell,
Preciosa is so overcome by her feelings, that Donna Clara entreats her
husband to buy the girl, whom she believes to be a stolen child.  Don
Fernando explains to the Bohemians, that he has the right to liberate
Preciosa, who has been taken in his grounds, if they should be unable
to prove her gipsy-descent.  Old Viarda, finding that her schemes have
fallen through, shows by a mark on Preciosa's shoulder, that the girl
is Donna Clara's own daughter, who was robbed many years ago and was
believed by her desolate parents to be drowned.  In consideration of
Preciosa's entreaties the gipsies are pardoned and only ordered to
leave the country for ever.  Preciosa is of course united to her
faithful lover Alonzo.




LE PROPHETE.

Opera in five acts by GIACOMO MEYERBEER.

Text by SCRIBE.


Though Meyerbeer never again attained the high standard of his
Huguenots, the "Prophet" is {280} not without both striking and
powerful passages; it is even said, that motherly love never spoke in
accents more touching than in this opera.  The text is again
historical, but though done by Scribe, it is astonishingly weak and
uninteresting.

The scene is laid in Holland at the time of the wars with the
Anabaptists.

Fides, mother of the hero, John von Leyden, keeps an inn near
Dortrecht.  She has just betrothed a young peasant-girl to her son, but
Bertha is a vassal, of the Count of Oberthal and dares not marry
without his permission.

As they set about getting his consent to the marriage, three
Anabaptists, Jonas, Mathisen and Zacharias appear, exciting the people
with their speeches and false promises.  While they are preaching,
Oberthal enters, but smitten with Bertha's charms he refuses his
consent to her marriage and carries her off, with Fides as companion.

In the second act we find John, waiting for his bride; as she delays,
the Anabaptists try to win him for their cause, they prophesy him a
crown, but as yet he is not ambitious, and life with Bertha looks
sweeter to him than the greatest honors.  As the night comes on, Bertha
rushes in to seek refuge from her pursuer, from whom she has
fled.--Hardly has she hidden herself, when Oberthal enters to claim
her.  John refuses his assistance, but when Oberthal threatens to kill
his mother, he gives up Bertha to the Count, while his mother, whose
life he has saved at such a price, asks God's {281} benediction on his
head.  Then she retires for the night, and the Anabaptists appear once
more, again trying to win John over.  This time they succeed.  Without
a farewell to his sleeping mother, John follows the Anabaptists, to be
henceforth their leader, their Prophet, their Messiah.

In the third act we see the Anabaptists' camp, their soldiers have
captured a party of noblemen, who are to pay ransom.  They all make
merry and the famous ballet on the ice forms part of the amusements.
In the back-ground we see Muenster, which town is in the hands of Count
Oberthal's father, who refuses to surrender it to the enemy.  They
resolve to storm it, a resolution which is heard by young Oberthal, who
has come disguised to the Anabaptists' camp in order to save his father
and the town.

But as a light is struck, he is recognized and is about to be killed,
when John hears from him that Bertha has escaped.  She sprang out of
the window to save her honor, and falling into the stream, was saved.
When John learns this, he bids the soldiers spare Oberthal's life, that
he may be judged by Bertha herself.

John has already endured great pangs of conscience at seeing his party
so wild and bloodthirsty.  He refuses to go further, but hearing, that
an army of soldiers has broken out of Muenster to destroy the
Anabaptists, he rallies.  Praying fervently to God for help and
victory, inspiration comes over him and is communicated to all his
adherents, so that {282} they resolve to storm Muenster.  They succeed
and in the fourth act we are in the midst of this town, where we find
Fides, who, knowing that her son has turned Anabaptist, though not
aware of his being their Prophet, is receiving alms to save his soul by
masses.  She meets Bertha, disguised in a pilgrim's garb.  Both
vehemently curse the Prophet, when this latter appears, to be crowned
in state.

His mother recognizes him, but he disowns her, declaring her mad, and
by strength of will he compels the poor mother to renounce him.  Fides,
in order to save his life, avows that she was mistaken and she is led
to prison.

In the last act we find the three Anabaptists, Mathisen, Jonas and
Zacharias together.  The Emperor is near the gates of Muenster, and they
resolve to deliver their Prophet into his hands in order to save their
lives.

Fides has been brought into a dungeon, where John visits her to ask her
pardon and to save her.  She curses him, but his repentance moves her
so, that she pardons him when he promises to leave his party.  At this
moment Bertha enters.  She has sworn to kill the false Prophet, and she
comes to the dungeon to set fire to the gunpowder, hidden beneath it.
Fides detains her, but when she recognizes that her bridegroom and the
Prophet are one and the same person, she wildly denounces him for his
bloody deeds and stabs herself in his presence.  Then John decides to
die also and after {283} the soldiers have led his mother away, he
himself sets fire to the vault.

Then he appears at the coronation-banquet, where he knows that he is to
be taken prisoner.  When Oberthal, the Bishop and all his treacherous
friends are assembled, he bids two of his faithful soldiers close the
gates and fly.  This done, the castle is blown into the air with all
its inhabitants.  At the last moment Fides rushes in to share her son's
fate, and all are thus buried under the ruins.




THE QUEEN OF SHEBA.

(DIE KOeNIGIN VON SABA.)

Grand Opera in four acts by CHARLES GOLDMARK.

Text by MOSENTHAL.


Charles Goldmark was born in Hungary in 1852.  He received his musical
education in Vienna.

The well-known name of Mosenthal is in itself a warrant that the
libretto is excellently suited to the music.  The opera is considered
one of the best and finest of our modern compositions.

It is noble, original and full of brilliant orchestral effects, which,
united to a grand, not to say gorgeous mise en scene, captivate our
senses.

The contents are these:

A magnificent wedding is to be celebrated in King Solomon's palace at
Jerusalem.  The High-priest's daughter, Sulamith, is to marry Assad,
King Solomon's favorite.  But the lover, who has in a foreign country
seen a most beautiful and haughty woman bathing in a forest-well, is
now in {284} love with the stranger and has forgotten his destined
bride.

Returning home Assad confesses his error to the wise King and Solomon
bids him wed Sulamith and forget the heathen.  Assad gives his promise,
praying to God to restore peace to his breast.

Then enters the Queen of Sheba in all her glory, followed by a
procession of slaves and suitors.  Next to her litter walks her
principal slave, Astaroth.

The Queen comes to offer her homage to the great Solomon with all the
gifts of her rich kingdom.

She is veiled, and nobody has seen her yet, as only before the King
will she unveil herself.

When she draws back the veil, shining in all her perfect beauty, Assad
starts forward; he recognizes her; she is his nymph of the forest.  But
the proud Queen seems to know him not, she ignores him altogether.
Solomon and Sulamith try to reassure themselves, to console Assad, and
the Queen hears Solomon's words: "To-morrow shall find you united to
your bride!"  She starts and casts a passionate look on the unfortunate
Assad.

The Queen is full of raging jealousy of the young bride.  But though
she claims Assad's love for herself, she is yet too proud to resign her
crown, and so, hesitating between love and pride, she swears vengeance
on her rival.  Under the shade of night her slave-woman, Astaroth,
allures Assad to the fountain, where he finds the Queen, {285} who
employs all her arts again to captivate him, succeeding alas, only too
well.

Morning dawns and with it the day of Assad's marriage with Sulamith.
Solomon and the High-priest conduct the youth to the altar, but just as
he is taking the ring, offered to him by the bride's father, the Queen
of Sheba appears, bringing as wedding-gift a golden cup, filled with
pearls.

Assad, again overcome by the Queen's dazzling beauty, throws the ring
away and precipitates himself at her feet.  The Levites detain him, but
Solomon guessing at the truth, implores the Queen to speak.  Assad
invokes all the sweet memories of their past, the Queen hesitates, but
her pride conquers.  For the second time she disowns him.--Now
everybody believes Assad possessed by an evil spirit, and the priests
at once begin to exorcise it; it is all but done, when one word of the
Queen's, who sweetly calls him "Assad", spoils everything.  He is in
her hands: falling on his knees before her, he prays to her as to his
goddess.  Wrathful at this blasphemy in the temple, the priests demand
his death.

Assad asks no better, Sulamith despairs and the Queen repents having
gone so far.  In the great tumult Solomon alone is unmoved.  He detains
the priests with dignity, for he alone will judge Assad.

There now follows a charming ballet, given in honor of the Queen of
Sheba.  At the end of the meal, the Queen demands Assad's pardon from
Solomon.  He refuses her request.  She now tries {286} to ensnare the
King with her charms, as she did Assad, but in vain.  Solomon sees her
in her true light and treats her with cold politeness.  Almost beside
herself with rage, the Queen threatens to take vengeance on the King
and to free Assad at any risk.

Solomon, well understanding the vile tricks of the eastern Queen, has
changed the verdict of death into that of exile.  Sulamith, faithful
and gentle, entreats for her lover, and has only one wish: to sweeten
life to her Assad, or to die with him.

We find Assad in the desert.  He is broken down and deeply repents his
folly, when, lo, the Queen appears once more, hoping to lure him with
soft words and tears.  But this time her beauty is lost upon him: he
has at last recognized her false soul; with noble pride he scorns her,
prefering to expiate his follies, by dying in the desert.  He curses
her, praying to God to save him from the temptress.--Henceforth he
thinks only of Sulamith and invokes Heaven's benediction on her.  He is
dying in the dreadful heat of the desert, when Sulamith appears, the
faithful one who without resting has sought her bridegroom till now.
But alas, in vain she kneels beside him couching his head on her bosom;
his life is fast ebbing away.--Heaven has granted his last wish; he
sees Sulamith before his death and with the sigh: "Liberation!", he
sinks back and expires.




{287}

THE NIBELUNGEN RING.

A Festival-Play in three days and a fore-evening by RICHARD WAGNER.


THE RHINEGOLD.

The grand dramatic work, which cannot any longer with justice be called
an opera, differing as it does so considerably from the ordinary style
of these, is the result of many years of study and hard work.

Wagner took the subject from the German mythology, the oldest
representative of which is found in the Edda.

We have first to do with the fore-evening, called the "Rhinegold."

The first scene is laid in the very depths of the Rhine, where we see
three nymphs, frolicking in the water.  They are the guardians of the
Rhinegold which glimmers on a rock.

Alberich, a Nibelung, highly charmed by their grace and beauty, tries
to make love to each one of them alternately.  As he is an ugly dwarf,
they at first allure and then deride him, gliding away as soon as he
comes near and laughing at him.--Discovering their mockery at last, he
swears vengeance.  He sees the Rhinegold shining brightly, and asks the
nymphs what it means.  They tell him of its wonderful qualities, which
would render the owner all-powerful, if he should form it into a ring
and forswear love.

{288}

Alberich, listening attentively, all at once climbs the rock, and
before the frightened nymphs can cry for help, has grasped the treasure
and disappeared.  Darkness comes on; the scene changes into an open
district on mountain-heights.  In the back-ground we see a grand
castle, which the rising sun illumines.  Wotan, the father of the gods,
and Fricka, his wife, are slumbering on the ground.  Awakening, their
eyes fall on the castle for the first time.  It is the "Walhalla", the
palace, which the giants have built for them at Wotan's bidding.  As a
reward for their services they are to obtain Freia, the goddess of
youth; but already Wotan repents of his promise and forms plans with
his wife, to save her lovely sister.  The giants Fafner and Fasold
enter to claim their reward.  While they negociate, Loge, the god of
fire, comes up, relates the history of Alberich's theft of the
Rhinegold and tells Wotan of the gold's power.  Wotan decides to rob
the dwarf, promising the treasure to the giants, who consent to accept
it in Freia's stead.  But they distrust the gods and take Freia with
them as a pledge.  As soon as she disappears, the beautiful gods seem
old and grey and wrinkled, for the golden apples to which Freia attends
and of which the gods partake daily to be forever youthful, wither as
soon as she is gone.  Then Wotan without any further delay starts for
Nibelheim with Loge, justifying his intention by saying that the gold
is stolen property.  They disappear in a cleft and we find ourselves in
a subterranean cavern, the abode of the Nibelungs.

{289}

Alberich has forced his brother Mime to forge a "Tarnhelm" for him,
which renders its wearer invisible.  Mime vainly tries to keep it for
himself; Alberich, the possessor of the all-powerful ring, which he
himself formed, takes it by force and making himself invisible, strikes
Mime with a whip, until the latter is half dead.  Wotan and Loge,
hearing his complaints, promise to help him.  Alberich, coming forth
again, is greatly flattered by Wotan and dexterously led on to show his
might.  He first changes himself into an enormous snake and then into a
toad.  Wotan quickly puts his foot on it, while Loge seizes the
Tarnhelm.  Alberich becoming suddenly visible in his real shape, is
bound and led away captive.  The gods return to the mountain-heights of
the second scene, where Alberich is compelled to part with all his
treasures, which are brought by the dwarfs.  He is even obliged to
leave the ring, which Wotan intends to keep for himself.  With a
dreadful curse upon the possessor of the ring Alberich flies.

When the giants reappear with Freia, the treasures are heaped before
her; they are to cover her entirely, so it is decided, and not before,
will she be free.  When all the gold has been piled up, and even the
Tarnhelm thrown on the hoard, Fasold still sees Freia's eye shine
through it and at last Wotan, who is most unwilling to part with the
ring, is induced to do so by Erda, goddess of the earth, who appears to
him and warns him.  Now the pledge is kept and Freia is released.  The
{290} giants quarrel over the possession of the ring and Fafner kills
Fasold, thereby fulfilling Alberich's curse.  With lightened hearts the
gods cross the rainbow-bridge and enter Walhalla, while the songs and
wailings of the Rhine-nymphs are heard, imploring the restitution of
their lost treasure.




RIENZI, THE LAST OF THE TRIBUNES.

Grand tragic Opera in five acts by RICHARD WAGNER.


In this first opera of Wagner's one hardly recognizes the great master
of later times.--But though Wagner himself disowned this early child of
his muse, there is a grand energy in it, which preserves it from
triviality.  The orchestration is brilliant, the brass instruments
predominating, and here and there one may find traces of the peculiar
power which led up to the greatness of after-years, and which sometimes
make one think of Tannhaeuser.

The libretto, taken by Wagner from Bulwer's novel, is attractive and
powerful.

The hero, a pontifical notary, is a man of lofty ambition, dreaming in
the midst of the depravity of the 14th century of reerecting the old
Roma, and making her once more the Sovereign of the world.  He receives
help and encouragement from the church; Cardinal Raimondo even bids him
try all means, in order to attain his end.  The clergy {291} as well as
the people are oppressed by the almighty and insolent nobles.

In the first scene we witness an act of brutality, directed against
Rienzi's sister Irene, who is however liberated by Adriano, son of the
noble Colonna.  A Colonna it was, who murdered Rienzi's little brother
in sheer wantonness.--Rienzi has sworn vengeance, but, seeing Adriano
good and brave and in love with his sister, he wins him to his cause.

The nobles having left Rome to fight out a quarrel, which had been
started among them, are forbidden to reenter the town.--Rienzi calls
the people to arms and is victorious.  The strongholds of the nobles
are burnt, and they are only admitted into Rome, on promising
submission to the new laws, made and represented by Rienzi, who has
been created Tribune of Rome.

The hostile parties of Colonna and Orsini then join to destroy the
hated plebeian.  In the midst of the festivity in the Capitol, Orsini
makes an attempt to murder Rienzi, but the latter wears a shirt of mail
under his garments and besides he is warned by Adriano, who has
overheard the conspiracy.  The whole plot fails and the nobles who have
taken part in it are unanimously condemned to death.  But Adriano full
of remorse on account of his treason against his own father, implores
Rienzi to save their lives, and as Irene joins her prayers to those of
her lover, the culprits are pardoned and obliged to renew their oath of
fidelity.  {292} From this time on Rienzi's star begins to pale.  The
nobles do not adhere to their oath; in the third act they again give
battle, and though Rienzi is again victorious, it is only at the cost
of severe sacrifices.  The nobles are slain, and now Adriano, who had
in vain begged for peace, turns against Rienzi.

In the fourth act Adriano denounces him as a traitor; the people easily
misled, begin to mistrust him, and when even the church, which has
assisted him up to this time anathematises him on account of his last
bloody deed, all desert him.  Irene alone clings to her brother and
repulses her lover scornfully, when he tries to take her from Rienzi's
side.  Both brother and sister retire into the Capitol, where Adriano
once more vainly implores Irene to fly with him.  For the last time
Rienzi attempts to reassert his power, but his words are drowned in the
general uproar.  They are greeted by a hail of stones, the Capitol is
set on fire, and they perish like heroes in the flames, through which
Adriano makes his way at the last moment and thus finds a common grave
with his bride and her brother, the last of the Tribunes.




RIGOLETTO.

Opera in three acts by VERDI.

Text by PIAVE from VICTOR HUGO'S drama: "Le roi s'amuse".


No opera has become popular in so short a time as Rigoletto in Italy.
The music is very {293} winning and is, like all that Verdi has
written, full of exquisite melodies.

In Germany it has not met with the same favor, which is due in great
part to its awful libretto, which is a faithful copy of Hugo's drama,
and developed in a truly dramatic manner.  The subject is however
rather disgusting.  Excepting Gilda, we do not meet with one noble
character.

The Duke of Mantua, a wild and debauched youth, covets every girl or
woman he sees, and is assisted in his vile purposes by his jester,
Rigoletto an ugly, hump-backed man.  We meet him first helping the Duke
to seduce the wife of Count Ceprano, and afterwards the wife of Count
Monterone.  Both husbands curse the vile Rigoletto and swear to be
avenged.  Monterone especially, appearing like a ghost in the midst of
a festival, hurls such a fearful curse at them, that Rigoletto shudders.

This bad man has one tender point, it is his blind love for his
beautiful daughter Gilda, whom he brings up carefully, keeping her
hidden from the world and shielding her from all wickedness.

But the cunning Duke discovers her and gains her love under the assumed
name of a student, named Gualtier Malde.

Gilda is finally carried off by Ceprano and two other courtiers, aided
by her own father, who holds the ladder believing that Count Ceprano's
wife is to be the victim.--A mask blinds Rigoletto and he discovers,
too late, by Gilda's cries that he {294} has been duped.  Gilda is
brought to the Duke's palace.--Rigoletto appears in the midst of the
courtiers to claim Gilda, and then they hear that she, whom they
believed to be his mistress, is his daughter, for whose honor he is
willing to sacrifice everything.--Gilda enters and though she sees that
she has been deceived, she implores her father to pardon the Duke, whom
she still loves.  But Rigoletto vows vengeance, and engages Sparafucile
to stab the Duke.  Sparafucile decoys him into his inn, where his
sister Maddalena awaits him.  She too is enamoured of the Duke, who
makes love to her, as to all young females, and she entreats her
brother to have mercy on him.  Sparafucile declares that he will wait
until midnight, and will spare him, if another victim should turn up
before then.  Meanwhile Rigoletto persuades his daughter to fly from
the Duke's pursuit, but before he takes her away, he wants to show her
lover's fickleness, in order to cure her of her love.

She comes to the inn in masculine attire, and hearing the discourse
between Sparafucile and his sister, resolves to save her lover.  She
enters the inn and is instantly put to death, placed in a sack and
given to Rigoletto, who proceeds to the river to dispose of the corpse.
At this instant he hears the voice of the Duke, who passes by, singing
a frivolous tune.  Terrified, Rigoletto opens the sack, and recognizes
his daughter, who is yet able to tell him, that she gave her life for
that of her seducer and then expires.  With an awful cry, the {295}
unhappy father sinks upon the corpse.  Count Monterone's curse has been
fulfilled.




ROBERT LE DIABLE.

Opera in five acts by MEYERBEER.

Text by SCRIBE and DELAVIGNE.


Though the text, which embodies the well-known story of Robert the
Devil, Duke of Normandy, is often weak and involved, Meyerbeer has
understood in masterly fashion how to adapt his music to it, infusing
into it dramatic strength and taking his hearer captive from beginning
to end.  The instrumentation is brilliant, and the splendid parts for
the human voice deserve like praise.  The famous Cavatina "Air of
grace", as it is called, where the bugle has such a fine part, and the
duet in the fourth act between Robert and the Princess Isabella, in
which the harp fairly rouses us to wonder whether we are not listening
to celestial music--are but two of the enchanting features of an opera
in which such passages abound.

The following are the contents of the libretto:

Robert, Duke of Normandy, has a friend of gloomy exterior, named
Bertram, with whom he travels, but to whose evil influence he owes much
trouble and sorrow.  Without knowing it himself, Robert is the son of
this erring knight, who is an inhabitant of hell.  During his
wanderings on earth he seduced Bertha, daughter of the Duke of
Normandy, whose offspring Robert is.  This youth is {296} very wild and
has therefore been banished from his country.

Arriving in Sicily, Isabella the King's daughter and he fall mutually
in love.

In the first act we find Robert in Palermo, surrounded by other
knights, to whom a young countryman of his, Raimbaut, tells the story
of "Robert le Diable" and his fiendish father; warning everybody
against them.  Robert, giving his name, is about to deliver the unhappy
Raimbaut to the hangman, when the peasant is saved by his bride Alice,
Robert's foster-sister.  She has come to Palermo by order of Robert's
deceased mother, who sends her last will to her son, in case he should
change his bad habits and prove himself worthy.  Robert, feeling that
he is not likely to do this, begs Alice to keep it for him.  He
confides in the innocent maiden, and she promises to reason with
Isabella, whom Robert has irritated by his jealousy, and who has
banished him from her presence.

As a recompense for her service Alice asks Robert's permission to marry
Raimbaut.  Seeing Robert's friend, Bertram, she recognizes the latter's
likeness to Satan, whom she saw in a picture, and instinctively shrinks
from him.  When she leaves her master, Bertram induces his friend to
try his fortune with the dice and he loses all.

In the second act we are introduced into the palace of Isabella, who
laments Robert's inconstancy.  Alice enters bringing Robert's letter
and the latter instantly follows to crave his mistress' {297} pardon.
She presents him with a new suit of armor, and he consents to meet the
Prince of Granada in mortal combat.  But Bertram lures him away by
deceiving him with a phantom.  Robert vainly seeks the Prince in the
forest, and the Prince of Granada is in his absence victorious in the
tournament and obtains Isabella's hand.

The third act opens with a view of the rocks of St. Irene, where Alice
hopes to be united with Raimbaut.  The peasant expects his bride, but
meets Bertram instead, who makes him forget Alice, by giving him gold
and dangerous advice.  Raimbaut goes away to spend the money, while
Bertram descends to the evil spirits in the deep.  When Alice comes,
Raimbaut is gone, and she hears the demons calling for Bertram.
Bertram extracts a promise from her not to betray the dreadful secret
of the cavern.  She clings to the Saviour's cross for protection, and
is about to be destroyed by Bertram, when Robert approaches, to whom
she decides to reveal all.  But Bertram's renewed threats at last
oblige her to leave them.

Bertram now profits by Robert's rage and despair at the loss of his
bride, his wealth and his honor, to draw him on to entire destruction.
He tells Robert that his rival used magic arts, and suggests that he
should try the same expedient.  Then he leads him to a ruined cloister,
where he resuscitates the guilty nuns.  They try to seduce Robert first
by drink, then by gambling, and last of all by love.  In the last,
Helena, the most {298} beautiful of the nuns, succeeds and makes him
remove the cypress-branch, a talisman, by which in the fourth act he
enters Isabella's apartment unseen.  He awakes his bride out of her
magic sleep, to carry her off, but overcome by her tears and her appeal
to his honor, he breaks the talisman, and is seized by the now awakened
soldiers; but Bertram appears, and takes him under his protection.

The fifth act opens with a chorus sung by monks, which is followed by a
prayer for mercy.  Robert, concealed in the vestibule of the cathedral,
hears it full of contrition.  But Bertram is with him, and, his term on
earth being short, he confides to Robert the secret of his birth and
appeals to him as his father.

He almost succeeds, when Alice comes up, bringing the news that the
Prince of Granada renounces Isabella's hand, being unable to pass the
threshold of the church.  Bertram urges Robert all the more vehemently
to become one with him, suggesting that Isabella is likewise lost to
him, who has transgressed the laws of the church, when in the last
extremity Alice produces his mother's will, in which she warns him
against Bertram, entreating him to save his soul.  Then at last his
good angel is victorious, his demon-father vanishes into the earth and
Robert, united by prayer to the others, is restored to a life of peace
and goodness.

{299}

LE ROI L'A DIT.

(THE KING HAS SAID IT.)

Comic Opera in three acts by LEON DELIBES.

Text by EDMOND GONDINET.


It is impossible to imagine music more charming or more full of grace
and piquancy, than that which we find in this delightful opera.  Every
part abounds in exquisite harmonies, which no words can give any idea
of.  On hearing them one is compelled to the conclusion, that all the
graces have stood godmother to this lovely child of their muse.

The libretto though on the whole somewhat insipid, is flavored with
naive and goodnatured coquetry, which lends a certain charm to it.

The Marquis de Moncontour has long wished to be presented to the King
Louis XIV., and as he has been fortunate enough to catch the escaped
paroquet of Mme. de Maintenon, he is at last to have his wish
accomplished.  By way of preparation for his audience he tries to learn
the latest mode of bowing, his own being somewhat antiquated and the
Marquise and her four lovely daughters and even Javotte, the nice
little ladies'-maid, assist him.  After many failures the old gentleman
succeeds in making his bow to his own satisfaction, and he is put into
a litter, and born off, followed by his people's benedictions.  When
they are gone, Benoit, a young peasant comes to see Javotte, who is his
sweetheart.  He wishes to enter the Marquis' {300} service.  Javotte
thinks him too awkward, but she promises to intercede in his favor with
Miton, a dancing-master, who enters just as Benoit disappears.  He has
instructed the graceful Javotte in all the arts and graces of the noble
world, and when he rehearses the steps and all the nice little tricks
of his art with her, he is so delighted with his pupil, that he
pronounces her manners worthy of a Princess; but when Javotte tells him
that she loves a peasant, he is filled with disgust and orders her
away.  His real pupils, the four lovely daughters of the Marquis now
enter and while the lesson goes on, Miton hands a billet-doux from some
lover to each of them.  The two elder, Agatha and Chimene, are just in
the act of reading theirs, when they hear a serenade outside, and
shortly afterwards the two lovers are standing in the room, having
taken their way through the window.  The Marquis Flarembel and his
friend, the Marquis de la Bluette are just making a most ardent
declaration of love, when Mme. la Marquise enters to present to her
elder daughters the two bridegrooms she has chosen for them.  The young
men hide behind the ample dresses of the young ladies, and all begin to
sing with great zeal, Miton beating the measure, so that some time
elapses, before the Marquise is able to state her errand.  Of course
her words excite great terror, the girls flying to the other side of
the room with their lovers and receiving the two elderly suitors, Baron
de Merlussac and Gautru, a rich old financier, with great coolness and
a refusal of their {301} costly gifts.  When the suitors are gone, the
two young strangers are detected and the angry mother decides at once
to send her daughters to a convent, from which they shall only issue on
their wedding-day.

When they have departed in a most crest-fallen condition, the old
Marquis returns from his audience with the King and relates its
astounding results.  His Majesty had been so peremptory in his
questioning about the Marquis' son and heir, that the Marquis, losing
his presence of mind, promised to present his son at Court on the
King's demand.  The only question now is where to find a son to adopt,
as the Marquis has only four daughters.  Miton, the ever-useful, at
once presents Benoit to the parents, engaging himself to drill the
peasant into a nice cavalier in ten lessons.  Benoit takes readily to
his new position; he is fitted out at once and when the merchants come,
offering their best in cloth and finery, he treats them with an
insolence, worthy of the proudest Seigneur.  He even turns from his
sweet-heart Javotte.

In the second act Benoit, dressed like the finest cavalier, gives a
masked ball in his father's gardens.  Half Versailles is invited, but
having taken the Court Almanac to his aid, he has made the mistake of
inviting many people who have long been dead.  Those who do appear,
seem to him to be very insipid, and wanting some friends with whom he
can enjoy himself, the useful Miton presents the Marquis de la Bluette
and de Flarembel, who are {302} delighted to make the acquaintance of
their sweethearts' brother.

Benoit hears from them, that he has four charming sisters, who have
been sent to a convent and he at once promises to assist his new
friends.  Meanwhile Javotte appears in the mask of an oriental Queen
and Benoit makes love to her, but he is very much stupified when she
takes off her mask, and he recognizes Javotte.  She laughingly turns
away from him, when the good-for-nothing youth's new parents appear, to
reproach him with his levity.  But Benoit, nothing daunted rushes away,
telling the Marquis that he intends to visit his sisters in the
convent.  Miton tries in vain to recall him.  Then the two old suitors
of Agathe and Chimene appear, to complain that their deceased wife and
grand-mother were invited, and while the Marquis explains his son's
mistake, the four daughters rush in, having been liberated by their
lovers and their unknown brother, whom they greet with a fondness very
shocking to the old Marchioness.  The elderly suitors withdraw,
swearing to take vengeance on the inopportune brother.

In the last act Benoit appears in his father's house in a somewhat
dilapidated state.  He has spent the night amongst gay companions and
met Gautru and de Merlussac successively, who have both fought him and
believe they have killed him, Benoit having feigned to be dead on the
spot.

When the old Marquis enters, he is very much astonished at receiving
two letters of condolence {303} from his daughter's suitors.  Miton
appears in mourning, explaining that Mme. de Maintenon's visit being
expected, they must all wear dark colors as she prefers these.
Meanwhile Benoit has had an interview with Javotte, in which he
declares his love to be undiminished, and he at once asks his father to
give him Javotte as his wife, threatening to reveal the Marquis' deceit
to the King, if his request is not granted.  In this dilemma help comes
in the persons of the two young Marquises, who present their King's
condolences to old Moncontour.  This gentleman hears to his great
relief, that his son is supposed to have fallen in a duel, and so he is
disposed of.  Nobody is happier than Javotte, who now claims Benoit for
her own, while the Marquis, who receives a Duke's title from the King
in compensation for his loss, gladly gives his two elder daughters to
their young and noble lovers.

The girls, well aware, that they owe their happiness to their adopted
brother, are glad to provide him with ample means for his marriage with
Javotte, and the affair ends to everybody's satisfaction.




ROMEO E GIULIETTA.

Grand Opera in five acts by CH. GOUNOD.

Text by BARBIER and CARRE.


This highly favored opera by Gounod presents much that is worthy of
admiration, though it does not rise to the high level of his Marguerite
(Faust).  {304 The libretto follows Shakespeare's version pretty
accurately.

The first act opens with the masked ball in Capuletti's palace, where
the first meeting between the lovers takes place, Romeo being disguised
as a pilgrim.  They fall in love with each other, and Tybalt, Capulet's
nephew, recognizing Romeo, reveals, but too late, their true names and
swears to take revenge on his foe, who has thus entered the Capulet's
house uninvited.

The second act represents the famous scene on the balcony between
Juliet and her lover.

In the third act Romeo visits Friar Lorenzo's cell, to get advice from
him.  There he meets Juliet.  Lorenzo unites the lovers, hoping hereby
to reconciliate the hostile houses of the Montagus and the Capulets.

The following scene represents the street before Capulet's palace,
where the rivals meet; there ensues the double duel, first between
Tybalt and Romeo's friend Mercutio, who falls and then between Romeo,
who burns to avenge his comrade, and Tybalt.  Tybalt is killed and
Romeo is obliged to fly, all the Capulets being after him.

In the fourth act Romeo sees Juliet in her room, but when the morning
dawns he is obliged to leave, while Juliet's father comes to remind her
of his last promise to the dying Tybalt, which was to marry Juliet to
Count Paris.--

Juliet in great perplexity turns to Friar Lorenzo for help.--He gives
her a draught {305} which will cause her to fall into a deep swoon, and
after being laid in her ancestor's tomb, she is to be awakened by Romeo
and carried away into security.

In the fifth act Romeo, after having taken poison enters the tomb to
bid farewell to Juliet, whom he by a fatal misunderstanding believes to
be dead.--She awakes, and seeing her bridegroom die before her eyes,
she stabs herself, to be united with her lover in death, if not in life.




IL SERAGLIO.

Opera in three acts by MOZART.

Text after BRETZNER by G. STEPHANIE.


Mozart modestly called this opera a Vaudeville (in German: Singspiel).
They were the fashion towards the end of the last century, but "Il
Seraglio" ranks much higher, and may be justly called a comic opera of
the most pleasing kind.  The music is really charming, both fresh and
original.

The libretto is equally happy.  It particularly inspired Mozart because
given him by the Emperor Joseph II at a time, when he (Mozart), a happy
bridegroom, was about to conduct into his home his beloved Constanze.
The contents are as follows:

Constanza, the betrothed bride of Belmonte is with her maid Bionda
(Blondchen) and Pedrillo, Belmonte's servant, captured by pirates.  All
three are sold as slaves to Selim Pasha, who keeps the ladies in his
harem, taking Constanza for himself {306} and giving Bionda to his
overseer Osmin.  Pedrillo has found means to inform his master of their
misfortune, and Belmonte comes seeking entrance to the Pasha's villa in
the guise of an artist.  Osmin, who is much in love with Bionda, though
she treats him haughtily, distrusts the artist and tries to interfere.
But Pedrillo, who is gardener in the Pasha's service, frustrates
Osmin's purpose and Belmonte is engaged.  The worthy Pasha is quite
infatuated with Constanza and tries hard to gain her affections.  But
Constanza has sworn to be faithful till death to Belmonte and great is
her rapture, when Bionda brings the news that her lover is near.

With the help of Pedrillo, who manages to intoxicate Osmin, they try to
escape, but Osmin overtakes them and brings them back to the Pasha, who
at once orders that they be brought before him.--Constanza, advancing
with noble courage, explains that the pretended artist is her lover,
and that she will rather die with him than leave him.  Selim Pasha,
overwhelmed by this discovery, retires to think about what he shall do
and his prisoners prepare for death, Belmonte and Constanza with
renewed tender protestations of love, Pedrillo and Bionda without
either fear or trembling.

Great is their happiness and Osmin's wrath, when the noble Pasha,
touched by their constancy, sets them free, and asks for their
friendship, bidding them remember him kindly after their return into
their own country.

{307}

SIEGFRIED.

Second day of the Nibelungen Ring by WAGNER.

Musical Drama in three acts.


The first act represents a part of the forest, where Fafner guards the
Rhinegold and where Sieglinda has found refuge.  We find her son
Siegfried,--to whom when she was dying, she gave birth--in the rocky
cave of Mime the Nibelung, (brother of Alberich), who has brought up
the child as his own, knowing that he is destined to slay Fafner and to
gain the ring, which he covets for himself.  Siegfried, the brave and
innocent boy, instinctively shrinks from this father, who is so ugly,
so mean and vulgar, while he has a deep longing for his dead mother,
whom he never knew.  He gives vent to these feelings in impatient
questions about her.  The dwarf answers unwillingly and gives him the
broken pieces of the old sword Nothung (needful), which his mother left
as the only precious remembrance of Siegfried's father.

Siegfried asks Mime to forge the fragments afresh, while he rushes away
into the woods.

During his absence Wotan comes to Mime in the guise of a wanderer.
Mime, though he knows him not, fears him and would fain drive him away.
Finally he puts three questions to his guest.  The first is the name of
the race, which lives in earth's deepest depths, the second the name of
those, who live on earth's back and the third, that of those, who live
above the clouds.  Of course Wotan answers them all, {308} redeeming
his head and shelter thereby; but now it is his turn to put three
questions.  He first asks what race it is, that Wotan loves most,
though he dealt hardly with them, and Mime answers rightly, that they
are the Waelsungs, whose son Siegfried is; then Wotan asks after the
sword, which is to make Siegfried victorious.  Mime joyously names
"Nothung", but when Wotan asks him, who is to unite the pieces, he is
in great embarrassment, for he remembers his task and perceives too
late, what question he ought to have asked.  Wotan leaves him, telling
him that only that man can forge it, who never knew fear.  Siegfried,
finding the sword still in fragments when he returns, melts these in
fire, and easily forges them together, to Mime's great awe, for he sees
now that this boy is the one, whom the stranger has meant.

In the second scene we see the opening of Fafner's cavern, where
Alberich keeps watch for the dragon's slayer, so long predicted.

Wotan approaching, warns him that Alberich's brother Mime has brought
up the boy, who is to slay Fafner, in the hope of gaining Alberich's
ring, the wondrous qualities of which are unknown to Siegfried.

Wotan awakes Fafner, the dragon, telling him that his slayer is coming.

Mime, who has led Siegfried to this part of the forest under the
pretext of teaching him fear, approaches now, and Siegfried, eager for
combat, kills the dreadful worm.  Accidentally tasting the {309} blood,
he all at once understands the language of the birds.  They tell him to
seek for the Tarnhelm and for the ring, which he finds in the cavern.
Meanwhile the brothers, Alberich and Mime, quarrel over the treasure,
which they hope to gain.  When Siegfried returns with ring and helmet,
he is again warned by the voice of a wood-bird, not to trust in Mime.
Having tasted the dragon's blood, Siegfried is enabled to probe Mime's
innermost thoughts, and so he learns that Mime means to poison him, in
order to obtain the treasure.  He then kills the traitor with a single
stroke.--Stretching himself under the linden-tree to repose after that
day's hard work, he again hears the voice of the wood-bird, which tells
him of a glorious bride, sleeping on a rock surrounded by fire; and
flying before him, the bird shows Siegfried the way to the spot.

In the third scene we find Wotan once more awakening Erda, to seek her
counsel as to how best to avert the doom, which he sees coming, but she
is less wise than he and so he decides to let fate have its course.
When he sees Siegfried coming, he for the last time tries to oppose him
by barring the way to Bruennhilde, but the sword Nothung splits the
god's spear.  Seeing that his power avails him nothing he retires to
Walhalla, there to await the "Dusk of the Gods".

Siegfried plunges through the fire, awakes the Walkyrie and after a
long resistance, wins the proud virgin.




{310}

SILVANA.

Romantic Opera in four acts by WEBER.

Text by ERNST PASQUE.


This opera was left unfinished by Weber.  It has however recently been
completed, the text by Ernest Pasque, and the music by Ferdinand
Langer, who rearranged the manuscript with loving care, interweaving
different compositions from Weber, as for instance his "Invitation a la
valse", and his "Polonaise", which are dexterously introduced into the
ballet of the second act.

The action is taken from an old German legend which comes to us from
the land of the Rhine.  There we may still find the ruins of the two
castles Sternberg and Liebenstein.

Of these our legend says, that they belonged to two brothers, who hated
each other, for the one, Boland, loved his brother's bride and was
refused by her.  By way of revenge he slew his brother and burnt down
his castle.  But in this fray the wife he coveted disappeared with her
child and both were supposed to have perished in the flames.

Since then Boland has fallen into deep melancholy and the consequences
of his dreadful deed have never ceased to torment him.  His only son,
who lost his mother in early childhood, has grown up solitary, knowing
nothing of woman's sweetness, of peace and happiness.  His only passion
is the hunt.  He has grown into manhood and his father {311} as well as