As has been said, Goethe's contemporary letters addressed from
Frankfort to his friends bring a different side of his life before us
from that presented in the Autobiography. From these letters we gather
that he was by no means wholly engrossed in religious or mystical
studies. "During this winter," he wrote to his friend Oeser, about two
months after his arrival in Frankfort, "the company of the muses and
correspondence with friends will bring pleasure into a sickly,
solitary life, which for a youth of twenty years would otherwise be
something of a martyrdom."[54] In spite of the affectionate solicitude
of Fräulein von Klettenberg and other friends, he found Frankfort a
depressing place after gay Leipzig. "I could go mad when I think of
Leipzig," wrote his sprightly friend Horn, who had also tasted the
pleasures of that place; and Goethe shared his opinion. Both also
agreed that the girls of Frankfort were vastly inferior creatures to
those of Leipzig. "I came here," Goethe wrote in a poetical epistle to
the daughter of Oeser, "and found the girls a little--one does not
quite like to speak it out--as they always were; enough, none has as
yet touched my heart."[55] It would appear, nevertheless, that he did
find certain Frankfort girls to his taste. "I get along tolerably
here," he wrote to another correspondent. "I am contented and quiet; I
have half-a-dozen angels of girls whom I often see, though I have lost
my heart to none of them. They are pleasant creatures, and make my
life uncommonly agreeable. He who has seen no Leipzig might be very
well off here."[56] His life in Frankfort was, in short, what he
himself called it, an exile (_Verbannung_).

[Footnote 54: _Werke, Briefe_, Band i. 179, November 7th, 1768.]

[Footnote 55: _Ib._ p. 173.]

[Footnote 56: _Ib._ p. 217.]

Among his correspondents was Käthchen Schönkopf with whom, as we have
seen, he had come to what he thought a satisfactory arrangement before
leaving Leipzig. In this correspondence it is the Leipzig student, not
the associate of the Fräulein von Klettenberg, who is before us. There
is the same waywardness, there are the same irresponsible sallies
which made him such a difficult lover. If we are to take him
seriously, he still suffered from the pangs of rejected love and
regretted that his former relations to Käthchen had not continued. "A
lover to whom his love will not listen," he writes, "is by many
degrees not so unfortunate as one who has been cast off; the former
still retains hope and has at least no fear of being hated; the other,
yes, the other, who has once experienced what it is to be cast out of
a heart which once was his, gladly avoids thinking, not to say
speaking, of it."[57] When this passage was written (June, 1769) he
had received the news that Käthchen was betrothed to another. In a
final letter addressed to her (January 23rd, 1770) occur these
characteristic words: "You are still the same loveable girl, and you
will also be a loveable wife. And I, I shall remain Goethe. You know
what that means. When I mention my name, I mention all; and you know
that, as long as I have known you, I have lived only as part of
you."[58] So closed a relation of which it is difficult to say how
much there was in it of genuine passion, how much of artificial
sentiment. Serious intention in it there was none; from the first
Goethe perfectly realised the fact that he could never make Käthchen
his wife.[59]

[Footnote 57: _Ib._ p. 211.]

[Footnote 58: _Ib._ p. 224.]

[Footnote 59: Goethe saw Käthchen as a married woman in Leipzig in
1776, when he wrote to the lady who then held his affections (Frau von
Stein): "Mais ce n'est plus Julie."]

As at Leipzig, his other distractions did not divert him from his
interests in art and literature. When the state of his health
permitted, he assiduously practised drawing and etching. "Now as
formerly," he wrote to Oeser, "art is almost my chief occupation." But
he also found time for wide excursions into the fields of general
literature. Before leaving Leipzig he had exchanged with Langer "whole
baskets-full" of German poets and critics for Greek authors, and these
(though his knowledge of Greek remained to the end elementary) he
must have read in a fashion. Latin authors he read were Cicero,
Quintilian, Seneca, and Pliny. Among the moderns Shakespeare and
Molière already held the place in his estimation which they always
retained. Shakespeare he as yet knew only from the selections in
Dodd's _Beauties_ and Wieland's translation, but he already felt his
greatness, and, as we have seen, names him with Wieland and Oeser as
one of his masters. "Voltaire," he wrote to Oeser, "has been able to
do no harm to Shakespeare; no lesser spirit will prevail over a
greater one."[60] The German writers who now stood highest in his
esteem were Lessing and Wieland. Lessing's æsthetic teaching he
accepted with some reserves, but this did not abate the admiration
which he retained for him at every period of his life. "Lessing!
Lessing!" he wrote in the same letter to Oeser; "if he were not
Lessing, I might say something. Write against him I may not; he is a
conqueror.... He is a mental phenomenon, and, truly, such apparitions
are rare in Germany."[61] That Goethe, at this period, should have had
such an unbounded admiration for Wieland is an interesting commentary
on his pietistic leanings; for Wieland was now in his full pagan
phase, so distasteful to moral Germany, as Goethe himself indicates.
"I have already been annoyed on Wieland's account," he writes--"I
think with justice. Wieland has often the misfortune to be
misunderstood; frequently, perhaps, the fault is his own, but as
frequently it is not." At a later day Goethe clearly saw and marked in
Wieland that lack of "high seriousness" on which he himself came to
lay such stress as all-important in literature and life, but in the
meantime he freely acknowledged what Wieland had been to him.[62]
"After him (Oeser) and Shakespeare," he wrote in the letter just
quoted, "Wieland is still the only one whom I can hold as my true
master; others had shown me where I had gone astray; they showed me
how to do better."

[Footnote 60: _Werke, Briefe_, Band i. 205.]

[Footnote 61: _Ib._ p. 230.]

[Footnote 62: Goethe has this entry in his _Tagebuch_ (April 2nd,
1780): "Wieland sieht ganz unglaublich alles, was man machen will,
macht, und was hangt und langt in einer Schrift."]

What is noteworthy in the serious passages of Goethe's Frankfort
letters is the advance in maturity and self-knowledge which they
reveal when compared with those written from Leipzig. Penetrative
remarks on men and things, such as give its value to his later
correspondence, now begin to fall from his pen by the way. He
consciously takes the measure of his own powers, and forms clear
judgments on the literary and artistic tastes of the time. The poems
which he had written in Leipzig now seemed to him "trifling, cold,
dry, and superficial," and, as in Leipzig he had made a holocaust of
his boyish poems, so he made a second holocaust of those produced in
Leipzig. In a long letter addressed (February 13th, 1769) to
Friederike Oeser he thus expounds the artistic ideals at which he had
then arrived: "A great scholar is seldom a great philosopher, and he
who has laboriously thumbed the pages of many books regards with
contempt the simple, easy book of nature; and yet nothing is true
except what is simple--certainly a sorry recommendation for true
wisdom. Let him who goes the way of simplicity go it in quiet. Modesty
and circumspection are the essential characteristics of him who would
tread this path, and every step will bring its reward. I have to thank
your dear father for these conceptions; he it was who prepared my mind
to receive them; time will give its blessing to my diligence which may
complete the work he began."[63] In point of fact, partly owing to the
depressing conditions in which he found himself, and partly, it may
be, out of his own deliberate purpose, Goethe produced no work of
importance during the year and a half he spent in Frankfort. It was a
period of incubation, and the stimulus to production was to come to
him in another environment.

[Footnote 63: _Werke, Briefe_, Band i. 200.]

In the spring of 1770 Goethe recovered his normal health and spirits,
and, in accordance with his father's wish, he proceeded to Strassburg
to complete his legal studies. He left home with as intense a feeling
of relief as he had left it on the previous occasion. Between him and
his father there had been growing estrangement, and the estrangement
had ended in an open quarrel when he ventured to criticise the
architecture of the paternal house, which had been constructed under
his father's own directions. Thwarted though the father had been in
his hopes of his son, however, he was not turned from his purpose of
affording him every opportunity of laying a broad foundation of
general culture. It was his express wish that Wolfgang, after
completing his studies in Strassburg, should travel in France and
spend some time in Paris.




CHAPTER IV

GOETHE IN STRASSBURG

APRIL, 1770--AUGUST, 1771


Goethe was in his twenty-first year when he entered Strassburg in the
beginning of April, 1770. From his maturer age and the chastening
experience of the preceding eighteen months, therefore, it was to be
expected that his management of his life in his new home would be more
in accordance with his father's wishes than his wild ways in Leipzig.
In sending his son to Strassburg it was the father's intention that he
should complete those legal studies of which he had made a jest in
Leipzig, and qualify himself for the profession by which he was to
make his future living. During his residence of some sixteen months in
Strassburg Goethe did actually fulfil his father's wish, and returned
to Frankfort as a full-fledged Licenciate of Laws, but as little as at
Leipzig did the interests which engrossed him suggest future eminence
in his profession.

What again strikes us is the rapidity with which he caught the tone of
his new surroundings. In Strassburg he found a society whose ways of
living and thinking were equally different from those of Frankfort and
of Leipzig. Strassburg had not the bounded intellectual horizon which
made him feel himself an alien in his native town, nor, on the other
hand, did it offer the opportunities for frivolous distraction which
he found in the "little Paris." Strassburg had been a French town for
a hundred years, but there was no town in Germany more intensely
German in its sympathies and aspirations. The officials and the upper
classes in the town spoke French and were French in their tastes and
habits, but the great majority of its citizens clung to their national
traditions with the tenacity of the conquered. It is Goethe's own
testimony that his residence in Strassburg precisely at this period of
his life was a decisive circumstance for his future development. At
the moment of his arrival, he had not yet completely broken with
French models, and he would even appear to have had vague dreams that
he would eventually choose the French language as his literary
medium.[64] Ever responsive to the intellectual and spiritual
atmosphere in which he found himself, however, the intensely German
sympathies of his Strassburg circle definitely turned him from a
career which would have cut off his genius from its profoundest
sources.

[Footnote 64: So we are led to infer from what he says in Part iii.,
Book ii. of _Dichtung und Wahrheit_.]

His decisive rejection of French for German ideals was the governing
fact of his sojourn in Strassburg, but he had other experiences there
which show that he was the same variable being of the Leipzig days.
His first letters from his new home would seem to show that he had
brought with him something of the pious sentiments he had acquired
from his association with Fräulein von Klettenberg, though his
expression of them has a singular savour. About a fortnight after his
arrival in Strassburg he writes as follows to one Limprecht, a
theological student whose acquaintance he had made in Leipzig: "I am
now again _Studiosus_, and, thank God, have now as much health as I
need, and spirits in superabundance. As I was, so am I still; only
that I stand better with our Lord God and with his dear Son Jesus
Christ. It follows that I am a somewhat wiser man; and have learned by
experience the meaning of the saying, 'The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom.' To be sure, we first sing Hosanna to him who
cometh yonder; well and good! even that is joy and happiness; the King
must first enter before he ascends his throne." A week later he writes
again to the same correspondent in a similar strain[65]: "I am a
different man, very different: for that I thank my Saviour; and I am
thankful also that I am not what I pass for."[66]

[Footnote 65: _Werke, Briefe_, Band i. 232.]

[Footnote 66: _Ib._ p. 234.]

Two months later (July 28th) he appears to be in the same pious frame
of mind. "I still live somewhat at random," he writes to another
correspondent, "and I thank God for it; and often, when I dare, I
thank His Son also that I am in circumstances which seem to enjoin
this random mode of life.... Reflections are very light wares, but
prayer is a profitable business; a single welling-up of the heart to
Him whom we call _a_ God till we can name Him _our_ God, and we are
overwhelmed by the multitude of our mercies."[67]

[Footnote 67: _Ib._ pp. 240, 241.]

This mood, we cannot help feeling, sits ill on Goethe; pious as are
his expressions, they have not the ring of the genuine believer. Yet
it would be unjust to charge him with deliberate hypocrisy. The truth
is that at this time, and indeed throughout all his sojourn in
Strassburg, he was in a state of nervous irritability of which both
himself and his friends were aware.[68] Other expressions in letters
of the same date reveal a variability of moods, the only explanation
of which is that he had not fully recovered from the depressed mental
condition consequent on his long illness in Frankfort. But his
unnatural mood of piety did not long withstand the new influences to
which he was now subjected, and it is in a letter to Fräulein von
Klettenberg herself, written towards the end of August, that he
intimates his growing distaste for the religious set to whom she had
introduced him in Strassburg. After telling her that he had been to
Holy Communion "to remind him of the sufferings and death of our
Lord," he proceeds: "My intercourse with the religious people here is
not quite hearty, though at first I did turn very heartily to them;
but it seems as if it were not to be. They are so deadly dull when
they begin that my natural vivacity cannot endure it." He goes on to
say that he has made the acquaintance of one who is of a different way
of thinking from these people--one "who from the coolness of blood
with which he has always regarded the world thinks he has discovered
that we are put in this world for the special purpose of being useful
in it; that we are capable of making ourselves so; that religion is of
some help in this; and that the most useful man is the best."[69]

[Footnote 68: Lerse, one of Goethe's friends in Strassburg, said: "Da
geriet Goethe oft in hohe Verzückung, sprach Worte der Prophezeiung
und machte Lerse Besorgnisse, er werde überschnappen." (Goethe's
_Gespräche_. Gesamtausgabe von Freiherrn v. Biedermann, Leipzig, 1909,
i. p. 19.)]

[Footnote 69: _Werke, Briefe_, Band i. pp. 245-7.]

The acquaintance to whom Goethe thus refers was the most important
person in the circle with which he was mainly associated during his
residence in Strassburg. It was a circle widely different in tastes
and ways of thinking from that which he had left at Frankfort. Boarded
in one house, the persons who composed it, about ten in number, daily
met at a common table. Of different ages, and mostly medical students,
their talk, as Goethe tells us, mainly turned on their professional
studies. The talk of medical students is not favourable to the
cultivation of a mystical piety, and it need not surprise us that a
few weeks in this atmosphere were sufficient to give Goethe a growing
distaste for those religious sentiments which in his case were only a
morbid distortion of his natural instincts. Yet during these
Strassburg days there is no trace in him of that anti-Christian
attitude of mind which was to be one of his later phases. He
decisively dissociated himself from the Herrnhut society, and he
ceased to speak in their language, but, as we have seen, he was still
disposed to assign to religion a due place in the lives of reasonable
men.

In the president of the common table, Dr. Salzmann, the acquaintance
to whom he referred, Goethe found one who by his personal character
and general views of life appealed to what was deepest in his own
nature. Salzmann's belief that "the most useful man is the best," may
be said, indeed, to sum up Goethe's own maturest conviction regarding
the conduct of life. In his relations to Salzmann, therefore, so far
as Goethe's ethical and religious ideals are concerned, we have the
clearest light thrown on his Strassburg period. As described by Goethe
himself, Salzmann was a man of the world, characterised by a tact,
good sense, and personal dignity which gave him an undisputed
ascendancy over the miscellaneous company which met at the common
table. From another member of the circle[70] we have this additional
tribute to Salzmann's high character: "His place (at table) was the
uppermost, and that would have been his natural place, even had he sat
behind the door. His modesty does not permit me to pass a panegyric on
him.... Let my readers imagine a philosophy, based at once on feeling
and a thorough grasp of principles, conjoined with the most genuine
Christianity, and he will have an idea of a Salzmann." Goethe and he,
the same writer adds, were "the most cordial friends (_Herzensfreunde_)."
In Leipzig the cynical _roué_ Behrisch had been Goethe's mentor; in
Strassburg his mentor was Salzmann, and the fact emphasises all the
difference between Goethe's Leipzig and Strassburg days. That he chose
Salzmann as his chiefest friend and confidant at a period when
self-control was still far from his reach, is the proof that _des
Lebens ernstes Führen_--the strenuous conduct of life--was in reality,
as he himself claimed, an imperative instinct of his nature. Certainly
he did not regulate his life in Strassburg in accordance with the
maxim of his self-chosen counsellor, yet we may conjecture that but
for Salzmann's restraining influence he would have gone further and
faster than he actually did. In the extremity of what was to be his
most passionate experience in Strassburg, it was to Salzmann that he
poured forth all the tumult of his passion, and the very act of laying
bare his heart to such a counsellor was a suggestion of the necessity
of a certain measure of self-control. In connection with Goethe's
relations to Salzmann we have also to note what is true of his
relations to everyone at whose feet he chose for the time to sit. When
a youth of eighteen he had written to Behrisch, a man of thirty, on
terms of perfect equality. He was now a little over twenty, and
Salzmann was approaching fifty and a man of the stamp we have seen,
yet in Goethe's letters to him there is no trace of the modest
diffidence with which a youth usually addresses his seniors. A forward
self-confidence, which some found objectionable, was in fact a
characteristic of his youth and early manhood which is noticed by more
than one observer. He entered a room, we are told, with a bold and
confident air; and we have it from another witness that he was _d'une
suffisance insupportable_.[71] Be it remarked, however, that there is
equal testimony to the overpowering charm of his bearing and
conversation--a charm due, as we learn, to a spontaneity of feeling
and exuberance of youthful spirits which broke through all conventions
and gave the tone to every company in which he found himself.

[Footnote 70: Jung Stilling.]

[Footnote 71: Biedermann, _op. cit._, i. pp. 15, 19. At an earlier
period Goethe was thus described: "Er mag 15 oder 16 Jahr alt sein, im
übrigen hat er mehr ein gutes Plappermaul als Gründlichkeit." _Ib._ p.
6.]

Goethe's relations to another member of the circle, who joined it
somewhat later, show him in his most attractive light. This was Johann
Heinrich Jung, better known as Jung Stilling, now about thirty years
of age. Stilling was another of those originals who crossed Goethe's
path at different periods, and to whom he was at all times specially
attracted. Stilling had had a remarkable career; he had been
successively charcoal-burner, tailor, schoolmaster, and private tutor,
and he had come to Strassburg to qualify himself for the practice of
medicine. What attracted Goethe to him was a type of mind and
character at every point dissimilar from his own. With a simple
mystical piety, which led him to believe that he was a special child
of Providence, Stilling combined an intelligence and a zeal for
knowledge which gave his words and his actions an individual stamp. It
is from Stilling that we have the most vivid description of Goethe in
these Strassburg days. As he sat with a friend at the common table for
the first time, they saw a youth enter who, by his "large bright eyes,
magnificent forehead, handsome person, and confident air," arrested
their attention.[72] "That must be a fine fellow," remarked
Stilling's friend, but both agreed that they might look for trouble
with him, as he seemed _ein wilder Kamerad_. They were mistaken, and
Goethe was to prove one of Stilling's warmest friends. Stilling
himself relates how, when one at the table directed a gibe at him, it
was Goethe who rebuked the railer. When Stilling was in despair at the
news of the illness of his betrothed, it was to Goethe he flew for
comfort, and he found him a friend in need. At a later date Goethe
published Stilling's Autobiography without his knowledge, and
presented him with the copyright. It was with the lively recollection
of these and other acts of friendship that Stilling wrote the words
which are the finest tribute ever paid to Goethe: "Goethe's heart,
which few knew, was as great as his intellect, which all knew."[73]

[Footnote 72: Goethe's personal appearance made such a remarkable
impression on all who met him that it deserves to be more minutely
described. In stature he was slightly over the middle height, though
the poise of his head, both in youth and age, gave the impression of
greater tallness. Till past his thirtieth year he was notably slender
in figure, a defect in symmetry being the observable shortness of the
legs, and he walked with swift, elastic step. The foot was elegantly
shaped, but the hand was that of the descendant of ancestors who had
been engaged in manual labour. The head was of oval form, the chin
small and feminine, the height of the forehead remarkable. The face,
which (in youth) gave the impression of smallness, was brown in
complexion; the nose was delicately formed and slightly curved; the
hair brown, abundant, and usually dishevelled. The feature which
struck all who met him for the first time was the eyes, which were
brown in colour, large, and widely-opened, with the white conspicuous,
and piercingly bright.--An exhaustive study of the portraits and busts
of Goethe will be found in _Goethes Kopf und Gestalt von Karl Bauer_,
Berlin, 1908.]

[Footnote 73: Stilling elsewhere says: "Schade, dass so wenige diesen
vortrefflichen Menschen seinem Herzen nach kennen!" Others used
similar expressions regarding Goethe's mind and heart.]

Neither in Frankfort, nor in Leipzig, nor in Strassburg had Goethe as
yet met the man in whom he could recognise his intellectual peer. In
the beginning of September, 1770, however, there came to Strassburg
one who, for the first time, impressed him with a sense of
inferiority. This was Johann Gottfried Herder, who, some five years
Goethe's senior, had a career behind him widely different from that of
the fortunate son of the Imperial Councillor of Frankfort. Born of
poor parents, he had had to fight his way at every step to the
distinction which he had already attained. He had studied under Kant
at Königsberg, had been successively assistant teacher, assistant
pastor, and private tutor. In this last capacity he had travelled in
France, and visited Paris, where he had made the acquaintance, among
others, of Diderot and D'Alembert. In Hamburg he had for several weeks
been in intercourse with Lessing, whom Goethe in a moment of caprice
had neglected to visit in Leipzig. Already, moreover, he had produced
work in literary criticism which by its suggestiveness and originality
had attracted much attention, and notably among the youth of Germany.
In hard-won experience, in extent of knowledge and range of ideas,
therefore, Herder, as Goethe himself speedily saw and acknowledged,
was far ahead of him along those very paths where he himself was
ambitious of distinction.

The association of Herder and Goethe in these Strassburg days is one
of the interesting chapters in European literary history. Goethe
himself bears emphatic testimony to Herder's determining influence at
once on his mind and character. "The most significant event of that
time, he tells us, "and one which was to have the weightiest
consequences for me, was my acquaintance with Herder and the closer
bond that resulted from it." Bond there was between them, but it was
not the bond of genuine friendship. No two men, indeed, could be more
essentially antipathetic by nature than Herder and Goethe. Their
antagonism was clearly apparent during their intercourse in
Strassburg, and in the end, after many years of uneasy relations,
their alienation became complete. Be it said that the traits in Herder
which estranged Goethe from him were equally recognised and felt by
others. Naturally querulous, splenetic, and inconsiderate of others'
feelings, the adverse circumstances of his early life had made him
something of a Timon among his fellows.[74] His favourite author was
Swift, and from this preference and from the peculiarities of his own
temper he was known among his acquaintances as the "Dean." But there
were sides to his nature which certainly did not exist in the
"terrible" Dean. Herder was an enthusiast for his own ideas, and these
ideas were of a quality and range that marked him as one of the
pioneers of his time. Religion as a primary instinct in man and the
principal factor in his development was Herder's lifelong and
predominant interest. He identified himself with Christianity, but it
was a Christianity understood by him in the most liberal sense, a
Christianity free from dogma, a spirit rather than a creed. As
kindred to religion, poetry in his conception was inseparable from it
in the essential being of man--poetry not as expressed in conventional
forms but as the breath of the human spirit, and one of the most
precious gifts for the purifying and elevation of humanity. These
conceptions he owed, not to Kant, to whom he had listened in
Königsberg, but to a less systematic teacher, J.G. Hamann, whose
eccentric character and visionary speculations had gained for him the
designation of the "Magus of the North." Goethe came to be acquainted
with the writings of Hamann, and had a genuine admiration of him as a
seer struggling with visions to which he was unable to give adequate
utterance.[75] It was in his conversations with Herder, however, that
he was introduced to those deeper conceptions of man and his
possibilities which implied a complete emancipation from the
mechanical philosophy which he had hitherto been endeavouring to find
in a mystical religion.

[Footnote 74: R. Haym, Herder's biographer, says of him: "Einen
unbedingt erfreulichen, harmonischen Eindruck kann dieser Mann, der
selbst von den 'gräulichen Dissonanzen' redet, in die Äussererungen
zuweilen ausklingen möchten, auch auf den günstigst gestimmten
Betrachter nimmermehr machen." (_Herder nach seinem Leben und seinen
Werken_, Berlin, 1887, i. p. 396.)]

[Footnote 75: Goethe attached so much importance to many of Hamann's
utterances that, as late as 1806, he had thoughts of bringing out an
edition of Hamann's works.]

During the six months that Herder resided in Strassburg he was under
treatment for a serious ailment of his eyes, and Goethe was assiduous
in his attendance on him, often remaining with him for whole days.
Their intercourse was not an unmixed pleasure for either. Herder's
mordant humour and spirit of contradiction were a daily trial to
Goethe's temper, and he describes his feelings of alternating
attraction and repulsion as a wholly new experience in his life.
Herder, who had known Diderot and D'Alembert and Lessing, appears,
indeed, to have treated Goethe as an undisciplined boy, spoilt by
flattery, with no serious purpose in life, inconsequent and
irresponsible.[76] Nor does he seem to have been specially impressed
by any promise in the youth who was so completely to eclipse him in
the eyes of the world. In his letters from Strassburg he does not even
mention Goethe's name; and, when he subsequently referred to him, it
was in terms he might have applied to any clever and confident youth.
"Goethe," he wrote, "is at bottom a good fellow, only somewhat
superficial and sparrow-like,[77] faults with which I constantly taxed
him." If Herder's moods frequently jarred on Goethe, it is evident
that the experience was mutual. The physical and mental restlessness,
which is suggested by the epithet "sparrow-like," and which was noted
by others as characteristic of Goethe at this period, could not fail
to irritate one like Herder, naturally grave, sobered by hard
experience, and then suffering from a painful and serious ailment.
Equally distasteful to Herder were Goethe's explosive outbursts in
general conversation and his liking for practical jokes at the expense
of his friends. To Herder as to everyone else Goethe aired his
opinions with the "frank confidingness" which he notes as a trait of
his own character, and which gave Herder frequent opportunities for
scathing criticism. Herder gibed at his youthful tastes--at his
collection of seals, at his elegantly-bound volumes which stood unread
on his shelves, at his enthusiasms for Italian art, for the writings
of the Cabbalists, for the poetry of Ovid.[78]

[Footnote 76: Herder thought that Goethe was lacking in enthusiasm.]

[Footnote 77: Elsewhere Herder calls Goethe a _Specht_, a
wood-pecker.]

[Footnote 78: Writing to a correspondent in 1780, Goethe says: "Herder
fährt fort, sich und andern das Leben sauer zu machen."]

At bottom, as Herder said, Goethe was a "good fellow," slow to take
offence, and as little vindictive as is possible to human nature. This
easy temper doubtless stood him in good stead under the fire of
Herder's sarcasms, but he himself specifies another reason for his
docility which is equally characteristic: he endured all Herder's
satirical spleen because he had learned to attach a high value to
everything that contributed to his own culture. According to his own
account, he owed a double debt to Herder--a determining influence on
his character, and an equally determining influence on his
intellectual development. Till he met Herder he had been treated as a
youthful genius, as a "conquering lord," whose eccentricities were
only a proof of his originality. Very different was the measure he
received from Herder, who showed no mercy for "whatever of
self-complacency, egotism, vanity, pride and presumption was latent or
active" in him. Herder, he says elsewhere, "exercised such a
blighting influence on me that I began to doubt my own powers."
Whether or not Goethe learned from Herder the lesson of modesty
regarding his own gifts, it is the truth that of all the sons of
genius none has been freer than Goethe was in his maturer years from
every form of vanity and self-consciousness.

It is on his intellectual debt to Herder, however, that Goethe dwells
most emphatically in his account of their personal intercourse. Daily
and even hourly, he says, Herder's conversation was a summons to new
points of view. Poetry was the subject in which both had a common
interest, and from Herder Goethe learned to regard poetry "in another
sense" from that in which he had hitherto regarded it. He had hitherto
regarded poetry as an accomplishment; Herder taught him that it was a
gift of nature, of the essence of humanity, "the mother-speech of the
human race." This expression was Hamann's, who had been inspired to
utter it out of his revulsion against French literature and his study
of the literature of England. From England, indeed, came those
conceptions of the nature and function of poetry which, as expounded
and exemplified in the writings of Hamann, Herder, Goethe, and others,
were to effect a revolution in German literature. In a literary
manifesto, written by an Englishman, but apparently better known in
Germany than in England, German historians of their own literature
have found the main impulse that gave occasion to this revolution.
This manifesto was a pamphlet written by Edward Young, the author of
_Night Thoughts_, entitled _Conjectures on Original Composition, in a
Letter addressed to the Author of Sir Charles Grandison_. The
dithyrambic style of the Letter manifestly exercised a powerful
influence on the prose of Herder and Goethe--prose charged with
perfervid feeling, and hitherto unknown in German literature. Young's
main contention is that in literature genius must make rules for
itself, and that imitation is suicidal. "Genius," he says, "can set us
right in composition, without the rules of the learned; as conscience
sets us right in life, without the laws of the land." He lays it down
as a maxim that "the less we copy the renowned ancients, we shall
resemble them the more." The two golden rules in composition as in
ethics are: know thyself and reverence thyself. Such were the
"conjectures on original composition," expounded to him by Herder
which led Goethe to regard poetry in "another sense" from that in
which he had hitherto understood it. And in confirmation of his views
Herder directed him to the exemplars where he would find their
illustration--to the Bible, to Homer and Pindar, to Shakespeare and
Ossian, and, above all, to the primitive poetry of all peoples.

As we shall see, Goethe laid these counsels even too faithfully to
heart; the first composition[79] in which he attempted to realise them
drew upon him Herder's characteristic censure. And it is in this
connection that we have to note the reserves which Goethe makes in the
acknowledgment of his debt to Herder, "Had Herder been more methodical
in his mental habit," he says, "he would have afforded the most
valuable guidance for the permanent direction of my culture; but he
was more disposed to probe and to stimulate than to give guidance and
leading." So it was, as Goethe adds elsewhere, that the result of
Herder's influence on him was a mental confusion and tumult, plainly
visible in another of his early writings,[80] where "quite simple
thoughts and observations are veiled in a dust-cloud of unusual words
and phrases."

[Footnote 79: _Götz von Berlichingen._]

[Footnote 80: Von deutcher Baukunst.]

The homage which Goethe pays to Herder in the retrospect of his
Strassburg days is equally emphasised in his contemporary letters.
"Herder, Herder," he writes in one place, "remain to me what you are.
If I am destined to be your planet I will be it; be it willingly,
faithfully."[81] Yet we may doubt whether Herder's influence was, in
truth, so determining a factor in his life as Goethe himself
represents it. Herder, he tells us, first taught him a wise
self-distrust, but we have seen that one of the lessons he professes
to have learned from Oeser was "to be modest without self-depreciation,
and to be proud without presumption." Before he saw Herder, also, he
had already divined the greatness of Shakespeare and the futility of
Voltaire's criticisms of him. Herder's ideas regarding the human
spirit and its possibilities were in the air, and, had the two men
never met, the probability is that Goethe's development would not have
been different from what it actually was. Herder's general views were
already incipient in him; and what Herder did was to deepen and
intensify them.[82] Nevertheless the collision for the first time with
a mind that revealed to him his own immaturity was for Goethe, as for
every youth, a formative influence of the highest import and an epoch
in his mental history. Yet in his association with Herder one fact has
to be noted: Goethe was not subjugated by him. He frankly recognised
Herder's superiority to himself in knowledge and experience, but he
retained his mental independence. In his letters to Herder, as in
those to Salzmann, he writes in terms of equality. In such words as
the following, for example, we have not the attitude of the
unquestioning disciple to his master. "Pray let us try to see each
other oftener. You feel how you would embrace one who could be to you
what you are to me. Don't let us be frightened like weaklings because
we must often disagree: should our passions collide, can we not
endure the collision?"[83] Might we not infer from this passage that
not Herder but Goethe was the dominating spirit in their
intercourse?[84]

[Footnote 81: _Werke, Briefe_, Band i. p. 264. He adds that he would
prefer to be Mercury, the least of the seven planets that revolve
round the sun, than first among the five that revolve round Saturn.]

[Footnote 82: Herder himself says of his influence on Goethe: "Ich
glaube ihm, ohne Lobrednerei, einige gute Eindrücke gegeben zu haben,
die einmal wirksam werden können."--Haym, _op. cit._ i. 392.]

[Footnote 83: _Ib._ Band ii. p. 18.]

[Footnote 84: Schiller, in a letter to C.G. Körner, the father of the
poet, writes (July, 1787): "He [Herder] said that Goethe had greatly
influenced his intellectual development."]

Goethe found another source of inspiration in Strassburg besides
Herder, and one which, as he describes it both in his Autobiography
and in a contemporary effusion, moved him even more powerfully. His
first act on his arrival in Strassburg, he tells us, was to visit its
cathedral whose towers had caught his eye long before he reached the
town. He had been taught by his old master Oeser, who only represented
the general opinion of the time in Germany, that Gothic architecture
was the product of a barbarous age and could be regarded only with
amazed disgust by every person of educated taste. But Goethe's
mystical studies and religious experiences in Frankfort had not left
him what he was in his Leipzig days, and had given him an insight into
movements of the human spirit which did not come within the cognizance
of Oeser. It was with predisposed sympathy, therefore, that he looked
for the first time on a specimen of Gothic architecture in its most
august form. His first impression was of "a wholly peculiar kind";
and, without seeking to analyse the impression, "he surrendered
himself to its silent working." Thenceforward, during his stay in
Strassburg, the cathedral exercised a fascination upon him that evoked
a new world of thought and feeling. It was his delight to ascend its
tower at sunset and gaze on the rich landscape of Alsace, whose beauty
made him bless the fate that had placed him for a time amid such
surroundings. He studied its structure with such minute care that he
correctly divined the additions to the great tower which the original
architect had contemplated, but which he had been unable to carry out.

Goethe has himself indicated how the impressions he received from the
cathedral influenced his first literary productions which bore the
stamp of his individuality. It formed a fitting background, he says,
for such poetical creations as _Götz von Berlichingen_ and _Faust_. To
the cathedral and its suggestions, even more than to Herder, perhaps,
we should trace the inspiration that produced these works--the former
of which met with Herder's questioning approval. To the full force of
that inspiration Goethe gave direct expression in a composition which
is the most characteristic product of his Strassburg period--a short
essay, entitled _Of German Architecture_. Probably sketched in
Strassburg, it was not published till his return to Frankfort. Its
rhapsodical style, as well as the conceptions of art and nature which
it embodies, directly recall Young's _Conjectures on Original
Composition_. Like Young he proclaims that genius is a law to itself,
that all imitation and subservience to rule is disastrous to
imaginative production. "Principles," he declares, "are even more
injurious to genius than examples." The burden of the Essay is the
glorification of the genius of the architect of Strassburg cathedral,
and of Gothic architecture in general, which, Goethe maintained,
should be correctly designated "German" architecture, as having had
its origin on German soil. With this youthful sally of Goethe, time
was to deal with its unkindest irony. Later research has proved that
Gothic architecture is of French and not of German origin, and Goethe
himself did not remain faithful to his youthful enthusiasm. On his way
home from Strassburg, he relates, the sight of some specimens of
ancient art in Mannheim "shook his faith in northern architecture,"
and the impression he thus received was to become a permanent
conviction. It was in the art of classical antiquity that he was to
find the expression of his maturest ideal; when in later years his
attention was temporarily turned to Gothic architecture, it was with
little of his youthful enthusiasm that he admitted its claim to our
regard.

"I cannot go on long without a passion," Goethe wrote in his
twenty-third year, and we have no difficulty in believing him. In
Strassburg he lived through a passion which was to be the occasion of
his giving the first clear proof to the world that he was to be among
its original poets. On the 14th of October, 1770, more than five
months after his arrival in Strassburg, he wrote these words to a
correspondent: "I have never so vividly experienced what it is to be
content with one's heart disengaged as now here in Strassburg."[85] In
the same letter in which these words occur he casually mentions that
he has just spent a few days in the country with some pleasant people.
These pleasant people were a pastor Brion and his family living at
Sesenheim, an Alsace village some twenty miles from Strassburg. These
few days spent with the Brion family were to be the beginning of a
history which, as Goethe relates it in his Autobiography, has the
character of an idyll, but, when stripped of the poetic haze which he
has thrown around it, is not far from tragedy. He himself is our sole
authority for its incidents, and he chose so to tell them that the
exact truth of the whole history can never be known.[86]

[Footnote 85: _Ib._ Band i. p. 250.]

[Footnote 86: Subsequent investigation has proved that Goethe has
committed several errors of fact in his narrative. For example, he
relates that on his first visit to the Sesenheim family he was vividly
reminded of the family of the Vicar of Wakefield. In point of fact, he
was introduced to Goldsmith's work by Herder, who came to Strassburg
subsequent to Goethe's first visit to Sesenheim.]

The day following the writing of the letter just quoted, Goethe wrote
another letter which proves that his heart was no longer "disengaged."
This letter is, in fact, a declaration of love to the youngest
daughter of the Sesenheim pastor, Friederike--name of pleasantest
suggestions in the long list of Goethe's loves. The letter, it may be
said, does not strike us as a happy introduction to the relations that
were to follow; it would not have been written had Friederike been the
daughter of a house of the same social standing as his own. All
through his relations to the Sesenheim family, indeed, there is an
unpleasant suggestion that it is the son of the Imperial Councillor
who is indulging a passion which he is fully aware must one day end in
a more or less bitter parting. "Dear new Friend," he begins, "Such I
do not hesitate to call you, for, if in other circumstances I have not
much insight into the language of the eyes, at the first glance I saw
in yours the hope of this friendship; and for our hearts I would
swear. How should you, tender and good as I know you to be, not be a
little partial to me in return?"[87] In this strain the letter
continues, and with a skill of approach that reminds us of his boast
to his former confidant Behrisch.

[Footnote 87: _Ib._ p. 251.]

Goethe's relations with Friederike lasted till the end of June,
1771--a period of some ten months. Of this period the first half would
seem to have been passed by both in idyllic oblivion of consequences;
during the second there came painful awakening to realities on the
part of one of the lovers. As they lived in his memory, those first
months that Goethe spent in intercourse with the Sesenheim circle were
a long dream of happiness; and nowhere in his Autobiography is he so
obviously moved by his recollection of the past.[88] The picture he
has drawn of that time is, indeed, an idyll in every sense. We have
the setting of a primitive home in a country Arcadian in its
bountifulness and beauty; in the centre of this home is the father,
whose simple piety is in perfect keeping with his office and his
surroundings; and the home is brightened by the presence of two
daughters,[89] the one of whom, Friederike, appears as a vision of
rustic grace and modest maidenhood. In the midst of this circle moves
the richly-gifted youth, laying under a spell father, daughters, and
all who come within the magnetism of his presence. In no other
situation, indeed, are the attractive sides of Goethe's character so
strikingly manifest as in his intercourse with the Sesenheim family
and the friendly group attached to them. It is without a touch of
egotism that he brings himself before us in all the buoyant spirits,
the quickness of sympathy, the diversity of interests, the splendour
of his gifts, which made Wieland speak of him as "a veritable ruler of
spirits." He humours the good father by drawing a plan for a new
parsonage and painting his coach, he charms the daughters by his
various accomplishments, and the neighbours who came about the
parsonage are carried away by his frolicsome humour. "When Goethe
came among us girls when we were at work in the barn," related one who
had seen him, "his jests and droll stories almost made work
impossible."[90]

[Footnote 88: It is recorded that his voice trembled as he dictated
the passages referring to Sesenheim and Friederike.]

[Footnote 89: In reality, there were four daughters, but Goethe omits
mention of the other two in order to make more striking the
resemblance between the family of the Vicar of Wakefield and that of
Sesenheim.]

[Footnote 90: Biedermann, _op. cit._ i. pp. 16-17.]

The beginning of disillusion came on the occasion of a visit made by
the two sisters to Strassburg. In a world that was alien to her
Friederike lost something of the charm which was derived from her
perfect fitness to her native surroundings, and it was brought home to
Goethe that there must be a rude awakening from the dream of the last
few months. In May, 1771, he paid a visit to Sesenheim which lasted
several weeks, and the picture we have of his state of mind during his
visit shows that he felt that the time of reckoning had come. His mind
was already clear that he and Friederike must separate, but he was
fully conscious that he was playing a sorry part. Exaggerated language
was such an inveterate habit with him at this period of his life that
it is difficult to know with what exactness his words express his real
feelings.[91] That he was unhappy, however, we cannot doubt, make what
reserves we may for rhetorical excesses of style. Here are a few
passages from letters addressed to his friend Salzmann during his stay
at Sesenheim: "It rains without and within, and the hateful evening
winds rustle among the vine leaves before my window, and my _animula
vagula_ is like yonder weather-cock on the church tower." "For the
honour of God I am not leaving this place just at present.... I am now
certainly in tolerably good health; my cough, as the result of
treatment and exercise, is pretty nearly gone, and I hope it will soon
go altogether. Things about me, however, are not very bright; the
little one [Friederike] continues sadly ill, and that makes everything
look out of joint--not to speak of _conscia mens_, unfortunately not
_recti_, which I carry about with me." "It is now about time that I
should return [to Strassburg]; I will and will, but what avails
willing in the presence of the faces I see around me? The state of my
heart is strange, and my health is as variable as usual in the world,
which it is long since I have seen so beautiful. The most delightful
country, people who love me, a round of pleasures! Are not the dreams
of thy childhood all fulfilled?--I often ask myself when my eye feeds
on this circumambient bliss. Are not these the fairy gardens after
which thy heart yearned? They are! They are! I feel it, dear friend;
and feel that we are not a whit the happier when our desires are
realised. The make-weight! the make-weight! with which Fate balances
every bliss that we enjoy. Dear friend, there needs much courage not
to lose courage in this world of ours."[92]

[Footnote 91: In the recently discovered manuscript of _Wilhelm
Meisters Theatralische Sendung_ occurs this passage, evidently
self-descriptive: "Als Knabe hatte er zu grossen prächtigen Worten und
Sprüchen eine ausserordentliche Liebe, er schmückte seine Seele damit
aus wie mit einem köstlichen Kleide, und freute sich darüber, als wenn
sie zu ihm selbst gehörten kindlisch über diesen äussern Schmuck."]

[Footnote 92: _Werke, Briefe_, Band i. p. 258 _ff._]

The day of parting came at the end of June; on August 6th he passed
the tests necessary for the Licentiate of Laws, and at the end of that
month he left Strassburg for home. He left Friederike, he tells us, at
a moment when their parting almost cost her her life[93]; did he do
her a greater wrong than his own narrative would imply? We cannot
tell; but one thing is certain, from the first he never intended
marriage. That he had pangs of self-reproach for the part he had
played, his words above quoted may be taken as sufficient evidence,
but alike from temperament and deliberate consideration of the facts
of life he was incapable of the contrition that troubles human nature
to its depths.[94] Yet in our judgment of him it is well to remember
the ideas then current in Germany regarding the relations between love
and marriage. In his seventy-fourth year Goethe himself said: "Love is
something ideal, marriage is something real; and never with impunity
do we exchange the ideal for the real." The severest of moralists,
Kant, was of the same opinion. "The word _conjugium_ itself," he says,
"implies that two married people are yoked together, and to be thus
yoked cannot be called bliss." And to the same purport Wilhelm von
Humboldt, one of the finest spirits of his time, declared that
"marriage was no bond of souls." It was in a world where such opinions
were entertained by men of the highest character and intelligence that
Goethe made his irresponsible addresses to the successive objects of
his passion.

[Footnote 93: Friederike died in 1815. She was still alive when Goethe
was writing the story of their love.]

[Footnote 94:

     Nichts taugt Ungeduld,
       Noch weniger Reue;
     Jene vermehrt die Schuld,
       Diese schafft neue.]

The distractions of Strassburg, no more than the distractions of
Leipzig, diverted Goethe from what were his ruling instincts from the
beginning--to know life and to be master of himself. As in Leipzig,
his professional studies in Strassburg held little place in his
thoughts; his law degree, he tells us, he regarded as a matter of
"secondary importance." The subject he chose as his thesis--the
obligation of magistrates to impose a State religion binding on all
their subjects--was of a nature that had no living interest for him at
any period of his life, and he wrote the thesis "only to satisfy his
father." If his law studies were neglected, however, it was almost
with feverish passion that he coursed through other fields of
knowledge. In the _Ephemerides_--a diary he kept in Strassburg and in
which he noted his random thoughts and the books that happened to be
engaging him--we can see the range of his reading and the scope of his
interests. Occultism, metaphysics, science in many departments,
literature ancient and modern, all in turn absorbed his attention and
suggest a mental state impatient of the limits of the human
faculties--the state of mind which he was afterwards so marvellously
to reproduce in his _Faust_.[95] Inspired by the conversation of the
medical students who met at the common table, as well as by his own
natural bent, he attended the university lectures on chemistry and
anatomy, and thus laid a solid foundation for his subsequent original
investigations in these sciences. Extensive travels in the surrounding
country were among the chief pleasures of his sojourn in Strassburg,
and these travels, as was the case with him always, were voyages of
discovery. Architecture, machinery, works of engineering, Roman
antiquities, the native ballads of the district--on all he turned an
equally curious eye, and with such vivid impressions that they
remained in his memory after the lapse of half a lifetime.

[Footnote 95: "I, too," Goethe wrote in _Dichtung und Wahrheit_, "had
trodden the path of knowledge, and had early been led to see the
vanity of it."]

In Goethe the instinct for self-mastery was as remarkable as his
instinct for knowledge. As the result of his illness in Frankfort, his
organs of sense were in a state of morbid susceptibility which "put
him out of harmony with himself, with objects around him, and even
with the elements." It throws a curious light on the nature of the man
that amid all the preoccupations of his mind and heart in Strassburg
he could deliberately turn his thoughts to the cure of his jarred
nerves. Loud sounds disturbed him, and to deaden the sensitiveness of
his ears he attended the evening tatoo; to cure himself of a tendency
to giddiness he practised climbing the cathedral; partly to rid
himself of a repugnance to repulsive sights he attended clinical
lectures; and by a similar course of discipline he so completely
delivered himself from "night fears" that he afterwards found it
difficult to realise them even in imagination.

In his old age Goethe said of himself: "I have that in me which, if I
allowed it to go unchecked, would ruin both myself and those about
me." Was it, as Goethe would have us believe, by sheer purposive will
that he kept this dangerous element in him under check and saved
himself at critical moments from disaster? When we regard his life as
a whole, the actual facts hardly justify such a conclusion. Nature had
given him two safeguards which, without any effort of will on his own
part, assured him deliverance where the risk of wreckage was
greatest--a consuming desire to _know_ which grew with every year of
his life, and a versatility of temperament which necessitated
ever-renewed sensations equally of the mind and heart. Of the working
of these two elements in him we have already had illustration; they
will receive further illustration as we proceed.

It would be within the truth to say that the period of Goethe's
sojourn in Strassburg was the most memorable epoch of his life. During
the eighteen months he spent there he received an intellectual
stimulus from which we may date his dedication to the unique career
before him, in which self-culture, the passion for knowledge, and the
impulse to produce were all commensurate ends. Moreover, as has
already been said, it was in Strassburg that his genius found its
first adequate expression. And, what is worth noting in the case of
one who was to range over so many fields, it was in lyric poetry that
his genius first expressed itself. The problem with Goethe is to
discover which among his various gifts was nature's special dowry to
him. What, at least, is true is that at different periods of his life
he produced numbers of lyrics which the world has recognised as among
the most perfect things of their kind. And among these perfect things
are the few songs and other pieces inspired by Friederike Brion.
Doubtless his genius would have flowered had he never seen Friederike,
but it was among the many kind offices that fortune did him that he
found the theme for his muse in one whose simple charm, while it
excited his passion, at the same time chastened and purified it, and
compelled a truthful simplicity of expression in keeping with her own
nature. It was to Friederike that Goethe owed the pure inspiration
which gives his verses to her a quality rare in lyric poetry, but to
the writing of them there went all the forces that were then working
in him. In these verses we have the conclusive proof that he now both
understood and felt poetry "in another sense" from that in which he
had hitherto understood and felt it. Through them we feel the breath
of another air than that which he had breathed when he strained his
invention to make poetic compliments to Käthchen Schönkopf. In the
intensity and directness of passion which they express we may trace
all the new poetic influences which he had come under in
Strassburg--Shakespeare, Ossian, the popular ballad, the inspiration
of Herder. What is remarkable in these early lyrics, however, is that
though they vibrate with the emotion of the poet, the emotion is under
strict restraint and never passes into the watery effusiveness which
is the inherent sin of so much German lyrical poetry. That "brevity
and precision" which was the ideal he now put before him he had
attained at one bound, and in none of his later work did he exemplify
it in greater perfection. As his countrymen have frequently pointed
out, these firstfruits of Goethe's genius mark a new departure in
lyrical poetry. In them we have the direct simplicity of the best
lyrics of the past, but combined with this simplicity a depth of
introspection and a fusion of nature with human feeling which is a new
content in the imaginative presentation of human experience. In
connection with Goethe's Leipzig period we gave a specimen of the best
work he was then capable of producing; when we place beside it such a
poem as the following, we are reminded of the saying of Emerson that
"the soul's advances are not made by gradation ... but rather by
ascension of state."

     WILKOMMEN UND ABSCHIED.

     Es schlug mein Herz; geschwind zu Pferde,
     Und fort, wild, wie ein Held zur Schlacht!
     Der Abend wiegte schon die Erde,
     Und an den Bergen hing die Nacht;
     Schon stund im Nebelkleid die Eiche,
     Wie ein getürmter Riese da,
     Wo Finsternis aus dem Gesträuche
     Mit hundert schwarzen Augen sah.

     Der Mond von einem Wolkenhügel
     Sah kläglich aus dem Duft hervor;
     Die Winde schwangen leise Flügel,
     Umsausten schauerlich mein Ohr;
     Die Nacht schuf tausend Ungeheuer;
     Doch frisch und fröhlich war mein Mut;
     In meinen Adern welches Feuer!
     In meinem Herzen welche Glut!

     Dich sah ich, und die milde Freude
     Floss aus dem süssen Blick auf mich,
     Ganz war mein Herz an deiner Seite,
     Und jeder Athemzug für dich.
     Ein rosenfarbnes Frühlingswetter
     Umgab das liebliche Gesicht,
     Und Zärtlichkeit für mich, ihr Götter!
     Ich hofft' es, ich verdient' es nicht.

     Doch ach, schon mit der Morgensonne
     Verengt der Abschied mir das Herz:
     In deinen Küssen, welche Wonne,
     In deinem Auge, welcher Schmerz!
     Ich ging, du standst und sahst zur Erden,
     Und sahst mir nach mit nassem Blick;
     Und doch, welch Glück geliebt zu werden!
     Und lieben, Götter, welch ein Glück!

     WELCOME AND PARTING.

     Throbbed high my breast! To horse, to horse!
       Raptured as hero for the fight;
     Soft lay the earth in eve's embrace,
       And on the mountain brooded night.
     The oak, a dim-discovered shape,
       Did, like a towering giant, rise--
     There whence from forth the thicket glared
       Black darkness with its myriad eyes.

     From out a pile of cloud the moon
       Peered sadly through the misty veil;
     Softly the breezes waved their wings;
       Sighed in my ears with plaintive wail.
     Night shaped a thousand monstrous forms;
       Yet fresh and frolicsome my breast;
     And what a fire burned in my veins,
       And what a glow my heart possessed!

     I saw thee: in thine eye's soft gaze
       A tender, calm delight I knew;
     All motions of my heart were thine.
       And thine was every breath I drew.
     The freshest, richest hues of Spring
       Enhaloëd thy lovely face,--
     And tenderest thoughts for me!--my hope!
       But, undeserved, ye Powers of Grace!

     But, ah! too soon, with morning's dawn,
       The hour of parting cramps my heart;
     Then, in thy kisses, O what bliss!
       And in thine eye, what poignant smart!
     I went; thou stood'st and downward gazed,
       Gazed after me with tearful eyes;
     Yet, to be loved, what blessedness,
       And, oh! to love, ye Gods, what bliss!




CHAPTER V

FRANKFORT--_GÖTZ VON BERLICHINGEN_

AUGUST, 1771--DECEMBER, 1771


Goethe returned to Frankfort at the end of August, 1771, and, with the
exception of two memorable intervals, he remained there till November,
1775, when he left it, never again to make it his permanent home. This
period of four years and two months is in creative productiveness
unparalleled in his own career, and is probably without a parallel in
literary history. During these years he produced _Götz von
Berlichingen_ and _Werther_, both of which works, whatever their
merits or demerits, are at least landmarks, not only in the history of
German, but of European literature. To the same period belong the
original scenes of _Faust_, in which he displayed a richness of
imagination with a spontaneity of passion, of thought and of feeling,
to which he never attained in the subsequent additions he made to the
poem. In these scenes are already clearly defined the two figures,
Faust and Mephistopheles, which have their place in the world's
gallery of imaginative creations beside Ulysses and Don Quixote,
Hamlet and Falstaff; and there, too, in all her essential lineaments,
we have Gretchen, the most moving of all the births of a poet's mind
and heart. And, besides these three works of universal interest, there
belong to the same period a series of productions--plays, lyrics,
essays--which, though at a lower level of inspiration, were sufficient
to mark their author as an original genius with a compass of thought
and imagination hitherto unexampled in the literature of his country.
Had Goethe died at the age of twenty-six, he would have left behind
him a legacy which would have assured him a place with the great
creative minds of all time.

This extraordinary productiveness of itself implies an intellectual
and spiritual ferment which receives further illustration from the
poet's letters written during the same period. In these letters we
have the expression of a mind distracted by contending emotions and
conflicting aims, now in sanguine hope, now paralysed with a sense of
impotence to adjust itself to the inexorable conditions under which
life had to be lived. Moods of thinking and feeling follow each other
with a rapidity of contrast which are bewildering to the reader and
hardly permit him to draw any certain inference as to the real import
of what is written. In one effusion we have lachrymose sentiment which
suggests morbid self-relaxation; in another, a bitter cynicism equally
suggestive of ill-regulated emotions. We have moods of piety and
moods in which the mental attitude towards all human aspirations can
only be described as Mephistophelian.

Goethe himself was well aware of a congenital morbid strain in him
which all through his life demanded careful control if he were to
avert bodily and mental collapse. And at no period of his life did
external conditions and inward experiences combine to put his
self-control to a severer test than during these last years in
Frankfort. Frankfort itself, as we shall see, had become more
distasteful to him than ever, and his abiding feeling towards it, now
as subsequently, was that he could not breathe freely in its
atmosphere. On his return from Strassburg his father received him with
greater cordiality than on his return from Leipzig, but the lack of
real sympathy between them remained, and was undoubtedly one of the
permanent sources of Goethe's discontent with his native town. With no
interest in his nominal profession, he had at the same time no clear
conception of the function to which his genius called him. Throughout
these years in Frankfort he continued uncertain whether Nature meant
him for a poet or an artist, and we receive the impression that his
ambition was to be artist rather than poet. From the varied literary
forms in which he expressed himself, also, we are led to infer that in
the domain of literature he was still only feeling his way.

If the diversity of his gifts thus distracted him, his emotional
experiences, it will appear, were not more favourable to a settled aim
and purpose. One paroxysm of passion succeeded another, with the
result that he was eventually, in self-preservation, driven to make a
complete breach with his past, and to seek deliverance in a new set of
conditions under which he might attain the self-control after which he
had hitherto vainly striven. This prolonged conflict with himself was
doubtless primarily due to his own inherited temperament, but it was
also in large measure owing to the character of the society and of the
time in which the period of his youth was passed. Had he been born
half a century earlier--that is to say, in a time when the current
speculation was bound up with a mechanical philosophy, and when the
limits of emotion were conditioned by strict conventional
standards--he might have been a youth of eccentric humours, but the
morbid fancies and wandering affections that consumed him could not
have come within his experience. But by the time when he began to
think and feel, Rousseau had written and opened the flood-gates of the
emotions, and Sterne had shown how accepted conventions might appear
in the light of a capricious wit and fancy which probed the surface of
things. In Goethe's letters, which are the most direct revelation of
his mental and moral condition during the period, the influence of
Rousseau and Sterne is visible on every page, and the fact has to be
remembered in drawing any conclusions as to the real state of his
mind from his language to his various correspondents. The fashion of
giving exaggerated expression to every emotion was, in fact, the
convention of the day, and we find it in all the correspondence, both
of the men and women of the time. That it was in large degree forced
and artificial and must be interpreted with due reserves, will appear
in the case of Goethe himself.

There are three critical epochs during these Frankfort years, each
marked by a central event which resulted in new developments of
Goethe's character and genius. In the period between his return to
Frankfort in August, 1771, and May, 1772, was written the first draft
of _Götz von Berlichingen_, the eventual publication of which made him
the most famous author in Germany. During these months the memories of
Strassburg are fresh in his mind, and the recollection of Friederike
and the teaching of Herder are his chief sources of inspiration. In
May, 1772, he went to Wetzlar, where, during a residence of three
months, he passed through another emotional experience which, two
years later, found expression in _Werther_, of still more resounding
notoriety than _Götz_. The opening of 1775 saw him entangled in a new
affair of the heart of another nature than those which had preceded
it, and resulting in a mental turmoil that drove him to seek
deliverance in a new field of life and action. There were other
incidents and other experiences that moved him less or more during
this period of his career, but it is in connection with these three
central events that his character and his genius are presented in
their fullest light, and are best known to the world.

We have it on Goethe's own testimony that, on his return from
Strassburg to Frankfort, he was healthier in body and more composed in
mind than on his return from Leipzig two years before. Still, he adds,
he was conscious of a sense of tension in his nature which implied
that his mind had not completely recovered its normal balance. So he
writes in his Autobiography, and his contemporary letters fully bear
out his memories of the period. He certainly returned from Strassburg
with a more satisfactory record than from Leipzig. He had actually
completed the necessary legal studies, and was now Licentiate of Laws.
His _Disputation_ had won the approval of his father, who was even
prepared to go to the expense of publishing it. In his son's purely
literary efforts during his Strassburg sojourn, also, he showed an
undisguised pleasure, and he would evidently have been quite content
to have seen him combine eminence in his profession with distinction
in literature. When Goethe, therefore, immediately on his arrival in
the paternal home, took the necessary steps to qualify himself for
legal practice, it seemed that the father's ambition for his wayward
son was at length about to be realised.[96] But the apparent
reconciliation of their respective aims was based on no cordial
understanding, and the son, it is evident, made no special effort to
adapt himself to his father's idiosyncrasies. An incident he himself
relates curiously illustrates his careless disregard of the
conventions of the family home. On his way from Strassburg he picked
up a boy-harper who had interested him, and seriously thought of
making him a member of the household. The reconciling mother realised
the absurdity of lodging in the mansion of an Imperial Rath a
strolling musician, who would have to earn his living by daily visits
to the taverns of the town, and she met her son's good-humoured whim
by finding a home for the boy in more fitting quarters. These noble
Bohemian humours of his son, which, as we shall see, displayed
themselves in other unconventional habits, were not likely to
propitiate a father who, as we are told, "leading a contented life
amid his ancient hobbies and pursuits, was comfortably at ease, like
one who has carried out his plans in spite of all hindrances and
delays." In point of fact, as during Goethe's former sojourn at home,
his estrangement from his father increased from year to year, and he
came to speak of him with a bitterness which proves that, for a time
at least, any kindly feeling that existed between them was effaced.

[Footnote 96: In point of fact, only two legal cases passed through
Goethe's hands during the first seven months after his return. During
the later period of his stay in Frankfort he was more busily engaged
with law.]

Again, as after his return from Leipzig, it was his sister Cornelia
who made home in any degree tolerable for the brother whom she alone
of the family was sufficiently sympathetic and sufficiently instructed
fully to understand. She had gathered round her a circle of attractive
and educated women, of whom she was the dominating spirit, and in
whose company her brother, always appreciative of feminine society,
now found a congenial atmosphere. Associated with the circle were
certain men with kindred interests, among whom Goethe specially names
the two brothers Schlosser as esteemed counsellors.[97] Both were
accomplished men of the world, the one a jurist, the other engaged in
the public service; and both were keenly interested in literature. It
was a peculiarity of Goethe, even into advanced life, that he seems
always to have required a mentor, whose counsels, however, he might or
might not choose to follow. At this time it was the elder of these two
brothers who played this part, and Goethe testifies that he received
from him the sagest of advice, which, however, he was prevented from
following by "a thousand varying distractions, moods, and passions."

[Footnote 97: The younger brother, Georg, subsequently married
Cornelia.]

What these distractions were is vividly revealed in his correspondence
of the time. First, his whole being was in disaccord with the social,
religious, and intellectual atmosphere of Frankfort; he felt himself
cribbed, cabined, and confined in all the aspirations of his nature;
and the future seemed to offer no prospect of more favouring
conditions. Two months after his return he communicates to his friend
Salzmann in Strassburg his sense of oppression in his present
surroundings. Arduous intellectual effort is necessary to him, he
writes, "for it is dreary to live in a place where one's whole
activity must simmer within itself.... For the rest, everything around
me is dead.... Frankfort remains the nest it was--_nidus_, if you
will. Good enough for hatching birds; to use another figure,
_spelunca_, a wretched hole. God help us out of this misery.
Amen."[98]

[Footnote 98: _Werke, Briefe_, Band 2, pp. 7-8.]

In himself, also, there was a turmoil of thoughts and emotions which,
apart from depressing surroundings, was sufficient to occasion
alternating moods of exaltation and despair. The upbraiding memory of
Friederike pursued him, and we may take it that in his Autobiography
he faithfully records his continued self-reproach for his abrupt
desertion of her. "Friederike's reply to a written adieu lacerated my
heart. It was the same hand, the same mind, the same feeling that had
been educed in her to me and through me. For the first time I now
realised the loss she suffered, and saw no way of redressing or even
of alleviating it. Her whole being was before me; I continually felt
the want of her; and, which is worse, I could not forgive myself my
own unhappiness." We may ascribe it either to delicacy of feeling or
to the consideration that their further intercourse was undesirable,
that he ceased to communicate directly with her. A drawing by his own
hand, which he thought would give her pleasure, he sends to her
through Salzmann, who is requested to accompany it with or without a
note, as he thinks best. Through the same hands he sends to her a play
(_Götz von Berlichingen_), in which a lover plays a sorry part, and
adds the comment that "Friederike will find herself to some extent
consoled if the faithless one is poisoned."

But the profoundest source of his unrest was neither the
distastefulness of Frankfort society nor his remorse for his conduct
to Friederike. It was his concern with his own life and what he was to
make of it. It is this concern that gives interest to his letters of
the period which otherwise possess little intrinsic value, either in
substance or form. What we find in them, and what is hardly to be
found elsewhere, is a mirror of one of the world's greatest spirits in
the process of attaining self-knowledge and self-mastery in the
direction of powers which are not yet fully revealed to him. At times,
it appears to him as if the task were hopeless of establishing any
harmony between his own nature and the nature of things. Now he is
filled with an exhilarating confidence in his own gifts and in his
destiny to bring them to full fruition; now he seems to be paralysed
with a sense of impotence in which we see all the perils attending his
peculiar temperament. In his letters to his Strassburg friend Salzmann
we have the frankest communications regarding his alternating moods of
depression and hopefulness. "What I am doing," he writes immediately
after his settlement in Frankfort, "is of no account. So much the
worse. As usual, more planned than done, and for that very reason
nothing much will come of me."[99] To a different purport are his
words in a later note (November 28th) to the same correspondent: "In
searching for your letter of October 5th, I came upon a multitude of
others requiring answers. Dear man, my friends must pardon me, my
_nisus_ forwards is so strong that I can seldom force myself to take
breath, and cast a look backwards."[100] In the opening of the year,
1772 (February 3rd), he is in the same sanguine temper: "Prospects
daily widen out before me, and obstacles give way, so that I may
confidently lay the blame on my own feet if I do not move on."[101]

[Footnote 99: _Ib._ p. 6.]

[Footnote 100: _Ib._ p. 8.]

[Footnote 101: _Ib._ p. 14.]

The "_nisus_ forwards," of which he speaks, had no connection with the
worldly ambition for success in his profession. What was consuming him
was the double desire of mastering himself and at the same time of
giving expression to the seething ideas and emotions which rendered
that self-mastery so hard of attainment. From the moment of his return
to Frankfort we see all the seeds fructifying which had taken root in
him during his residence in Strassburg. He sends to Herder the ballads
he had collected in Alsace, and sends him, also, translations from
what he considered the original of the adored Ossian. But the
overmastering influence in him at this time was the genius of
Shakespeare, as it had been interpreted for him by Herder. Goethe's
unbounded admiration for Shakespeare had already found expression in
the rhapsody composed in Strassburg to which reference has been made,
and to the circle of men and women who had gathered round his sister,
he communicated his enthusiasm. Their enthusiasm took a form perfectly
in keeping with the spirit of the time. Shakespeare's birthday
occurred on October 14th,[102] and it was resolved that, at once as a
tribute to their divinity and a challenge to all his gainsayers, the
auspicious day should be celebrated with due rites. At Cornelia's
instance, Herder, as high-priest of the object of their worship, was
invited to honour the occasion. If he could not be present in body, he
was at least to be present in spirit, and he was to send his essay on
Shakespeare that it might form part of the day's liturgy. So under the
roof of the precise Imperial Rath, to whom Klopstock's use of unrhymed
verse in his _Messias_ was an unpardonable innovation in German
literature, the memory of the "drunken barbarian," as with Voltaire he
must have regarded him, was celebrated--whether in his presence or
not, his son does not record.[103]

[Footnote 102: So it was then thought, but the exact date is
uncertain.]

[Footnote 103: The toast of the evening--"The Will of all Wills"--was
given by Goethe, who thereupon delivered the panegyric on Shakespeare
which he had composed in Strassburg. This toast was followed by one to
the health of Herder.]

But Goethe was about to pay more serious homage to the Master, as he
then understood him. On November 28th, he informed Salzmann that he
was engaged on a work which was absorbing him to the forgetfulness of
Homer, Shakespeare, and everything else. He was dramatising the
history of "one of the noblest of Germans," rescuing from oblivion the
memory of "an honest man." The "noblest of Germans" was Gottfried von
Berlichingen (1482-1562), one of those "knights of the cows," whose
predatory propensities were the terror of Germany throughout the
Middle Ages, and who appears to have been neither better nor worse
than the rest of his class. While still in Strassburg, Goethe had
noted Gottfried as an appropriate subject for dramatic treatment, but,
as he records in his Autobiography, it was immediately after his
return to Frankfort that he first put his hand to the work. Stimulated
to his task by his sister Cornelia, in the course of six weeks he had
completed the play which, on its publication two years later, was to
make him the most famous author in Germany.

Goethe's choice of Götz as a theme on which to try his powers is a
revelation of the motives that were now compelling him. Of the nature
of these motives he has himself given somewhat conflicting accounts.
He tells his contemporary correspondents that the play was written to
relieve his own bosom of its perilous stuff; to enable him "to forget
the sun, moon, and dear stars," and, again, that its primary object
was to do justice to the memory of a great man. Writing in old age, he
assigns still another motive as mainly prompting him to the production
of the play: it was written, he says, with the express object of
improving the German stage, of rescuing it from the pitiful condition
into which it had fallen during the first half of the eighteenth
century. What is entirely obvious, however, is that Shakespeare is the
beginning and end of the inspiration of the _Geschichte Gottfriedens
von Berlichingen mit der eisernen Hand_, as the play in its original
form was entitled. In its conception and in its details Shakespeare is
everywhere suggested, though it may be noted that the comic element
with which Shakespeare flavours his tragedies is absent from _Götz_.
But for Shakespeare the play could not have taken the shape in which
we have it. Given the model, however, Goethe had to infuse it with
motives which would have a living interest for his own time. One of
these motives was the admiration of great men which Goethe shared with
the generation to which he belonged. During this Frankfort period he
was successively attracted by such contrasted types of heroes as
Julius Cæsar, Socrates, and Mahomet as appropriate central figures for
dramatic representation. "It is a pleasure to behold a great man," one
of the characters in _Götz_ is made to say; and, if Goethe had any
determinate aim when he took his theme in hand, it was to present the
spectacle of a hero for admiration and inspiration. As it was, deeper
instincts of his nature asserted themselves as he proceeded with his
work, and Götz is overshadowed by other characters in the drama in
whom the poet himself, by his own admission, came to find a more
congenial interest.

The play exists in three forms--the first draft being recast for
publication in 1773, which second version was adapted for the Weimar
theatre in collaboration with Schiller in 1804. It is generally
admitted that in its first form we have the fullest manifestation of
its author's genius, and equally the fullest expression of the
original inspiration that led to its production. Like Shakespeare he
had a book for his text--the Memoirs of Gottfried, written by himself;
and like Shakespeare he took large liberties with his original--no
fewer than six characters in the play, two of whom are of the first
importance, being of Goethe's own invention. The plot may be briefly
told. Adelbert von Weislingen, a Knight of the Empire, had been the
early friend of Gottfried, but under the influence of the Bishop of
Bamberg and others he had taken a line which led him into direct
conflict with Gottfried. While the latter, identifying himself with
the lesser German nobles, was for supporting the power of the Emperor,
Weislingen had identified himself with the princes whose object was to
cripple it. Gottfried seizes Weislingen while on his way to the Bishop
of Bamberg, and bears him off to his castle at Jaxthausen. The
contrasted characters of the two chief personages in the play are now
brought before us--Gottfried the rough soldier, honest, resolute, and
Weislingen, more of a courtier than a soldier, weak and unstable.
Overborne by the stronger nature of Gottfried, Weislingen agrees to
break his alliance with the Bishop, and, as a pledge for his future
conduct, betroths himself to Gottfried's sister Marie, who, weakly
devout, is a counterpart to Gottfried's wife Elizabeth, who is
depicted as a Spartan mother.[104] To square accounts with the Bishop,
Weislingen finds it necessary to proceed to Bamberg, and the second
act tells the tale of his second apostacy. At Bamberg he comes under
the spell of an enchantress in the shape of a beautiful woman,
Adelheid von Walldorf, a widow, whose physical charms are represented
as irresistible. Weislingen becomes her creature, forswears his bond
with Gottfried, and rejoins the ranks of his enemies--news which
Gottfried is reluctantly brought to credit. In the third act we find
Gottfried in a coil of troubles. He has robbed a band of merchants on
their way from the Frankfort Fair, and, at the prompting of
Weislingen, the Emperor puts him under the ban of the Empire, and
dispatches an armed force against him. Beaten in the field and
besieged in his own castle, he is at length forced to surrender. In
the fourth act he is a prisoner in Heilbronn, but is rescued by Franz
von Sickingen, a knight of the same stamp and with the same political
sympathies as himself. Sickingen, who is on friendly terms with the
Emperor, does him the still further service of securing his relief
from the ban, whereupon Gottfried settles down to a peaceful life in
his own castle, and to relieve its monotony betakes himself to the
uncongenial task of writing his own memoirs. In the fifth act we sup
with horrors. The peasants rise in rebellion and wreak frightful
vengeance on their oppressors. In the hope of controlling them,
Gottfried, at their own request, puts himself at their head, but finds
himself powerless to check their excesses, and on their defeat he is
again taken prisoner. But the main interest of the last act is
concentrated in Adelheid, who now reveals all the depths of her
sensual nature and her unscrupulous ambition. Weislingen she has
discovered to be a despicable creature, and she attaches herself to
Sickingen, in whom she finds a man after her own heart, able to
satisfy all the cravings of her nature. She poisons Weislingen, who
dies as he has lived, the victim of weakness rather than of
wickedness. Her crimes are known to the judges of the Vehmgericht, who
in their mysterious tribunal adjudge her to death, which is effected
in a curious scene by one of their agents. The drama closes with the
death of Gottfried in prison, baffled in his dearest schemes, blasted
in reputation, and with gloomy forebodings for the future of his
country.

[Footnote 104: In the characters of Marie and Elizabeth we have traits
of Friederike and of Goethe's mother.]

Such is an outline of the production in which Goethe made his first
appeal to his countrymen at large,[105] and which is in such singular
contrast to the ideals of his maturity. That it was not the inevitable
birth of his whole heart and mind is proved by the fact that he never
repeated the experiment. Neither the incidents nor the hero of the
piece, indeed, were of a nature to elicit the full play of his genius.
Goethe had not, like Scott, an inborn interest in the scenes of the
camp and the field, and could not, like Scott, take a special delight
in describing them for their own sake. To the portrayal of a character
like Gottfried Scott could give his whole heart, but Goethe required
characters of a subtler type to enlist his full sympathies and to give
scope to his full powers. Goethe himself has told us how, as he
proceeded in the writing of the play, his interest in his hero
gradually flagged. In depicting the charms of Adelheid, he says, he
fell in love with her himself, and his interest in her fate gradually
overmastered him. In truth, it is in scenes where Gottfried is not the
principal actor that any originality in the play is to be found, for
in these scenes Goethe was drawing from his own experience and
recording emotions that had distracted himself. In the unstable
Weislingen he represents a weakness of his own nature of which he was
himself well aware. "You are a chameleon," Adelheid tells Weislingen;
and, as we have seen, Goethe so described himself. It is, therefore,
in the relations of Weislingen to Marie and Adelheid that we must look
for the spontaneous expression of the poet's genius, working on
material drawn from self-introspection. In Weislingen's hasty wooing
and equally hasty desertion of Marie we have an exaggerated
presentment of Goethe's own conduct to Friederike, to which objection
may be taken on the score of delicacy, though he himself suggests that
it is to be regarded as a public confession of his self-reproach. In
depicting Marie and Weislingen he had Friederike and himself before
him to restrain his imagination within the limits of nature and truth.
In the case of Adelheid he had no model before him, and the result is
that, with youthful exaggeration, he has made her a beautiful monster
with no redeeming touch, and, therefore, of little human interest.
Such a character was essentially alien to Goethe's own nature, and so
are the melodramatic scenes which depict her desperate attempts to
escape from her toils and the proceedings of the avenging tribunal
that had marked her for judgment.

[Footnote 105: As we have seen, the Leipzig book of verses did not
attract general attention.]

As in the case of all Goethe's longer productions, critical opinion
has been divided from the beginning regarding the intrinsic merits of
_Götz_. In the opinion of critics like Edmond Scherer it is a crude
imitation of Shakespeare with little promise of its author's future
achievement, while other critics, like Lewes, regard it as a "work of
daring power, of vigour, of originality." On one point Goethe himself
and all his critics are agreed: the play as a whole is only a
succession of scenes, loosely strung together, with no inner
development leading up to a determinate end. In his later life Goethe
characterised Shakespeare's plays as "highly interesting tales, only
told by more persons than one." Whatever truth there may be in this
judgment in the case of Shakespeare, it exactly describes _Götz_. It
is as a tale, a narrative, and not as a drama, that it is to be read
if it is to be enjoyed without the sense of artistic failure. The
anachronisms with which the piece abounds, and which Hegel caustically
noted, have been a further stumbling-block to the critics.[106] In
the second scene of the first Act, Luther is introduced for no other
purpose than to expound ideas which come strangely from his mouth,
but which were effervescing in the minds of Goethe and his
contemporaries--the ideas which they had learned from Rousseau
regarding the excellence of the natural man. Similarly, in the scene
following, educational problems are discussed which sound oddly in the
castle of a mediæval baron, but which were awakening interest in
Goethe's own day. In the supreme moments of his career--on the
occasion of the surrender of his castle and in his last
hour--Gottfried is made to utter the word _freedom_ as the watchword
of his aspirations, but in so doing he is expressing Goethe's own
passionate protest against the conventions of his age in religion, in
philosophy, and art, and not a sentiment in keeping with the class of
which he is a type.

[Footnote 106: Lessing strongly disapproved of _Götz_ as flouting the
doctrines laid down in his _Dramaturgie_. When his brother announced
to him that _Götz_ had been played with great applause in Berlin, his
cold comment was that no doubt the chief credit was due to the
decorator.]

These blemishes in the play as a work of art are apparent, yet it may
be said that it was mainly owing to these very blemishes that the
"beautiful monster," as Wieland called it, took contemporaries by
storm and retains its freshness of interest after the lapse of a
century and a half. The successive scenes are, indeed, without organic
connection, but each scene by itself has the vivacity and directness
of improvisation. Nor do the anachronisms to which criticism may
object really mar the interest of the work. Rather they constitute
its most characteristic elements, proceeding as they do from the
poet's own deepest intellectual interests, and, therefore, from his
most spontaneous inspiration.

But the most conclusive testimony to the essential power of the play
is the effect it produced not only in German but in European
literature. Its publication in its altered form in 1773 had the effect
of a bomb on the literary public of Germany. It sent a shudder of
horror through the sticklers for the rules of the classical drama
which it ignored with such contemptuous indifference; a shudder of
delight through the band of effervescing youths who shared Goethe's
revolutionary ideals, and to whom _Götz_ was a manifesto and a
challenge to all traditional conventions in literature and life. It
was the immediate parent of that truly German growth--the literature
of _Sturm und Drang_, whose exponents, says Kant, thought that they
could not more effectively show that they were budding geniuses than
by flinging all rules to the winds, and that one appears to better
advantage on a spavined hack than on a trained steed. The literature
of _Sturm und Drang_ was a passing phenomenon, but the influence of
_Götz_ did not end with its abortive life. But for _Götz_ Schiller's
early productions would have been differently inspired; and to _Götz_
also was due much of the inspiration of the subsequent German Romantic
School, though many of its developments were abhorrent to Goethe's
nature both in youth and maturity. It emancipated the drama from
conventional shackles, but it did more: it extended the range of
national thought, sentiment, and emotion, and for good and evil
introduced new elements into German literature which have maintained
their place there since its first portentous appearance. And German
critics are unanimous in assigning another result to the publication
of _Götz_: in its style as in its form it set convention at naught,
and thus marks an epoch in the development of German literary
language. Not since Luther, "whose words were battles," had German
been written so direct from the heart and with such elemental force as
makes words living things.

It has been a commonplace remark that 1773, the year of the
publication of _Götz_, corresponds in European literature to 1789 in
European political history. The remark may be exaggerated, but, if a
work is to be named which marks the advent of what is covered by the
vague name of romanticism, _Götz_ may fairly claim the honour. It had
precursors of more or less importance in other countries, but, by the
nature of its subject, by its audacious disregard of reigning models,
and by its resounding notoriety, it gave the signal for a fresh
reconstruction of art and life. It gave the decisive impulse to the
writer who is the European representative of the romantic movement,
and whose genius specifically fitted him to work the vein which was
opened in _Götz_--a task to which Goethe himself was not called. In
1799 Scott published his translation of _Götz_,[107] and followed it
up by his series of romantic poems in which the influence of Goethe's
work was the main inspiration. But it was in his prose romances,
dealing with the Middle Ages, that he found the appropriate form for
his inspiration--a form which ensured a popular appeal, impossible in
the case of the severer form of the drama. In the enchanter's sway
which Scott exercised over Europe during the greater part of the
nineteenth century, the memories of _Götz_ were not the least potent
of his spells.

[Footnote 107: Two of the scenes in _Götz_ were imitated by Scott in
his own work--the Vehmgericht scene in _Anne of Geierstein_ and the
description of the siege of Torquilstone by Rebecca to the wounded
Ivanhoe. Scott also borrowed from _Egmont_.]




CHAPTER VI

INFLUENCE OF MERCK AND THE DARMSTADT CIRCLE

1772


Specially associated with _Götz von Berlichingen_, but associated also
with Goethe's general development at this time, was another of those
mentors whose counsel and stimulus were necessary to him at all
periods of his life. This was Johann Heinrich Merck, the son of an
apothecary in Darmstadt and now Paymaster of the Forces there. Of
Merck Goethe says that "he had the greatest influence on my life," and
he makes him the subject of one of his elaborate character sketches in
his Autobiography. To men of original nature, however discordant with
his own, Goethe was always attracted. We have seen him in more or less
close relations with Behrisch, Jung Stilling, and Herder, from all of
whom he was divided by dissonances which made a perfect mutual
understanding impossible. So it was in the case of Merck, as Goethe's
references to him in his Autobiography and elsewhere clearly imply. In
Merck there was apparently a mixture of conflicting elements which
made him a mystery to his friends, and his suicide at the age of fifty
points to something morbid in his nature. Of his real goodness of
heart and of his genuine admiration for what he considered worthy of
it, his own reported sayings and the testimony of others leave us in
no doubt. Recording his impression of Goethe after a few interviews,
he wrote: "I begin to have a real affection for Goethe. He is a man
after my own heart, as I have found few." On the other hand, there
were traits in him which Goethe did not scruple to call
Mephistophelian--an opinion shared even by Goethe's mother, whose
nature it was to see the best side of men and things. His variable
humour and caustic tongue made him at once a terror and an attraction
in whatever society he moved, and it is evident from the tone of
Goethe's reminiscences of him that his intercourse with Merck was a
mixed pleasure. But, as we have seen, it was an abiding principle of
Goethe to be repelled by no one who had something to give him, and
Merck possessed qualities and accomplishments which were of the first
importance to him in the phase through which he was now passing. Merck
was keenly interested in literature, especially in English literature,
and had all Goethe's enthusiasm for Shakespeare. Though his own
original productions were of mediocre quality, he had an insight into
the character and genius of others which Goethe fully recognised and
to which he acknowledges his special obligation. His general attitude
in criticism was "negative and destructive," but this attitude was
entirely wholesome for Goethe at a period when instinct and passion
tended to overbear his judgment. With admirable penetration he saw how
Goethe during these Frankfort years occasionally wasted his powers in
attempts which were unworthy of his gifts and alien to his real
nature. It was in reference to these futile tendencies that Merck gave
him counsel in words which subsequent critics have recognised as the
most adequate definition of the essential characteristic of Goethe's
genius as a poet. "Your endeavour, your unswerving aim," he wrote, "is
to give poetic form to the real. Others seek to realise the so-called
poetic, the imaginative; and the result is nothing but stupid
nonsense." Like subsequent critics, also, Merck saw the superiority of
the first draft of _Götz_ to the second, but when the latter was
completed, he played a friend's part. "It is rubbish and of no
account," was his characteristic remark; "however, let the thing be
printed";[108] and published it was, Merck bearing the cost of
printing and Goethe supplying the paper.

[Footnote 108: Eckermann, _Gespräche mit Goethe_, November 9th, 1824.]

It was towards the close of 1771 that Goethe had made Merck's
acquaintance[109] on the occasion of a visit Merck had paid to
Frankfort; and in March of the following year, in company with the
younger Schlosser, they renewed their intercourse in Darmstadt, where
Merck was settled. The visit lasted a few days, and was of some
importance, as it introduced Goethe to a society of which he was to
see much during the remainder of his stay in Frankfort, and which,
according to his own testimony, "invigorated and widened his powers."
It was a society in which we are surprised to find the Mephistophelian
Merck the leading and most admired member. It consisted of a group of
men and women associated with the Court at Darmstadt, whose bond of
union was the cult of sensibility as the rising generation of Germany
had learned it from Rousseau, Richardson, and Sterne. They went by the
name of the _Gemeinschaft der Heiligen_, and the fervours of the
community were at least those of genuine votaries. So far as Goethe is
concerned, it was in three of the priestesses, one of them Caroline
Flachsland, the betrothed of Herder, that he found the attraction of
the society. For the youth who two years later was to give classic
expression to the cult of sensibility in his _Werther_, his
intercourse with these ladies of Darmstadt was an appropriate
schooling. For their sensibilities were boundless, and they did not
shrink from giving them expression. Caroline relates to her future
husband how one night in the woods she fell on her knees at sight of
the moon and arranged some glow-worms in her hair so that their loves
might not be disturbed. On one occasion when Merck and Goethe met two
of the coterie, one of them embraced Merck with kisses and the other
fell upon his breast. Goethe was not a youth to be indifferent to such
favours, and the attentions of Caroline were such as to disquiet
Herder and to occasion an estrangement between the two friends which
lasted for nearly two years.

[Footnote 109: It was Schlosser who had made Goethe and Merck
acquainted. Herder, to whom Merck was known, had been a previous
intermediary.]

From the effusive Caroline herself we learn the impression Goethe made
on the precious circle. "A few days ago" (in the beginning of March,
1772), she writes to Herder, "I made the acquaintance of your friend
Goethe and Herr Schlosser.... Goethe is such a good-hearted, lively
creature, without any parade of learning, and has made such a to-do
with Merck's children that my heart has quite gone out to him.... The
second afternoon we spent in a pleasant stroll and over a bowl of
punch in our house. We were not sentimental, but very merry, and
Goethe and I danced a minuette to the piano. Thereafter he recited an
excellent ballad of yours [the Scottish ballad _Edward_, translated by
Herder]." On the occasion of a later visit (April) of Goethe to
Darmstadt, she again writes to Herder: "Our Goethe has come on foot
from Frankfort[110] on a visit to Merck. We have been together every
day, and once, when we had gone together into the wood, we were soaked
to the skin. We took refuge under a tree, and Goethe sang a little
song, 'Under the Greenwood Tree,' which you translated from
Shakespeare. Our common plight made us very confidential. He read
aloud to us some of the best scenes from his _Gottfried von
Berlichingen_.... Goethe is choke-full of songs. One about a hut built
out of the ruins of a temple is excellent.[111] ... The poor fellow
told my sister and myself a day ago that he had already been once in
love, but that the girl had played with him for a whole year and then
deserted him.[112] He believed, however, that she really loved him,
but another had appeared on the scene, and he was made a goose of."

[Footnote 110: A six hours' walk.]

[Footnote 111: The poem, entitled _Der Wanderer_, noted below.]

[Footnote 112: The girl meant was no doubt Käthchen Schönkopf.]

Under the inspiration of these caressing attentions Goethe's muse
could not be silent, and in the course of the spring and autumn he
threw off a succession of pieces which are the classical expression of
the sentimentalism of the period. To the three ladies-in-chief, under
the pseudonyms of Urania, Lila, and Psyche (Caroline Flachsland), he
successively addressed odes in which he gave them back their own
emotions with interest. Their inspiration is sufficiently suggested by
these lines which conclude the lines entitled _Elysium, an Uranien_:--

     Seligkeit! Seligkeit!
     Eines Kusses Gefühl.

In all the three poems we have another illustration of Goethe's
susceptibility to immediate influences. Under the inspiration of
Friederike's simplicity he had written lyrics which were as pure in
form as direct in feeling. Now we have him indulging in a vein of
artificial sentiment, which, it might have been supposed, he had for
ever left behind as the result of his schooling in Strassburg.

In two pieces belonging to the same period, however, is revealed in
fullest measure the true self of the poet, with all the emotional and
intellectual preoccupations which he had brought with him from
Strassburg. Of the one, _Wanderers Sturmlied_, he has given in his
Autobiography an account which is fully borne out by the character of
the poem itself. It was composed, he tells us, in a terrific storm on
one of his restless journeys between Frankfort and Darmstadt, and at a
time when the memory of Friederike was still haunting him. Of
Friederike, however, there is no direct suggestion in the poem; from
first to last it is a pæan of the _Sturm und Drang_, composed in a
form directly imitated from Pindar, whom he had been ardently studying
since his return to Frankfort. The theme is the glorification of
genius--genius in its upwelling and original force as manifest in
Pindar, not as in poets like Anacreon and Theocritus. He who is in
possession of this genius is armed against all the powers of nature
and fate, and his end can only be crowned with victory. Goethe himself
calls the poem a _Halbunsinn_, and one of his most sympathetic
critics--Viktor Hehn--admits that to follow its drift requires some
labour and some creative phantasy on the part of the reader.[113] But
it is not its poetical merit that gives the poem its chief interest;
it is to be taken, as it was meant, as a profession of the poet's
literary faith at the period when it was written, and as such it is a
historic document of the _Sturm und Drang_--at once an illustration
and an exposition of its motives and ideals. "All this," is Goethe's
mature comment on this and other productions of the same period, "was
deeply and genuinely felt, but often expressed in a one-sided and
unbalanced way."

[Footnote 113: _Über Goethe's Gedichte_ (1911), p. 157.]

Of far higher poetic value is the second poem, _Der Wanderer_,[114] in
which Matthew Arnold found "the power of Greek radiance" which Goethe
could give to his handling of nature. The scene of the poem is in
southern Italy, near Cumæ. The Wanderer, wearied by his travel under
the noonday sun, comes upon a woman by the wayside whom he asks where
he may quench his thirst. She conducts him through the neighbouring
thicket, when an architrave, half-buried in the moss, and bearing an
effaced inscription, catches his eye. They reach the woman's hut,
which he finds to have been constructed from the stones of a ruined
temple. Asleep in the hut is the woman's infant son, whom she leaves
in the arms of the Wanderer, while she goes to fetch water from the
spring. She presses on him a piece of bread, the only food she has to
offer, and invites him to remain till the return of her husband to the
evening meal. He refuses her hospitality, and resumes his journey to
Cumæ, his destination. Such is the outline of the poem, which is in
the form of a dialogue, in the irregular measure common to the odes
above mentioned. But in the _Wanderer_ there is nothing dithyrambic;
rather its characteristic is a reflective repose, which is in strange
contrast to the tumultuous outpouring of the _Wanderers Sturmlied_,
and which might induce us to assign its production to a later day in
Goethe's life, to the period of his sojourn in Italy, when years had
somewhat chastened him, and when he was under the spell of the
artistic remains of classical antiquity. Of the finest inspiration is
the contrast between the remarks of the peasant woman wholly engrossed
in the immediate needs of the day, and the speculations of the
Wanderer as he comes upon the ruins that time has wrought upon the
choicest works of man's hand. Here we are far from all vapid and
artificial sentiment; we have philosophical meditation proceeding from
the profoundest source of the pathos of human life, the transitoriness
of man and his works. Completely in accord with the philosophy of his
ripest years, however, the poet finds no ground for melancholy regrets
in the spectacle of nature triumphing over man's handiwork. Even in
her work of corrosion she provides for the welfare of her children; in
a home reared out of a ruined temple happy human lives are spent. And
it is in the spirit of the broadest humanity--a spirit that marks him
off from the sentimentalists of the Darmstadt circle--that he regards
the "ruins of time."

[Footnote 114: On account of his constant travels between Frankfort
and Darmstadt, Goethe was known among his friends as the _Wanderer_.
The poem was written in the autumn, during Goethe's residence in
Wetzlar.]

     Natur! du ewig keimende,
     Schaffst jeden zum Genuss des Lebens,
     Hast deine Kinder alle mütterlich
     Mit Erbteil ausgestattet, einer Hütte.

     Nature! eternal engenderer,
     Thou bring'st forth thy children for the joy of living,
     With care all maternal thou providest
     Each with his portion, with his cottage.

In reading this poem we feel the force of the words of the younger
Schlosser in which he records his impression of Goethe at the moment
when both first made the acquaintance of the Darmstadt society. "I
shall be accompanied (to Darmstadt)," he wrote, "by a young friend of
the highest promise who, through his strenuous endeavours to purify
his soul, without unnerving it, is to me worthy of special
honour."[115] The purification had indeed begun, but Goethe had to
pass through many fires before the purification was complete. One such
fire was immediately awaiting him.

[Footnote 115: Biedermann, _op. cit._ i. 19-20.]




CHAPTER VII

WETZLAR AND CHARLOTTE BUFF

MAY--SEPTEMBER, 1772


During the summer and autumn of 1772 Goethe found himself in a society
and surroundings which were in curious contrast to those of Darmstadt;
and the next four months were to supply him with an experience which,
wrought into one book of transcendent literary effect, was to make his
name known, literally, to the ends of the earth,[116] and which may be
regarded as the most remarkable episode in his long life. It was as
"the author of _Werther_" that he was known to the reading world,
until after his death the publication of the completed _Faust_
gradually effaced the conception of Goethe as the master-sentimentalist
of European literature.

[Footnote 116: Werther, as Goethe reminds us in one of his Venetian
epigrams, was known in China:--

     Doch was fördert es mich, dass auch sogar der Chinese
       Malet mit ängstlicher Hand Werthern und Lotten auf Glas?]

It was mainly as a temporary escape from the tedium of Frankfort that,
towards the end of May, 1772, Goethe proceeded to Wetzlar, a little
town on the Lahn, a confluent of the Rhine. His settlement in Wetzlar
had the semblance of a serious professional purpose, since Wetzlar was
the historic legal capital of the Holy Roman Empire, and the seat of
the Imperial Court of Justice. If he had any such serious purpose, his
experience of the place speedily dispelled it. The place itself he
found distasteful; a "little, ill-built town," he calls it, though the
modern visitor finds it not unattractive, with its climbing, tortuous
streets, reminiscent of the Middle Age, and with its impressive
cathedral, one of the most interesting specimens of mediæval
architecture to be found in Germany, and still unfinished in Goethe's
day. Instead of the spectacle of an august tribunal administering
prompt and even justice, what he saw was a multitude of corrupt
officials, deluded litigants, and endless delays of law. Wetzlar, in
fact, he gives us to understand, destroyed any respect he may ever
have had alike for judges and the law they professed to administer. He
duly enrolled himself as a "Praktikant,"[117] but, as was the case
with the majority of that class who haunted the town, his legal
activity was confined to this step. "Solitary, depressed, aimless," so
he described himself to his friends during his first weeks in
Wetzlar.[118] Disgusted with law, he found refuge in the study of
literature. In a long and rhapsodical letter to Herder he depicts the
intellectual and spiritual experiences through which he was now
passing. The Greeks were his one preoccupation. Homer, Xenophon,
Plato, Theocritus, and Anacreon he had read in turn, but it was in
Pindar he was now revelling, and from Pindar he was learning the
lesson that only in laying firm hold of one's subject is the essence
of all mastery. A sentence of Herder to the effect that "thought and
feeling create the expression" had rejoiced his heart as expressing
his own deepest experience. Herder had said of _Götz_ that its author
had been spoilt by Shakespeare, and he modestly accepted the censure.
_Götz_, he admits, had been _thought_, not _felt_, and he would be
depressed by his failure, were he not occasionally conscious that some
day he would do better things.[119]

[Footnote 117: The _Praktikanten_ were voluntary attendants on the
Imperial Court, had little or no dependence on the authorities, and
lived on their own resources.]

[Footnote 118: Caroline Flachsland to Herder, May 25th, 1772.]

[Footnote 119: Goethe to Herder, _Werke, Briefe_, Band ii. 15.]

As in Strassburg, it was at a _table d'hôte_[120] that Goethe made the
acquaintance of the youths who, like himself, were idling away their
time in Wetzlar. To relieve the tedium of the place[121] they had
formed a fantastic society on a feudal model, with a Grand-master,
Chancellor, and all the other subordinate officials--the point of the
jest being that each associate bore the name and played the part of
his office and title. For frolic of all kinds Goethe was ever ready;
his taste for practical joking, indeed, as we shall see, occasionally
led him to play questionable pranks. Under the name of Götz von
Berlichingen he became a member of the brotherhood, and, according to
his own account, he contributed to the gaiety of the proceedings.
Among the company, however, there were a few serious persons with
tastes kindred to his own, and he specially names F.W. Gotter,
Secretary of the Gotha Legation at Wetzlar, as one who, like Salzmann
and Schlosser, impressed him by his character and talent. In English
literature they had a common interest, and, as a poem which both
admired, they each made a translation of Goldsmith's _Deserted
Village_--Gotter, according to Goethe, being the more successful in
the attempt. Gotter was thus still another of those grave counsellors
whom Goethe had the good fortune to discover and attach to himself
amid the distracting frivolities of every society he frequented.[122]

[Footnote 120: In the _Kronprinz_, the principal hotel in the town.]

[Footnote 121: Goethe's own lodging (still shown) was in the
_Gewandsgasse_, a narrow, dirty street, whence sun or moon could be
seen at no season of the year.]

[Footnote 122: In his contemporary letters, Goethe does not always
speak of Gotter so favourably as he does in his Autobiography.]

"What happened to me in Wetzlar," Goethe writes in his Autobiography,
"is of no great significance." But posterity has thought differently,
and, if we are to judge by the consequences of what, happened to him
in Wetzlar, both for himself and for the world, posterity is
right.[123] Be it said also, that contemporary testimony at first
hand leaves us in no doubt that, but for his Wetzlar experience, one
of the most remarkable phases in Goethe's development would not have
found expression, and one resounding note in European literature would
have been unheard.

[Footnote 123: An exhaustive account of Goethe's sojourn in Wetzlar
will be found in W. Herbst's _Goethe in Wetzlar_, 1772. _Vier Monate
aus des Dichters Jugendleben_, Gotha, 1881.]

In Leipzig and Strassburg Goethe had found objects to engage his
affections, and he was not to be without a similar experience in
Wetzlar. During his first weeks there he had seen no maiden to
interest him, and the fact may explain his dissatisfaction during that
period. After leaving in succession the circles of Sesenheim,
Frankfort, and Darmstadt, he tells us, he felt a void in his heart
which he could not fill. An accident at length came to fill the void.
On June 9th (the date is carefully recorded) he met a girl at a ball
in a neighbouring village (Garbenheim), who "made a complete conquest
of him."[124] Her name was Charlotte Buff, the second daughter of an
official of the Teutonic Order--a widower with twelve children.
Charlotte, or Lotte, as he calls her, was of a different type from any
of his previous loves, so that she possessed all the freshness of
novelty. Though only nineteen, she had taken upon her the care of the
numerous household, and discharged her duties with a motherly tact and
good sense which excited general admiration. Over Lotte's personal
appearance Goethe is not rapturous as in the case of Friederike; he
simply says that she had a light and graceful figure, and in the same
cool tone remarks that she was one of those women who do not inspire
ardent passion, but who give general pleasure. So he chose to say in
the retrospect, but neither his contemporary words nor actions permit
us to believe that his feeling to Lotte was merely a calm regard. In
the case of Lotte his situation was materially different from what it
had been in the case of Friederike. He had no rival in his relations
to Friederike; in his relations to Lotte he had one. Shortly after
their first meeting he learned that Lotte was already betrothed,
though the fact was not known to the world. The successful wooer was
Johann Christian Kestner, a native of Hanover, and a Secretary of
Legation settled in Wetzlar. Kestner was at every point the antithesis
of his intruding rival. He was calm, deliberate, unimaginative, yet
conspicuously a man of insight and character, with a fund of good
sense and good temper, on which the situation made a large draft.
"Kestner must be a very good man," was the frequent remark of Merck's
wife in view of the relations of the three parties to each other, and
Kestner's own words prove it. It is in his Letters and Diary that we
have the closest glimpse of all three, and all that he says of
himself, of Lotte, and of Goethe, shows a tact and good feeling that
inspire esteem.

[Footnote 124: This is the expression of Kestner, Lotte's betrothed.]

After their first meeting at the ball, according to Goethe's own
testimony, he became Lotte's constant attendant. "Soon he could not
endure her absence." In her home he made himself the idol of the
children; in the beautiful surrounding country they were inseparable
companions--Kestner, when his avocations permitted, occasionally
joining them. "So through the splendid summer," he records, "they
lived a true German idyll." But the testimony of Kestner shows that
the idyll was not without its discords. Goethe, he says, "with all his
philosophy and his natural pride, had not such self-control as wholly
to restrain his inclination.... His peace of mind suffered," and
"there were various notable scenes," though Lotte showed herself a
model of discretion. The situation was, in fact, an impossible one,
and Goethe came to see it. Several times he made the effort to break
his bonds and flee, but it was not till the beginning of September
that he took the decisive step. Equally from his own and Kestner's
account of the circumstances of his flight we receive the impression
that his relation to Lotte was such as to make their further
intercourse undesirable. The night before he went, according to
Kestner, all three were together in Lotte's home, and their
conversation, suggested by Lotte, turned upon the dead and the
possibility of holding intercourse with them. Whichever of the three
should die first, it was agreed, should, if possible, communicate with
the survivors. All through the evening Goethe was in deep dejection,
knowing, as he did, that it would be the last they would spend
together. The following morning he left Wetzlar without intimating his
intention to any of his friends--a proceeding which his grand-aunt,
resident in the town, characterised as "very ill-bred," declaring that
she would let the Frau Goethe know how her son had behaved.[125] In
three brief parting notes he addressed to Kestner and Lotte we have
the expression of the mental tumult which his passion for Lotte had
produced in him. On his return home, after the last evening he spent
with them, he wrote as follows to Kestner: "He is gone, Kestner; by
the time you receive this note, he is gone. Give Lotte the enclosed
note. I was quite calm, but your conversation has torn me to
distraction. At this moment I can say nothing more than farewell. Had
I remained a moment longer with you, I could not have restrained
myself. Now I am alone, and to-morrow I go. Oh, my poor head!" In the
lines enclosed for Lotte he has this outburst with reference to the
evening's conversation: "When I ventured to say all I felt, it was of
the present world I was thinking, of your hand which I kissed for the
last time."

[Footnote 125: Such abrupt departures were characteristic of Goethe.
We shall find him taking similar unceremonious leave of another of his
loves. Goethe, wrote Frau von Stein to her son (May, 1812), "kann das
Abschied nehmen nicht leiden, er ging ohne Abschied neulich von mir."]

From this record of the Wetzlar episode, directly reproducing the
relations of all the persons concerned, it is clear that Lotte was for
Goethe more than the pleasant companion he represents her in his
Autobiography. If his own words and those of Kestner have any meaning,
his feeling towards her amounted to a passion which only the singular
self-control of her and Kestner prevented from breaking bounds.
Strange as it may appear, neither Lotte nor Kestner regarded one whose
presence was a menace to their own peace with other feelings than
esteem, and apparently even affection. He parted from Lotte, he says,
"with a clearer conscience" than from Friederike, and the statement is
at least borne out by what we know of the sequel to the "splendid
idyll." As we shall see, he continued to remain on the most cordial
terms with the two lovers, and, though with mingled feelings, he gave
them his best blessing on the day which saw them united as husband and
wife.

In what has been said of Goethe's relations to Lotte Buff it is the
emotional side of his nature that has been before us, but from the
hand of the judicious Kestner we have a portrait of the whole man
which leaves nothing to be desired in its completeness and insight.
Kestner's description of his first meeting with his formidable rival
reminds us of the "conquering lord" whose self-assurance evoked
Herder's stinging criticism. Stretched on his back on the grass under
a tree, Goethe was carrying on a conversation with two acquaintances
who stood by. Kestner's first decided impression was that the
stranger was "no ordinary man," and that he had "genius and a lively
imagination." His final and complete impression, after Goethe had left
Wetzlar, he thus records:--

"He has very many gifts, is a real genius, and a man of character; he
has an extraordinarily lively imagination, and so, for the most part,
expresses himself in pictures and similes. He is himself in the habit
of saying that he always expresses himself in general terms, can never
express himself with precision; when he is older, however, he hopes to
think and express the thought as it is. He is violent in all his
emotions; yet often exercises great self-command. His manner of
thinking is noble; as free as possible from all prejudices, he acts on
the prompting of the moment without troubling whether it may please
other people, is in the fashion, or whether convention permits it. All
constraint is hateful to him. He is fond of children and can occupy
himself much with them. He is _bizarre_; in his conduct and manner
there are various peculiarities which might make him disagreeable. But
with children, with women, and many others he is nevertheless a
favourite. For the female sex he has great respect. _In principiis_ he
is not yet fixed, and is still only endeavouring after a sure system.
To say something on this point; he thinks highly of Rousseau, but is
not a blind worshipper of him. He is not what we call orthodox; yet
this is not from pride or caprice or from a desire to play a part. On
certain important matters, also, he expresses himself only to few, and
does not willingly disturb others in their ideas. He certainly hates
scepticism, and strives after truth and settled conviction on certain
subjects of the first importance; believes even that he has already
attained conviction on the most important; but, so far as I have
observed, this is not the case. He does not go to church; not even to
communion, and he prays seldom. For, says he, I am not hypocrite
enough for that. At times he seems at rest with regard to certain
subjects; at other times, however, very far from being so. He
reverences the Christian religion, but not as our theologians present
it. He believes in a future life and a better state of existence. He
strives after truth, and yet attaches more importance to feeling than
to demonstration as the test of it. He has already accomplished much;
has many acquirements and much reading, but has thought and reasoned
still more. He has mainly devoted himself to _belles lettres_ and the
fine arts, or rather to all branches of knowledge, only not to the
so-called bread-winning ones. I wished to describe him, but to do so I
should run to too great length, for he is one of whom there is a great
deal to be said. _In one word, he is a very remarkable man._"[126]

[Footnote 126: Kestner's characterisation of Goethe will be found in
Biedermann, _op. cit._ i. pp. 21-3.]




CHAPTER VIII

AFTER WETZLAR

1772--1773


In _Götz von Berlichingen_ Goethe had given expression to the ideals
and emotions he had brought with him from Strassburg; Shakespeare and
the memory of Friederike had been the main impulses to its production.
As the result of his experience at Wetzlar, he was filled with a new
inspiration, which, though it did not immediately find utterance, left
him no repose till it was embodied in a work in which the man and the
artist in him equally found deliverance. That the conception came to
him shortly after his leaving Wetzlar we have conclusive evidence. In
the beginning of November, 1772, after his return to Frankfort from
Wetzlar, he received the news that a youth named Jerusalem, a casual
acquaintance of his own,[127] had committed suicide as the result of
an unhappy love adventure. Instantly, Goethe tells us in his
Autobiography, the plan of _Werther_ shaped itself in his mind; and
his contemporary letters bear out the statement. Immediately on
receiving the news of Jerusalem's death, he wrote to Kestner for a
detailed account of all the circumstances, and he made a careful copy
of the information with which Kestner supplied him. In point of fact,
it was not till after more than a year that _Werther_ came to
fruition, but that he was in labour with the portentous birth all its
lineaments were to show.

[Footnote 127: Goethe had made Jerusalem's acquaintance in Leipzig.
Jerusalem called Goethe a _Geck_, a coxcomb, a description which, as
we have seen, was not inapplicable to him in his Leipzig days.
Jerusalem was a friend of Lessing, who highly esteemed him, and after
his death published his MSS.]

But before _Werther_ came to birth, Goethe went through another
experience which was to form an essential part of its tissue. Merck,
to whom Goethe attributes the chief influence over him during this
Frankfort period, was again the intermediary. Before Goethe left
Wetzlar, Merck had arranged that they should meet at Ehrenbreitstein,
where he would introduce Goethe to a family resident there.[128] The
family was that of Herr von la Roche, a Privy Councillor in the
service of the Elector of Trier, and it consisted of himself, his wife
and two daughters. The head of the house, a matter-of-fact man of the
world, plays no part in Goethe's relations to the family. It was Frau
von la Roche to whom, as a desirable acquaintance, Merck specially
wished to introduce his friend, and the sequel proved that he had
rightly divined their mutual affinities. The cousin of Wieland, with
whom she had had a _liaison_ before her marriage, she was now past
forty, but, according to Goethe's description of her, she possessed
all the charm of youth with the dignity and repose of maturity. What
is evident is, that Goethe saw in her the type of a high-bred woman
such as had not yet crossed his path. In his reminiscence of her, his
words have a warmth which is in notable contrast to the coldness of
his portrait of Lotte Buff. "She was a most wonderful woman," he
writes; "I knew no other to compare with her. Slight and delicately
formed, rather tall than short, she had contrived even in advanced
years to retain a certain elegance both of form and bearing which
pleasingly combined the manner of a Court lady with that of a
dignified burgess's wife."[129] In addition to these graces, Frau von
la Roche had precisely the temperament and the mental qualities that
appealed to Goethe in the emotional phase through which he was now
passing. She lived in the same world of sentiment as the ladies of the
Darmstadt circle, and she had the gift of effusive utterance, as she
had shown in a novel in the manner of Richardson which had brought her
some celebrity.

[Footnote 128: In point of fact, Goethe announced himself. Merck
arrived after him.]

[Footnote 129: In a letter to Schiller (July 24th, 1799) Goethe gives
a much less favourable estimate of Frau von la Roche, whom he had just
met: "Sie gehört zu den nivellierenden Naturen, sie hebt das Gemeine
herauf und zieht das Vorzügliche herunter...."]

With Frau von la Roche Goethe established a Platonic relation which he
assiduously cultivated during the remainder of his residence in
Frankfort, but there was another member of the household to whom he
was attracted by a livelier feeling. This was the elder of the two
daughters, Maximiliane by name, a girl of seventeen, whose charms were
subsequently to be given to the lady of Werther's infatuation. From
what we have seen of Goethe's inflammability, we are prepared for the
naïve remark in which he records his new sensation. "It is a very
pleasant sensation," he says, "when a new passion begins to stir in us
before the old one is quite extinct. So, as the sun sets, we gladly
behold the moon rise on the opposite horizon, and rejoice in the
double splendour of the two heavenly lights." Be it said that the
atmosphere of the household was provocative of relaxed feelings.
Goethe was not the only guest. Besides Merck there was a youth named
Leuchsenring whose special line of activity had endeared him to a wide
circle. Leuchsenring made it his business to enter into correspondence
with susceptible souls whose effusions he carried about with him in
dispatch-boxes and was in the habit of reading aloud to sympathetic
listeners. The reading of these precious documents was part of the
entertainment of the circle in which Goethe now found himself, and he
assures us that he enjoyed it. We see, therefore, the world in which
he was now moving--a world in which those who belonged to it made it
their first concern to titillate their sensibilities, and squandered
their emotions with a profusion and abandonment in which
self-respecting reserve was forgotten. It was a world wide as the
poles apart from that of Sesenheim, where human relations were founded
on natural feeling and only the language of the heart was spoken. Once
again Goethe had taken on the hue of his surroundings. In Leipzig he
had been what we have seen him; now under the influence of Darmstadt
he appears in still another phase--to be by no means the last.

From Goethe's connection with the family of von la Roche was to come
the occasion which immediately prompted the production of _Werther_,
but more than a year was to elapse before the occasion came, and in
the interval his own mental experiences were to supply him with
further materials which were to find expression in that work. In his
correspondence of the period we have the fullest revelation of these
experiences, and they leave us with the impression that he spoke only
the literal truth when he tells us in his Autobiography that, on being
delivered of _Werther_, he felt as if he had made a general
confession. The same period, moreover, is signalised by a succession
of minor productions which, though they did not attain to the
celebrity of _Götz_ and _Werther_, exhibit a range of intellectual
interests and a play of varied moods which materially enhance our
conceptions of his genius.

The circumstances in which Goethe had left Friederike had precluded
subsequent communications with her and her family; in the case of the
Wetzlar circle there was no such impediment to future epistolary
intercourse. He had left Lotte Buff, as he tells us, with a clearer
conscience than he had left Friederike, and on the part of Lotte and
Kestner there was apparently no feeling that prompted a breach of
their relations with him. For more than a year he kept up assiduous
communications with Wetzlar; then his letters became less frequent and
finally ceased when changes in the circumstances of both parties
effaced their mutual interests. While the correspondence was in full
flood, however, Goethe's letters leave us in no doubt as to the real
nature of his passion for Lotte; if words mean anything, his memories
of her were a cause of mental unrest to which other distractions of
the time gave a morbid direction, and which threatened to end in moral
collapse.

A few extracts from his letters to Wetzlar will reveal his state of
mind during the months that immediately followed his return to
Frankfort. Within a week after his return we have these hurried lines
addressed to Kestner: "God bless you, dear Kestner, and tell Lotte
that I sometimes imagine I could forget her; but then comes the
recitative, and I am worse than ever." In the same month (September)
he again addresses Kestner: "I would not desire to have spent my days
better than I did at Wetzlar, but God send me no more such days!...
This I have just said to Lotte's silhouette." In the beginning of
November he paid a flying visit to Wetzlar, and apparently had reason
to regret it. "Certainly, Kestner," he wrote the day after he left,
"it was time that I should go; yesterday evening, as I sat on the
sofa, I had thoughts for which I deserve hanging." On Christmas Day he
writes still at the same high pitch: "It is still night, dear Kestner,
and I have risen to write again by the morning light, which recalls
pleasant memories of past days.... Immediately on my arrival here I
had pinned up Lotte's silhouette; while I was in Darmstadt, they
placed my bed here, and there to my great joy hangs Lotte's picture at
its head." In April, 1773, Kestner and Lotte were married, and Goethe
insisted, against Kestner's wish, on sending the bride her
marriage-ring, which was accompanied by the following note: "May the
remembrance of me as of this ring be ever with you in your happiness.
Dear Lotte, after a long interval we shall see each other again, you
with the ring on your finger, and me always _yours_. I affix no name
nor surname. You know well who writes." A few days later we have the
following words in a letter to Kestner: "To part from Lotte, I do not
yet understand how it was possible.... It cost me little, and yet I
don't understand how it was possible. There is the rub." In the course
of the summer Kestner removed to Hanover, where he had received an
official appointment, and took his wife with him. The correspondence
then became less frequent, though on both sides it was maintained in
the same friendly spirit. Only for a time, on the publication of
_Werther_, as we shall see, was there the shadow of possible
estrangement. "Alienated lovers," is Goethe's remark, already quoted,
"become the best friends, if only they can be properly managed"; and
Goethe showed himself an adept in this art of management.

While Goethe was pouring forth his confessions to Kestner and Lotte,
his circumstances at home were not such as to conduce to calm of mind.
Frankfort remained as distasteful to him as ever. "The Frankforters,"
he wrote to Kestner, "are an accursed folk; they are so pig-headed
that nothing can be made of them." With his father his relations had
not become more cordial after his return from Wetzlar. "Lieber Gott,"
he wrote on receiving a letter from his father, "shall I then also
become like this when I am old? Shall my soul no longer attach itself
to what is good and amiable? Strange the belief that the older a man
becomes, the freer he becomes from what is worldly and petty. He
becomes increasingly more worldly and petty."[130] His father's
insistence on his attention to legal business was a permanent cause of
mutual misunderstanding. "I let my father do as he pleases; he daily
seeks to enmesh me more and more in the affairs of the town, and I
submit."[131]

[Footnote 130: Goethe to Kestner, November 10th, 1772. _Werke,
Briefe_, Band ii. 35.]

[Footnote 131: To the same, September 15th, 1773. _Ib._ p. 104.]

In his sister Cornelia, as formerly, he had a sympathetic confidant
equally in his affairs of the heart and in his literary and artistic
ambitions, but in the course of the year 1773 he was deprived of her
soothing and stimulating influence. In October she was betrothed to
J.G. Schlosser, who has already been noted as one of Goethe's sager
counsellors, and the marriage took place on November 1st. "I rejoice
in their joy," he wrote to Sophie von la Roche, "though, at the same
time, it is mostly to my own loss." Other friends, also, in the course
of the same year, he complains, were departing and leaving him in
dreary solitude. "My poor existence," he writes to Kestner, "is
becoming petrified. This summer everyone is going--Merck with the
Court to Berlin, his wife to Switzerland, my sister, and Fräulein
Flachsland, you, everybody. And I am alone. If I do not take a wife or
hang myself, say that life is right dear to me, or something, if you
like, which does me more honour."[132] So in May he describes himself
as alone and daily becoming more so; in October as "entirely alone,"
and as indescribably rejoiced at the return of Merck towards the close
of the year.

[Footnote 132: _Ib._ pp. 82-3.]




CHAPTER IX

SATIRICAL DRAMAS AND FRAGMENTS


If, during the year that followed his return from Wetzlar, Goethe was
distracted by his wandering affections, he was no less divided in mind
by his intellectual ambitions. The doubt which had possessed him since
boyhood as to whether nature meant him for an artist or a poet
remained still unsettled for him. In one of the best-known passages of
his Autobiography he has related how he sought to resolve his
difficulty. As he wandered down the banks of the Lahn, after he had
torn himself away from Wetzlar, the beauty of the scenery awoke in him
the artist's desire to transfer it worthily to canvas. The whim then
occurred to him to let fate decide whether this was the work for which
he was appointed. He would throw his knife into the river, and, if he
saw it reach the surface, he would take it as a sign that art was his
vocation. Unfortunately the oracle proved dubious. Owing to the
intervening bushes he did not see the knife enter the river, but only
the splash occasioned by its fall. As the result of the uncertainty
of the oracle, he adds, he gave himself less assiduously than hitherto
to the study of art. If this were indeed the case, it was only for a
time, since the contemporary testimony, both of himself and his
friends, shows that during the period that immediately followed his
leaving Wetzlar, art received more of his attention than literature.
Goethe, wrote Caroline Flachsland to Herder, "still thinks of becoming
a painter, and we strongly advise him to pursue that end."[133] "I am
now quite a draughtsman," he himself wrote to Herder in December of
the same year; and he tells another correspondent in the autumn of
1773 that "the plastic arts occupy him almost entirely."

[Footnote 133: November 27th, 1772.]

Yet, since his return from Strassburg to Frankfort in August, 1771,
his literary activity was never wholly intermitted. During the
remainder of that year he wrote the first draft of _Götz von
Berlichingen_, and in 1772, mainly under the inspiration of the
Darmstadt circle, he produced the poems to which attention has already
been drawn. In that year, also, he shared in an undertaking the main
object of which was to proclaim those revolutionary ideas in
literature, religion, and life that inspired the movement of the
_Sturm und Drang_. In cooperation with Herder, Merck, and Schlosser,
his future brother-in-law, and others, he conducted a journal which,
under the title of the _Frankfurter Gelehrten Anzeigen_, expounded
these views to all who chose to read it. Merck, and afterwards
Schlosser, acted as editors during the year that it existed, but
Goethe was its principal contributor. In the preliminary announcement
to the first issue (January 1st, 1772) it is stated that the reviews
of books will range over science, philosophy, history, _belles-lettres_,
and the fine arts, and particularly that no English book worthy of
notice will escape attention. Of the successive reviews that appeared,
only three are certainly known to be by Goethe, though he must have
written or assisted in writing several others. With his usual
causticity Herder characterised the manner of the two chief
contributors. "You," he tells Merck, "are always Socrates-Addison; and
Goethe is for the most part a young, arrogant lord, with horribly
scraping cock's heels, and, if I come among you some day, I shall be
the Irish Dean with his whip." Goethe himself, reviewing these early
efforts in the light of his maturity, is sufficiently modest regarding
their intrinsic merit. He had then, he says, neither the knowledge nor
the discipline requisite for adequate criticism. On the other hand, he
claims to have given evidence in his notices of books of a gift, which
no reader of them can fail to perceive--the gift of instinctive
insight into the essentials of the subject in hand. In the business of
reviewing, however, he seems to have taken little pleasure. "The day
has begun festively," he wrote to Kestner on Christmas, 1772, "but,
unfortunately, I must spoil the beautiful hours with reviewing; but I
do so with good heart, as it is for the last issue."[134]

[Footnote 134: Goethe wrote the epilogue to the last number of the
Review, of which he says to Kestner, "hat ich das Publikum und den
Verleger turlipinirt."]

To the same year, 1772, belong two short productions of Goethe which
deserve a passing notice as exhibiting his strange blending of
interests at this period. The one is entitled _Brief des Pastors zu
... an den neuen Pastor zu ..._, and professes to have been translated
from the French. The Letter is another illustration of his interest in
religion and in the interpretation of the Bible which had begun with
his early reading of the Old Testament, and which his intercourse with
the Fräulein von Klettenberg and Herder had intermittently kept alive.
The theological teaching of the Letter is, in point of fact, a
compound of the teaching of these two. Its main object is to emphasise
the necessity of toleration in the interest of religion itself, and
nowhere was the monition more needed than in Frankfort, where the
antipathy between those of the Reformed and the Lutheran communions
was such as even to debar intermarriage. Rationalism and dogmatism are
equally reprobated, and the sum of all true religion is found to
consist in the love of God and of our neighbour. The strain of
mystical piety which runs through the whole production doubtless
proceeds from imaginative sympathy and not from personal experience,
and is to be regarded only as another illustration of Goethe's
facility in identifying himself with emotions essentially alien to his
own nature. The other piece, entitled _Zwo wichtige bisher unerörterte
biblische Fragen, zum erstenmal gründlich beantwortet_, professing to
be written by a Swabian pastor, is still more singular. In the first
of the two questions he inquires whether it was the Ten Commandments
or the prescriptions of ritual that were inscribed on the tables of
stone, and concludes that it was the latter; and in the second he
discusses the nature of the speaking with tongues that followed St.
Paul's laying of hands on the newly-baptised Christians, and resolves
the question in a purely mystical sense.

The year 1773 marks an epoch in Goethe's career, and an epoch also in
the literary history of Germany. In that year he made his first appeal
as a writer to the great German public which was to follow his
successive productions with varying degrees of admiration during the
next half-century. Dissatisfied with the first draft of _Götz von
Berlichingen_ as lacking in dramatic unity, in the beginning
(February--March) of 1773 he recast the whole play, which in its new
form was published in June.[135] As has already been said, the second
form of _Götz_ is generally recognised as inferior to the first, but,
such as it was, it made the sensation we have seen. With as much truth
as Byron, Goethe might have said that "he woke one morning and found
himself famous." In 1772 he could be spoken of by an intelligent
person in Leipzig as "one named Getté," and even in the circles he
frequented he had hitherto been known simply as a youth of
extraordinary promise from whom great things were to be expected.
Henceforth his name was on the tongue of all who were interested in
German literature, and whatever he was likely to produce in the future
was certain to command universal interest.

[Footnote 135: In its new form _Götz_ was no better adapted for the
stage. "Eine angeborne Unart ist schwierig zu meistern," is Goethe's
own remark on his attempt to make it a good acting play.]

According to Merck, Goethe's head was turned for a time by the success
of _Götz_. During the months that followed its publication, at all
events, he was possessed with a wanton humour which spared neither
friends nor foes, nor the society of which he had apparently caught
the contagion as completely as any of its members. At a later date,
Goethe speaks of his "considerate levity" and his "warm
coolness";[136] and in a succession of pieces which he threw off at
this time we have an interesting commentary on this characterisation
of himself. In these pieces we have an old vein reopened. We have seen
how in Leipzig he had burlesqued the professor of literature, Clodius,
but in the years that followed his departure from Leipzig--the
depressing period in Frankfort and the period of rapid development in
Strassburg--there was neither the occasion nor the prompting to
personal or general satire. Now, however, in the tumult of his own
feelings and in the follies of the society around him he found themes
for satirical comment which afforded scope for a side of his genius
rarely manifested in his later years. The short satirical dramas
produced at this time on the mere impulse of the moment have in
themselves only a local and temporary interest, but they derive
importance from the fact that they proceed from the same mental
attitude which was to find its definitive expression in the character
of Mephistopheles--essentially the creation of this period of Goethe's
development. In these trivial exercises he was practising the craft
which is so consummately displayed in the original fragments of
_Faust_.

[Footnote 136: Ich bin wie immer der nachdenkliche Leichtsinn und die
warme Kälte.--Goethe to Sophie von la Roche, September 1st, 1780.]

The first of these sallies--_Das Jahrmarktsfest zu Plundersweilern,
Ein Schönbartspiel_--was written in March, 1773, and was sent as a
birthday gift to Merck--an appropriate recipient. Written in doggerel
verse, which Goethe took over from the shoemaker poet Hans Sachs, the
piece brings before us the motley crowd of persons who frequented the
fairs of the time, each vociferating the cheapness and excellence of
his own wares. The humour of the spectacle, however, is that the
_dramatis personæ_ were individuals recognisable by contemporaries in
traits which now escape us. Goethe himself appears in the guise of a
doctor, Herder as a captain of the gipsies, and his bride, Caroline
Flachsland, as a milkmaid. The satire is directed equally against the
idiosyncrasies of individuals and against the follies of the time, the
sentimentalism which Goethe himself had not escaped, but of which he
saw the inanity, the petty jealousies of authors which had also come
within his personal experience. A mock tragedy on the subject of
Esther, which forms part of the burlesque, is a malicious parody of
the French models which he had begun by imitating, but which were now
the sport of the youths who led the _Sturm und Drang_.

The _Jahrmarktsfest_ is a genial explosion of madcap humour. Not so
another succession of scenes produced about the same time. The subject
of them is that Leuchsenring whose acquaintance, we have seen, Goethe
had made under the roof of Sophie von la Roche. Since then,
apparently, Leuchsenring's proceedings had provoked a repugnance in
Goethe which displays itself in a strain of bitterness hardly to be
found in any other of his works. It was Leuchsenring's habit to
ingratiate himself with households where his pseudo-sentiment made him
acceptable, and by questionable methods to make mischief between their
members, and especially between the two sexes.[137] Goethe had seen
the results of these intrigues in circles with which he was
acquainted, and it was to punish the sinner that he wrote _Ein
Fastnachtspiel, auch wohl zu tragieren nach Ostern, vom Pater Brey dem
falschen Propheten_. Pater Brey, the false prophet, is Leuchsenring,
and his sugared speech and shifty ways are the main object of the
satire, but other persons are introduced into the piece and exhibited
in lights which are a singular commentary on the taste of the time.
The victim on whom Pater Brey plies his arts is Caroline Flachsland,
who appears under the name of Leonora, and the injured lover is Herder
(Captain Velandrino).[138] The Captain, who has been informed of Pater
Brey's philanderings with his betrothed, appears on the scene, is
assured of her faithfulness, and in concert with another character in
the piece (Merck) plays a coarse trick on the Pater which makes him
the laughing-stock of the neighbourhood.

[Footnote 137: A quarrel had arisen between Merck and Leuchsenring,
and Goethe had warmly taken Merck's side.]

[Footnote 138: As we have seen, Herder was jealous of Goethe's own
attentions to Caroline.]

Herder had good reason to resent the licence with which his private
affairs had been obtruded on the public in _Pater Brey_,[139] but in
the same year Goethe made him the main subject of another production
which raises equally our astonishment at the manners of the time and
at the wanton audacity of its author. In _Pater Brey_ the prevailing
sentimentalism, as veiling dubious motives, had been the theme of
ridicule; in _Satyros, oder der vergötterte Waldteufel_, it was the
extravagancies of the followers of Rousseau in their idealisation of
the natural man. According to Kestner, as we have seen, Goethe himself
greatly admired Rousseau, but was not one of his blind worshippers,
and _Satyros_ is a sufficiently cogent proof of the fact. What is
astounding is the means he chose to give point to his ridicule. Herder
is Satyros, the Waldteufel,[140] who is represented as being humanely
received by a hermit (Merck) while suffering from a wounded leg.
Satyros requites his host with coarse abuse of himself and his
religion, flings his crucifix into the neighbouring stream, and steals
a valuable piece of linen cloth. Next by an enchanting melody he
cajoles two maidens, Arsinoë and Psyche (Caroline Flachsland), into
the belief that he is a superhuman being, and Psyche is so overcome
that she submits to his embraces. The people of the neighbourhood
flock to him, see in him a new god, and on his persuasion take to
eating chestnuts, as the natural food of man--the priest of the
community, Hermes, joining in their worship. The hermit appears on the
scene, and on his abusing Satyros for the theft of his crucifix, the
people decide to offer him as a sacrifice to their insulted divinity.
By a stratagem of the wife of Hermes, the hermit is rescued and the
bestiality of Satyros exposed. In no way disconcerted, Satyros leaves
the throng with flouts at their asinine attachment to their
conventional morality as opposed to the free life inculcated by
nature. Goethe's later comment on this remarkable production is that
it was "a document of the godlike insolence of our youth," and
certainly no document could bring more vividly before us the world in
which Goethe's genius came to fruition.[141]

[Footnote 139: It was published in the autumn of the following year,
1774.]

[Footnote 140: W. Scherer was the first to identify Herder with
Satyros.]

[Footnote 141: _Satyros_ was not published till 1814, after Herder's
death, but he was aware of its existence.]

Still another piece of the "godlike insolence of youth," though less
offensive in its implications, is the farce, _Götter, Helden, und
Wieland_, written in the autumn of the same year, 1773. At an earlier
period Wieland had been one of the gods of Goethe's idolatry, but
Wieland was now the most distinguished champion of those French models
against which Goethe and the youths associated with him had declared
irreconcilable war. Moreover, in a journal recently started by
Wieland, there had appeared an unfriendly review of _Götz von
Berlichingen_. By the publication of a play, _Alceste_, in which he
foolishly challenged comparison with Euripides' drama of the same
name, Wieland gave the enemy his opportunity. On a Sunday afternoon,
with a bottle of Burgundy beside him, as he tells us, Goethe tossed
off his skit at one sitting. As a piece of improvisation, it certainly
contains excellent fooling. We are introduced to the lower world,
where the four characters in Euripides' play, Admetus, Alcestis,
Hercules, and Mercury, as well as its author, are represented as in a
state of high indignation at the liberties which Wieland has taken
with them in his _Alcestes_. Summoned before them, Wieland appears in
his nightcap, and has to run the gauntlet of their several
reproaches--the purport of them all being that he has foolishly
misunderstood the Greek world which he had undertaken to portray.
Against Goethe's wish the satire was published in the following year,
and rapidly ran through four editions, but Wieland had a genteel
revenge. With that _Lebensweisheit_ which Goethe long afterwards
marked as his characteristic, he published in his review a notice of
the burlesque, in which it is recommended as "a masterpiece of
persiflage and of sophistical wit." "Wieland has turned the tables on
me," was Goethe's own admission; "Ich bin eben prostituiert."[142]

[Footnote 142: Max Morris, _op. cit._ iv. 81.]

These successive _jeux d'esprit_ were merely the crackling fireworks
of exuberant youth, and were regarded as such by their author himself.
At the very time he was writing them, he was planning and sketching
works, the scope of which reveals the true bent of his genius, and of
the ideals that were preoccupying him. "My ideals," he wrote to
Kestner (September 15th, 1773), "grow daily in beauty and grandeur";
and when he penned these words he was engaged on a production which,
though it remained a mere fragment, has justly been regarded as one of
the most striking manifestations of his powers. The subject, the myth
of Prometheus, he tells us, attracted him as one in which he could
embody his own deepest experience and the conclusions regarding the
individual life of man to which that experience had led him. In the
crises of his past life, he tells us, he had found that no aid had
been forthcoming either from man or any supernal power. "We must tread
the wine-press alone." Only in one source had he discovered a
stay and stimulus, which brought him the sense of individual
self-subsistence--in the exercise of such creative talent as nature
had bestowed upon him. Of this consciousness, no external power could
deprive him, and it is this consciousness that is the governing idea
of the fragment, and not the Titanism of the Prometheus of Æschylus.
It was, moreover, an idea which permanently accompanied Goethe
throughout life, and to which he frequently gave expression in his
later correspondence.[143]

[Footnote 143: The following passage from an article in the _Hibbert
Journal_, by M. Bergson (October, 1911, pp. 42-3), is an interesting
commentary on Goethe's conception: "If, then, in every province the
triumph of life is expressed by creation, might we not think that the
ultimate reason of human life is a creation which, in distinction from
that of the artist or man of science, can be pursued at every moment
and by all men alike; I mean the creation of self by self, the
continual enrichment of personality, by elements which it does not
draw from outside, but causes to spring forth from itself?"]

As, apart from its intrinsic power, _Prometheus_ has an incidental
interest in the history of philosophic thought, it may be worth while
to sketch briefly the development it attained. When Prometheus is
introduced to us, he is a rebel against Zeus and the other gods. He
had rendered them allegiance so long as he believed that "they saw the
past and the future in the present and were animated by
self-originated and disinterested wisdom," but, on the discovery of
his error, he had renounced their authority, and, as an independent
agent, he had fashioned images of human beings, to which, however, he
was powerless to give the breath of life. In the first Scene of the
first Act, Mercury appears as the messenger of the gods and reasons
with Prometheus on the folly of his contending with their omnipotence.
Prometheus denies their omnipotence either over nature or over
himself. "Can they separate me from myself?" he asks, and Mercury
admits that the gods are subject to a power stronger than their
own--the power of Fate. "Go, then," is the reply, "I do not serve
vassals." After a brief soliloquy, in which Prometheus expresses the
passionate wish that he might impart feeling to his lifeless images,
Epimetheus appears as a second representative of the gods. Their
offer, he tells Prometheus, is reasonable; let him but recognise their
supremacy, and he will be free of the heights of Olympus, from which
he would rule the earth. "Yes," is the reply, "to be their burggrave,
and defend their Heaven! My offer is more reasonable; their wish is to
be a partner with me, and my thought is to have nothing to
participate with them; they cannot rob me of what I have, and what
they have, let them guard. Here is mine, and here is thine, and so are
we apart." "But what is thine?" inquires Epimetheus; and the reply is,
"The circle which my activity fulfils--_Der Kreis, den meine
Wirklichkeit erfüllt_." And here follows one of the passages in the
dialogue which, as expressing the pantheistic conception of the
universe, gave occasion to the quarrel of the philosophers, to be
presently noted. "Thou standest alone," is the comment of Epimetheus
on the claim to independent self-subsistence asserted by Prometheus;
"thou standest alone; thy self-will fails to appreciate the bliss of
the gods--thou, thine, the world and heaven, all feel themselves one
intimate whole." Repelled like Mercury, Epimetheus departs, and
Minerva, in whom Prometheus acknowledges his sole inspirer and
instructress, appears. Minerva, who declares that she honours her
father Zeus and loves Prometheus, repeats the offer of Zeus to animate
the clay images if Prometheus will acknowledge his sovereignty; but
when Prometheus passionately refuses to accept the offer, she bursts
forth: "And they shall live! to fate and not to the gods it pertains
to bestow life and to take it. Come, I conduct thee to the source of
all life, which Jupiter may not close against us. They shall live, and
through thee!"

Of the second Act only two Scenes were written. In the first, Mercury,
proclaiming in Olympus that Minerva has given life to the clay images
of Prometheus, calls on Zeus to destroy the new creatures with his
thunder. Zeus calmly replies that they will only increase the number
of his servants, and Mercury, changing his tone, prays that he may be
sent to "the poor earthborn folk," to announce the goodness and wisdom
of the father of all. "Not yet," is the reply. "In the newborn rapture
of youth they dream that they are like unto the gods. Not till they
need thee will they listen to thy words. Leave them to their own
life!" In the second Scene, we see Prometheus in a valley at the base
of Olympus, surrounded by the new race of animated beings engaged in
business or pleasure. There follow three brief Scenes which are meant
to depict the dawnings of human consciousness and the conditions under
which life is to be lived. To one he shows how a hut to shelter him
may be constructed with the branches he has lopped with the aid of an
implement of stone. In a dispute between two men, one of whom wounds
the other and steals his goat, Prometheus pronounces the judgment that
the hand of the offender will be against every man, and every man's
hand against him. In the third and last Scene we have the most
remarkable passage in the poem. Pandora, Prometheus' favourite
creation, in dismay and bewilderment, describes the strange
experience she has witnessed in the case of a friend, another maiden,
and Prometheus tells her that what she had seen was death. What death
meant Prometheus explains in the following passage, charged with the
sensuous mysticism which was one of the elements of Goethe's own
experiences when he wrote it:--

     Wenn aus dem innerst tiefsten Grunde
     Du ganz erschüttert alles fühlst,
     Was Freud' und Schmerzen jemals dir ergossen,