CONTENTS


INTRODUCTORY SKETCH

CHAPTER.                                            PAGE

   I. SCHOOLDAYS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1
  II. LIFE AS AN UNDERGRADUATE AT CAMBRIDGE  . . . .  10
 III. WORK AT CAMBRIDGE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
  IV. THE LAST FEW MONTHS  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   V. TWO APPRECIATIONS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36

LETTERS TO HIS FRIENDS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54

APPENDIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193

INDEX  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199




ILLUSTRATIONS

Forbes Robinson . . . . . . . . . . Frontispiece

Forbes Robinson (1880)

Forbes Robinson (1887)




{1}

INTRODUCTORY SKETCH

CHAPTER I

SCHOOLDAYS

Forbes Robinson was born on November 13, 1867, in the vicarage of
Keynsham, a village in Somerset lying between Bristol and Bath.  He was
the eleventh child in a family of thirteen, of whom eight were sons and
five daughters.  His parents were both from the north of Ireland, and
his Christian name had been his mother's surname.  The motto attached
to his father's family crest was 'Non nobis solum sed toti mundo nati.'
Before he was three years old his father moved to Liverpool and became
incumbent of St. Augustine's, Everton.  He died before Forbes was
thirteen, but the memory of his holy life remained as an abiding
influence.  Thus he writes of him in 1903:

'The old memories form a kind of sacred history urging me onwards and
upwards.  I like to feel that I reap the prayers and thanksgivings of
my father, that God blesses the son of such a father.  The same work,
the same God, the same promises, the same hope, the same sure and
certain reward.  I thank God and take courage.'

{2} As a boy he was never robust and might even be regarded as
delicate.  After attending one or two private schools he was entered,
at the age of twelve, at Liverpool College, where five of his brothers
had been.  When his father died in February 1881, the house in
Liverpool was given up and Forbes was sent to Rossall.  He continued at
Rossall till he entered Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1887.

The photograph which is inserted on p. 4 was taken just before he went
to Rossall.  He was then a shy retiring boy, fonder of reading than of
athletic exercise.  One who was in the same house with him at Rossall,
and who is now vicar of a parish in Lancashire, writes:

'His life at Rossall was not an outwardly eventful one.  Not being
athletic, he lived rather apart from and above the rest of us in a
world of books.  The walls of his study used to be almost covered with
extracts, largely, I think, from the poets, copied on to scraps of
paper and pinned up all round, partly to be learnt by heart and partly,
I think, for companionship.  He was much older than the rest of us
whose years were the same as his.  His school life was a time of
retirement and preparation for the wider life among men at Cambridge.
Though my memory of him as a quiet studious member of the house, more
often alone than not, and quite happy to be alone so long as his books
were near him, is very distinct, I can recall almost nothing of the
nature of incident or about which one can write.'

The present headmaster of Marlborough, who was {3} also a contemporary
at Rossall, writes in a letter to the editor of this memoir:

'Your brother was a great recluse at Rossall, and I much doubt whether
you would get any great amount of information about him from
Rossallians.  I knew him because we were both interested in reading,
and I owed a good deal to his influence. . . .  You will find, I
believe, that his Cambridge days show him in a far clearer light than
his school days.  I know that when I saw him at Cambridge I realised
with pleasure that he was a welcomed visitor in the rooms of very
various types of undergraduates, whereas his circle at school had been
very limited, and most boys no doubt regarded him as quite "out of it."
This is of course to some extent the fault of the athletic standards of
our schools, but I also think that he himself developed a great deal
socially at Cambridge.'

A sketch of Forbes, by Dr. James, written for 'The Rossallian,' will be
found at the close of this chapter.  Dr. Tancock, who succeeded Dr.
James as headmaster of Rossall a year before Forbes left, writes:

'When I was appointed to Rossall in 1886, I found him a member of the
upper sixth form. . . .  He always gave me the impression of an
earnest-minded, hard-working boy, with a deep sense of duty.  It was
rather suggested to my mind sometimes, possibly erroneously, that as a
younger boy he had felt himself misunderstood, and a certain reserve
was the consequence, not perhaps unnaturally.  He was already much
interested in theological work. . . .  It {4} has been a great pleasure
to me in later years to hear of his excellent work at Christ's and the
strong influence he exerted over undergraduates.  It was quite the
natural result of the qualities I saw in him at school, provided once
his reserve could be broken.'

[Illustration: Forbes Robinson (1880)]

Though of Irish descent he only once visited Ireland.  This was during
his summer holidays in 1884, when he travelled round a good part of the
north and west coasts.  The only adventure of special interest was his
unintended voyage across the Bay of Donegal, which was nearly attended
with fatal consequences.  He and his brother, the editor of this
memoir, started in a small open sailing boat from the harbour of
Killybegs, intending to return within a few minutes; but no sooner had
they got outside the harbour than they were caught in a squall, which
rapidly developed into a gale, and made it impossible to turn the boat
or head it for the shore, owing to the immediate risk of swamping.  The
only means of securing momentary safety was to head the boat out into
the Atlantic, but as the nearest land in this direction was the coast
of America, the prospect was far from cheerful.  Eventually the boat
was turned a few points further south, in the direction of land which
could not be seen, but which was known to lie about fifteen miles away
on the other side of the Bay of Donegal.  After having been nearly
swamped many times, and running with bare poles, owing to the violence
of the gale, the boat arrived at length at Bundoran.  As this place was
distant some sixty miles from Killybegs, {5} it seemed wearisome to
return by land, and a return by sea was out of the question.
Accordingly, Forbes and the writer, drenched to the skin and without a
vestige of baggage, started forthwith on a walking tour along the west
coast of Ireland, arriving at Connemara in the course of the following
week.  Forbes's dislike of sea voyages in after years may in part be
traced to this experience.  During the greater part of the voyage
across Donegal Bay he was helpless from sea-sickness; his companion was
busily occupied in baling out the water to prevent the boat from
sinking.

The letters which Forbes wrote from school to members of his family are
a curious mixture of humour and religion.  It was his keen sense of
humour which preserved him from becoming morbid.  It was this same
sense of humour which helped to attract to him at the University men on
whom he eventually exercised a strong religious influence, but whom
religious conversation would have inevitably repelled.

In two letters written to one of his sisters from Rossall in 1886, the
following sentences occur.  They show that he found time while at
school for a considerable amount of reading which was not connected
with his school work:

'You ask me to tell you what books I have been reading.  Among others,
Longfellow's "Hiawatha" and "Evangeline," both exquisite; continually
the "In Memoriam," "Idylls of the King"; some of Buchanan, which I
scarcely recommend; M. Arnold, which I do most heartily recommend; and
Walt Whitman, the {6} great poet of democracy; "Confessions of an
English Opium Eater," by De Quincey, good in its way; G. Eliot and Mrs.
Browning, &c., &c.  Perhaps you would like some of those.  I read Chas.
Kingsley's "Andromeda"--it is really a splendid rhythmical piece of
hexameter--and some of his Life.  I rather like pieces of his poetry,
and the one you sent me I liked.

'My only birthday advice is: Read more Longfellow.  If you have any
writers, send me word, though I am sorry to say I can appreciate but
few. . . .'

Another letter, written the same year, is entirely composed of
selections from Tennyson's 'Princess,' which, he says, 'I have just
read through.'  He ends, 'Mind you send me gleanings of Milton if you
have time.'  In another, 'I have been reading a fair amount of Carlyle
at present, as we had an essay on "The influence of individuals on
great movements of religion, politics, and thought," for which I read
especially Carlyle's "Heroes and Hero Worship," and Emerson's
"Representative Men," and for which, I am glad to say, I not only got
full marks, but the highest maximum possible.  Have read Tennyson's
"Queen Mary."  Am reading "Harold."  I liked the first very much, but
the latter a great deal more.  The scene where Harold debates about
telling a lie or the truth is very fine. . . .'  The rest of the letter
is composed of quotations from 'Harold.'  In other letters he says,
'Get Emerson's "Essays" for me.'  'I send you "Aurora Leigh." . . .'

He left Rossall in the summer of 1887, when he {7} was nearly twenty,
and entered Christ's College, Cambridge, in the following October.  His
brother Armitage, now Dean of Westminster, was then fellow and dean of
Christ's College, and Forbes occupied the attic rooms over his.


The following notice by Dr. James, now headmaster of Rugby and formerly
headmaster of Rossall, appeared in 'The Rossallian' and is reprinted
here at his suggestion:

'Forbes Robinson came to Rossall in 1881.  He was a member of a very
able family; an elder brother is Dean of Westminster; another is
Charles H. Robinson, Editorial Secretary of the S.P.G. and translator
of part of the Gospels into Hausa.  He was a delicate boy, and lived
for a year or two in the headmaster's private house, from which he
passed on into Mr. Batson's.  Rather shy and retiring in disposition,
and unable to take much part in games, he was not conspicuous in the
School until he reached the Sixth, and did not make friends as easily
as some boys do.  But the few who knew him well recognised in him a
deeply affectionate if very sensitive nature, and saw how the religious
side of it, afterwards so conspicuous, was even then developing.  His
powers as a classical scholar, though considerable, were not
exceptional; they enabled him to reach the Upper Sixth, but not to win
a scholarship at his entrance to the university, and I well remember
advising him to make theology, to which his inclinations were already
drawing him, his special subject at Cambridge.  To this I knew he would
bring not only interest but power of reasoning and literary culture.
He had won the Divinity Prize of the School in 1885 and again in 1886,
and the English Essay Prize (for an essay on "The relative value of
art, science, and literature in education") in the latter year.

{8}

'He went up to Christ's, Cambridge, in 1887, and at once addressed
himself to his favourite study.  What strides he was making in it were
apparent at once from the extraordinary series of distinctions which he
won--a scholarship at the college, the Carus Greek Testament Prize for
undergraduates, the Jeremie Septuagint Prize, a first class in the
Theological Tripos, the Burney Theological Essay Prize, the Carus Prize
for Bachelors, the Crosse Divinity Scholarship, and the Hulsean Prize
all fell to him between 1888 and 1893, and finally in 1896 he was
elected to a Fellowship at Christ's, where he had already been
Theological Lecturer for a year.

'His essay which gained the Burney Prize in 1891 was on "The Authority
of our Lord in its bearing upon the Interpretation of the Old
Testament."  He printed it in 1893 under the title of "The
Self-limitation of the Word of God as manifested in the Incarnation."
With characteristic modesty he says in his preface: "I can claim but
little of the work as strictly original."  This is far too deprecatory;
the essay is a singularly lucid statement and attempted solution of a
most difficult theological problem, in which all who believe in the
Deity of Christ must be deeply interested, and I can bear personal
testimony to its helpfulness.  It was only the other day that I was
reading it afresh, for I had just recovered it, when I feared that the
copy he gave me was hopelessly lost and irreplaceable, from South
Africa, where a friend to whom I had lent it had taken it among his
books.  Among Forbes Robinson's later activities were a work on the
Coptic Apocryphal Gospels ("the subject," he wrote to me, "was so
technical and uninteresting that I did not send you a copy"), and the
editing of a Sahidic fragment of the Gospels.

'But his value to Cambridge and to his college lay mainly in the
influence for good which he was able to exert over undergraduates.
Again and again I have been told {9} there how great this was; and it
was no little achievement for one whose very modesty and
humble-mindedness must have made it difficult.  But his heart was in
the work, and in the maintaining of Christian influences in university
life.  It is hard to over-estimate the loss which his death at so early
an age implies alike to students of theology and to those among whom he
was more immediately working.  But he has left us the example of a
simple and devoted life and the consecration of great and growing
powers to his Master's service.  "God buries His workmen, but carries
on His work."'




{10}

CHAPTER II

LIFE AS AN UNDERGRADUATE AT CAMBRIDGE

From this point forward the sketch of Forbes's life can be given almost
entirely in the words of those who knew him at Cambridge.

A writer in the Christ's College Magazine for the Lent term 1904 says:
'Many older friends will always think of him in his attic rooms, where
he began to make his mark in our College society upon his first coming
up.  Only two other Freshmen had rooms in College, and Robinson's rooms
became at once a centre for his year, and later a meeting-place where
the gulfs between higher and lower years were bridged over.  A little
older than most men of his year, he was considerably their senior in
character and in intellect.  He showed at once the qualities which he
retained to such a unique degree in later years--an inexhaustible power
of making friends with all sorts and conditions of men, and an
insatiable interest in all sides of College life; the most serious
things were from the first not beyond his comprehension, and the most
trivial did not appear to bore him, even when their freshness had worn
off.  His love of books was catholic; he possessed a great many and
read them {11} to his friends.  At the College Debate, of which he
became secretary and president in his second year, he was a frequent
and fluent speaker, with a remarkable command of language, though
sometimes his eloquence was more than half burlesque.  His powers of
thought and real strength in argument were more often displayed in
private discussions, where irony and humour hardly veiled the depth of
earnestness below.'

[Illustration: Forbes Robinson (1887)]

During his first three years at Cambridge he read for the Theological
Tripos.  In the course of his first year he was elected a scholar of
his College.  At the beginning of his second year he won his first
University distinction, the Carus prize for the Greek Testament.  The
other University prizes which he gained were the Jeremie prize for the
Septuagint in 1889, the Burney prize essay in 1891, the Carus prize for
Bachelors, the Hulsean prize essay, and the Crosse University
Scholarship in 1892.  He took his degree in the first class of the
Theological Tripos in 1890, and obtained a second class in the Moral
Science Tripos of 1891.  The year which he spent in reading moral
science he afterwards looked back upon as one of the most useful in his
life.  After he had been reading for some time in view of this Tripos,
he wrote to a friend: 'I have come to the conclusion that I know
nothing, and am an awful fool into the bargain. . . .  The subject is
so utterly fresh to me, so completely unlike theology of any sort at
Cambridge, that I find it hard to do anything at it.  In fact, I
chucked it up for about ten days in the middle of the term, and
determined to have nothing more to {12} do with it; but after that rest
I thought better and renewed the study.  It is an excellent training
for the mind.  I never distinctly remember thinking at all before this
term.'

Having learnt to _think_ himself, his desire was to help others by
teaching them to think.  One who came under his influence several years
later says of him: 'I owe so much to him in every way.  Above
everything else he taught me to _think_.  I remember so well the first
time I went to him with a difficulty.  I expected him to solve it for
me, instead of which, at the end of half an hour, I still found that I
had to think it out for myself.  It was a revelation to me, and has
helped me in my dealings with men.'  The same friend writes: 'I may
mention a conversation I once had with him.  He had in front of him the
answers to some Theological Tripos papers.  He took up two of them and
compared the answers given to the same question by the two men.  The
answer required was a translation of a passage of Greek with notes.
And, as far as I can remember, his words were these: "Now, W----, this
man has passed over the real difficulty.  As far as I can tell, he has
not even noticed that there is a difficulty.  I have given him two
marks out of a possible ten.  This other man has seen the difficulty
and grappled with it.  His solution is without doubt incorrect, but
that is quite immaterial.  Result, eight marks out of ten."  I cannot
but think that this attitude of mind was largely the secret of his
influence.'  In another case, when urging a man to attempt some
independent investigation of the Synoptic problem, he said; {13} 'Your
conclusions may be wrong, but you can correct them, and it will teach
you to think.'

One who was an undergraduate with Forbes says of him: He 'did not take
a prominent part in religious movements in the College, such as the
College prayer meeting or Bible readings, though he was occasionally
present at them.  In chapel his reverence was quiet, though in no way
obtrusive.  I think that by not identifying himself with any particular
religious party he had greater influence with those men whose minds ran
in very different grooves.  I always felt when in his company that I
was conversing with one vastly superior to myself in intellectual
powers, and yet he never appeared conscious of it himself.  It is
surprising how considerate he was of the feelings of others.  I
remember a large print of Pope Leo XIII. which used to hang in his
rooms as an undergraduate, which delighted his gyp, who was a Romanist,
but scandalised his Protestant friends.  I begged earnestly for a copy
of one of his prize essays, which had been printed though not
published.  He at first consented, but almost immediately asked me to
return it, saying that he did not wish it to go out to the world as
expressing his matured views.  He then asked me to accept instead a
small booklet, which he said I should find useful to have in visiting.
It contained the verses called "The Old, Old Story."  He also gave me a
copy of the "Practice of the Presence of God," by Brother Lawrence.'

Before he decided to read for the Moral Science Tripos he had thought
of going in for the Semitic Languages Tripos.  With this object in view
he {14} commenced the study of Syriac.  Finding that the best Syriac
grammar was written in German and had not been translated, he decided
to learn German also.  He was advised that Switzerland was a suitable
place in which to study German, and accordingly, after taking his
degree, he started in the summer of 1890 for Switzerland.  The two
following letters are inserted in order to illustrate his sense of
humour, as well as to describe the way in which he spent this summer.
He eventually returned from Switzerland, having made more progress in
Syriac than in German, but without having obtained any great knowledge
of either language.  Soon after his return he decided to commence the
study of Moral Science instead of the Semitic languages.


_To H. M. S._

'Habkern: July 1890.

'A few days after I got to Switzerland, by dint of incessant inquiries
and correspondence I found out the name of a pastor who lived in a
sufficiently healthy place and who talked German.  So I girded up my
loins and went to visit him.  "Sprechen Sie Englisch, mein Herr?" I
asked.  "Nein" was the reply.  As I scarcely knew a word of German I
was in a considerable fix.  But I found out that the Pfarrer spoke
"Lateinisch" and could read English a little when it was written.  So I
went up to his study and we got paper and pencil and began.  I tried to
tell him in a mixture of broken English and dog-Latin that I intended
to give him the honour of my company.  He said he would be pleased to
take me "en pension."  He then {15} asked how much I wished to pay.  I
hadn't for the life of me an idea of what I ought to pay.  "Ut tibi
optimum videtur," I said.  But he made me fix my price.  Then, when I
had fixed it, I had to turn it into Swiss money.  The good Pfarrer was
so pleased with the honour of my company that he took me for less than
I asked.  Our greatest difficulty next arose: How was my luggage to be
conveyed the five miles from the nearest town up a steep hill?  Latin,
French, English, German, failed to make me understand the situation.
At last I took in the Pfarrer's meaning.  I was to send it by the
milkman after leaving it at a certain hotel.  "Ja," I cried in an
ecstasy of joy, at last grasping his meaning, "Ja, ich mittam der
Gepäck von der milkman."  I arrived the next day.  I found the Pfarrer
knew Latin, Greek (but he pronounces both quite differently from me),
German, French, Russian, Syriac, Hebrew, and a little English.  His
usual custom is to address me in German.  If I fail to understand, he
tries Latin and intersperses his remarks with Greek and Hebrew.  So my
great difficulty is first of all to find out what language he thinks he
is speaking in.

'Yesterday we were sitting, smoking and drinking, in the village
"Wirthshaus" among the natives of the place, the Pfarrer addressing me
in Latin, the villagers staring at his learning in adoration and
astonishment, and laughing at my attempts at German.  The landlord came
up to me when I arrived and sent in a bottle of wine for me, refusing
to be paid for it, for he said that the natives of Interlaken fleeced
the English; but when Habkern was for once honoured by the {16}
presence of one, the people were not going to treat him in the same way.

'It is curious how the Pfarrer goes and sits and drinks and gossips in
the "Wirthshaus," even on Sunday, I think.  Last Sunday they had a
country dance, and very curious and pretty was the scene--the
old-fashioned wooden room--the odd national dress of the women--the
curiously cut brown clothes of the men--the thick boots--the fiddlers
raised above the rest--the quaint urn with its inscriptions above--the
gaping crowd of villagers.  Then the church is strange--very rude and
simple, all whitewashed.  The women sit on one side, the men on the
other.  They stand to pray and hear the text, and sit to sing and hear
the sermon.  The organ and font are placed at one end.  The elders
stand below the organ, the Pfarrer is lost in the far distance, right
up in a big pulpit.  The "Predigt" or sermon is everything.  They have
one written prayer before and one after the "Predigt."  The people
never say "Amen" or anything--only sing.  They sing so slowly that,
although I had only been with the Pfarrer three days, I could almost
sing and look out the words in the dictionary at the same time!  I talk
German with every one who will talk with me.  So well did I spin yarns
when I had been in the country three or four days, that with a mixture
of Latin and German I managed to make a German use strong language at
some of my tales, which he was pleased to think were not exactly true.
Reflecting on the situation afterwards, I remembered that I had told
him, among other things, that I had walked nearly fifty "stunden" {17}
in a day.  His language was awful.  I found afterwards that "stunde"
was not, as I had supposed, an English "mile," but an English "hour."
But I keep on talking.  I have come to the conclusion that the way to
learn a language is to argue in it.  Accordingly I do so.  I have tried
to convince them that the order of bishops is semi-apostolic, and that
if St. Paul did not actually wear a surplice himself, his successors
shortly afterwards did.

'One other thing, if you ever reply to this letter: would you copy out
a few of the most thickly marked lines in the "Grammarian's Funeral" in
my edition of Browning?  They are always in my mind, but I can't quite
recollect how they go.  There is no poem I like so much as that.  I
would send you some butterflies, but I daren't kill them.  Some of us
may have once been butterflies: as M. Arnold says,

  'What was before us we know not,
  And we know not what shall succeed.'


_To H. M. S._

'Habkern: August 1890.

'There is a French pensionnaire staying here, the same as I am.  He is
very polite, but his tastes are diametrically opposite to mine.  He
likes wine, walking, women, smoking, painting, violin and piano
playing, dogs, and the like.

'He asked me whether I liked the French.  I told him "No," and gave him
a good many reasons.  He abhors the Germans.  I told him I thought the
Germans were a fine race.  I'm occupying my time {18} in sleeping,
arguing, observing the natives, and reading a Tauchnitz edition of
"Martin Chuzzlewit," which is good, though already a young girl of
seventeen has been introduced, very beautiful and all the rest, and I'm
afraid she won't be poisoned, but marry a certain young man already
introduced.  I'd give a good deal to be able to write a novel in which
all the young ladies tumbled out of windows, six stories high, and were
picked up dead.  I think I must try and write one.  Shall I dedicate it
to you?  The heroine will be a plain old lady with white curls, close
on sixty-five, without any money, but with a certain amount of
intellect.  There will be no marriages, but suicides and murders if
necessary.

'I'm inventing a German word of 1,000 letters.  It is to be divided
into some 150 or 200 compartments.  After each compartment there is
five minutes for refreshments.  After about the 500th letter there will
be half an hour allowed for dinner.  After the 600th letter or so there
will be a notice to the effect that no person with a weak heart may
proceed further without consulting a medical man.  After about the
980th there will be a notice forbidding any one to go further until
their family doctor is in attendance.  I have thought of the groundwork
of the word--the finished word I'm going to send to M----, as he has
the strongest constitution of any one I know.  Then I shall get Duke
Bismarck to patent it; after which I shall take out a professorship on
the strength of it at Berne.  It will, of course, be the "Hauptsache"
of my existence.'

{19}

Forbes was far from being an athlete, but in 1891, shortly before his
ordination, he accomplished the feat of walking with two athletic
friends from London to Cambridge in a day, a distance of more than
fifty miles.  The following description is by Mr. A. N. C.
Kittermaster, who was one of his companions.


_Walk from London to Cambridge._

Some of us had read that Charles Kingsley had walked from London to
Cambridge; so we determined to follow in his footsteps.  We were a
party of three--Forbes Robinson, D. D. Robertson, and myself.  We spent
the previous day at the Naval Exhibition, the night at the Liverpool
Street Hotel, and at 4.30 A.M. of Tuesday, August 25, 1891, we started
on our fifty-mile trudge.  We walked steadily, at first over immense
stretches of pavement, till we reached Ware, twenty-one miles out.
There we had breakfast or lunch of huge chops at 10.15.  After that we
took the road again, and did not call a halt of any length till we had
put another twenty miles behind us.  The day was fine but dull, and we
were not troubled by the heat.  At the fortieth milestone it began to
appear doubtful whether we should all reach the journey's end.  I have
an entry in my diary: 'At 40 Robertson bad, I worse, Deanlet (_i.e._
Forbes) quite fit.'  So at Foulmire, nine miles from Cambridge, we
stopped for tea.  By this time I was in a state of temporary collapse,
but I remember the other two during tea carried on an animated
discussion upon the creation as described in Genesis.  We all felt
better after the {20} rest and covered the last stage fairly easily,
arriving at Christ's at 9.30 P.M.  We had a meal in Forbes's rooms,
fought our battles over again, and retired to rest about midnight.

The thing which remains with me best is the amazing ease with which
Forbes accomplished the journey.  It is a matter of common experience
that prolonged physical effort reacts on the mind; conversation becomes
difficult, and cheerfulness forced.  I must say that in my case the
thought which for a considerable period occupied my mind was how I was
to get to the end.  But it was not so with Forbes.  He travelled
lightly, talking happily on all subjects the whole day.  It seemed to
make little difference to him whether he took food or no, and he was as
willing to stop at every place of refreshment we suggested as to march
the whole day without a meal.




{21}

CHAPTER III

WORK AT CAMBRIDGE

In September 1891 Forbes was ordained as curate to his brother
Armitage, who was at that time vicar of All Saints', Cambridge.
Several of the letters which are given later refer to his thoughts and
feelings at the time of his ordination.  His connection with All
Saints' did not last more than a year, as his brother resigned in the
following spring.  Forbes had already been licensed as chaplain to
Emmanuel College.  He received priest's orders in 1892.  In 1895 he was
appointed theological lecturer at Christ's College, and in the
following year, May 30, 1896, was elected a fellow.  During the same
year he was appointed an examining chaplain to the Bishop of Southwell.

One who knew him well, soon after the time of his ordination, writes:
'I cannot remember how we first became acquainted, beyond the fact that
I used to meet him in the rooms of some prominent members of the
College Football XV.  All I know is that several of our year got to
know him quite well, and the friendship grew with time.  The fact that
he had distinguished himself in the Moral Science Tripos at {22} first
rather awed me, a freshman.  But I soon got over that feeling, for he
was the last person in the world to trouble any one with a sense of
intellectual inferiority.

'I am sure the private business hours of the Debating Society were some
of his happiest moments.  His magnificent assumption of wrath on the
most absurd grounds; his vast intensity over trivialities; his love for
the heat and play of debate, would have made a stranger believe he
lived for nothing else.

'Physical strength and virtue seemed to have a strange attraction for
him.  His assortment of athlete friends was peculiarly wide, and his
frank admiration of their qualities gave them a pleasant feeling that
in some way he looked up to them--a feeling which I am sure
strengthened the hold he had over them.

'He was a tireless walker, and could go far on very little.  A party of
us used to take long walks, often on a Sunday, to various places in the
country.  There was generally a volume of Burke or Emerson in his
pocket, whose sonorous periods filled the interval when we lunched
frugally or rested.  I have never known him anything but good-humoured
under any conditions.  His enthusiasm for our most commonplace jests
was unfailing--perhaps one of the surest ways of getting to a man's
heart and staying there--and he had a wide tolerance for the minor
offences of undergraduate thought and deed.  Yet, as for the tone of
conversation when he was near, I need scarcely say that one simply did
not think of anything unpleasant or vulgar, much less say it.

'I used to admire his immense power of putting {23} his thoughts into
words, but he could be silent too.  Sometimes he would come to my rooms
when I was working, throw himself into an arm-chair, and absolutely
refuse to speak.  After a considerable interval perhaps he would
consider I had worked long enough, and cocoa and conversation would
follow.  But it was when I visited him in his own rooms that I remember
things most vividly.

'I can still see that little room under the roof; the picture on the
wall of the dead saint floating on the dark water; the well-filled
bookcase; the table piled with volumes; himself throwing everything
aside to greet one.  It was almost with a feeling of awe that I
sometimes climbed those stairs and entered into his presence.  Perhaps
it would be for a lesson on the New Testament--for when I was reading
for a Theological Tripos he was generous, even prodigal, of help.  The
lesson over--and there are many who know what a goodly thing a lesson
from him on the New Testament was--he would open a volume of
Tennyson--"In Memoriam" most likely--read a few stanzas, and begin to
talk about them.  Gradually, it would seem, the things of the world
would fade from him.  He forgot the hour and my presence as his
thoughts poured out.  I sat and listened, generally silent, sometimes
hazarding a question.  Presently--it was often late--I would rise to
leave.  Rapt from his surroundings, he seemed scarcely conscious of my
departure; and I would go quietly out, almost as though I had been on
holy ground, where not once nor twice the dweller had seen God face to
face.'

His power of helping men by silent sympathy is {24} referred to by one
who writes: 'The many words of kindness, but more particularly the
silent sympathy he conveyed in some mysterious manner, will ever keep
him present with us.'

Another, who had known him in his early days at Christ's, and again in
later years, writes: 'When I was up he was a nervous retiring man, at
his best when one found him alone in his own room.  Even then he would
sometimes talk little.  Since my return from South Africa I have found
him much more at home with men and much more ready to talk, but
retaining his old power of sympathy without words.'  His own faith was
based rather upon intuitive perception of the Divine love than upon
argument.  On one occasion, quite towards the end of his life, he said
to one with whom he was staying, 'Sometimes I sit and think, till I can
find no reason for the existence of God; and then there rises up in me
something which is stronger than the love I have for those who are dear
to me--and they are very dear--the love of God.  It seems to smile at
my doubts.'

Several of his friends have referred to Forbes's influence as a power
which helped to develop their own sympathy towards others.  Thus one
writes:

'I think perhaps it was my intercourse with him that first taught me to
look out for and appreciate the real goodness--or, better,
Christlikeness--of others from whom one differed in important matters
and with whom one seemed perhaps to have little in common.'

In some instances friendship between Forbes and an acquaintance seems
to have arisen where very {25} little direct intercourse had taken
place.  One who was greatly his senior says of him, 'I have never known
any one with whom there was so strong a sense of intimacy founded on so
little positive intercourse.'

In July 1892--_i.e._ about nine months after his ordination as
deacon--he took part in a kind of peregrinating mission tour through
part of South Cornwall.  Dressed simply in cassock and cape, and
carrying a small brown paper parcel containing necessary luggage, he
and his brother (the compiler of this book) walked from village to
village, preaching afternoon and evening in the open air.  At the end
of the evening service an appeal was made to the people.  It was
explained to them that the preachers had come without provision or
money, and hoped to receive hospitality from those to whom they
ministered.  Night after night Forbes and his companion were taken in
and entertained, often by very poor people.  A unique opportunity was
thus afforded of getting to know something of the home life as well as
of the religious beliefs of the poor.  As a rule, those who acted as
hosts were Nonconformists.  Forbes spoke once or twice each day to the
people who gathered, and his addresses, which were generally based on
the words 'Our Father,' were admirably suited to the comprehension and
needs of the simple country people.

For several months during 1895 he took charge of a small country parish
near Cambridge, called Toft.  While staying at Toft he wrote to a
friend, 'I like living among country folk and talking with {26} and
visiting them.  I want to get out of my life into their lives.  This
parish work humiliates if it does not humble one. . . .  The smallest
parish is a tremendous responsibility.'


The following are a few additional notes contributed by others who knew
Forbes at Christ's: 'His broad sympathies, his unfailing efforts to
find out the good in persons and systems--the rays of truth which each
possessed--combined with the rare faculty of going deep down beneath
vexed questions, and thus lifting controversies to a higher and serener
atmosphere: these were qualities in him which were known especially by
those privileged to have more intimate knowledge of him than that
vouchsafed by formal lectures or social gatherings. . . .  He is now
another link with the life beyond these conflicting voices, one "who
loved Heaven's silence more than fame."'

The same writer says of him in another letter: 'His extreme fairness
and toleration, which at first seemed to me to reduce half one's
cherished beliefs to open questions, was of the greatest value in
dispelling ignorance and prejudice, and in promoting true charity and a
more intelligent faith.  He delighted to call attention to the fact
that our Lord found something commendable and exemplary in the serpent.
And so, in dealing with those with whom he most disagreed, he tried to
fix attention on that portion of truth which lay behind their opinions,
or on those real difficulties, to be slighted only by {27} the
superficial, with which they were grappling.  Tertullian, with his love
of scoring off opponents, fared badly at his hands, and he used to
treat Clement of Alexandria more sympathetically than Irenaeus.

'It was striking to find a mind so evenly balanced and philosophical
become fired with enthusiasm as he spoke in simplest language, in
chapel or elsewhere, of great Christian truths or the victories of
faith.  His sermons influenced, I believe, many of the naturally
careless.  Simple, impartial, earnest and sympathetic, he won, I know,
the deepest affection and respect of many.'

Another writes: 'Bright, pure, and strong--this was the impression he
gave me . . . .  Many men will be very sorry that he is not here any
more, but every one who _knew_ him will be very thankful that he was
here, and that they had an opportunity of hearing him "think"
sometimes.  I recall him most in his own rooms, beginning to talk on
some small matter, and gradually lifting us higher and still higher,
until we all silently listened, following as best we, with our muddier
minds, could; and even when he got beyond us there were still
inspiration and strength to be got from his flashing eyes and
on-rushing earnestness; but if some smaller mind broke in, in a moment
he was down at the level of that mind, half bantering and wholly
sympathising.  Nevertheless, some of us have never forgotten the things
he showed us as he led us up, and the possibility of soaring very high
without losing touch with those whose levels are pathetically
human. . . .  I do know that he helped {28} me much, and that many
things he said I shall never forget, and thank God for still.'

A Cambridge and international athlete, an intimate friend of Forbes,
writes: 'Though I have lost your brother Forbes, and life will be for
ever poorer to me, I can't thank God enough that I ever knew him and
loved him, and that he called himself my friend.  He was so dear to
me--my greatest friend in the world.  His goodness and his help to me
in my Cambridge days were wonderful.  He altered my life.  God has
called him home and to the blessed rest of the children of God, and we
are rich still with his memory and the influence of his beautiful,
patient, Christlike life.'

In another letter he writes: 'The death, or, as I like to think of it,
the passing of Forbes into the Great Beyond has been such a grief to
me.  You have no idea what he was to me--a real man "sent from God"
into my life.  I could do nothing when I heard the sad, and to me
utterly unexpected, news, but kneel down by my bedside, and weep till I
could weep no more for my beloved friend.  I feel so rich and proud to
have had him for my friend, and to have had his love; and so do many
Cambridge men.  Oh, but I did so love him! and my prayer now is that
the memory of him with me always may strengthen my weak and feeble
life, and help me to live somewhat more as he lived, very near the
Master.'

He obtained but little help from self-introspection or
self-examination.  Thus he writes in one of the letters given later on:
'I am not sure that we cannot learn more about others than we can about
ourselves.  {29} I never think it is profitable to study oneself too
closely.  I never could meditate with any profit on my sins.  But
there, I dare say I differ from many others.'

To very intimate friends he would in rare instances admit that the
secret of any influence which he possessed over men was the outcome of
his efforts to pray for them.  One who had known him intimately at
Christ's writes in 1904:

'About eighteen months ago I had the privilege of spending a night with
him, and then for the first time I realised how much of his spiritual
power was the outcome of prayer.  He told me that in his younger days
he had taken every opportunity of personally appealing to men to come
to Christ.  "But," he went on, "as I grow older I become more
diffident, and now often, when I desire to see the Truth come home to
any man, I say to myself, 'If I have him here he will spend half an
hour with me.  Instead, I will spend that half-hour in prayer for
him.'"  Later on, when I had retired for the night, he came to me again
and said, "W----, what I have said to you is in the strictest
confidence: don't mention it to any one."  And this revelation of his
inner life is my last memory of him.'

On another occasion he said to one with whom he was staying, when
speaking of the little that men could do for each other, 'I think that
I should go mad were it not for prayer.'

As an instance of his common sense in a matter in which as a bachelor
he could have had no personal experience, he strongly urged a married
man, before {30} deciding to accept a curacy which had been offered to
him, to let his wife see the vicar's wife or women-folk.  'She will
know intuitively,' he said, 'whether she can get on with them and they
with her, and it will make all the difference to your work and
happiness.'  The man to whom this advice was offered writes: 'The
advice was given seriously, but with that bright twinkle of his; and I
owe much to it, for we have been here since . . . and I don't want to
go.'


The following is an extract from a notice which appeared in the
'Guardian '!

'By his published work he is best known to the outer world as one of
the few English scholars who have given attention to Coptic.  In 1896
he edited "The Coptic Apocryphal Gospels" in the "Cambridge Texts and
Studies."  The important article on the Coptic Version in Hastings's
"Bible Dictionary" came also from his pen, and he was engaged on an
edition of the Sahidic fragments of St. Luke's Gospel.  His deepest
interest, however, lay not in these subsidiary studies, but in the
fundamental problems of theology proper.  His Burney Prize essay,
printed at the University Press in 1893 under the title of "The
Self-limitation of the Word of God as manifested in the Incarnation,"
is no doubt comparatively slight, and in some respects immature; but
its reverent and fearless treatment of the difficulties of his great
theme gave promise of work of permanent value in this field.  His
interest in the great problems never flagged, and his sympathetic touch
with the life and thought of the younger men in his college kept him
constantly {31} engaged on the task of putting into clear and ever
clearer expression such solutions as he was able to attain.  His
sermons in College Chapel were singularly effective, because he never
wasted a word, and because every sentence was felt to be the outcome of
strenuous thought tested by living experience.

'It is not surprising, therefore, that he exercised an unusual
influence upon younger students.  His friends were very closely bound
to him indeed, in bonds which death can consecrate but cannot sever.
They can never cease to thank God for the pure, bright, tender, utterly
sincere, fearless, and faithful spirit He has given them to love.'




{32}

CHAPTER IV

THE LAST FEW MONTHS

From the time that Forbes took his degree at Cambridge his health was
far from strong.  He suffered from time to time from a form of eczema
which caused him a good deal of discomfort and pain.  Many of his
letters contain references to the fact that he had been unwell and had
been unable to do as much work as he had hoped.  In September 1897 he
went with his brother Armitage on a visit to St. Petersburg and Moscow.
He stayed in the house of a Russian priest at St. Petersburg, and was
much interested in the work of Father John of Kronstadt, with whom an
interview was arranged which unfortunately fell through at the last
moment.  Towards the end of 1897 he developed a bad cough and was
threatened with phthisis.  He accordingly spent Christmas and the first
two or three months of 1898 at St. Moritz in Switzerland.  His health
then seemed to be much improved.  For several years he went back to St.
Moritz to spend the greater part of the Christmas vacation.  He took
great delight in tobogganing, and on one occasion was awarded a prize
for a race in which he took part.  In the summer of 1899 he went out to
South Africa {33} during the Long Vacation.  He visited Pretoria and
had an interview with President Kruger and his wife.  One of his
letters records his impressions of the President.  He was for some time
disposed to believe that the war, which broke out soon after his
return, could and should have been avoided, but he subsequently
modified his views on this point.

Towards the end of August 1903 the pain from which he had suffered
intermittently for years became so much worse that he came up to
consult a London doctor, and by his advice remained in town as a
patient at St. Thomas's Home.  When he entered the home he fully
expected to undergo an operation within a fortnight; but the doctor who
had suggested it declared, after further examination, that no operation
was necessary.  Meanwhile Forbes lingered on in the home week after
week.  Eventually a partial operation was performed, and after he had
spent thirteen weeks in the home the surgeon suggested his removal to a
private nursing home, where he could keep him under closer observation.
Here he performed a second operation.  This seemed at first to have
been a success, and after a fortnight in this private home he was well
enough to start for Switzerland again.  He went at first to St. Moritz,
where he had been so often before; but, finding that the pain returned
and that he could not sleep, he went down to Alassio on the Riviera.
Here he was for several weeks till his return to England.  He reached
Westminster on January 13 and went up to Cambridge on the following
day.  For a few days he was well enough to lecture, and it seemed as
though he might be able to {34} resume his old work.  On Sunday
evening, January 17, he was 'at home' in his rooms and received over
sixty undergraduates who came to welcome him back.  Soon the old
trouble returned, and he rapidly grew worse.  His pain became almost
constant, and he was removed with great difficulty to another London
nursing home on January 29.  It was then proposed that the original
operation which had been suggested, but had never been performed,
should take place, and he fully expected that this would result in his
restoration to health and to work.  A few days later he was threatened
with blood-poisoning, and it became obvious that the operation must be
delayed.  On Saturday evening, February 6, he seemed fairly cheerful.
Neither he nor his doctors had any idea that he was in an extremely
critical state.  About midnight, as the pain had become worse, his
doctor was sent for, and he gave him an injection of morphia.  Soon
after this he asked his nurse to turn the light down and said to her,
'If I am asleep in the morning do not wake me.'  She looked in about
3.30 A.M. to see if he was asleep, and, finding him awake, inquired if
he would like a drink of champagne.  He said yes, and asked her first
of all to help him turn over to the other side.  As she was in the act
of assisting him, he passed away, without a movement of any kind.  A
happy smile lingered long on his face after the end had come.

His body was removed the same evening to St. Faith's Chapel, in
Westminster Abbey.  Here on the following Thursday morning, February
11, at 9 A.M., the funeral service was said.  The chapel {35} was
filled with his friends, who had come from Cambridge and elsewhere.
His body was buried the same afternoon at Eastbourne in the same grave
with that of his sister, the Deaconess Cecilia, who had passed away
five months before.

The inscription on the memorial card issued to his friends was:

  CUM CHRISTO VICTURUS
  DE MORTE AD VITAM MIGRAVIT
  DOMINICA IN SEXAGESIMA
  ANNO SALUTIS MCMIV
  AETATIS SUAE XXXVII.


  And, doubtless, unto thee is given
    A life that bears immortal fruit
    In those great offices that suit
  The full-grown energies of heaven.




{36}

CHAPTER V

TWO APPRECIATIONS

The two following sketches of Forbes Robinson's life at Cambridge have
been contributed, the first by the Rev. T. C. Fitzpatrick, Fellow and
Dean of Christ's College, and the second by the Rev. Digby B.
Kittermaster, of Clare College, now Head of the Shrewsbury School
Mission in Liverpool.


Mr. Fitzpatrick writes:

'College life has changed a good deal since the days when a young
graduate, on his election to a fellowship, was advised not to see too
much of the undergraduate members of the College, that the division
between the senior and junior members of the College might be
preserved.  A custom of that kind, once established, is not easy to
break, for traditions of all sorts, good and bad, live long in College.

'Fortunately, the relations between the undergraduates and the fellows
of the College are gradually becoming more natural, to the benefit of
the whole body.  Forbes Robinson will be long remembered for the
influence that he exerted in this {37} direction, and what he has
effected it will be comparatively easy for others to carry on.

'It is my desire to give some slight impression of his life in College,
and I do not wish to say much about his teaching work.  I must mention,
however, what frequently struck me, the great joy he had in teaching;
his success was not surprising.  When he found (in January last) that
he could not take up all his lecture work he would not allow another to
give in his place the course of lectures on Church History.  "I want,"
he said to me, "to give them myself in my own way," and he hoped to
have given them this Easter term.  I was not surprised to hear from a
pupil of the interest that he and others found in a similar course of
lectures which he had given the previous year.  "He put things so," the
pupil told me, "that you could not forget what he had said."

'My last recollection of him as a teacher bears witness to his interest
and purpose.  Word was brought me before morning chapel that he had
been obliged to call in the doctor in the middle of the night.  I went
to his rooms after chapel and found that he was asleep, I put up a
notice that he would be unable to lecture.  He awoke soon after I had
left his rooms; he had another notice put up that he would lecture in
his rooms.  When I came back to College later in the morning I looked
in and found him lying on his sofa with the room full of men, sitting
where they could.  The class will not forget that lecture, nor shall I
forget the sight.

'When two men have lived a number of years within the same College, it
is difficult for them to {38} realise the change in their relationship
that has come with time.  There is a comradeship that comes through the
influence of circumstances rather than from that personal attraction
which two men feel for one another, and which arose they don't remember
when or how.  It was this comradeship of work and the sharing of
responsibilities that led me to know Forbes Robinson.  We had lived
some years in College before I knew much of him; I was some years his
senior, and our lines of work were very different.  As far as I know,
he never talked to older men in that frank way which was his custom
with those of his own age, and still more with men younger than
himself.  Some weeks ago I was staying at the hotel on the Riviera
where he had been at Christmas time.  The English lady, whose husband
keeps the house, told me that with them Forbes Robinson hardly talked
at all, but that he took their boy out for long walks and talked to
him; and the boy's face lit up as I spoke to him of Forbes.

'There is still the recollection in College, handed on from year to
year, of the walk which he took at the end of a Long Vacation from
London to Cambridge with two other men, and how he talked all the way.
It was these conversations, often prolonged for two or three hours,
that impressed those to whom he opened out his thoughts, and who in
turn let him see something of their inner life.

'Forbes always had one or two special friends among the younger men,
whom he seemed to me to look upon as heroes; he always yearned for
sympathy, and he was prepared to give to others all that {39} he had
got.  This closer relationship with a few men did not in the least
narrow his interest in the life of the College.  He gained, I cannot
believe that it can have been without an effort long and hard, the
power of taking an interest in all sorts of things that form no small
part of the life of the average man.  There was nothing strained or
exaggerated in his relations with other men; he was at all times just
himself.

'When he was elected a Fellow, being also Theological Lecturer, he was
anxious to do something to interest and help those who were not
theological students, and he had, first on Sunday mornings after
Chapel, and afterwards in the latter part of the afternoons, Greek
Testament readings for non-theological men, and some terms he took up
some of the problems that present themselves as difficulties to the
thoughtful man.  These papers were prepared with great care, and, as I
know, at no small cost of time and energy.

'On Sunday evenings he was "at home" from 9 to 11 to any members of the
College who cared to come.  On those occasions it was a curious sight
that met the eyes of any late comer as he opened the door and saw men
in groups sitting on the floor, as chairs were insufficient; as a rule
there was no general subject of conversation--numbers made that
impossible.  Most Sunday evenings there was music, but not always, and
it was difficult at the end of the evening to say what could have
brought so many men together.  It was a common ground of meeting for
different kinds of men.  Forbes Robinson was often at his best on these
occasions; he would join {40} first one group and then another, and
take part in the subject which was being discussed.  Generally one or
two would remain when the others left, and deeper problems would then
be talked over.  Only on one Sunday of last term was Forbes Robinson
well enough to be "at home."  The room was more crowded than I had ever
seen it.  It was a sort of welcome back after his absence the previous
term.  It was evident that it gave him pleasure, and evident, too, that
he was all the time in pain.  Yet with a brightness, which must have
cost him much, he talked with one and another of simple daily interests
in the way that showed his sympathy with life, and gained for him the
power of saying on other occasions deeper things.

'Nothing could have been simpler than the character of these
gatherings.  Simplicity was the secret of his power.

'I find it impossible to write of my own conversations with him; they
dealt chiefly with the difficulties of Cambridge, of College life, and
of the lives of those in our College for whom we felt we had a
responsibility.  Talking of the difficulties of belief, I was struck by
his quiet answer: "I do not believe some things which I did when I was
younger; but those which I believe, I believe more firmly."  Forbes
Robinson had a great belief in the power of intercession.  Quite
recently a man in his year told me that when Forbes Robinson was an
undergraduate he had known him spend two hours during the afternoon in
intercession for his friends.  One is not surprised that prayer was a
subject on which he {41} thought much.  He was to have written an
important article on it.

'As we talked together of different men, I remember being struck with
the desire he expressed that men should be good and strong, and not of
any one type.  He had a great confidence in the essential goodness that
there is in men, and he always formed a high estimate of another.

'His letters will indicate how deeply he entered into the lives of
others, and how wide were his sympathies.  A member of another College
told me that the news of the death of Forbes Robinson reached him just
after the close of their evening chapel, and he had not long returned
to his rooms when an Indian gentleman called, an undergraduate of this
College, who almost in tears told him of all that Forbes had done for
him, and how he had learnt in Hall at Christ's from the strange silence
that something must have happened, and was told of the loss that came
so unexpectedly upon us on Sunday, February 7.

'I close this short account of my friend with extracts from three
letters casually taken from those which have reached me.  A young
clergyman writes: "I feel I owe a very great debt to him, both as a
lecturer and as a friend.  His clearness of mind and power of thought
were such as I have never seen in any other man.  But far more precious
than these intellectual gifts was the inspiration of his personal
character.  His ideals were so high, and he lived so close to them.
Few lives have better expressed the truth of the words of which he was
so fond: 'He that {42} loseth his life shall find it.'"  A schoolmaster
writes: "The last talk I had with him was a month before my ordination,
and I remember the emphasis that he laid on the praying side of a
clergyman's life."  A doctor writes: "Looking back upon my time at
Christ's, I think that of all the influences which helped me, the most
potent was my friendship with Forbes Robinson. . . .  I came to know
him somewhat intimately by spending an Easter vacation with him, and
several of our conversations then have left a lasting impression on my
mind. . . .  I suppose, as one gets older and sees so much more of
death, that a deepening faith takes away that sense of personal loss
and leaves behind a feeling of gladness that yet another friend has
passed to the Communion of Saints."

'Of his life we may use the motto of his College:

'AD HONOREM CHRISTI JESU ET FIDEI EJUS INCREMENTUM.'


Mr. Kittermaster writes:

'Forbes Robinson did not regard any one of us as a "mere
undergraduate," one of a mass; that was the first thing which those of
us who knew him as undergraduates learnt.  He was genuinely interested
from the first in his undergraduate acquaintances; interested in them
as men, not as promising pupils, not as likely scholars, not as
athletes, not as material for "improving" influence, but as
men--individuals, each possessing a separate and distinct human {43}
personality, and therefore of the truest and deepest interest to him.

'Our public schools taught us (and for most of us Cambridge continued
the teaching) that to be of any real importance and consequence among
his fellows a man must be "good at games," or perhaps--but this more
rarely--"good at work."  Such is the simple creed of the undergraduate.
If he satisfies neither of the above requirements, then he recognises,
with greater or less sadness, that he is an ordinary man, the "average
undergraduate."  He is one of the crowd if he has no athletic powers to
commend him to the notice of his fellows _in statu pupillari_; he is
one of the crowd if he has no slightest hope of making for himself any
name in the intellectual world, to commend him to the leaders of
thought at Cambridge.  And this knowledge is to many a Cambridge boy,
playing at being a man, a matter of real, if unconfessed, grief.

'But "there is no such thing as the average man, or at least as the
average undergraduate."  This was the belief which Forbes Robinson held
with increasing conviction as his life went on.  And it was this belief
which accounted to some extent for the very large part which his
friendship undoubtedly played in the life of many a Cambridge
undergraduate.

'For a man condemned by his fellows and himself to the position of the
"ordinary man" found himself in the presence of Forbes (as all of us
universally called him) to be no such thing.  Gradually and with
genuine surprise he learned from him--not by any definite {44} word of
teaching--that though it might cost him efforts painful and many to get
the better of his "special," and though athletic fame knew him not at
all, yet the possibilities of his own peculiar personal life were
wonderful and great.  For here was one who compelled men by his genuine
unaffected interest in their lives and work to be themselves genuinely
interested in them too.  A man could not know Forbes for long and not
be quickly conscious of a new sense of the value of himself, which made
him believe that his own personality and life were things of great
importance.  For "He is interested in me" is what almost every man felt
from the start of his acquaintance with Forbes.  "He is interested in
me" we felt when he passed us in the street with his quaint humorous
smile of recognition; we felt the same when we entered his room, to be
received often without a word but with the same half smile: we felt the
same again if we knew that he was watching the progress of a football
match or boat race in which we were taking part.  And "he is interested
in me"--most wonderful of all--we felt as we listened to him in the
lecture room, and were compelled to attention; for his interest in the
men in front of him, coupled with his interest in his subject, forced
us all--pass men and honours men alike--to listen to the history of
Church and Doctrine and Creeds.  It was this unfeigned interest in men,
simply as men, that in the first instance gave him the influence which
he certainly exercised over all sorts of men, including the kind of men
whom the majority of their fellows disregarded, {45} or perhaps
despised; "the babes and sucklings of the undergraduate world," to
quote another.  Such men, in whom most of us could find little to
attract us, were to him vastly interesting--interesting for their
simple human personality.

'Some men perhaps never discovered from what source his interest in
them sprang.  They knew that their views of the possibilities of their
own life were enlarged, that they believed in themselves more for
having been with him; but it was not all at once that they discovered
the reason of his interest and belief in them.  It was due to the
Christ.  With each new friendship and acquaintance which Forbes
made--and this is especially true of young men--he saw deeper into the
meaning of the Incarnation of Christ.  This was the secret of his
extraordinary interest and amazing belief in nearly every one of us.
He saw in us all, however ordinary, however commonplace--yes, however
unlovely were our lives--something somewhere of Jesus Christ.

'Then some of us were privileged to discover that what he felt for us
was something far deeper and holier than is expressed by the word
"interest."  It was love.  In every fullest sense he understood the
grand full meaning of the word.  His love for his friends was something
altogether larger and deeper and truer than is generally understood by
the word.  It was so holy a thing that it is hard to write of it.  He
knew, and the knowledge is perhaps rarer than is supposed, what in all
its fulness was the meaning of the love of one man for another.  This
is why he could enter into the spirit of Tennyson's "In {46} Memoriam"
as almost no one else could.  Tennyson's experience might have been so
entirely his own.  His love for his friends was indeed a wonderful,
sacred thing, beautiful to see.  With Henry Drummond he felt that it
was better not to live than not to love.  Love was to him a part of all
his being: for in him dwelt "the strong Son of God, Immortal Love,"
compelling him to love his fellow-men.

'It was to him a real grief that (as he often quite wrongly supposed)
one or two of those, for whom he would quite willingly have cut off his
right hand if in any way it could have advantaged them, cared not at
all for him, nor ever understood how he cared for them.  But he found
relief from the strange unsatisfied longing, engendered in him by this
belief, in intense continuous prayer for those whom he loved.  He
prayed, it is certain, as few men pray.  Prayer was to him the very
breath of life.  And his prayers, like his life, must have been utterly
selfless.  Many do not understand the amount they owe to his prayers.
Some of us may some day realise the magnitude of the debt; at present
it is not seen.  But he prayed with all the effort of his being for his
friends: eagerly, passionately, unceasingly he prayed.  "Pray for him,
believe in him; believe in him, pray for him," he was never tired of
saying to those who spoke to him of some disappointing friend.  And his
own life was a proof of the power which lay behind such prayer.

'To those reading this who did not know Forbes Robinson it may seem
that a man of such intensity of feeling and holiness of life would be
more likely {47} to frighten away than to attract to close quarters the
"average undergraduate" (whose existence he denied).  This most
certainly was not the case.  For, if there was in him something utterly
divine, he was also human as ever man could be.  He admired, like the
veriest freshman, the physical strength and powers of the athlete.  In
his presence the man of bodily attainments and strength of limb
experienced the strange sensation of being looked up to by one whom he
knew to be utterly superior to him.  But perhaps nearly all who knew
him experienced this at one time or another; for he must have been one
of the most humble men that have ever lived.  His humility was almost a
fault.  It led him to depreciate himself so far.  And yet how beautiful
a thing it was!  He did indeed count all men better than himself.

'He easily condoned offences which in some eyes, and especially the
eyes of dons, loom as a general rule heinous and large.  And the
riotous undergraduate, who cuts chapels and lectures, found that a
don--yes, and a junior dean--could be a friend of his.

'He possessed too a keen and real sense of humour.  He could, and often
did, laugh with all his heart.  He chaffed continuously his large
circle of undergraduate friends.  When he was questioning a man in the
lecture-room, you felt that all the time he was half chaffing him.  He
addressed us all in lectures as "Mr.," in a half serious, half amused
style.  "It is the only chance for some men to retain any
self-respect--to address them as 'Mr.'"--he would say, after the
discovery of some more than usual piece of {48} ignorance in his class
of "special" men; "for how can a man have any self-respect unless
addressed as 'Mr.' who does not know which are the Pastoral Epistles,
or who is the Bishop of Durham (then Bishop Westcott)?"

'He could not remember the name of his best friend on occasions, and he
would recount with real glee how he had been known successfully to
introduce two men, not knowing the name of either.  On one occasion it
fell to him to introduce to each other a low-caste West African native
and a particularly high-caste Brahmin rejoicing in a lofty sounding
polysyllabic title: of course he transposed the names--with results, so
he declared, almost fatal to himself.

'He would display with humorous pride to his athletic friends a
photograph of himself coming in second in a toboggan handicap race at
St. Moritz, which he always maintained he morally won.  He was full of
spontaneous humour.  When he greeted you, when he looked at you, when
he talked with you, it was always with a half smile on his face.  It
was his sense of humour which procured him a quick entrance into many a
man's life and heart.  It was his sense of humour which made the
hostile undergraduate, hauled for cutting lectures or chapels, forget
his hostility and the presence of the don; though at the end of the
interview he, probably for the first time, began to think whether
chapel-going had any meaning, whether a lecture, if listened to, might
conceivably profit the listener.  It was his sense of humour which made
all feel at home with him, which at the first attracted the most
unlikely men, {49} which inspired with confidence the shyest, and made
the most frivolous and thoughtless not afraid of him.  Yet while he
would laugh, and make us laugh, for as long as ever any one wished,
through all his unaffected merriment he made men feel the strange
earnestness of his life.  And all knew that, while he never obtruded on
us religious or even serious matters, he was ready at a moment's notice
to speak with us of spiritual things.  And most men felt something of
what a friend of his wrote of him after his death: "He understood of
'the things that matter' more than any man that I shall ever meet."
And many men who owe to Forbes Robinson their first serious thoughts of
and their first insight into "the things that matter" must feel the
same.  It is this fact that makes it impossible to measure the
far-reaching deep influence of his life.  For the greatness of that
life lay not in any large influence on any large body of
undergraduates, though the undergraduate life of Christ's College must,
as a whole, have felt his real influence; nor was his life great simply
because he was a scholar and a thinker.  But his life was great, and
will for all time remain great, because it was an inspiration--there is
no other word: it was, and is, a lasting, vivid, real inspiration to a
few.  What Bishop Westcott did on a large scale, Forbes Robinson did on
a small.  He inspired men--inspired them to search for and hold to the
realities of life.

'To sum up: a man admitted into the inner chamber of his life learnt
there something of these three things: (_a_) The value of his own
personality, (_b_) the meaning of love, (_c_) the power of prayer.

{50}

'_a. The value of his own personality._--A man, as he talked with
Forbes, was taught with increasing clearness the amazing possibilities
of life for any one who has tried to think what it means to say that
"this is I."  Many of us, conscious in ourselves only of very ordinary
attainments, of no very high ideals, of weaknesses of character, learnt
from our friend that in spite of all this, our own personality was
God's greatest gift to us.  We learnt from him that our own particular
commonplace life was, with all its failures and inconsistencies, a
tremendous enterprise, big with opportunities.  He taught us this by
his belief in us.  He held (again like Bishop Westcott) through
everything to the faith of "man naturally Christian." By his belief in
a man he forced him at last to believe in himself.  For he taught us
that we were, each one, two men--the real "Ego" and the false--and that
the real self must in the end have the mastery over the false, because
that real self was the Christ.

'_b. The meaning of love._--It is impossible for lesser natures to
enter into all that the word "love" meant to Forbes.  His love for his
friends was "wonderful, passing the love of women."  He loved some men
with an intensity of feeling impossible to describe.  It was almost
pain to him.  If he loved a man he loved him with a passionate love (no
weaker expression will do).  We undergraduates found our natures too
small to understand it.  Yet, as we learnt to know him more and more,
we began too to learn a little of what real love is--we began to learn
what can be the meaning and the wonder and the power {51} and the depth
of the love of man for man.  And we understood in time that his love
for us and his belief in us sprang from the same high source--from the
Christ in him, in us.

'_c. The power of prayer._--This last lesson explained the other two.
Perhaps only a few of those who knew Forbes as undergraduates learnt
it.  Yet an intimate knowledge of him must have forced almost any man
to the belief that 'more things are wrought by prayer than this world
dreams of.'  He prayed for those he loved, it is certain, for hours at
a time.  All his thoughts about some men gradually became prayers.  He
could not teach us everything that prayer meant to him; he could not
teach us to pray as he prayed.  Yet through him one or two at least of
his undergraduate friends saw a little further into the eternal mystery
of prayer.  And men must sometimes--with all reverence be it said--have
experienced in his presence the same kind of a feeling of some great
unseen influence at work as that which the disciples must have
experienced in the presence of Christ after He, apart and alone, had
watched through the night with God in prayer.  For many an hour of his
life did Forbes spend like that, striving with God for those he loved.
He believed--he knew (this was his own testimony)--that he could in
this way bring to bear upon a man's life more real effective influence
than by any word of direct personal teaching or advice.  So did he
prove once more that the man of power in the spiritual world is the man
of prayer.

'These are the great lessons of Forbes Robinson's {52} life--lessons
which many a careless undergraduate learnt in a greater or less degree,
and, learning, caught from the teacher something of his passion for
life and love and prayer, for service of God and man.

'There must be many who will not soon forget the lessons; there must be
many in whose lives the influence and inspiration of that saintly life
will be for ever a power making for holiness and high ideals of living;
there are, it is certain, very many who will thank God continually that
they were, in their undergraduate days, allowed to call Forbes Robinson
friend.

'How many of us, when we heard with a shock of almost horror that he
had passed from us, conjured up before us the picture we shall never
see again--the picture of our friend sitting any evening at his table
in Darwin's historic rooms at Christ's, dimly lighted with candles!  We
shall remember long the quick look up at our entrance, the half-smile
on his face, the welcome of a man's love in his eyes, however busy and
tired he might be.  Then, though it cost him later hours out of bed,
the invitation to sit down, followed quickly by an indignant
remonstrance as we ousted his cat from the best arm-chair.  And then
the talk that followed: sometimes almost trivial; sometimes (but only
if we wished it) deeply serious; sometimes--and these occasions were
precious--a kind of soliloquy on his part, as he spoke of God, of the
realities of life, of love, of prayer.  Then, with still the same
half-smile, he would bid us "Good night," and watch us out of the room
with the same look of love in his eyes with which he welcomed us, {53}
as he turned back to his table to work and think and pray far into the
night.

'So many a one of us has left him again and again, to return to the
merry, careless, selfish undergraduate world a nobler, better man.  And
now he has passed from us--"dead ere his prime" we should say, did we
not understand that somewhere the faithful, hopeful, loving soul has
better work to do.  He is, as he ever was, "in Christ."  He lives.  His
life remains here and beyond.  His faith in God, in prayer; his hope
for every man; his utterly wonderful, amazing love,--they still remain.
For _nuni menei_ (nothing can rob us of the word) _pistis, elpis,
agape, ta tria tauta; meizpon de touton he agape_.'