[Illustration: A GENERAL VIEW OF QUEBEC.--BY RICH. SHORT. AFTER SIEGE OF
1759]



  Journal of
  An American Prisoner
  At Fort Malden and
  Quebec in the War of
  1812

Edited by

G. M. Fairchild, jr.

Author of

"From My Quebec Scrap Book," "Gleanings from Quebec," "A Ridiculous
Courting," "A Winter Carnival," etc.

[Illustration]

          Privately Printed by
          Frank Carrel, Limited, Quebec
          1909




          200 Copies Privately Printed.
          Copy No. 71

          =Registered= _by_ G. M. FAIRCHILD, JR., _in the
          Office of the Minister of Agriculture in
          conformity with the Law passed by the Parliament
          of Canada, in the year 1906._

          Quebec, 1909:--The Daily Telegraph Printing Co.




Explanatory Note


_The book containing this journal is an ordinary pocket memorandum or
account book measuring 6 x 4¼ inches and covered with split calf. The
journal opens the day of the author's capture, and closes on the day he
receives orders at Quebec to prepare to leave for Boston. The author's
name is nowhere to be found in the book, and several pages at the
beginning have been cut out, evidently by the original owner. The
journal was found among the papers of the late J. Gradden, a benevolent
merchant of Quebec who rendered considerable aid to the American
prisoners of war confined there on prison ships. The journal was no
doubt presented to Mr. Gradden by its author as a return for kindnesses.
Mr. Gradden's son, the late Chas. Gradden of Kilmarnock, gave it to Sir
James M. LeMoine, the venerable Historian of Quebec, who in turn
presented it to me with the understanding that I would edit and print
it._

_Although the author's name is not attached to the journal it bears
unmistakable evidence of having been written by Surgeon's Mate James
Reynolds who was deputed by Surgeon General Edwards of Gen. Hull's army
to the charge of the sick on the two vessels that were dispatched from
Maumee to Detroit, but which were captured at Fort Malden (Amherstburg)
by the British. Lossing, in his "Pictorial Field Book of the war of
1812" says that the schooner conveying the sick in charge of Reynolds
escaped and reached Detroit, and that the Dr. Reynolds of this
expedition was killed at the attack on Detroit by a cannon ball. There
is a mistake somewhere as the author of this journal says that HE was in
charge of the Cuyahoga conveying the sick, and that the accompanying
schooner carried the stores, and that both vessels were captured at
Malden. Could it be that there were two Reynolds, one the Surgeon's Mate
and the other the Dr. Reynolds that Lossing refers to as having been
killed, and hence the confusion? I am inclined to this view in the
absence of convincing proof to the contrary. The journal itself is
strongly corroborative of my contention as the weight of evidence is
with the writer whose story is everywhere the simple straightforward one
of the daily chronicler of the events that came under his observation.
It is a very human document and not without historical value. It will
take its place in the Archives of the war of 1812 on the Frontiers._

                                             G. M. FAIRCHILD, JR.,
                                                          _Editor_.

NOTE.--_On a blank page in the book I find written in pencil in the
author's handwriting, Sergt. Ord. Reed, Dougherty, Jowlen, Madison,
Printiss, Button, Noble--Emetic (The author had evidently dosed them
all)._




Historical Note


_Anticipating the formal declaration of war President Madison of the
United States during the winter of 1811-12 commissioned Gov. Wm. Hull of
the Territory of Michigan as a Brigadier General to command the Ohio and
Michigan troops at Detroit, with the understanding that immediately upon
the announcement of war he was to invade all that part of Canada
contiguous to Detroit. On June 24th, 1812, Gen. Hull with several
thousand troops had arrived at Fort Findlay. Here he received despatches
from Washington to hasten his forces to Detroit and there await further
orders. When the troops arrived at the navigable waters on the Maumee
(or Miami) Hull determined to relieve his tired men of as much baggage
as possible by dispatching it by water. Accordingly a considerable
portion of the stores and intrenching tools, Hull's and his staff's
personal baggage, and the trunk containing Hull's instructions and the
muster rolls of the army together with other valuable papers--also three
officers' wives, Lt. Goodwin, Lieut. Dent with thirty soldiers were
transferred to the Cuyahoga packet and an auxiliary schooner. Both
reached Maumee Bay where Toledo now stands on the evening of July 1st.
On the morning of the 2nd of July the Cuyahoga and the schooner entered
the Detroit River and while sailing past Fort Malden (Amherstburg) the
British armed vessel Hunter went alongside of the Cuyahoga, and vessel
and cargo became a prize, while the crew, troops and passengers were
declared prisoners of war. Lossing says that the auxiliary schooner
bearing the invalids, being behind the Cuyahoga, escaped and reached
Detroit next day. The author of the journal says that this auxiliary
vessel which contained only the stores was also captured later in the
day and brought in under the guns of Fort Malden. Col. St. George, the
commander at Fort Malden, had received the news of the declaration of
war on the 30th of June, while Gen. Hull only received it on the 2nd of
July when he immediately despatched an officer to the mouth of the
Raisen to intercept the two vessels, but he arrived too late. In the
capture of these two vessels valuable stores and yet more valuable
information fell into the hands of the British. The journal of the
Surgeon's Mate begins July 1st and some of the events that lead to the
final surrender of Detroit and the forces under Gen. Hull's command are
recorded in the journal from such observations as were possible to a
prisoner on a vessel, and from stray information. The journey from
Malden to Quebec is recounted and the subsequent imprisonment there on a
ship in the harbor until he with others were sent to Boston for
exchange._




Journal of an American Prisoner

at Fort Malden and Quebec in the War of 1812


July 1st (1812).--After a long and tedious march I with the sick, went
on board the Caryaorgo[1] packet at Maume, a little town on the Maume
River[2]. Doctor Edwards Surgeon General of the North Wertern Army gave
me charge of the Hospital stores and sick to go by water to Detroit. We
sailed about 4 p.m. and had a gentle breeze the afternoon. At sunset the
wind died away and we ancored for the night[3] and about 4 o'clock in
the morning the wind rose and we weighed ancor and with a fair wind
entered Lake Erie all in to good spirits to think we should be at
Detroit by 3 o'clock in the afternoon. To our surprise just as we were
about to enter Detroit River we saw a boat that hailed us and ordered
the Captain to lower his sails[4]. Our arms were all in the hole (hold)
and the men sick. I thought it improper to make any resistance as I had
not been informed that war was declared[5] and had not had orders from
the Genl. to make any resistence. Lt. Goodwin and 2nd Master Beatt and
Mr. Dent paymaster to the 3rd Regt. Ohio Vlts. and three ladies and two
soldiers wifes making in the whole forty-five in number and not more
than six well persons among them it must have been imprudent in the
highest degree to have attempted to resisted a boat of eight well armed
men and a Capt., and another of 5 men who demanded us as prisoners of
war and we were nearly under the cover of the guns at Ft. Malden, soever
we gave ourselves up and was taken into Malden and our property was all
stored in the hole (hold) and hatches nailed immediately and we were
taken alongside a prison ship. The next morning about X o'clock our
Schooner was[6] taken and all our effects even to a blanket. The Doctor
came on board to see some of the sick and I asked him for knapsacks and
blankets for the men which were returned immediately and the cloths of
the officers and men on board.

3rd.--The day past with Mallone holey (wholly) the men sick and despond,
nothing pleasing appeard.

4th.--We were surrounded with Savages singing and dancing their war
dances through the town[7]. O heavens what a glory Sun for independence
can any person discribe the feeling of a free born subject to see the
Savages dancing their war dance and hooting about the town and to be
confined when we knew they were preparing (to) murder our fellow
creatures and not only the soldiers but the helpless women and children.
These horrible and dispicable seens closed the day and Sol returned to
his rest.

5th.--Some gentlemen[8] from our (side) came from Detroit with a flag of
truce and brought news that our army had arrived their safe and that the
men were in tolerable health and spirits but we could not see them
without a British being present. We sent some papers to Detroit after
having them examined (by) an officer (of) the Part we would expect for
prisoners[9].

6th.--We were provided with tolerable rations, and nothing happened
through the day.

7th.--Nothing especial happened through the day, but all the (men) were
making preparations for war.

9th.--Know news for prisoners.

X.--Nothing extra happened in the course of the day.

10th.--We were moved below town. Dr. Davis attends on our sick daily.
The weather verry warm and the men suffer much from the heat.

11th.--We had a very warm day in the afternoon. The officers and Indians
were verry busy, however we heard nothing[10]

12th.--Sunday. The American troops crossed the river into Sandwich and
divested the people of their arms and sent them to their farms.

13th.--Monday. Pleasant and cool. Nothing extra happened.

14th.--Tuesday. Nothing worthy of notice.

15th.--Wensday, healthy weather. People was moving very much in town and
considerable blustor.

16th.--Thursday. Pleasant and cool. Capt. Brown[11] came to town with a
flag of truce on and (what) express news we knew not, but could judge by
the movements. Two topsail vessels were sent out of the river and the
people were moving out of the town at night.

17th.--Friday. The Indians[12] were flocking into town all the morning
armed and painted black. A lousifer with their arms and the town was in
an uproar. It appeared by ten o'clock that almost every person had left
the town. About five o'clock the Savages began to return into town
hollowing and barekin and firing all around our vessell, and to crown
the whole they had one of our men's scalp stretched on a pole as they
past by us to aggrevate us in a helpless state and wound the feelings of
prisoners. These Indians[13] were headed by a british subject. Is it
possible that their can be so much corruption in the British Government.
They are void of feelings and in fact are as bad as the savages
themselves for they carry on their intrigues under the pretence that
they cannot govern the Indians, and in fact they themselves are
personally at their head and give them their instructions. God deliver
me from monarch's gag laws and all their subjects[14] for free I was
born and free I'll die or by the sword shall we live like bruts and
worse, glory in each other's fall and more than that confine our fellow
creatures and tantalize them by the blood of our fellow mortals. What
will man do when left to himself. But thanks be to God this (is) about
the last act of bravery you can show you are on your last legs. The
crown will loose another jewil and savage yell dispersed and harmony
fill the land. The eagle here shall build her nest and every subject
shall be at peice[15].

18th.--Pleasant. All things peceable through (the) day. About X o'clock
in the evening their was an alarm[16] and the prisoners, sick and well,
were all ordered in to the hole (hold) together and what a disagreeable
(night) it was to have forty men half sick all stowed together and some
had to stand all night.

19th.--Sunday. Warm and muggy weather. Their was considerable movement,
the Indians again past armed and about 2 p.m. we heard firing towards
Sandwich[17]. The Savages returned about dark in not so good spirits as
usual and this led us to suppose their success had not been so good as
they could wish. About 8 in the evening their came a party (of) Savages
by and fired several times near us and struck up their war hoop.

20th.--Monday. To day the Indians past by armed as usual, they returned
about sunset some verry much fatigued. We were informed that the Indians
and some of the militia had a Scirmish with some of our troops
yesterday.

21st.--Tuesday. Cloudy and rain. Nothing extra occurred.

22nd.--Wednesday. Everything still. Nothing extra occurred.

23rd.--Thursday. Cold for the season and some rain.

24th.--Friday[18]. Cold and pleasant for the season. I was ordered to
the King's Stores in order to give information about the hospital
stores. Everything peciable.

25th.--Saterday. Pleasant. Nothing worth mentioning through the day. The
Indians went out as usual and returned in the evening and are now
partickular morn (ful).

26th.--Sunday. Nothing extraordinary.

27th.--Monday. We had three prisoners brought on board our vessel one of
which was from our army. We rec'd him with joy, and he thought the army
would be down in a week.

28th.--Tuesday. Pleasant. Nothing happened extra through the day. All
past peceable.

29th.--Wensday. The Indians killed a man and his servants and took a
boat loaded with goods and two bbls whiskey, got drunk and raised the
divil all knight.

30th.--Thursday. Pleasant. Nothing extra.


31st.--Friday. Cloudy and rainy. The officers[19] were ordered on board
the Lady Provost to go to Niagary. Nothing further happened through the
day.

August 1st.--Saterday. Pleasant. Nothing worth recording.

2nd.--Sunday. Cloudy. Nothing extra, the Indians commence (to cross to)
Brownstown with Britishs and officers.

3rd.--Monday[20]. Pleasant. The soldiers and Indians crossed to Brown's
town twelves boats loaded. I should judge about 400 in numbers. I cannot
tell their business.

4th.--Tuesday. Pleasant. The troops and Indians crossed the river as
yestirday and returned about eight o'clock in the evening.

5th.--Wensday[21]. Plesent. The Indians crossed the river about 11
o'clock and the people appeared very much allarmed. A party of them
returned about sunset but the boats had few in them. Their was six guns
fired about 11 o'clock at Browns Town.

6th.--Thursday. Pleasant. Nothing in particular.

7th.--Friday. Pleasant. Capt. Olds and Ensign Elison came on board and
informed us that two hundred militia ran from forty Indians and several
of our men was taken. God save the ignorant for they cannot take care of
themselves.

8th.--Saterday. Pleasant. The Schooner or brig R1^o from Fort Erie with
about fifty or sixty[22]. Nothing further worth recording.

No news from the army.

9th.--Sunday[23]. The little brig. Hunter ret'd this morning from Fort
Erie. The people seemed to be in considerable motion about tewlve
o'clock and we heard about sunset that their was an engagement on the
other side of the river. Considerable motion in the evening.

10th.--Monday. Rainy in the morning. We herd in the morning that they
had a hard battle at Browns Town and the Americans mentained their
ground. Several killed and wounded on both sides. We were likewise
informed that they intended to have another battle this day[24].

11th.--Continued showers of rain. About 5 o'clock we herd a continual
firing near Browns Town which continued about one hour and a half and
from the nois the American army drove the Indians and British[25]. The
Schooner Chipoway came from Lk. Erie with one company of red coats.

12th.--Monday. No rain. A little cloudy. The British moved their
army--moved from B (Browns) Town and it appeared that the Indians had
all come to this town and left Browns Town.

13th.--Thursday[26]. Pleasant. The people had all left the town. Not
much moving until evening. The Indians began their war dance and
commenced firing about daily daun and a bot (boat) entered the river
about fifty in number and the D. dis't. C. A. ball that evening herd
both by the Indians and white people.

14th.--Friday[27]. Pleasant. After (noon) made the detail for the 13th.
Their was five boats came up loaded with soldiers, and five more this
morning loaded with from 12 to 20 men in each making in the whole about
170 men. Another boat arrived about eleven o'clock--20 men in it, and
the new soldiers all appeared to leave the town about sunset.

15th.--Saterday. Foggy. The drums beat to arms about sunrise and the
troops were all in motion or at least all that were left. The citizens
all entered boats for Detroit, as I am told. The Indians went by in
boats. By land about 300. About sunset the Cannon began to roar at
Sandwich[28].

16th.--Sunday. Pleasant weather but unpleasant news we herd about noon
that Hull had given up Detroit and the whole Territory Mitchigan. The
Indians began to return about sunset well mounted and some with horses
and chais. Who can express the feelings of a person who knows that Hull
had men enough to have this place three times and gave up his post.
Shame to him, shame to his country, shame to the world. When Hull first
came to Detroit the 4th U. S. Regt. would have taken Malden and he with
his great generalship has lost about 200 men and his Territory[29].

Can he be forgiven when he had command of an army of about 2500 men
besides the Regulars and Militia of his Territory and given up to about
400 regular troops and Militia and about 700 Indians.

17th.--Monday. Clouday. The news of yesterday was confirmed. The Indians
were riding our horses and hollowing and shouting the whole day.

18th.--The Provo Marshal[30] came on board and wanted a list of the
Regular Troops, and told us that the Regular Troops[31] were prisoners
of war and the militia had liberty to go home. We were taken from the
Schooner Thames and put into a little Schooner but every attention paid
us that was possible. In the evening we were ordered on board the
Elinor. Their was a detachment of prisoners joined us.

19th.--Wensday. Pleasant. I got provisions and medicines on board. The
other vessels came from Detroit. Nothing extraordinary through the day.

20th.--Thursday. Rainy. Unpleasant on board. The militia left the river.

21st.--Friday. We drifted out of the river into the Lake. Capt. Brown
and Ensign Phillips came on board.

22nd.--Saterday. Clouday but no rain. We sailed to the Three Sisters and
lay to for the Sharlott[32], and about 12 o'clock we came to ancor.

23rd.--Sunday. Pleasant and warm. No wind. Several sick on bord but none
dangerous. The wounded are in a good way. About sunset the wind rose and
we weighed ancor.

24th.--Monday. Pleasant. Fair wind. We made good headway. Nothing extra.

25th.--Tuesday. Pleasant. Good wind.

26th.--Wensday. Pleasant. We arrived at Fort Niagary[33] and was put on
shore where we found wagons ready for the transportation of our baggage
and about 12 o'clock we proceeded on our way to Chippawa where we stayed
the night.

27th.--Thursday. Pleasant. We proceeded on our march from Chippawa to
Fort George[34]. We pased through Queenstown and opposite to the town
was two or three hundred American Troops was stationed. We past by
Niagary Falls. We arrived at Fort George about 5 o'clock p.m. and stayed
in the river all night and we are very much crowded.

28th.--Friday. Pleasant. We had a fair wind for King's Town (Kingston)
which was our next place of destination. We weighed ancor about 2
o'clock and had pleasant sail through the day and night.

29th.--Saterday.--Pleasant. We hove in sight of King's Town (Kingston)
about 7 o'clock a.m. Cast ancor about 9 o'clock and was landed on an
Island near Kingston. About 5 p.m. I was ordered to take charge of the
sick and wounded.

30th.--Sunday. Pleasant but cool for the season. The sick were visited
by the Doctor about eleven o'clock. Three of the sick were taken to
Kingston hospital, the other 40 sick and wounded were left in my charge.

31st.--Monday. Pleasant. A detachment of 400 men arrived here from
Montreal for Detroit. 2 men deserted last evening. The sick are better.
The officers treat us very kindly and we are well provided for for
people in our situation.

Sept. 1st.--Tuesday. Pleasant. We left Kingston[35] about 4 o'clock p.m.
for Montreal. We went 18 miles in the evening.

2nd.--Wensday. Pleasant. We started nearly with the sun and past the
Thousand Islands and our first stop Elizabeth Town on the St. Lawrence
opposite. After staying about half an hour we proceeded down the river.
Very good wind and past several handsome towns on each side of the
river. The Sun above an hour high we past about five hundred of our
troops stationed on the bank of the river at Sagrota and stopped at
Johns Town.

3rd.--Thursday. Pleasant. We started nearly with the sun and stopped
about 9 o'clock about half an hour. Proceeded to Cornwall where we
stayed through the knight. We past several fine towns on both sides of
the river. Hamleton is a fine town on the American side.

4th.--Friday. Clouday and cold--east wind. We stayed at Cornwall[36] all
this day as we had a head wind. The men remained in the gaol yard and
fought several times and in fact played hell all day.

5th.--Saturday. Pleasant, head wind, however we proceeded on our journey
and have about thirty sick. We stayed at Point Burdet.

6th.--Sunday. Pleasant. We started about 6 o'clcok and stopped at
Lachein and the well men were marched to Montreal by land. The sick went
in boats by water where we arrived about 7 in the evening and was
marched to the Garrison[37].

7th.--Monday. Pleasant. We stayed at the Garrison through the day and
four of the sick sent to the King's Hospital which reduced my number to
about 30.

8th.--Tuesday. Pleasant. We left Montreal[38] about 10 A.M. and
descended the St. Lawrence. We had a pleasant prospect on both sides of
the river handsome meadows and fine farms and several handsome towns. We
stopped at Sorril (Sorel) and were marched from the boats to a room
where we were all put into a room together and locked up and not a man
allowed to get a drink of water nor allowed to leave the room on any
occasion. The men were obliged to comply with natures requests in the
room where we all lay, and we suffered verry much all knight.

9th.--Pleasant. The British officers that came with us when informed of
our treatment was very much offended and told the officers of the 100th.
regiment. We started about 9 o'clock A.M. with a fair wind and arrived
late at St. Francis and stopped at Three Rivers about two hours and then
went about two miles down the river and camped for the knight.

10th.--Thursday. Pleasant. Head winds we started the sun about one hour
high. and spent the day pretty much in parading the boats. We stopped
at the Three Sisters for the night.

11th.--Friday[39]. Pleasant. We stayed for the tide to come in. Started
about ten o'clock and descended the river rapidly with the tide and
arrlved at Quebec about sunset and was put on bord one of the transports
for the night.

12th.--Saturday. Cloudy and rainy in the afternoon. All in confusion,
the prisoners very troublesome, however I hope this is not for life.

13th.--Sunday. Clouday. The proceedings verry much as yesterday, our
officers in town and do not visit us, the reason why I know not why. We
are guarded this day. Parroled prisoners from the States. Nothing extra.

14th.--Monday. Clouday. Our rations were bread that would crawl with
worms, in fact our fare is hard and unwholesome, half the men sick with
the diarrie. No news of any better times.

15th.--Tuesday. Pleasant. I gave five men emetic and 3 carthartic. Our
provisions better than yesterday. No news, the men are something better.

16th.--Wensday. Pleasant. Our sick were taken from our vessel. We had
several good things for our vituals, rice, oatmeal and this plenty. This
is called banyan day. The surgeon came on board our vessel and ordered
men and me on bord the brig 160 transport.

17th.--Thursday. Pleasant. I proceeded to give the men medicine and gave
them gruel and they appeared verry much better at night. We had twelve
women on board and some worse than the devil--they quarreled like cats
and dogs and in fact I had to make use of rash (harsh) means in order
for to live.

18th.--Friday. Pleasant. The men generally better with one or two
exceptions. The women in better nature than yesterday. Nothing extra
happened through the day.

19th.--Saterday. Pleasant, nothing particular through the day.

20th.--Sunday. Cold and windy. The men not so well.

21st.--Monday. Pleasant. The men no better and no Doct. to see them and
no medicine, no phisition attended us, the time dubious and the men down
hearted--not verry good accommodation.

22nd.--Tuesday. Clouday and some rain in the morning. Many of the men
verry low, but verry little refreshment for the sick. Thirteen more sick
came on board which augmented the sick to 54.

23rd.--Wensday. Pleasant. The men that came on board yesterday are
better after being phisiced. Nothing new.

24th.--Thursday. Clouday. The men generally better 17 men were sent from
our ship to those where the main Regt. lay. Nothing further worth
attention.

25th.--Friday. Pleasant. Two sick men sent on board our ship which made
our number 40. James Duffer died at 4 o'clock p.m. with Hectic fever.
Many of the men are very low. Bellew and Collins were sent to our ship
which augments our number to 42 men.

26th.--Saterday. Clouday. McDuff[40] was buried at ten o'clock. Sergt.
Traig and Corp. Wentworth, McIntosh went on shore to attend the funeril.
He was decently intered. The English people here are decent, friendlay
and humane

27th.--Sunday. Pleasant. The men are something better. Nothing happened
through the day.

28th.--Monday.[41] Pleasant but cold for the season. The men better, the
women cross etc. The Surgeon came on bord.

29th.---Tuesday. Nothing worth recording.

30th.--Wensday. Pleasant. The Doct. came on bord. Nothing other worth
recording. Good weather but cold for the season.

Oct. 1st.--Thursday. Pleasant. Sergt. Maj. Huggins and two men all sick
came on bord our vessel and I sent (away) three well men in their room
(place). The three men that came on bord were verry sick.

2nd.--Friday. Clouday. The men something better. The Surgeon did not
call to see us.

3rd.--Saturday. Clouday and rainy. Corp. Perries child died this
morning about day brake and was buried (at) 4 o'clock p.m. Mrs. Andrews
has been in travail ever since early this morning.

4th.--Sunday. Rainy. Mrs. Andrews was delivered of a fine boy after 24
hours labor. The men not much better.

5th.--Monday. Clouday. I visited all the prison ships in the harbor and
took 4 men on bord our vessel. The sick verry low

6th.--Tuesday. Cold. Sergt. Stoner's child died this morning. The men
verry low, many of them. For the first time I had to lay violent hands
on Mrs. Critchet and the first time I ever saw her made to hold her
tongue. Women deprived of decency are the damdest creatures that ever
were borned.

7th.--Wensday. Could and squalws of snow. The guard came to bury Sergt.
Stoner's child. I visited all the prison ships in the Harbor and gave
medicine to the sick. We had some sugar, rice, and barley sent for the
sick and some other refreshments was sent on bord.

8th.--Thursday. Cold and rain. They brought 7 men sick from 4 to 6
(o'clock) and we returned five. About nothing further.

9th.--Friday. Cold for the season. Corp. Berries child died about three
o'clock this morning. The men are something better. I visited all the
prison ships in the harbor. Corp. Perries child was buried this
afternoon. Three men came from No. 85--three returned to No. 85 and
three to 406. (Transports and prison ships).

10th.--Saterday. Clouday. Three men that was sent to No. 406 came on
bord this morning and we returned them immediately. We drawed fresh
bread for the first time. Nothing further.

11th.--Sunday. Clouday and cold. I visited all the prison ships in the
harbor. The women were all ordered from our ship, accordingly they all
went, but four who had sick children and one lately layed in (confined).
We had snow this evening and rain. We had a fresh surply of stores.

12th.--Monday. Clouday and cold. The sail covered with snow. Joseph
Quil's child died at 12 o'clock this morning and Saml. Lewis died at
half past 12 o'clock. The Surgeon came on bord at 9 o'clock. The men
something better. I took from Morgan his scrotum and left the testicles
entirely naked.

13th.--Violent storm of snow but not cold. The people on bord better
except Ingalls and McMaster. We had 3 men from 406 and returned two.

14th.--Wensday. The storm continues. Wires child died at -- o'clock.
Four men received and 6 discharged. Ingals child died at 4 o'clock this
afternoon. The times are serious and the lessons striking.

15th.--Thursday. Clouday and warm. John McMaster died at half past three
o'clock this morning. Henry Pluck died at half past 10 o'clock this
evening.

16th.--Friday. Cold and clouday. A Surgeon came on bord. A Mister
(minister) of the Church of England came on board and baptised Ingalls.

17th.--Saterday. Clouday. We have five sick men from No. 406. Discharged
two, one from 35, and one sent to 35. Two women sent to 71. Pluck buried
this forenoon.

18th.--Sunday. Clouday. I received hospital bedding and cloths (clothes)
the men in genl. better except Ingals.

19th.--Monday. Pleasant. Amos Ingals died at 5 o'clock this morning. 6
men came from 406 and 4 returned. The men verry sick many of them, 44 in
our number of sick. I had a reprimand from one of the B. (British) Os.
(Officers).

20th.--Tuesday. Pleasant. Ingals buried. I gave the men some cloths
(clothes) and they appear better generally.

21st.--Wensday. Pleasant. Nothing particular happened through the day.
The Surgeon did not visit us.

22nd.--Thursday. Pleasant and cold. Dennis Hagerman died at 2 o'clock
this morning. The Surgeon came on bord at 10 o'clock. We rec'd five sick
men--none discharged.

23rd.--Friday. Clouday. We this day herd that we were destined for
Boston--the men very much revived.

24th.--Saturday. Clouday. The Surgeon came on bord, and Capt. Baker of
our service gave me an order to make a minute of what would be necessary
for the sick on our passage to Boston.

25th.--Sunday. Clouday. I and the sick were ordered on bord the 406. The
men paid----_Here the diary abruptly ends._



          _The "Quebec Mercury" of 29th Oct. 1812 contains
          the following:_

          _"The prisoners taken at Detroit and brought down
          to Quebec are on the point of embarking for Boston
          for the purpose of being exchanged. Five cannon
          are now lying in the Chateau Court taken at
          Detroit."_

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Cuyahoga. Cayahogo according to Kingsford._

[2] _Maumee or Miami River of the Lakes to distinguish it from two
others of the same name._

[3] _Maumee Bay where Toledo now stands._

[4] _Lossing says that Reynolds and his party of sick sailed from the
Maumee in an accompanying sloop and that the latter reached Detroit in
safety. This is evidently a mistake. The sloop, or as Reynolds calls it
schooner was also captured and it was this schooner that contained the
stores._

[5] _News of the declaration of war had been received by Col. St. George
in command at Fort Malden as early as June 30th, 1812._

[6] _This schooner contained Gen. Hull's despatch box and a great
quantity of stores for his army. The despatches put the English in
possession of valuable information as to Hull's forces, etc._

[7] _Amherstburg near which stood Fort Malden._

[8] _On the morning of the 6th Col. Cass was sent to Malden with a flag
of truce to demand the baggage and prisoners taken from the schooner.
The demand was unheeded and he returned to camp with Capt. Burbanks of
the British Army._ M'AFEE.

[9] _Mr. Reynolds wrote by this means and this may have led to the
belief that he and his party of invalid soldiers had reached Detroit in
safety on the schooner._

[10] _On the 12th Hull crossed his army to Sandwich of which he took
possession. The few British troops stationed here retired to Fort
Malden. Col. Miller of the American army in a letter to his wife says:
"As we were crossing the river we saw two British officers ride up very
fast opposite where we intended landing, but they went back faster than
they came. They were Col. St. George, commanding officer at Malden, and
one of his Captains."_

[11] _Probably sent by Gen. Hull to announce to Col. St. George of his
(Gen. Hull's) intention to attack Fort Malden and to advise the removal
from the town of the non-combatants._

[12] _There were frequent and small engagements between the American
outposts and the Indians on the British side. Scalping the dead was
practised by both Indian and the frontiers men on both sides._

[13] _The Indians were almost invariably commanded or led by their own
chiefs, but oft'times under the direction of an English officer._

[14] _On the 16th Col. Cass of the American Army with a force of about
280 men pushed forward to the Ta-ron-tee or Riviere aux Canards about
four miles above Malden and engaged the British outpost guarding the
bridge across the river. The British and Indians fled and were pursued
by the Americans. Night put an end to the engagement and the Americans
returned to the bridge. Hull however retired the force to Sandwich as he
said the position was untenable with so small a force._

[15] _The author somewhat mixes himself in his rhapsody._

[16] _On the 18th Capt. Snelling of the American Army and a small
detachment left Sandwich on a reconnoitring expedition towards Malden._

[17] _On the 18th July Gen. Hull issued an order for a general movement
on Fort Malden. Col. McArthur with a detachment of his regiment joined
Capt. Snelling on the 19th at Petite Cote about a mile above the Aux
Canards Bridge. A general skirmish ensued with the Indians under command
of Tecumseh and McArthur was compelled to fall back. He sent for
reinforcements and Col. Cass hastened to his aid with a six pounder, but
after another short engagement with the Indians and the English supports
that had been hastened to their assistance the American forces returned
to Sandwich._

[18] _For some reason or other Reynolds makes no mention here of the
engagement of the 24th, when Major Denny and a considerable force of
Americans were engaged with some Indians and retreated in considerable
confusion pursued by the Indians. Denny lost six killed and two wounded.
This was the first blood shed in the war._

[19] _The captive American officers are probably meant._

[20] _Col. Proctor who now commanded at Amherstburg or Malden detached
the Indians under Tecumseh across the Detroit River to intercept a
convoy that Major VanHorne and a force of Americans had been sent to
safely conduct within the American lines._

[21] _On this day the Indians under Tecumseh badly defeated Major
VanHorne's force of Americans near Brownstown and the latter retreated
in great disorder. The mail fell into the hands of the British and
revealed the mutinous spirit in Hull's army. In this engagement
seventeen of the Americans were killed and eight wounded._

[22] _Reinforcements of the 41st Regt. under Lt. Bullock._

[23] _The battle of Maguaga where Col. Miller in command of a force of
Americans defeated the British and Indians and drove them to their boats
whence they returned to Malden. The advantages of this victory were not
followed up for the relief of Brush on his way to Detroit with a convoy
of supplies for Hull's army._

[24] _Skirmishing occurred for several days after the main engagement of
the 10th._

[25] _Major Muir and his subaltern Sutherland of the British forces were
both wounded. The losses and casualties on the American side were very
heavy._

[26] _Gen. Brock joined Col. Proctor at Malden (Amherstburg) on the
night of the 13th with three hundred militia and a few regulars._

[27] _Gen. Brock marched that day with the forces under his command and
took possession of Sandwich which had been abandoned by the Americans._

[28] _About 4 o'clock on the afternoon of the 15th, a general
cannonading began between the British at Sandwich and the Americans at
Detroit. Considerable damage was done by the British artillery and
several American officers were killed. Two guns on the British side were
silenced by the American artillerists._

[29] _During the night the British forces crossed to the Detroit side of
the river and prepared for an assault on the town. The guns at Sandwich
opening a heavy cannonading and their range was so accurate that many
Americans were slain. Dr. Reynolds who it is supposed accompanied Hull's
invalids from the Maumee to Detroit was instantly killed. Gen. Hull
early decided to capitulate._

[30] _By the terms of the surrender the American Militia were paroled
and allowed to return to their homes, but the regulars were declared to
be prisoners of war and were sent on board the prison ships._

[31] _Mostly the 4th Regt. of Regulars._

[32] _The Queen Charlotte and Hunter were also detailed to convey some
of the prisoners of war including Gen. Hull and other officers, to Fort
Erie opposite Buffalo._

[33] _The writer evidently means Fort Erie at the entrance to the
Niagara River._

[34] _Fort George directly opposite Fort Niagara which was on American
territory and garrisoned by American troops._

[35] _The British escort from Kingston was commanded by Major Heathcote
of the Nova Scotia Regt._

[36] _From Cornwall to Lachine the British escort was in command of
Captain Gray of the Quarter Master General's Dept. From Lachine to
Montreal Captains Richardson and Ogilvie with three militia companies,
and a company of the 8th Regt. commanded by Capt. Blackmore formed an
escort._

[37] _The line of march in Montreal was as follows:_

         _1st. The 8th Regt. Band.
          2nd. The first escort division.
          3rd. Gen. Hull and Capt. Gray in a carriage.
          4th. The American Officers.
          5th. The non-coms. and soldiers.
          6th. The second escort division._

[38] _Gen. Hull was paroled at Montreal with 8 other officers and left
the city for the United States._

[39] _The Officers and regular troops of the American Army taken at
Detroit and which have no permission to return on their parole arrived
at Anse des Meres Friday afternoon escorted by a detachment of the Regt.
of Glengary of Three Rivers. The prisoners, with the exception of the
officers were immediately embarked in boats for the transports. The
officers were lodged in the city for the night and the following day
were conducted to Charlesbourg where they will be domiciled on
parole._--QUEBEC GAZETTE

_The Quebec Mercury of Sept. 15th says: The commissioned officers were
liberated on their parole. They passed Saturday morning at the Union
Hotel where they were the gazing stock of the multitude, whilst they in
no way abashed presented a bold front to the public stare, puffed the
smoke of their cigars into the faces of such as approached too near.
About 2 o'clock they set off by stage with four horses for Charlesbourg
the destined place of their residence._

[40] _The man previously referred to as Duffer._

[41]

_Commisary General's Office._
                                        _Quebec 28 Sept. 1812._

_Wanted for the American prisoners of war comfortable warm clothing
consisting of the following articles viz: Jackets, shirts, trousers,
stockings mockessons or shoes--also 2000 lbs of soap. They will require
to be delivered immediately._