Again, rent became due in stated amounts and at stated times. This want
was therefore not unforeseen, and, looked at in one aspect, rent was due
daily or weekly, though collected at longer intervals. The principle
having been laid down that no debt should be incurred, it was considered
as implying that the amount due for rent should be put aside daily, or
at least weekly, even though not then payable. This rule was henceforth
adopted, with this understanding, that money thus laid aside was sacred
to that end, and not to be drawn upon, even temporarily, for any other.

Notwithstanding such conscientiousness and consistency the trial of
faith and patience continued. Money came in only in small sums, and
barely enough with rigid economy to meet each day's wants. The outlook
was often most dark and the prospect most threatening; but _no real need
ever failed to be supplied:_ and so praise was continually mingled with
prayer, the incense of thanksgiving making fragrant the flame of
supplication. God's interposing power and love could not be doubted, and
in fact made the more impression as unquestionable facts, because help
came so frequently at the hour of extremity, and in the exact form or
amount needed. Before the provision was entirely exhausted, there came
new supplies or the money wherewith to buy, so that these many mouths
were always fed and these many bodies always clad.

To live up to such principles as had been laid down was not possible
without faith, kept in constant and lively exercise. For example, in the
closing months of 1838 God seemed purposely putting them to a severe
test, whether or not they _did trust Him alone._ The orphan work was in
continual straits: at times not one half-penny was in the hands of the
matrons in the three houses. But not only was no knowledge of such facts
ever allowed to leak out, or any hint of the extreme need ever given to
outsiders, _but even those who inquired, with intent to aid, were not
informed._

One evening a brother ventured to ask how the balance would stand when
the next accounts were made up, and whether it would be as great in
favour of the orphans as when the previous balance-sheet had been
prepared. Mr. Mutter's calm but evasive answer was: _"It will be as
great as the Lord pleases."_ This was no intentional rudeness. To have
said more would have been turning from the one Helper to make at least
an indirect appeal to man for help; and every such snare was carefully
avoided lest the one great aim should be lost sight of: to prove to all
men that it is safe to trust only in the Living God.

While admitting the severity of the straits to which the whole work of
the Scriptural Knowledge Institution was often brought, Mr. Muller takes
pains to assure his readers that these straits were never a surprise to
him, and that his expectations in the matter of funds were not
disappointed, but rather the reverse. He had looked for great
emergencies as essential to his full witness to a prayer-hearing God.
The almighty Hand can never be clearly seen while any human help is
sought for or is in sight. We must turn absolutely away from all else if
we are to turn fully unto the living God. The deliverance is signal,
only in proportion as the danger is serious, and is most significant
when, without God, we face absolute despair. Hence the exact end for
which the whole work was mainly begun could be attained only through
such conditions of extremity and such experiences of interposition in
extremity.

Some who have known but little of the interior history of the orphan
work have very naturally accounted for the regularity of supplies by
supposing that the public statements, made about it by word of mouth,
and especially by the pen in the printed annual reports, have
constituted _appeals for aid._ Unbelief would interpret all God's
working however wonderful, by 'natural laws,' and the carnal mind,
refusing to see in any of the manifestations of God's power any
supernatural force at work, persists in thus explaining away all the
'miracles of prayer.'

No doubt humane and sympathetic hearts have been strongly moved by the
remarkable ways in which God has day by day provided for all these
orphans, as well as the other branches of work of the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution; and believing souls have been drawn into loving
and hearty sympathy with work so conducted, and have been led to become
its helpers. It is a well-known fact that God has used these annual
reports to accomplish just such results. Yet it remains true that these
reports were never intended or issued as appeals for aid, and no
dependence has been placed upon them for securing timely help. It is
also undeniable that, however frequent their issue, wide their
circulation, or great their influence, the regularity and abundance of
the supplies of all needs must in some other way be accounted for.

Only a few days after public meetings were held or printed reports
issued, funds often fell to their lowest ebb. Mr. Muller and his helpers
were singularly kept from all undue leaning upon any such indirect
appeals, and frequently and definitely asked God that they might never
be left to look for any inflow of means through such channels. For many
reasons the Lord's dealings with them were made known, the main object
of such publicity always being a _testimony to the faithfulness of God._
This great object Mr. Muller always kept foremost, hoping and praying
that, by such records and revelations of God's fidelity to His promises,
and of the manner in which He met each new need, his servant might
awaken, quicken, and stimulate faith in Him as the Living God. One has
only to read these reports to see the conspicuous absence of any appeal
for human aid, or of any attempt to excite pity, sympathy and compassion
toward the orphans. The burden of every report is to induce the reader
to venture wholly upon God, to taste and see that the Lord is good, and
find for himself how blessed are all they that put their trust in Him.
Only in the light of this supreme purpose can these records of a life of
faith be read intelligently and intelligibly.

Weakness of body again, in the autumn of 1839, compelled, for a time,
rest from active labour, and Mr. Muller went to Trowbridge and Exeter,
Teignmouth and Plymouth. God had precious lessons for him which He could
best teach in the school of affliction.

While at Plymouth Mr. Muller felt anew the impulse to early rising for
purposes of devotional communion. At Halle he had been an early riser,
influenced by zeal for excellence in study. Afterwards, when his weak
head and feeble nerves made more sleep seem needful, he judged that,
even when he rose late, the day would be long enough to exhaust his
little fund of strength; and so often he lay in bed till six or even
seven o'clock, instead of rising at four; and after dinner took a nap
for a quarter-hour. It now grew upon him, however, that he was losing in
spiritual vigour, and that his soul's health was declining under this
new regimen. The work now so pressed upon him as to prevent proper
reading of the Word and rob him of leisure for secret prayer.

A 'chance remark'--there is no _chance_ in a believer's life!--made by
the brother at whose house he was abiding at Plymouth, much impressed
him. Referring to the sacrifices in Leviticus, he said that, as the
refuse of the animals was never offered up on the altar, but only the
best parts and the fat, so the choicest of our time and strength, the
best parts of our day, should be especially given to the Lord in worship
and communion. George Muller meditated much on this; and determined,
even at the risk of damage to bodily health, that he would no longer
spend his best hours in bed. Henceforth he allowed himself but _seven
hours' sleep_ and gave up his after-dinner rest. This resumption of
early rising secured long seasons of uninterrupted interviews 'with God,
in prayer and meditation on the Scriptures, before breakfast and the
various inevitable interruptions that followed. He found himself not
worse but better, physically, and became convinced that to have lain
longer in bed as before would have kept his nerves weak; and, as to
spiritual life, such new vitality and vigour accrued from thus waiting
upon God while others slept, that it continued to be the habit of his
after-life.

In November, 1839, when the needs were again great and the supplies very
small, he was kept in peace: "I was not," he says, "looking at the
_little in hand, 'but at the fulness of God."_

It was his rule to empty himself of all that he had, in order to greater
boldness in appealing for help from above. All needless articles were
sold if a market could be found. But what was useful in the Lord's work
he did not reckon as needless, nor regard it right to sell, since the
Father knew the need. One of his fellow labourers had put forward his
valuable watch as a security for the return of money laid by for rent,
but drawn upon for the time; yet even this plan was not felt to be
scriptural, as the watch might be reckoned among articles needful and
useful in the Lord's service, and, if such, expedients were quite
abandoned, the deliverance would be more manifest as of the Lord. And
so, one by one, all resorts were laid aside that might imperil full
trust and sole dependence upon the one and only Helper.

When the poverty of their resources seemed most pinching, Mr. Muller
still comforted himself with the daily proof that God had not forgotten,
and would day by day feed them with 'the bread of their convenience.'
Often he said to himself, If it is even a proverb of the world that
"Man's necessity is God's opportunity," how much more may God's own dear
children in their great need look to Him to make their extremity the fit
moment to display His love and power!

In February, 1840, another attack of ill health combined with a mission
to Germany to lead Mr. Muller for five weeks to the Continent. At
Heimersleben, where he found his father weakened by a serious cough, the
two rooms in which he spent most time in prayer and reading of the Word,
and confession of the Lord, were the same in which, nearly twenty years
before, he had passed most time as an unreconciled sinner against God
and man. Later on, at Wolfenbuttel, he saw the inn whence in 1821 he ran
away in debt. In taking leave once more of his father he was pierced by
a keen anguish, fearing it was his last farewell, and an unusual
tenderness and affection were now exhibited by his father, whom he
yearned more and more to know as safe in the Lord Jesus, and depending
no longer on outward and formal religiousness, or substituting the
reading of prayers and of Scripture for an inward conformity to Christ.
This proved the last interview, for the father died on March 30th of the
same year.

The main purpose of this journey to Germany was to send forth more
missionaries to the East. At Sandersleben Mr. Muller met his friend, Mr.
Stahlschmidt, and found a little band of disciples meeting in secret to
evade the police. Those who have always breathed the atmosphere of
religious liberty know little of such intolerance as, in that nominally
Christian land, stifled all freedom of Worship. Eleven years before,
when Mr. Stahlschmidt's servant had come to this place, he had found
scarce one true disciple beside his master. The first meetings had been
literally of but two or three, and, when they had grown a little larger,
Mr. Kroll was summoned before the magistrates and, like the apostles in
the first days of the church, forbidden to speak in His name. But again,
like those same primitive disciples, believing that they were to obey
God rather than men, the believing band had continued to meet,
notwithstanding police raids which were so disturbing, and government
fines which were so exacting. So secret, however, were their assemblies,
as to have neither stated place nor regular time.

George Muller found these persecuted believers, meeting in the room of a
humble weaver where there was but one chair. The twenty-five or thirty
who were present found such places to sit or stand as they might, in and
about the loom, which itself filled half the space.

In Halberstadt Mr. Muller found seven large Protestant churches without
one clergyman who gave evidence of true conversion, and the few genuine
disciples there were likewise forbidden to meet together.

A few days after returning to Bristol from his few weeks in Germany, and
at a time of great financial distress in the work, a letter reached him
from a brother who had often before given money, as follows:

"Have you any _present_ need for the Institution under your care? I know
you do not _ask,_ except indeed of Him whose work you are doing; but to
_answer when asked_ seems another thing, and a right thing. I have a
reason for desiring to know the present state of your means towards the
objects you are labouring to serve: viz., should you _not have_ need,
other departments of the Lord's work, or other people of the Lord, _may
have_ need. Kindly then inform me, and to what amount, i.e. what amount
you at this present time need or can profitably lay out."

To most men, even those who carry on a work of faith and prayer, such a
letter would have been at least a temptation. But Mr. Muller did not
waver. To announce even to an inquirer the exact needs of the work
would, in his opinion, involve two serious risks:

1. It would turn his own eyes away from God to man;

2. It would turn the minds of saints away from dependence solely upon
Him.

This man of God had staked everything upon one great experiment--he had
set himself to prove that the prayer which _resorts to God only_ will
bring help in every crisis, even when the crisis is unknown to His
people whom He uses as the means of relief and help.

At this time there remained in hand but twenty-seven pence ha'penny, in
all, to meet the needs of hundreds of orphans. Nevertheless this was the
reply to the letter:

"Whilst I thank you for your love, and whilst I agree with you that, in
general, there is a difference between _asking for money_ and _answering
when asked,_ nevertheless, in our case, I feel not at liberty to speak
about the state of our funds, as the primary object of the work in my
hands is to lead those who are weak in faith to see that there is
_reality_ in dealing with God _alone."_

Consistently with his position, however, no sooner was the answer posted
than the appeal went up to the Living God: "Lord, thou knowest that, for
Thy sake, I did not tell this brother about our need. Now, Lord, show
afresh that there is reality in speaking to Thee only, about our need,
and speak therefore to this brother so that he may help us." In answer,
God moved this inquiring brother to send one hundred pounds, which came
when _not one penny was in hand._

The confidence of faith, long tried, had its increasing reward and was
strengthened by experience. In July, 1845, Mr. Muller gave this
testimony reviewing these very years of trial:

"Though for about seven years, our funds have been so exhausted that it
has been comparatively a rare case that there have been means in hand to
meet the necessities of the orphans _for three days_ together, yet I
have been only once tried in spirit, and that was on September 18, 1838,
when for the first time the Lord seemed not to regard our prayer. But
when He did send help at that time, and I saw that it was only for the
trial of our faith, and not because He had forsaken the work, that we
were brought so low, my soul was so strengthened and encouraged that I
have not only not been allowed to distrust the Lord since that time, but
I have not even been cast down when in the deepest poverty."


CHAPTER XII

NEW LESSONS IN GOD'S SCHOOL OF PRAYER

THE teacher must also be a learner, and therefore only he who continues
to learn is competent to continue to teach. Nothing but new lessons,
daily mastered, can keep our testimony fresh and vitalizing and enable
us to give advance lessons. Instead of being always engaged in a sort of
review, our teaching and testimony will thus be drawn each day from a
new and higher level.

George Muller's experiences of prevailing prayer went on constantly
accumulating, and so qualified him to speak to others, not as on a
matter of speculation, theory, or doctrinal belief, but of long, varied,
and successful personal experiment. Patiently, carefully and frequently,
he seeks to impress on others the conditions of effective supplication.
From time to time he met those to whom his courageous, childlike trust
in God was a mystery; and occasionally unbelief's secret misgivings
found a voice in the question, _what he would do if God did not send
help!_ what, if a meal-time actually came with no food, and no money to
procure it; or if clothing were worn out, and nothing to replace it?

To all such questions there was always ready this one answer: that _such
a failure on God's part is inconceivable,_ and must therefore be put
among the impossibilities. There are, however, conditions necessary on
man's part: _the suppliant soul must come to God in the right spirit and
attitude._ For the sake of such readers as might need further guidance
as to the proper and acceptable manner of approach to God, he was wont
to make very plain the scripture teaching upon this point.

Five grand conditions of prevailing prayer were ever before his mind:

1. Entire dependence upon the merits and mediation of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the only ground of any claim for blessing. (See John xiv. 13,
14; xv. 16, etc.)

2. Separation from all known sin. If we regard iniquity in our hearts,
the Lord will not hear us, for it would be sanctioning sin. (Psalm lxvi.
18.)

3. Faith in God's word of promise as confirmed by His oath. Not to
believe Him is to make Him both a liar and a perjurer. (Hebrews xi. 6;
vi. 13-20.)

4. Asking in accordance with His will. Our motives must be godly: we
must not seek any gift of God to consume it upon our own lusts. (1 John
v. 14; James iv. 3.)

5. Importunity in supplication. There must be waiting on God and waiting
for God, as the husbandman has long patience to wait for the harvest.
(James v. 7; Luke xviii. 1-10.)

The importance of firmly fixing in mind principles such as these cannot
be overstated. The first lays the basis of all prayer, in our oneness
with the great High Priest. The second states a condition of prayer,
found in abandonment of sin. The third reminds us of the need of
honouring God by faith that He is, and is the Rewarder of the diligent
seeker. The fourth reveals the sympathy with God that helps us to ask
what is for our good and His glory. The last teaches us that, having
laid hold of God in prayer, we are to keep hold until His arm is
outstretched in blessing.

Where these conditions do not exist, for God to answer prayer would be
both a dishonour to Himself and a damage to the suppliant. To encourage
those who come to Him in their own name, or in a self-righteous,
self-seeking, and disobedient spirit, would be to set a premium upon
continuance in sin. To answer the requests of the unbelieving would be
to disregard the double insult put upon His word of promise and His oath
of confirmation, by persistent doubt of His truthfulness and distrust of
His faithfulness. Indeed not one condition of prevailing prayer exists
which is not such in the very nature of things. These are not arbitrary
limitations affixed to prayer by a despotic will; they are necessary
alike to God's character and man's good.

All the lessons learned in God's school of prayer made Mr. Muller's
feelings and convictions about this matter more profound and subduing.
He saw the vital relation of prayer to holiness, and perpetually sought
to impress it upon both his hearers and readers; and, remembering that
for the purpose of persuasion the most effective figure of speech is
_repetition,_ he hesitated at no frequency of restatement by which such
truths might find root in the minds and hearts of others.

There has never been a saint, from Abel's day to our own, who has not
been taught the same essential lessons. All prayer which has ever
brought down blessing has prevailed by the same law of success--_the
inward impulse of God's Holy Spirit._ If, therefore, that Spirit's
teachings be disregarded or disobeyed, or His inward movings be
hindered, in just such measure will prayer become formal or be
altogether abandoned. Sin, consciously indulged, or duty, knowingly
neglected, makes supplication an offence to God.

Again, all prayer prevails only in the measure of our real, even if not
conscious, unity with the Lord Jesus Christ as the ground of our
approach, and in the degree of our dependence on Him as the medium of
our access to God.

Yet again, all prayer prevails only as it is offered in faith; and the
_answer_ to such prayer can be recognized and received only _on the
plane of faith;_ that is, we must maintain the believing frame,
expecting the blessing, and being ready to receive it in God's way and
time and form, and not our own.

The faith that thus _expects_ cannot be surprised at answers to prayer.
When, in November, 1840, a sister gave ten pounds for the orphans, and
at a time specially opportune, Mr. Muller records his triumphant joy in
God as exceeding and defying all expression. Yet he was _free from
excitement and not in the least surprised,_ because by grace he had been
trustfully waiting on God for deliverance. Help had been so long delayed
that in one of the houses there was no bread, and in none of them any
milk or any money to buy either. It was only a few minutes before the
milkman's cart was due, that this money came.

However faithful and trustful in prayer, it behooves us to be none the
less careful and diligent in the use of all proper means. Here again Mr.
Muller's whole life is a lesson to other believers. For example, when
travelling in other lands, or helping other brethren on their way, he
besought the Lord's constant guardianship over the conveyances used, and
even over the luggage so liable to go astray. But he himself looked
carefully to the seaworthiness of the vessel he was to sail in, and to
every other condition of safe and speedy transportation for himself and
others. In one case where certain German brethren and sisters were
departing for foreign shores, he noticed the manner in which the cabman
stored away the small luggage in the fly; and observed that several
carpetbags were hastily thrust into a hind boot. He also carefully
counted the pieces of luggage and took note of the fact that there were
seventeen in all. On arriving at the wharf, where there is generally
much hurry and flurry, the dishonest cabman would have driven off with a
large part of the property belonging to the party, but for this man of
God who not only _prayed_ but _watched._ He who trusted God implicitly,
no less faithfully looked to the cabman's fidelity, who, after he
pretended to have delivered all the luggage to the porters, was
compelled to open that hind boot and, greatly to his own confusion,
deliver up the five or six bags hidden away there. Mr. Muller adds in
his Narrative that "such a circumstance should teach one to make the
very smallest affairs a subject of prayer, as, for instance, that all
the luggage might be safely taken out of a fly." May we not add that
such a circumstance teaches us that companion lesson, quite as important
in its way, that we are to be watchful as well as prayerful, and see
that a dishonest cab-driver does not run off with another's goods!

This praying saint, who watched man, most of all watched God. Even in
the lesser details of his work, his eye was ever looking for God's
unfailing supplies, and taking notice of the divine leadings and
dealings; and, afterward, there always followed the fruit of the lips,
giving thanks to His name. Here is another secret revealed:
prayerfulness and thankfulness--those two handmaidens Of God--always go
together, each helping the other. "Pray without ceasing: in everything
give thanks." (1 Thess. v. 17, 18.) These two precepts stand side by
side where they belong, and he who neglects one will find himself
disobeying the other. This man who prayed so much and so well, offered
the sacrifice of praise to God continually.

For example, on September 21, 1840, a specific entry was made in the
Narrative, so simple, childlike, and in every way characteristic, that
every word of it is precious.

"The Lord, to show His continued care over us, raises up new helpers.
They that trust in the Lord shall never be confounded. Some who helped
for a while may fall asleep in Jesus; others grow cold in the service of
the Lord; others be as desirous as ever to help, but no longer able; or,
having means, feel it to be His will to lay them out in another way. But
in leaning upon God, the Living God alone, we are BEYOND DISAPPOINTMENT
and BEYOND _being forsaken because of death, or want of means, or want
of love, or because of the claims of other work._ How precious to have
learned, in any measure, to be content to stand with God alone in the
world, and to know that surely no good thing shall be withheld from us,
whilst we walk uprightly!"

Among the gifts received during this long life of stewardship for God
some deserve individual mention.

To an offering received in March, 1839, a peculiar history attaches. The
circumstances attending its reception made upon him a deep impression.
He had given a copy of the Annual Report to a believing brother who had
been greatly stirred up to prayer by reading it; and knowing his own
sister, who was also a disciple, to possess sundry costly ornaments and
jewels, such as a heavy gold chain, a pair of gold bracelets, and a
superb ring set with fine brilliants, this brother besought the Lord so
to show her the uselessness of such trinkets that she should be led to
lay them all upon His altar as an offering for the orphan work. This
prayer was literally answered. Her sacrifice of jewels proved of service
to the work at a time of such pressing need that Mr. Muller's heart
specially rejoiced in God. By the proceeds of the sale of these
ornaments he was helped to meet the expenses of a whole week, and
besides to _pay the salaries_ due to the helpers. But, before disposing
of the diamond ring, he wrote with it upon the window-pane of his own
room that precious name and title of the Lord--"JEHOVAH JIREH"--and
henceforth whenever, in deep poverty, he cast his eyes upon those two
words, imperishably written with the point of a diamond upon that pane,
he thankfully remembered that "THE LORD WILL PROVIDE."

How many of his fellow believers might find unfailing refreshment and
inspiration in dwelling upon the divine promises! Ancient believers were
bidden to write God's words on the palms of their hands, the doorposts
of their houses, and on their gates, so that the employments of their
hands, their goings out and comings in, their personal and home life,
might be constant reminders of Jehovah's everlasting faithfulness. He
who inscribed this chosen name of God upon the window-pane of his
dwelling, found that every ray of sunlight that shone into his room lit
up his Lord's promise.

He thus sums up the experiences of the year 1840:

1. Notwithstanding multiplied trials of faith, the orphans have lacked
nothing.

2. Instead of being disappointed in his expectations or work, the
reverse had been true, such trials being seen to be needful to
demonstrate that the Lord was their Helper in times of need.

3. Such a way of living brings the Lord very near, as one who daily
inspects the need that He may send the more timely aid.

4. Such constant, instant reliance upon divine help does not so absorb
the mind in temporal things as to unfit for spiritual employments and
enjoyments; but rather prompts to habitual communion with the Lord and
His Word.

5. Other children of God may not be called to a similar work, but are
called to a like faith, and may experience similar interposition if they
live according to His will and seek His help.

6. The incurring of debt, being unscriptural, is a sin needing
confession and abandonment if we desire unhindered fellowship with God,
and experience of His interposition.

It was in this year 1840, also, that a further object was embraced in
the work of the Scripture Knowledge Institution, namely, the circulation
of Christian books and tracts. But, as the continuance and enlargement
of these benevolent activities made the needs greater, so, in answer to
prayer, the Hand of the great Provider bestowed larger supplies.

Divine interposition will never be doubted by one who, like George
Muller, gives himself to prayer, for the coincidences will prove too
exact and frequent between demand and supply, times and seasons of
asking and answering, to allow of doubt that God has helped.

The 'ethics of language' embody many lessons. For example, the term
'poetic retribution' describes a visitation of judgment where the
penalty peculiarly befits the crime. As poetic lines harmonize, rhyme
and rhythm showing the work of a designing hand, so there is often
harmony between an offense and its retribution, as when Adonibezek, who
had afflicted a like injury upon threescore and five captive kings, had
his own thumbs and great toes cut off, or as when Haman was himself hung
on the gallows that he built for Mordecai. We read in Psalm ix. 16:

       "The Lord is known by the judgment which He executeth:
        The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands."

The inspired thought is that the punishment of evil-doers is in such
exact correspondence with the character of their evil doings as to show
that it is the Lord executing vengeance--the penalty shows a designing
hand. He who watches the peculiar retributive judgments of God, how He
causes those who set snares and pitfalls for others to fall into them
themselves, will not doubt that behind such 'poetic retribution' there
is an intelligent Judge.

Somewhat so the poetic harmony between prayer and its answer silences
all question as to a discriminating Hearer of the suppliant soul. A
single case of such answered prayer might be accounted accidental; but,
ever since men began to call upon the name of the Lord, there have been
such repeated, striking, and marvelous correspondences between the
requests of man and the replies of God, that the inference is perfectly
safe, the induction has too broad a basis and too large a body of
particulars to allow mistake. The coincidences are both too many and too
exact to admit the doctrine of _chance._ We are compelled, not to say
justified, to conclude that the only sufficient and reasonable
explanation must be found in a God who hears and answers prayer.

Mr. Muller was not the only party to these transactions, nor the only
person thus convinced that God was in the whole matter of the work and
its support. The _donors_ as well as the receiver were conscious of
divine leading.

Frequent were the instances also when those who gave most timely help
conveyed to Mr. Muller the knowledge of the experiences that accompanied
or preceded their offerings; as, for example, when, without any
intimation being given them from man that there was special need, the
heart was impressed in prayer to God that there was an emergency
requiring prompt assistance.

For example, in June, 1841, fifty pounds were received with these words:
_"I am not concerned at my having been prevented for so many days from
sending this money; I am confident it has not been needed."_

"This last sentence is remarkable," says Mr. Muller. "It is now nearly
three years since our funds were for the first time exhausted, and only
at this period, since then, could it have been said in truth, so far as
I remember, that a donation of fifty pounds was _not_ needed. From the
beginning in July, 1838, till now, there never had been a period when we
so abounded as when this donation came; for there were then, in the
orphan fund and the other funds, between two and three hundred pounds!
The words of our brother are so much the more remarkable as, on four
former occasions, when he likewise gave considerable donations, we were
always in need, yea, great need, which he afterwards knew from the
printed accounts."

Prevailing prayer is largely conditioned on constant obedience.
"Whatsoever we ask we receive of Him, because we keep His commandments,
and do those things which are well pleasing in His sight." (1 John iii.
22.) There is no way of keeping in close touch with God unless a _new
step_ is taken in advance whenever _new light_ is given. Here is another
of the life-secrets of George Muller. Without unduly counting the cost,
he followed every leading of God.

In July, 1841, both Mr. Craik and Mr. Muller were impressed that the
existing mode of receiving free-will offerings from those among whom
they laboured was inexpedient. These contributions were deposited in
boxes, over which their names were placed with an explanation of the
purpose to which such offerings were applied. But it was felt that this
might have the appearance of unduly elevating them above others, as
though they were assuming official importance, or excluding others from
full and equal recognition as labourers in word and doctrine. They
therefore decided to discontinue this mode of receiving such offerings.

Such an act of obedience may seem to some, over-scrupulous, but it cost
some inward struggles, for it threatened a possible and probable
decrease in supplies for their own needs, and the question naturally
arose how such lack should be supplied. Happily Mr. Muller had long ago
settled the question that _to follow a clear sense of duty is always
safe._ He could say, in every such crisis, "O God, my heart is fixed, my
heart is fixed, trusting in Thee." (Psalm cxii. 7.) Once for all having
made such a decision, such apparent risks did not for a moment disturb
his peace. Somehow or other the Lord would provide, and all he had to do
was to serve and trust Him and leave the rest to His Fatherhood.

In the autumn of 1841 it pleased God that, beyond any previous period,
there should be a severe test of faith. For some months the supplies had
been comparatively abundant, but now, from day to day and from meal to
meal, the eye of faith had to be turned to the Lord, and,
notwithstanding continuance in prayer, _help seemed at times to fail,_
so much so that it was a special sign of God's grace that, during this
long trial of delay, the confidence of Mr. Muller and his helpers did
not altogether give way. But he and they were held up, and he
unwaveringly rested on the fatherly pity of God.

On one occasion a poor woman gave two pence, adding, "It is but a
trifle, but I must give it to you." Yet so opportune was the gift of
these 'two mites' that _one of these two pence_ was just what was at
that time needed to make up the sum required to buy bread for immediate
use. At another time eight pence more being necessary to provide for the
next meal, but _seven_ pence were in hand; but on opening one of the
boxes, _one penny_ only was found deposited, and thus a single penny was
traced to the Father's care.

It was in December of this same year, 1841, that, in order to show how
solely dependence was placed on a heavenly Provider, it was determined
to _delay for a while_ both the holding of any public meeting and the
printing of the Annual Report. Mr. Muller was confident that, though no
word should be either spoken or printed about the work and its needs,
the means would still be supplied. As a matter of fact the report of
1841-2 was thus postponed for five months; and so, _in the midst of deep
poverty_ and _partly because of the very pressure of such need,_ another
bold step was taken, which, like the cutting away of the ropes that held
the life-boat, in that Mediterranean shipwreck, threw Mr. Muller, and
all that were with him in the work, more completely on the promise and
the providence of God.

It might be inferred that, where such a decision was made, the Lord
would make haste to reward at once such courageous confidence. And yet,
so mysterious are His ways, that never, up to that time, had Mr.
Muller's faith been tried so sharply as between December 12, 1841, and
April 12, 1842. During these four months, again, it was as though God
were saying, "I will now see whether indeed you truly lean on Me and
look to Me." At any time during this trial, Mr. Muller might have
changed his course, holding the public meeting and publishing the
report, for, outside the few who were in his councils, _no one knew of
the determination,_ and in fact many children of God, looking for the
usual year's journal of 'The Lord's Dealings,' were surprised at the
delay. But the conclusion conscientiously reached was, for the glory of
the Lord, as steadfastly pursued, and again Jehovah Jireh revealed His
faithfulness.

During this four months, on March 9, 1842, the need was so extreme that,
had no help come, the work could not have gone on. But, _on that day,_
from a brother living near Dublin, ten pounds came: and the hand of the
Lord clearly appeared in this gift, for when the post had already come
and no letter had come with it, there was a strong confidence suggested
to Mr. Muller's mind that deliverance was at hand; and so it proved, for
presently the letter was brought to him, having been delivered at one of
the other houses. During this same month, it was necessary once to
_delay dinner for about a half-hour,_ because of a lack of supplies.
Such a postponement had scarcely ever been known before, and very rarely
was it repeated in the entire after-history of the work, though
thousands of mouths had to be daily fed.

In the spring of 1843, Mr. Muller felt led to open a _fourth orphan
house,_ the third having been opened nearly six years before. This step
was taken with his uniform conscientiousness, deliberation, and
prayerfulness. He had seen many reasons for such enlargement of the
work, but he had said nothing about the matter even to his beloved wife.
Day by day he waited on God in prayer, preferring to take counsel only
of Him, lest he might do something in haste, move in advance of clear
leading, or be biassed unduly by human judgment.

Unexpected obstacles interfered with his securing the premises which had
already been offered and found suitable; but he was in no way
'discomforted.' The burden of his prayer was, "Lord, if _Thou_ hast no
need of another orphan house, _I_ have none"; and he rightly judged that
the calm deliberation with which he had set about the whole matter, and
the unbroken peace with which he met new hindrances, were proofs that he
was following the guidance of God and not the motions of self-will.

As the public meeting and the publication of the Annual Report had been
purposely postponed to show that no undue dependence was placed even on
indirect appeals to man, much special prayer went up to God, that,
_before July 15,_ 1844, when the public meeting was to be held, He would
so richly supply all need that it might clearly appear that,
notwithstanding these lawful means of informing His servants concerning
the work had for a time not been used, the prayer of faith had drawn
down help from above. As the financial year had closed in May, it would
be more than _two years_ since the previous report had been made to the
public.

George Muller was jealous for the Lord God of hosts, He desired that
"even the shadow of ground might be cut off for persons to say, 'They
cannot get any more money; and therefore they now publish another
report.'" Hence, while, during the whole progress of the work, he
desired to stand with his Master, without heeding either the favourable
or unfavourable judgments of men, he felt strongly that God would be
much honoured and glorified as the prayer-hearing God if, before the
public had been at all apprised of the situation, an ample supply might
be given. In such case, instead of appearing to ask aid of men, he and
his associates would be able to witness to the church and the world,
God's faithfulness, and offer Him the praise of joyful and thankful
hearts. As he had asked, so was it done unto him. Money and other
supplies came in, and, on the day before the accounts were closed, such
liberal gifts, that there was a _surplus of over twenty pounds_ for the
whole work.


CHAPTER XIII

FOLLOWING THE PILLAR OF CLOUD AND FIRE

"THE steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord." (Psalm xxxvii. 23.)
Some one quaintly adds, "Yes, and the _stops, too!"_ The pillar of cloud
and fire is a symbol of that divine leadership which guides both as to
forward steps and intervals of rest. Mr Muller found it blessed to
follow, one step at a time, as God ordered his way, and to stand still
and wait when He seemed to call for a halt.

At the end of May, 1843, a crisis was reached, which was a new example
of the experiences to which faith is liable in the walk with God; and a
new illustration of the duty and delight of depending upon Him in
everything and for everything, habitually waiting upon Him, and trusting
in Him to remove all hindrances in the way of service.

Some eighteen months previously, a German lady from Wurtemberg had
called to consult him as to her own plans, and, finding her a
comparative stranger to God, he spoke to her about her spiritual state,
and gave her the first two parts of his Narrative. The perusal of these
pages was so blest to her that she was converted to God, and felt moved
to translate the Narrative into her own tongue as a channel of similar
blessing to other hearts.

This work of translation she partially accomplished, though somewhat
imperfectly; and the whole occurrence impressed Mr. Muller as an
indication that God was once more leading him in the direction of
Germany, for another season of labour in his native land. Much prayer
deepened his persuasion that he had not misread God's signal, and that
His time had now fully come. He records some of the motives which led to
this conclusion.

1. First, he yearned to encourage believing brethren who for conscience'
sake had felt constrained to separate themselves from the state
churches, and meet for worship in such conditions as would more accord
with New Testament principles, and secure greater edification.

2. Being a German himself, and therefore familiar with their language,
customs, and habits of thought, he saw that he was fitted to wield a
larger influence among his fellow countrymen than otherwise.

3. He was minded to publish his Narrative in his own tongue wherein he
was born, not so much in the form of a mere translation, as of an
independent record of his life's experiences such as would be specially
suited to its new mission.

4. An effectual door was opened before him, and more widely than ever,
especially at Stuttgart; and although there were many adversaries, they
only made his help the more needful to those whose spiritual welfare was
in peril.

5. A distinct burden was laid on his heart, as from the Lord, which
prayer, instead of relieving, increased--a burden which he _felt_
without being able to explain--so that the determination to visit his
native land gave him a certain peace which he did not have when he
thought of remaining at home.

To avoid mistake, with equal care he records the counter-arguments.

1. The new orphan house, No. 4, was about to be opened, and his presence
was desirable if not needful.

2. A few hundred pounds were needed, to be left with his helpers, for
current expenses in his absence.

3. Money was also required for travelling expenses of himself and his
wife, whose health called for a change.

4. Funds would be needful to publish four thousand copies of his
Narrative and avoid too high a market-price.

5. A matron for the new orphan house was not yet found, suitable for the
position.

In this careful _weighing of matters_ many sincere disciples fail, prone
to be impatient of delay in making decisions. Impulse too often sways,
and self-willed plans betray into false and even disastrous mistakes.
Life is too precious to risk one such failure. There is given us a
promise of deep meaning:

        "The meek will He guide in judgment;
        And the meek will He teach His way."
                                (Psalm xxv. 9.)

Here is a double emphasis upon _meekness_ as a condition of such
guidance and teaching. _Meekness is a real preference for God's will._
Where this holy habit of mind exists, the whole being becomes so open to
impression that, without any _outward_ sign or token, there is an
_inward_ recognition and choice of the will of God. God guides, not by a
visible sign, but by _swaying the judgment._ To wait before Him,
weighing candidly in the scales every consideration for or against a
proposed course, and in readiness to see which way the preponderance
lies, is a frame of mind and heart in which one is fitted to be guided;
and God touches the scales and makes the balance to sway as He will.
_But our hands must be off the scales,_ otherwise we need expect no
interposition of His, in our favour. To return to the figure with which
this chapter starts, the meek soul simply and humbly waits, and _watches
the moving of the Pillar._

One sure sign of this spirit of meekness is the entire _restfulness_
with which apparent obstacles to any proposed plan or course are
regarded. When waiting and wishing only to know and do God's will,
hindrances will give no anxiety, but a sort of pleasure, as affording a
new opportunity for divine interposition. If it is the Pillar of God we
are following, the Red Sea will not dismay us, for it will furnish but
another scene for the display of the power of Him who can make the
waters to stand up as an heap, and to become a wall about us as we go
through the sea on dry ground.

Mr. Muller had learned this rare lesson, and in this case he says: _"I
had a secret satisfaction in the greatness of the difficulties which
were in the way._ So far from being cast down on account of them, they
delighted my soul; for I only desired to do the will of the Lord in this
matter."

Here is revealed another secret of holy serving. To him who sets the
Lord always before him, and to whom the will of God is his delight,
there pertains a habit of soul which, in advance settles a thousand
difficult and perplexing questions.

The case in hand is an illustration of the blessing found in such meek
preference for God's pleasure. If it were the will of the Lord that this
Continental tour should be undertaken at that time, difficulties need
not cast him down; for the _difficulties could not be of God;_ and, if
not of God, they should give him no unrest, for, in answer to prayer,
they would all be removed. If, on the other hand, this proposed visit to
the Continent were _not_ God's plan at all, but only the fruit of
self-will; if some secret, selfish, and perhaps subtle motive were
controlling, then indeed hindrances might well be interferences of God,
designed to stay his steps. In the latter case, Mr. Muller rightly
judged that difficulties in the way would naturally vex and annoy him;
that he would not like to look at them, and would seek to remove them by
his own efforts. Instead of giving him an inward satisfaction as
affording God an opportunity to intervene in his behalf, they would
arouse impatience and vexation, as preventing self-will from carrying
out its own purposes.

Such discriminations have only to be stated to any spiritual mind, to
have their wisdom at once apparent. Any believing child of God may
safely gauge the measure of his surrender to the will of God, in any
matter, by the measure of impatience he feels at the obstacles in the
way; for in proportion as self-will sways him, whatever seems to oppose
or hinder his plans will disturb or annoy; and, instead of quietly
leaving all such hindrances and obstacles to the Lord, to deal with them
as He pleases, in His own way and time, the wilful disciple will,
impatiently and in the energy of the flesh, set himself to remove them
by his own scheming and struggling, and he will brook no delay.

Whenever Satan acts as a hinderer (1 Thess. ii. 18) the obstacles which
he puts in our way need not dismay us; God permits them to delay or
deter us for the time, only as a test of our patience and faith, and the
satanic hinderer will be met by a divine Helper who will sweep away all
his obstacles, as with the breath of His mouth.

Mr. Muller felt this, and he waited on God for light and help. But,
after forty days' waiting, the hindrances, instead of decreasing, seemed
rather to increase. Much more money was spent than was sent in; instead
of finding another suitable matron, a sister, already at work, was
probably about to withdraw, so that two vacancies would need to be
filled instead of one. Yet his rest and peace of mind were unbroken.
Being persuaded that he was yielded up to the will of God, faith not
only held him to his purpose, but saw the obstacles already surmounted,
so that he gave thanks in advance. Because Caleb "followed the Lord
fully," even the giant sons of Anak with their walled cities and
chariots of iron had for him no terrors. Their defence was departed from
them, but the Lord was with His believing follower, and made him strong
to drive them out and take possession of their very stronghold as his
own inheritance.

During this period of patient waiting, Mr. Muller remarked to a
believing sister: "Well, my soul is at peace. The Lord's time is not yet
come; but, when it is come, He will blow away all these obstacles, as
chaff is blown away before the wind." _A quarter of an hour later,_ a
gift of seven hundred pounds became available for the ends in view, so
that three of the five hindrances to this Continental tour were at once
removed. All travelling expenses for himself and wife, all necessary
funds for the home work for two months in advance, and all costs of
publishing the Narrative in German, were now provided. This was on July
12th; and so soon afterward were the remaining impediments out of the
way that, by August 9th, Mr. and Mrs. Muller were off for Germany.

The trip covered but seven months: and on March 6, 1844, they were once
more in Bristol. During this sojourn abroad no journal was kept, but Mr.
Muller's letters serve the purpose of a record. Rotterdam, Weinheim,
Cologne, Mayence, Stuttgart, Heidelberg, etc., were visited, and Mr.
Muller distributed tracts and conversed with individuals by the way; but
his main work was to expound the Word in little assemblies of believers,
who had separated themselves from the state church on account of what
they deemed errors in teaching, practice, modes of worship, etc.

The first hour of his stay at Stuttgart brought to him one of the
sharpest trials of faith he had ever thus far experienced. The nature of
it he does not reveal in his journal, but it now transpires that it was
due to the recalling of the seven hundred pounds, the gift of which had
led to his going to Germany. This fact could not at the time be recorded
because the party would feel it a reproach. Nor was this the only test
of faith during his sojourn abroad; in fact so many, so great, so
varied, and so prolonged were some of these trials, as to call into full
exercise all the wisdom and grace which he had received from God, and
whatever lessons he had previously learned in the school of experience
became now of use. Yet not only was his peace undisturbed, but he bears
witness that the conviction so rooted itself in his inmost being that in
all this God's goodness was being shown, that he would have had nothing
different. The greatest trials bore fruit in the fullest blessings and
sometimes in clusters of blessings. It particularly moved him to adoring
wonder and praise to see God's wisdom in having delayed his visit until
the very time when it occurred. Had he gone any earlier he would have
gone too soon, lacking the full experience necessary to confront the
perplexities of his work. When darkness seemed to obscure his way, faith
kept him expectant of light, or at least of guidance in the darkness;
and he found that promise to be literally fulfilled:

"As thou goest, step by step, the way shall open up before thee." (See
the Hebrew, of Prov. iv. 12.)

At Stuttgart he found and felt, like Jude, that it was "needful
earnestly to contend for the faith once delivered to the saints." Even
among believers, errors had found far too deep root. Especially was
undue stress laid upon _baptism,_ which was made to occupy a prominence
and importance out of all due proportion of faith. One brother had been
teaching that without it there is no new birth, and that, consequently,
no one could, before baptism, claim the forgiveness of sins; that the
apostles were not born from above until the day of Pentecost, and that
our Lord Himself had not been new-born until His own baptism, and had
thence, for the rest of His mortal life, ceased to be under the law!
Many other fanciful notions were found to prevail, such as that baptism
is the actual death of the old man by drowning, and that it is a
covenant with the believer into which God enters; that it is a sin to
break bread with unbaptized believers or with members of the state
church; and that the bread and the cup used in the Lord's Supper not
only mean but are the very body and blood of the Lord, etc.

A more serious and dangerous doctrine which it was needful to confront
and confute was what Mr. Muller calls that "awful error," spread almost
universally among believers in that land, that at last "all will be
saved," not-sinful men only, but "even the devils themselves."

Calmly and courteously, but firmly and courageously, these and kindred
errors were met with the plain witness of the Word. Refutation of false
teaching aroused a spirit of bitterness in opposers of the truth, and,
as is too often the case, faithful testimony was the occasion of
acrimony; but the Lord stood by His servant and so strengthened him that
he was kept both faithful and peaceful.

One grave practical lack which Mr. Muller sought to remedy was ignorance
of those deeper truths of the Word, which relate to the power and
presence of the Holy Spirit of God in the church, and to the ministry of
saints, one to another, as fellow members in the body of Christ, and as
those to whom that same Spirit divides severally, as He will, spiritual
gifts for service. As a natural result of being untaught in these
important practical matters, believers' meetings had proved rather
opportunities for unprofitable talk than godly edifying which is in
faith. The only hope of meeting such errors and supplying such lack lay
in faithful scripture teaching, and he undertook for a time to act as
the sole teacher in these gatherings, that the word of God might have
free course and be glorified. Afterward, when there seemed to be among
the brethren some proper apprehension of vital spiritual truths, with
his usual consistency and humility he resumed his place as simply a
brother among fellow believers, all of whom had liberty to teach as the
Spirit might lead and guide. There was, however, no shrinking from any
duty or responsibility laid upon him by larger, clearer acquaintance
with truth, or more complete experience of its power. When called by the
voice of his brethren to expound the Word in public assemblies, he
gladly embraced all opportunities for further instruction out of Holy
Scripture and of witness to God. With strong emphasis he dwelt upon the
presiding presence of the Blessed Spirit in all assemblies of saints,
and upon the duty and privilege of leaving the whole conduct of such
assemblies to His divine ordering; and in perfect accord, with such
teaching he showed that the Holy Spirit, if left free to administer all
things, would lead such brethren to speak, at such times and on such
themes as He mighty please; and that, whenever their desires and
preferences were spiritual and not carnal, such choice of the Spirit
would always be in harmony with their own.

These views of the Spirit's administration in the assemblies of
believers, and of His manifestation in all believers for common profit,
fully accord with scripture teaching. (1 Cor. xii., Romans xii., Ephes.
iv., etc.) Were such views practically held in the church of this day, a
radical revolution would be wrought and a revival of apostolic faith and
primitive church life would inevitably follow. No one subject is perhaps
more misunderstood, or less understood, even among professed believers,
than the person, offices, and functions of the Spirit of God. John Owen,
long since, suggested that the practical test of soundness in the faith,
during the present gospel age, is _the attitude of the church toward the
Holy Spirit._ If so, the great apostasy cannot be far off, if indeed it
is not already upon us, for there is a shameful ignorance and
indifference prevalent, as to the whole matter of His claim to holy
reverence and obedience.

In connection with this visit to Germany, a curious misapprehension
existed, to which a religious periodical had given currency, that Mr.
Muller was deputed by the English Baptists to labour among German
Baptists to bring them back to the state church. This rumour was of
course utterly unfounded, but he had no chance to correct it until just
before his return to Britain, as he had not until then heard of it. The
Lord had allowed this false report to spread and had used it to serve
His own ends, for it was due in part to this wrong impression of Mr.
Muller's mission that he was not molested or interfered with by the
officers of the government. Though for months openly and undisguisedly
teaching vital gospel truths among believers who had separated from the
established church, he had suffered no restraint, for, so long as it was
thought that his mission in Germany was to reclaim to the fold of the
state church those who had wandered away, he would of course be liable
to no interference from state officials.

The Lord went before His servant also in preparing the way for the
publishing of his Narrative, guiding him to a bookseller who undertook
its sale on commission, enabling the author to retain two thousand
copies to give away, while the rest were left to be sold.

Mr. Muller, about this time, makes special mention of his joy and
comfort in the spiritual blessing attending his work, and the present
and visible good, wrought through the publication of his Narrative. Many
believers had been led to put more faith in the promises of the great
Provider, and unbelievers had been converted by their perusal of the
simple story of the Lord's dealings; and these tidings came from every
quarter where the Narrative had as yet found its way.

The name of Henry Craik, hitherto affixed to every report together with
George Muller's, appears for the last time in the Report of 1844. This
withdrawal of his name resulted, not from any division of feeling or
diminution of sympathy, but solely from Mr. Craik's conviction that the
honour of being used of God as His instrument in forwarding the great
work of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution belonged solely to George
Muller.

The trials of faith ceased not although the occasions of praise were so
multiplied. On September 4, 1844, day-dawn, but one farthing was left on
hand, and hundred and forty mouths were to be fed at breakfast!'

The lack of money and such supplies was, however, only one form of these
tests of faith and incentives to prayer. Indeed he accounted these the
lightest of his burdens, for there were other cares and anxieties that
called for greater exercise of faith resolutely to cast them on Him who,
in exchange for solicitude, gives His own perfect peace. What these
trials were, any thoughtful mind must at once see who remembers how
these many orphans were needing, not only daily supplies of food and
clothing, but education, in mind and in morals; preparation for, and
location in, suitable homes; careful guards about their health and every
possible precaution and provision to prevent disease; also the character
of all helpers must be carefully investigated before they were admitted,
and their conduct carefully watched afterward lest any unworthy or
unqualified party should find a place, or be retained, in the conduct of
the work.

These and other matters, too many to be individually mentioned, had to
be borne daily to the great Helper, without whose Everlasting Arms they
could not have been carried. And Mr. Muller seeks constantly to impress
on all who read his pages or heard his voice, the perfect
trustworthiness of God. For any and all needs of the work help was
always given, and _it never once came too late._ However poor, and
however long the suppliant believer waits on God, he never fails to get
help, if he trusts the promises and is in the path of duty. Even the
delay in answered prayer serves a purpose. God permits us to call on Him
while He answers not a word, both to test our faith and importunity, and
to encourage others who hear of His dealings with us.

And so it was that, whether there were on hand much or little, by God's
grace the founder of these institutions remained untroubled, confident
that deliverance would surely come in the best way and time, not only
with reference to temporal wants, but in all things needful.

During the history of the Institution thus far, enlargement had been its
law. Mr. Muller's heart grew in capacity for larger service, and his
faith in capacity for firmer confidence, so that while he was led to
attempt greater things for God, he was led also to expect greater things
from God. Those suggestive words of Christ to Nathanael have often
prompted like larger expectations: "Believest thou? thou shalt see
greater things than these." (John i. 50.)

In the year 1846, _the wants of the mission field_ took far deeper hold
of him than ever before. He had already been giving aid to brethren
abroad, in British Guiana and elsewhere, as well as in fields nearer at
home. But he felt a strong yearning to be used of God more largely in
sending to their fields and supporting in their labours, the chosen
servants of the Lord who were working on a scriptural basis and were in
need of help. He had observed that whenever God had put into his heart
to devise liberal things, He had put into his hand the means to carry
out such liberal purposes; and from this time forth he determined, as
far as God should enable him, to aid brethren of good report, labouring
in word and doctrine, throughout the United Kingdom, who were faithful
witnesses to God and were receiving no regular salary. The special
object he had in view was to give a helping hand to such as for the sake
of conscience and of Christ had relinquished former stipends or worldly
emoluments.

Whatever enlargement took place in the work, however, it was no sign of
_surplus funds._ Every department of service or new call of duty had
separate and prayerful consideration. Advance steps were taken only when
and where and so fast as the Pillar moved, and fresh work was often
undertaken at a time when there was a lack rather than an abundance of
money.

Some who heard of Mr. Muller's absence in Germany inferred plenty of
funds on hand--a conclusion that was neither true nor legitimate. At
times when poverty was most pressing, additional expenditure was not
avoided nor new responsibility evaded if, after much prayer, the Lord
seemed plainly leading in that direction. And it was beautiful to see
how He did not permit any existing work to be embarrassed because at His
bidding new work was Undertaken.

One great law for all who would be truly led by God's Pillar of cloud
and fire, is to take no step at the bidding of self-will or without the
clear moving of the heavenly Guide. Though the direction be new and the
way seem beset with difficulty, there is never any risk, provided we are
only led of God. Each new advance needs separate and special authority
from Him, and yesterday's guidance is not sufficient for to-day.

It is important also to observe that, if one branch of the work is in
straits, it is not necessarily a reason for abandoning another form of
service. The work of God depends on Him alone. If the whole tree is His
planting, we need not cut off one limb to save another. The whole body
is His, and, if one member is weak, it is not necessary to cut off
another to make it strong, for the strength of the whole body is the
dependence of every part. In our many-branching service each must get
vitality and vigour from the same source in God. Nevertheless let us not
forget that the _stops,_ as well as the _steps,_ of a good man are
ordered of the Lord. If the work is His work, let Him control it, and,
whether we expand or contract, let it be at His bidding, and a matter of
equal satisfaction to His servant.


CHAPTER XIV

GOD'S BUILDING: THE NEW ORPHAN HOUSES

How complex are the movements of God's providence! Some events are
themselves eventful. Like the wheels in Ezekiel's vision--a wheel in the
middle of a wheel,--they involve other issues within their mysterious
mechanism, and constitute epochs of history. Such an epochal event was
the building of the first of the New Orphan Houses on Ashley Down.

After October, 1845, it became clear to Mr. Muller that the Lord was
leading in this direction. Residents on Wilson Street had raised
objections to the noise made by the children, especially in play hours;
the playgrounds were no longer large enough for so many orphans; the
drainage was not adequate, nor was the situation of the rented houses
favourable, for proper sanitary conditions; it was also desirable to
secure ground for cultivation, and thus supply outdoor work for the
boys, etc. Such were some of the reasons which seemed to demand the
building of a new orphan house; and the conviction steadily gained
ground that the highest well-being of all concerned would be largely
promoted if a suitable site could be found on which to erect a building
adapted to the purpose.

There were objections to building which were carefully weighed: money in
large sums would be needed; planning and constructing would severely tax
time and strength; wisdom and oversight would be in demand at every
stage of the work; and the question arose whether such permanent
structures befit God's pilgrim people, who have here no continuing city
and believe that the end of all things is at hand.

Continuance in prayer, however, brought a sense of quiet and restful
conviction that all objections were overbalanced by other and favourable
considerations. One argument seemed particularly weighty: Should God
provide large amounts of money for this purpose, it would still further
illustrate the power of prayer, offered in faith, to command help from
on high. A lot of ground, spacious enough, would, at the outset, cost
thousands of pounds; but why should this daunt a true child of God whose
Father was infinitely rich? Mr. Muller and his helpers sought day by day
to be guided of God, and, as faith fed on this daily bread of contact
with Him, the assurance grew strong that help would come. Shortly Mr.
Muller was as sure of this as though the building already stood before
his eyes, though for five weeks not one penny had been sent in for this
purpose. Meanwhile there went on that searching scrutiny of his own
heart by which he sought to know whether any hidden motive of a selfish
sort was swaying his will; but as strict self-examination brought to
light no conscious purpose but to glorify God, in promoting the good of
the orphans, and provoking to larger trust in God all who witnessed the
work, it was judged to be God's will that he should go forward.

In November of this year, he was much encouraged by a visit from a
believing brother* who bade him go on in the work, but wisely impressed
on him the need of asking for wisdom from above, at every step, seeking
God's help in showing him the plan for the building, that all details
might accord with the divine mind. On the thirty-sixth day after
specific prayer had first been offered about this new house, on December
10, 1845, Mr. Muller received _one thousand pounds_ for this purpose,
the largest sum yet received _in one donation_ since the work had begun,
March 5, 1834. Yet he was as calm and composed as though the gift had
been only a shilling; having full faith in God, as both guiding and
providing, he records that he would not have been surprised had the
amount been five or ten times greater.

* Robert C. Chapman, of Barnstaple, yet living--and whom Mr. Muller
cherished as his "oldest friend."

Three days later, a Christian architect in London voluntarily offered
not only to draught the plans, but gratuitously to superintend the
building! This offer had been brought about in a manner so strange as to
be naturally regarded as a new sign and proof of God's approval and a
fresh pledge of His sure help. Mr. Muller's sister-in-law, visiting the
metropolis, had met this architect; and, finding him much interested to
know more of the work of which he had read in the narrative, she had
told him of the purpose to build; whereupon, without either solicitation
or expectation on her part, this cheerful offer was made. Not only was
this architect not urged by her, but he pressed his proposal, himself,
urged on by his deep interest in the orphan work. Thus, within forty
days, the first thousand pounds had been given in answer to prayer, and
a pious man, as yet unseen and unknown by Mr. Muller, had been led to
offer his services in providing plans for the new building and
superintending its erection. Surely God was moving before His servant.

For a man, personally penniless, to attempt to erect such a house, on
such a scale, without appeal to man and in sole dependence on God was no
small venture of faith.

The full risk involved in such an undertaking, and the full force of the
testimony which it has since afforded to a prayer-hearing God, can be
felt only as the full weight of the responsibility is appreciated and
all the circumstances are duly considered.

First of all, ground must be bought, and it must comprise six or seven
acres, and the site must be in or near Bristol; for Mr. Muller's general
sphere of work was in the city, the orphans and their helpers should be
within reasonable reach of their customary meeting-place, and on many
other accounts such nearness to the city was desirable. But such a site
would cost from two thousand to three thousand pounds.

Next the building must be constructed, fitted up, and furnished, with
accommodations for three hundred orphans and their overseers, teachers,
and various helpers. However plain the building and its furnishings, the
total cost would reach from three to four times the price of the site.

Then, the annual cost of keeping such house open and of maintaining such
a large body of inmates would be four or five thousand pounds more.

Here, then, was a prospective outlay of somewhere between ten thousand
and fifteen thousand pounds, for site and building, with a further
expense of one third as much more every year. No man so poor as George
Muller, if at the same time sane, would ever have _thought_ of such a
gigantic scheme, much less have undertaken to work it out, if his faith
and hope were not fixed on God. Mr. Muller himself confesses that here
lay his whole secret. He was not driven onward by any self-seeking, but
drawn onward by a conviction that he was doing the will of God. When
Constantine was laying out on a vast scale the new capital on the
Bosphorus, he met the misgivings of those about him who wondered at his
audacity, by simply saying, "I am following One who is leading me."
George Muller's scheme was not self-originated. He followed One who was
leading him; and, because confident and conscious of such guidance, he
had only to follow, trust, and wait.

In proportion as the undertaking was great, he desired God's hand to be
very clearly seen. Hence he forbore even to seem prominent: he issued no
circular, announcing his purpose, and spoke of it only to the few who
were in his councils, and even then only as conversation led in that
direction. He remembered the promise, "I will guide thee with Mine eye,"
and looking up to God, he took no step unless the divine glance or beck
made duty "clear as daylight." As he saw the matter, his whole business
was to wait on God in prayer with faith and patience.

The assurance became doubly sure that _God would build for Himself_ a
large orphan house near Bristol, to show to all, near and far, what a
blessed privilege it is to trust in Him. He desired God Himself so
manifestly to act as that he should be seen by all men to be nothing but
His instrument, passive in His hands. Meanwhile he went on with his
daily search into the Word, where he found instruction so rich, and
encouragement so timely, that the Scriptures seemed written for his
special use--to convey messages to him from above. For example, in the
opening of the Book of Ezra, he saw how God, when His time had fully
come for the return of His exiled people to their own land and for the
rebuilding of His Temple, used Cyrus, an idolatrous king, to issue an
edict, and to provide means for carrying out His own unknown purpose. He
saw also how God stirred up the people to help the returning exiles in
their work; and he said to himself, this same God can and will, in His
own way, supply the money and all the needed help of man, stirring up
the hearts of His own children to aid as He may please.

The first donations toward the work themselves embody a suggestive
lesson. On December 10th, one thousand pounds had been given in one sum;
twenty days later, fifty pounds more; and the next day, three and
sixpence, followed, the same evening, by a second gift of a thousand
pounds. Shortly after, a little bag, made of foreign seeds, and a flower
wrought of shells, were sent to be sold for the fund; and, in connection
with these last gifts, of very little inherent value, a promise was
quoted, which had been prominently before the giver's mind, and which
brought more encouragement to Mr. Muller than any mere sum of money:

       "Who art thou, O great mountain?
        Before Zerubbabel, thou shalt become a plain!"
                                        (Zech. iv. 7.)

Gifts, however large, were never estimated by intrinsic worth, but as
tokens of God's working in the minds of His people, and of His gracious
working with and through His servant; and, for this reason, a thousand
pounds caused no more sincere praise to God and no more excitement of
mind than the fourpence given subsequently by a poor orphan.

Specially asking the Lord to go before him, Mr. Muller now began to seek
a suitable _site._ About four weeks passed in seemingly fruitless
search, when he was strongly impressed that very soon the Lord would
give the ground, and he so told his helpers on the evening of Saturday,
January 31, 1846. Within two days, his mind was drawn to _Ashley Down,_
where he found lots singularly suited for his needs. Shortly after, he
called twice on the owner, once at his house and again at his office;
but on both occasions failing to find him, he only left a message. He
judged that God's hand was to be seen _even in his not finding the man
he sought,_ and that, having twice failed the same day, he was not to
push the matter as though self-willed, but patiently wait till the
morrow. When he did find the owner, his patience was unexpectedly
rewarded. He confessed that he had spent two wakeful hours in bed,
thinking about his land, and about what reply he should make to Mr.
Muller's inquiry as to its sale for an orphan house; and that he had
determined, if it were applied for, to ask but one hundred and twenty
pounds an acre, instead of two hundred, his previous price.

The bargain was promptly completed; and thus the Lord's servant, by not
being in a hurry, saved, in the purchase of the site of seven acres,
five hundred and sixty pounds! Mr. Muller had asked the Lord to go
before him, and He had done so in a sense he had not thought of, first
speaking about the matter to the owner, holding his eyes waking till He
had made clear to him, as His servant and steward, what He would have
him do in the sale of that property.*

* Appendix G.

Six days after, came the formal offer from the London architect of his
services in surveying, in draughting plans, elevations, sections, and
specifications, and in overseeing the work of construction; and a week
later he came to Bristol, saw the site, and pronounced it in all
respects well fitted for its purpose.

Up to June 4, 1846, the total sum in hand for the building was a little
more than twenty-seven hundred pounds, a small part only of the sum
needful; but Mr. Muller felt no doubt that in God's own time all that
was required would be given. Two hundred and twelve days he had been
waiting on God for the way to be opened for building, and he resolved to
wait still further until the _whole sum_ was in hand, using for the
purpose only such gifts as were specified or left free for that end. He
also wisely decided that others must henceforth share the burden, and
that he would look out ten brethren of honest report, full of the Holy
Ghost and of wisdom, to act as trustees to hold and administer this
property in God's name. He felt that, as this work was now so enlarging,
and the foundations of a permanent Institution were to be laid, the
Christian public, who would aid in its erection and support, would be
entitled to a representation in its conduct. At such a point as this
many others have made a serious mistake, forfeiting confidence by
administering public benefactions in a private manner and an autocratic
spirit--their own head being the office, and their own pocket the
treasury, of a public and benevolent institution.

Satan again acted as a hinderer. After the ground for the new orphan
house had been found, bought and paid for, unforeseen obstacles
prevented prompt possession; but Mr. Muller's peace was not disturbed,
knowing even hindrances to be under God's control. If the Lord should
allow one piece of land to be taken from him, it would only be because
He was about to give him one still better; and so the delay only proved
his faith and perfected his patience.

On July 6th, two thousand pounds were given--twice as large a gift as
had yet come in one donation; and, on January 25, 1847, another like
offering, so that, on July 5th following, the work of building began.
Six months later, after four hundred days of waiting upon God for this
new orphan house, nine thousand pounds had been given in answer to
believing prayer.

As the new building approached completion, with its three hundred large
windows, and requiring full preparation for the accommodation of about
three hundred and thirty inmates, although above eleven thousand pounds
had been provided, several thousand more were necessary. But Mr. Muller
was not only helped, but far beyond his largest expectations. Up to May
26, 1848, these latter needs existed, and, had but _one_ serious
difficulty remained unremoved, the result must have been failure. But
all the necessary money was obtained, and even more, and all the helpers
were provided for the oversight of the orphans. On June 18, 1849, more
than twelve years after the beginning of the work, the orphans began to
be transferred from the four rented houses on Wilson Street to the new
orphan house on Ashley Down. Five weeks passed before fresh applicants
were received, that everything about the new institution might first be
brought into complete order by some experience in its conduct. By May
26, 1850, however, there were in the house two hundred and seventy-five
children, and the whole number of inmates was three hundred and eight.

The name--"The New Orphan _House"_ rather than _"Asylum"_--was chosen to
distinguish it from another institution, near by; and particularly was
it requested that it might never be known as _"Mr. Muller's_ Orphan
House," lest undue prominence be given to one who had been merely God's
instrument in its erection. He esteemed it a sin to appropriate even
indirectly, or allow others to attribute to him, any part of the glory
which belonged solely to Him who had led in the work, given faith and
means for it, and helped in it from first to last. The property was
placed in the hands of eleven trustees, chosen by Mr. Muller, and the
deeds were enrolled in chancery. Arrangements were made that the house
should be open to visitors only on Wednesday afternoons, as about one
hour and a half were necessary to see the whole building.

Scarcely were the orphans thus housed on Ashley Down, before Mr.
Muller's heart felt enlarged desire that one thousand, instead of three
hundred, might enjoy such privileges of temporal provision and spiritual
instruction; and, before the new year, 1851, had dawned, this yearning
had matured into a purpose. With his uniform carefulness and
prayerfulness, he sought to be assured that he was not following
self-will, but the will of God; and again in the scales of a pious
judgment the reasons for and against were conscientiously weighed. Would
he be going 'beyond his measure,' spiritually, or naturally? Was not the
work, with its vast correspondence and responsibility, already
sufficiently great? Would not a new orphan house for three hundred
orphans cost another fifteen thousand pounds, or, if built for seven
hundred, with the necessary ground, thirty-five thousand? And, even when
built and fitted and filled, would there not be the providing for daily
wants, which is a perpetual care, and cannot be paid for at once like a
site and a building? It would demand eight thousand pounds annual outlay
to provide for another seven hundred little ones. To all objections the
one all-sufficient answer was the all-sufficient God; and, because Mr.
Muller's eye was on His power, wisdom, and riches, his own weakness,
folly, and poverty were forgotten. Another objection was suggested: What
if he should succeed in thus housing and feeding a thousand poor waifs,
what would become of the institution _after his death?_ The reply is
memorable: "My business is, with all my might, to _serve my own
generation by the will of God:_ in so doing I shall best serve the next
generation, should the Lord Jesus tarry." Were such objection valid, it
were as valid against beginning any work likely to outlive the worker.
And Mr. Muller remembered how Francke at Halle had to meet the same
objection when, now over two hundred years ago, he founded the largest
charitable establishment which, up to 1851, existed in the world. But
when, after about thirty years of personal superintendence, Francke was
taken away, his son-in-law, as we have seen, became the director. That
fellow countryman who had spoken to Mr. Muller's soul in 1826, thus
twenty-five years later encouraged him to go forward, to do his own duty
and leave the future to the Eternal God.

Several reasons are recorded by Mr. Muller as specially influencing
still further advance: the many applications that could not, for want of
room, be accepted; the low moral state of the poorhouses to which these
children of poverty were liable to be sent; the large number of
distressing cases of orphanhood, known to be deserving of help; the
previous experiences of the Lord's gracious leading and of the work
itself; his calmness in view of the proposed expansion; and the
spiritual blessing possible to a larger number of homeless children. But
one reason overtopped all others: an enlarged service to man, attempted
and achieved solely in dependence upon God, would afford a
correspondingly weightier witness to the Hearer of prayer. These
reasons, here recorded, will need no repetition in connection with
subsequent expansions of the work, for, at every new stage of advance,
they were what influenced this servant of God.

On January 4, 1851, another offering was received, of three thousand
pounds--the largest single donation up to that date--which, being left
entirely to his own disposal, encouraged him to go forward.

Again, he kept his own counsel. Up to January 25th, he had not
mentioned, even to his own wife, his thought of a further forward
movement, feeling that, to avoid all mistakes, he must first of all get
clear light from God, and not darken it by misleading human counsel. Not
until the Twelfth Report of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution was
issued, was the public apprised of his purpose, with God's help to
provide for seven hundred more needy orphans.

Up to October 2, 1851, only about eleven hundred pounds had been given
directly toward the second proposed orphan house, and, up to May 26th
following, a total of some thirty-five hundred pounds. But George Muller
remembered one who, "after he had patiently endured, obtained the
promise." He had waited over two years before all means needful for the
first house had been supplied, and could wait still longer, if so God
willed it, for the answers to present prayers for means to build a
second.

After waiting upwards of nineteen months for the building fund for the
second house, and receiving, almost daily, something in answer to
prayer, on January 4, 1853, he had intimation that there were about to
be paid him, as _the joint donation of several Christians, eighty-one
hundred pounds,_ of which he appropriated six thousand for the building
fund. Again he was not surprised nor excited, though exceeding joyful
and triumphant in God. Just two years previous, when recording the
largest donation yet received,--three thousand pounds,--he had recorded
also his expectation of still greater things; and now a donation between
two and three times as large was about to come into his hands. It was
not the amount of money, however, that gave him his overflowing delight,
but the fact that not in vain had he made his boast in God.

As now some four hundred and eighty-three orphans were waiting for
admission, he was moved to pray that soon the way might be opened for
the new building to be begun. James i. 4 was deeply impressed upon him
as the injunction now to be kept before him: "But let patience have her
perfect work, that ye may be perfect, and entire, wanting nothing."

On May 26, 1853, the total sum available for the new building was about
twelve thousand five hundred pounds, and over five hundred orphans had
applied. Twice this sum would be needed, however, before the new house
could be begun without risk of debt.

On January 8, 1855, several Christian friends united in the promise that
fifty-seven hundred pounds should be paid to him for the work of God,
and of this, thirty-four hundred was by him set apart for the building
fund. As there were now between seven hundred and eight hundred
applicants, it seemed of God that, at least, a site should be secured
for another new orphan house; and a few weeks later Mr. Muller applied
for the purchase of two fields adjoining the site of the first house. As
they could not, however, be sold at that time, the only resource was to
believe that the Lord had other purposes, or would give better ground
than that on which His servant had set his mind.

Further thought and prayer suggested to him that two houses could be
built instead of one, and located on each side of the existing building,
upon the ground already owned. Accordingly it was determined to begin,
on the south side, the erection of a house to accommodate four hundred
orphans, there being money in the bank, or soon to be available,
sufficient to build, fit up, and furnish it.

On May 26, 1856, nearly thirty thousand pounds were in hand for the new
Orphan House No. 2; and on November 12, 1857, this house was opened for
four hundred additional orphans, and there was a balance of nearly
twenty-three hundred pounds. The God who provided the building furnished
the helpers, without either difficulty or advertising.

With the beginning of the new year, Mr. Muller began to lay aside six
hundred pounds as the first of the appropriations for the _third_ orphan
house, and the steps which led to the accomplishment of this work, also,
were identical with those taken hitherto. A purchase was made of
additional ground, adjoining the two buildings; and, as there were so
many applicants and the cost of providing for a larger number would be
but little more, it was determined to build so as to receive four
hundred and fifty instead of three hundred, rejoicing that, in every
enlargement of the work, it would be more apparent how much one poor
man, simply trusting in God, can bring about by prayer; and that thus
other children of God might be led to carry on the work of God in
dependence solely on Him, and generally to trust Him more in all
circumstances and positions.

Orphan House No. 3 was opened March 12, 1862, and with over ten thousand
pounds in hand for current expenses. All the helpers needed had not then
been supplied, but this delay was only a new incentive to believing
prayer: and, instead of _once, thrice,_ a day, God was besought to
provide suitable persons. One after another was thus added, and in no
case too late, so that the reception of children was not hindered nor
was the work embarrassed.

Still further enlargement seemed needful, for the same reasons as
previously. There was an increasing demand for accommodation of new
applicants, and past experience of God's wondrous dealings urged him
both to attempt and to expect greater things. Orphan Houses Nos. 4 and 5
began to loom up above his horizon of faith. By May 26, 1862, he had
over sixty-six hundred pounds to apply on their erection. In November,
1864, a large donation of five thousand pounds was received from a donor
who would let neither his name nor residence be known, and by this time
about twenty-seven thousand pounds had thus accumulated toward the fifty
thousand required. As more than half the requisite sum was thus in hand,
the purchase of a site might safely be made and the foundations for the
buildings be laid. Mr. Muller eyes had, for years, been upon land
adjoining the three houses already built, separated from them only by
the turnpike road. He called to see the agent, and found that the
property was subject to a lease that had yet two years to run. This
obstacle only incited to new prayer, but difficulties seemed to
increase: the price asked was too high, and the Bristol Waterworks
Company was negotiating for this same piece of land for reservoir
purposes. Nevertheless God successively removed all hindrances, so that
the ground was bought and conveyed to the trustees in March, 1865; and,
after the purchase-money was paid, about twenty-five thousand pounds yet
remained for the structures. Both the cost and the inconvenience of
building would be greatly lessened by erecting both houses at the same
time; and God was therefore asked for ample means speedily to complete
the whole work.

In May, 1866, over thirty-four thousand pounds being at Mr. Muller's
disposal, No. 4 was commenced; and in January following, No. 5 also. Up
to the end of March, 1867, over fifty thousand pounds had been supplied,
leaving but six thousand more needful to fit and furnish the two
buildings for occupancy. By the opening of February, 1868. fifty-eight
thousand pounds in all had been donated; so that, on November 5, 1868,
new Orphan House No. 4, and on January 6, 1870, No. 5, were thrown open,
a balance of several thousand pounds remaining for general purposes.
Thus, early in 1870, the orphan work had reached its complete outfit, in
five large buildings on Ashley Down with accommodations for two thousand
orphans and for all needed teachers and assistants.

Thus have been gathered, into one chapter, the facts about the erection
of this great monument to a prayer-hearing God on Ashley Down, though
the work of building covered so many years. Between the first decision
to build, in 1845, and the opening of the third house, in 1862, nearly
seventeen years had elapsed, and before No. 5 was opened, in 1870,
twenty-five years. The work was one in its plan and purpose. At each new
stage it supplies only a wider application and illustration of the same
laws of life and principles of conduct, as, from the outset of the work
in Bristol, had with growing power controlled George Muller. His one
supreme aim was the glory of God; his one sole resort, believing prayer;
his one trusted oracle, the inspired Word; and his one divine Teacher,
the Holy Spirit. One step taken in faith and prayer had prepared for
another; one act of trust had made him bolder to venture upon another,
implying a greater apparent risk and therefore demanding more implicit
trust. But answered prayer was rewarded faith, and every new risk only
showed that there was no risk in confidently leaning upon the truth and
faithfulness of God.

One cannot but be impressed, in visiting the orphan houses, with several
prominent features, and first of all their magnitude. They are very
spacious, with about seventeen hundred large windows, and accommodations
for over two thousand inmates. They are also very substantial, being
built of stone and made to last. They are scrupulously plain; utility
rather than beauty seems conspicuously stamped upon them, within and
without. Economy has been manifestly a ruling law in their construction;
the furniture is equally unpretentious and unostentatious; and, as to
garniture, there is absolutely none. To some few, they are almost too
destitute of embellishment, and Mr. Muller has been blamed for not
introducing some aesthetic features which might relieve this bald
utilitarianism and serve to educate the taste of these orphans.

To all such criticisms, there are two or three adequate answers. First,
Mr. Muller subordinated everything to his one great purpose, the
demonstration of the fact that the Living God is the Hearer of prayer.
Second, he felt himself to be the steward of God's property, and he
hesitated to spend one penny on what was not necessary to the frugal
carrying on of the work of God. He felt that all that could be spared
without injury to health, a proper mental training, and a thorough
scriptural and spiritual education, should be reserved for the relief of
the necessities of the poor and destitute elsewhere. And again, he felt
that, as these orphans were likely to be put at service in plain homes,
and compelled to live frugally, any surroundings which would accustom
them to indulge refined tastes, might by contrast make them discontented
with their future lot. And so he studied to promote simply their health
and comfort, and to school them to contentment when the necessities of
life were supplied.

But, more than this, a moment's serious thought will show that, had he
surrounded them with those elegancies which elaborate architecture and
the other fine arts furnish, he might have been even more severely
criticised. He would have been spending the gifts of the poor who often
sorely denied themselves for the sake of these orphans, to purchase
embellishments or secure decorations which, if they had adorned the
humble homes of thousands of donors, would have made their gifts
impossible. When we remember how many offerings, numbering tens of
thousands, were, like the widow's mites, very small in themselves, yet,
relatively to ability, very large, it will be seen how incongruous it
would have been to use the gifts, saved only by limiting even the wants
of the givers, to buy for the orphans what the donors could not and
would not afford for themselves.

Cleanness, neatness, method, and order, however, everywhere reign, and
honest labour has always had, at the orphan houses, a certain dignity.
The tracts of land, adjoining the buildings, are set apart as
vegetable-gardens, where wholesome exercise is provided for the orphan
boys, and, at the same time, work that helps to provide daily food, and
thus train them in part to self-support.

Throughout these houses studious care is exhibited, as to methodical
arrangement. Each child has a square and numbered compartment for
clothes, six orphans being told off, at a time, in each section, to take
charge. The boys have each three suits, and the girls, five dresses
each, the girls being taught to make and mend their own garments. In the
nursery, the infant children have books and playthings to occupy and
amuse them, and are the objects of tender maternal care. Several
children are often admitted to the orphanage from one family, in order
to avoid needless breaking of household ties by separation. The average
term of residence is about ten years, though some orphans have been
there for seventeen.

The daily life is laid out with regularity and goes on like clockwork in
punctuality. The children rise at six and are expected to be ready at
seven, the girls for knitting and the boys for reading, until eight
o'clock, when breakfast is served. Half an hour later there is a brief
morning service, and the school begins at ten. Half an hour of
recreation on the playground prepares for the one-o'clock dinner, and
school is resumed, until four; then comes an hour and a half of play or
outdoor exercise, a half-hour service preceding the six-o'clock meal.
Then the girls ply the needle, and the boys are in school, until
bedtime, the younger children going to rest at eight, and the older, at
nine. The food is simple, ample, and nutritious, consisting of bread,
oatmeal, milk, soups, meat, rice, and vegetables. Everything is adjusted
to one ultimate end; to use Mr. Muller's own words: "We aim at this:
that, if any of them do not turn out well, temporally or spiritually,
and do not become useful members of society, it shall not at least be
_our_ fault." The most thorough and careful examination of the whole
methods of the institution will only satisfy the visitor that it will
not be the fault of those who superintend this work, if the orphans are
not well fitted, body and soul, for the work of life, and are not
prepared for a blessed immortality.


CHAPTER XV

THE MANIFOLD GRACE OF GOD

SOME one has quaintly said, in commenting upon the Twenty-third Psalm,
that "the coach in which the Lord's saints ride has not only a driver,
but two footmen"--_"goodness and mercy shall follow me."_

Surely these two footmen of the Lord, in their celestial livery of
grace, followed George Muller all the days of his life. Wonderful as is
the story of the building of those five orphan houses on Ashley Down,
many other events and experiences no less showed the goodness and mercy
of God, and must not be unrecorded in these pages, if we are to trace,
however imperfectly, His gracious dealings; and having, by one
comprehensive view, taken in the story of the orphan homes, we may
retrace our steps to the year when the first of these houses was
planned, and, following another path, look at Mr. Muller's personal and
domestic life.

He himself loved to trace the Lord's goodness and mercy, and he saw
abundant proofs that they had followed him. A few instances may be
given, from different departments of experience, as representative
examples.

The Lord's tender care was manifest as to his beloved daughter Lydia. It
became clear in the year 1843, that, both for the relief of the mother
and the profit of the daughter, it would be better that Lydia should be
taught elsewhere than at home; and in answer to prayer, her father was
divinely directed to a Christian sister, whose special gifts in the way
of instructing and training children were manifestly from the Spirit,
who divides unto all believers severally as He will. She seemed to be
marked of God, as the woman to whom was to be intrusted the responsible
task of superintending the education of Lydia. Mr. Muller both expected
and desired to pay for such training, and asked for the account, which
in the first instance he paid, but the exact sum was returned to him
anonymously; and, for the six remaining years of his daughter's stay, he
could get no further bills for her schooling. Thus God provided for the
board and education of this only child, not only without cost to her
parents, but to their intense satisfaction as being under the true
"nurture and admonition of the Lord;" for while at this school, in
April, 1846, Lydia found peace in believing, and began that beautiful
life in the Lord Jesus Christ, that, for forty-four years afterward, so
singularly exhibited His image.

Many Christian parents have made the fatal mistake of intrusting their
children's education to those whose gifts were wholly intellectual and
not spiritual, and who have misled the young pupils entrusted to their
care, into an irreligious or infidel life, or, at best, a career of mere
intellectualism and worldly ambition. In not a few instances, all the
influences of a pious home have been counteracted by the atmosphere of a
school which, if not godless, has been without that fragrance of
spiritual devoutness and consecration which is indispensable to the true
training of impressible children during the plastic years when character
is forming for eternity!

Goodness and mercy followed Mr. and Mrs. Muller conspicuously in their
sojourn in Germany in 1845, which covered about three months, from July
19th to October 11th.

God plainly led to Stuttgart, where brethren had fallen into grievous
errors and needed again a helping hand. When the strong impression laid
hold of Mr. Muller, more than two months before his departure for the
Continent, that he was to return there for a season, he began definitely
to pray for means to go with, on May 3rd, and, within a _quarter hour_
after, five hundred pounds were received, the donor specifying that the
money was given for all expenses needful, "preparatory to, and attendant
upon" this proposed journey. The same goodness and mercy followed all
his steps while abroad. Provision was made, in God's own strange way,
for suitable lodgings in Stuttgart, at a time when the city was
exceptionally crowded, a wealthy retired surgeon, who had never before
rented apartments, being led to offer them. All Mr. Muller's labours
were attended with blessing: during part of the time he held as many as
eight meetings a week; and he was enabled to publish eleven tracts in
German, and judiciously to scatter over two hundred and twenty thousand
of them, as well as nearly four thousand of his Narrative, and yet evade
interference from the police.

One experience of this sojourn abroad should have special mention for
the lesson it suggests, both in charity for others' views and loving
adaptation to circumstances. A providential opening occurred to address
meetings of about one hundred and fifty members of the state church. In
his view the character of such assemblies was not wholly conformed to
the Scripture pattern, and hence did not altogether meet his approval;
but such opportunity was afforded to bear testimony for the truth's
sake, and to exhibit Christian unity upon essentials, for love's sake,
that he judged it of the Lord that he should enter this open door. Those
who knew Mr. Muller but little, but knew his positive convictions and
uncompromising loyalty to them, might suspect that he would have little
forbearance with even minor errors, and would not bend himself from his
stern attitude of inflexibility to accommodate himself to those who were
ensnared by them. But those who knew him better, saw that he held fast
the form of sound words with faith and love which are in Christ Jesus.
Like Paul, ever ready to be made all things to all men that by all means
he might save some, in his whole character and conduct nothing shone
more radiantly beautiful, than Love. He felt that he who would lift up
others must bow himself to lay hold on them; that to help brethren we
must bear with them, not insisting upon matters of minor importance as
though they were essential and fundamental. Hence his course, instead of
being needlessly repellant, was tenderly conciliatory; and it was a
conspicuous sign of grace that, while holding his own views of truth and
duty so positively and tenaciously, the intolerance of bigotry was so
displaced by the forbearance of charity that, when the Lord so led and
circumstances so required, he could conform for a time to customs whose
propriety he doubted, without abating either the earnestness of his
conviction or the integrity of his testimony.

God's goodness and mercy were seen in the fact that, whenever more
liberal things were devised for Him, He responded in providing liberally
means to carry out such desires. This was abundantly illustrated not
only in the orphan work, but in the history of the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution; when, for years together, the various branches of this work
grew so rapidly, until the point of full development was reached. The
time indeed came when, in some departments, it pleased God that
contraction should succeed expansion, but even here goodness ruled, for
it was afterward seen that it was because _other brethren_ had been led
to take up such branches of the Lord's work, in all of which
developments Mr. Muller as truly rejoiced as though it had been his work
alone that was honoured of God.

The aiding of brethren in the mission fields grew more and more dear to
his heart, and the means to indulge his unselfish desires were so
multiplied that, in 1846, he found, on reviewing the history of the
Lord's dealings, that he had been enabled to expend about _seven times_
as much of late years as previously. It may here be added, again by way
of anticipation, that when, nineteen years later, in 1865, he sat down
to apportion to such labourers in the Lord as he was wont to assist, the
sums he felt it desirable to send to each, he found before him the names
of _one hundred and twenty-two_ such! Goodness and mercy indeed! Here
was but one branch of his work, and yet to what proportions and
fruitfulness it had grown! He needed four hundred and sixty-six pounds
to send them to fill out his appropriations, and he lacked ninety-two of
this amount. He carried the lack to the Lord, and _that evening_
received five pounds, and the _next morning_ a hundred more, and a
further "birthday memorial" of fifty, so that he had in all thirty-seven
more than he had asked.

What goodness and mercy followed him in the strength he ever had to bear
the heavy loads of care incident to his work! The Lord's coach bore him
and his burdens together. Day by day his gracious Master preserved his
peace unbroken, though disease found its way into this large family,
though fit homes and work must be found for outgoing orphans, and fit
care and training for incoming orphans; though crises were constantly
arising and new needs constantly recurring, grave matters daily demanded
prayer and watching, and perpetual diligence and vigilance were needful;
for the Lord was his Helper, and carried all his loads.

During the winter of 1846-7 there was a peculiar season of dearth. Would
God's goodness and mercy fail? There were those who looked on, more than
half incredulous, saying to themselves if not to others, "I wonder how
it is now with Mr. Muller and his orphans! If he is able to provide for
them now as he has been, we will say nothing." But all through this time
of widespread want his witness was, "We lack nothing: God helps us."
Faith led when the way was too dark for sight; in fact the darker the
road the more was the Hand felt that leads the blind by a way they know
not. _They went through that winter as easily as through any other from
the beginning of the work!_

Was it no sign that God's 'footmen' followed George Muller that the work
never ceased to be both a work of faith and of prayer? that no
difficulties or discouragements, no successes or triumphs, ever caused
for an hour a departure from the sublime essential principles on which
the work was based, or a diversion from the purpose for which it had
been built up?

We have heard it said of a brother, much honoured of God in beginning a
work of faith, that, when it had grown to greater proportions, he seemed
to change its base to that of a business scheme. How it glorifies God
that the holy enterprise, planted in Bristol in 1834, has known no such
alteration in its essential features during all these years! Though the
work grew, and its needs with it, until the expenses were twofold,
threefold, fourfold, and, at last, seventyfold what they were when that
first Orphan House was opened in Wilson Street, there has been no
_change of base,_ never any looking to man for patronage or support,
never any dependence upon a regular income or fixed endowment. God has
been, all through these years, as at first, the sole Patron and
Dependence. The Scriptural Knowledge Institution has not been wrecked on
the rocks of financial failure, nor has it even drifted away from its
original moorings in the safe anchorage-ground of the Promises of
Jehovah.

Was it not goodness and mercy that kept George Muller ever grateful as
well as faithful! He did not more constantly feel his need of faith and
prayer than his duty and privilege of abounding joy and praise. Some
might think that, after such experiences of answered prayer, one would
be less and less moved by them, as the novelty was lost in the
uniformity of such interpositions. But no. When, in June, 1853, at a
time of sore need, the Lord sent, in one sum, three hundred pounds, he
could scarcely contain his triumphant joy in God. He walked up and down
his room for a long time, his heart overflowing and his eyes too, his
mouth filled with laughter and his voice with song, while he gave
himself afresh to the faithful Master he served. God's blessings were to
him always new and fresh. Answered prayers never lost the charm of
novelty; like flowers plucked fresh every hour from the gardens of God,
they never got stale, losing none of their beauty or celestial
fragrance.

And what goodness and mercy was it that never suffered prayerfulness and
patience to relax their hold, either when answers seemed to come fast
and thick like snow-flakes, or when the heavens seemed locked up and
faith had to wait patiently and long! Every day brought new demands for
continuance in prayer. In fact, as Mr. Muller testifies, the only
difference between latter and former days was that the difficulties were
greater in proportion as the work was larger. But he adds that this was
to be expected, for the Lord gives faith for the very purpose of trying
it for the glory of His own name and the good of him who has the faith,
and it is by these very trials that trust learns the secret of its
triumphs.

Goodness and mercy not only guided but also _guarded_ this servant of
God. God's footmen bore a protecting shield which was always over him.
Amid thousands of unseen perils, occasionally some danger was known,
though generally after it was passed. While at Keswick labouring in
1847, for example, a man, taken deranged while lodging in the same
house, shot himself. It afterward transpired that he had an impression
that Mr. Muller had designs on his life, and had he met Mr. Muller
during this insane attack he would probably have shot him with the
loaded pistol he carried about on his person.

The pathway of this man of God sometimes led through deep waters of
affliction, but goodness and mercy still followed, and held him up. In
the autumn of 1852, his beloved brother-in-law, Mr. A. N. Groves, came
back from the East Indies, very ill; and in May of the next year, after
blessed witness for God, he fell asleep at Mr. Muller's house. To him
Mr. Muller owed much through grace at the outset of his labours in 1829.
By his example his faith had been stimulated and helped when, with no
visible support or connection with any missionary society, Mr. Groves
had gone to Baghdad with wife and children, for the sake of mission work
in this far-off field, resigning a lucrative practice of about fifteen
hundred pounds a year. The tie between these men was very close and
tender and the loss of this brother-in-law gave keen sorrow.

In July following, Mr. and Mrs. Muller went through a yet severer trial.
Lydia, the beloved daughter and only child,--born in 1832 and new-born
in 1846, and at this time twenty years old and a treasure without
price,--was taken ill in the latter part of June, and the ailment
developed into a malignant typhoid which, two weeks later, brought her
to the gates of death. These parents had to face the prospect of being
left childless. But faith triumphed and prayer prevailed. Their darling
Lydia was spared to be, for many years to come, a blessing beyond words,
not only to them and to her future husband, but to many others in a
wider circle of influence. Mr. Muller found, in this trial, a special
proof of God's goodness and mercy, which he gratefully records, in the
growth in grace, evidenced in his entire and joyful acquiescence in the
Father's will, when, with such a loss apparently before him, his
confidence was undisturbed that all things would work together for good.
He could not but contrast with this experience of serenity, that broken
peace and complaining spirit with which he had met a like trial in
August, 1831, twenty-one years before. How, like a magnet among steel
filings, the thankful heart finds the mercies and picks them out of the
black dust of sorrow and suffering!

The second volume of Mr. Muller's Narrative closes with a paragraph in
which he formally disclaims as impudent presumption and pretension all
high rank as a miracle-worker, and records his regret that any work,
based on scriptural promises and built on the simple lines of faith and
prayer, should be accounted either phenomenal or fanatical.

The common ways of accounting for its success would be absurdly
ridiculous and amusing were they not so sadly unbelieving. Those who
knew little or nothing, either of the exercise of faith or the
experience of God's faithfulness, resorted to the most God-dishonouring
explanations of the work. Some said: "Mr. Muller is a foreigner; his
methods are so novel as to attract attention." Others thought that the
"Annual Reports brought in the money," or suggested that he had "a
_secret treasure."_ His quiet reply was, that his being a foreigner
would be more likely to repel than to attract confidence; that the
novelty would scarcely avail him after more than a score of years; that
other institutions which issued reports did not always escape want and
debt; but, as to the secret treasure to which he was supposed to have
access, he felt constrained to confess that there was _more in that
supposition than the objectors were aware of._ He had indeed a Treasury,
inexhaustible--in the promises of a God unchangeably faithful--from
which he admits that he had already in 1856 drawn for twenty-two years,
and in all over one hundred and thirteen thousand pounds. As to the
Reports, it may be worth while to notice that he never but once in his
life advertised the public of any need, and that was the _need of more
orphans_--more to care for in the name of the Lord--a single and
singular ease of advertising, by which he sought not to increase his
_income,_ but his _expenditure_--not asking the public to aid him in
supporting the needy, but to increase the occasion of his outlay!

So far was he from depending upon any such sources of supply as the
unbelieving world might think, that it was in the drying up of all such
channels that he found the opportunity of his faith and of God's power.
The visible treasure was often so small that it was reduced to nothing,
but the invisible Treasure was God's riches in glory, and could be drawn
from without limit. This it was to which he looked alone, and in which
he felt that he had a river of supply that can never run dry.*

* Appendix H.

The orphan work had, to Mr. Muller, many charms which grew on him as he
entered more fully into it. While his main hope was to be the means of
spiritual health to these children, he had the joy of seeing how God
used these homes for the promotion of their physical welfare also, and,
in cases not a few, for the entire renovation of their weak and diseased
bodies. It must be remembered that most of them owed their orphan
condition to that great destroyer, Consumption. Children were often
brought to the orphan houses thoroughly permeated by the poison of bad
blood, with diseased tendencies, and sometimes emaciated and
half-starved, having had neither proper food nor medical care.

For example, in the spring of 1855, four children from five to nine
years old, and of one family, were admitted to the orphanage, all in a
deplorable state from lack of both nursing and nutrition. It was a
serious question whether they should be admitted at all, as such cases
tended to turn the institution into a hospital, and absorb undue care
and time. But to dismiss them seemed almost inhuman, certainly
_inhumane._ So, trusting in God, they were taken in and cared for with
parental love. A few weeks later these children were physically
unrecognizable, so rapid had been the improvement in health, and
probably there were with God's blessing four graves less to be dug.

The trials incident to the moral and spiritual condition of the orphans
were even greater, however, than those caused by ill health and
weakness. When children proved incorrigibly bad, they were expelled,
lest they should corrupt others, for the institution was not a
_reformatory,_ as it was not a _hospital._ In 1849, a boy, of less than
eight years, had to be sent away as a confirmed liar and thief, having
twice run off with the belongings of other children and gloried in his
juvenile crimes. Yet the forbearance exercised even in his case was
marvelously godlike, for, during over five years, he had been the
subject of private admonitions and prayers and all other methods of
reclamation; and, when expulsion became the last resort, he was solemnly
and with prayer, before all the others, sent away from the orphan house,
that if possible such a course might prove a double blessing, a remedy
to him and a warning to others; and even then this young practised
sinner was followed, in his expulsion, by loving supplication.

Towards the end of November, 1857, it was found that a serious leak in
the boiler of the heating apparatus of house No. 1 would make repairs at
once necessary, and as the boilers were encased in bricks and a new
boiler might be required, such repairs must consume time. Meanwhile how
could three hundred children, some of them very young and tender, be
kept warm? Even if gas-stoves could be temporarily set up, chimneys
would be needful to carry off the impure air; and no way of heating was
available during repairs, even if a hundred pounds were expended to
prevent risk of cold. Again Mr. Muller turned to the Living God, and,
trusting in Him, decided to have the repairs begun. A day or so before
the fires had to be put out, a bleak north wind set in. The work could
no longer be delayed; yet weather, prematurely cold for the season,
threatened these hundreds of children with hurtful exposure. The Lord
was boldly appealed to. "Lord, these are _Thy_ orphans: be pleased to
change this north wind into a south wind, and give the workmen a mind to
work that the job may be speedily done."

The evening before the repairs actually began, the cold blast was still
blowing; but _on that day a south wind blew, and the weather was so mild
that no fire was needful!_ Not only so, but, as Mr. Muller went into the
cellar with the overseer of the work, to see whether the repairs could
in no way be expedited, he heard him say, in the hearing of the men,
"they will work late this evening, and come very early again to-morrow."
_"We would rather, sir,"_ was the reply, _"work all night."_ And so,
within about thirty hours, the fire was again burning to heat the water
in the boiler; and, until the apparatus was again in order, that
merciful soft south wind had continued to blow. Goodness and mercy were
following the Lord's humble servant, made the more conspicuous by the
crises of special trial and trouble.

Every new exigency provoked new prayer and evoked new faith. When, in
1862, several boys were ready to be apprenticed, and there were no
applications such as were desired, prayer was the one resort, as
advertising would tend to bring applications from masters who sought
apprentices for the sake of the premium. But every one of the eighteen
boys was properly bound over to a Christian master, whose business was
suitable and who would receive the lad into his own family.

About the same time one of the drains was obstructed which runs about
eleven feet underground. When three holes had been dug and as many
places in the drain tapped in vain, prayer was offered that in the
fourth case the workmen might be guided to the very spot where the
stoppage existed--and the request was literally answered.

Three instances of marked deliverance, in answer to prayer, are
specially recorded for the year between May 26, 1864, and the same date
in 1865, which should not be passed by without at least a mention.

First, in the great drought of the summer of 1864, when the fifteen
large cisterns in the three orphan houses were empty, and the nine deep
wells, and even the good spring which had never before failed, were
almost all dry. Two or three thousand gallons of water were daily
required, and daily prayer was made to the God of the rain. See how God
provided, while pleased to withhold the supply from above! A farmer,
near by, supplied, from his larger wells, about half the water needful,
the rest being furnished by the half-exhausted wells on Ashley Down;
and, when he could no longer spare water, without a day's interval,
another farmer offered a supply from a brook which ran through his
fields, and thus there was abundance until the rains replenished
cisterns and wells.*

* About twenty years later the Bristol Water Works Co. introduced pipes
and thus a permanent and unfailing supply.

Second, when, for three years, scarlet and typhus fevers and smallpox,
being prevalent in Bristol and the vicinity threatened the orphans,
prayer was again made to Him who is the God of health as well as of
rain. There was no case of scarlet or typhus fever during the whole
time, though smallpox was permitted to find an entrance into the
smallest of the orphan houses. Prayer was still the one resort. The
disease spread to the other houses, until at one time fifteen were ill
with it. The cases, however, were mercifully light, and the Lord was
besought to allow the epidemic to spread _no further._ Not another child
was taken; and when, after nine months, the disease altogether
disappeared, not one child had died of it, and only one teacher or adult
had had an attack, and that was very mild. What ravages the disease
might have made among the twelve hundred inmates of these orphan houses,
had it then prevailed as later, in 1872!

Third, tremendous gales visited Bristol and neighbourhood in January,
1865. The roofs of the orphan houses were so injured as to be laid open
in at least twenty places, and large panes of glass were broken. The day
was Saturday, and no glazier and slater could be had before Monday. So
the Lord of wind and weather was besought to protect the exposed
property during the interval. The wind calmed down, and the rain was
restrained until midday of Wednesday, when the repairs were about
finished, but heavy rainfalls drove the slaters from the roof. One
exposed opening remained and much damage threatened; but, in answer to
prayer, the rain was stayed, and the work resumed. No damage had been
done while the last opening was unrepaired for it had exposed the
building from the _south,_ while the rain came from the _north._

Mr. Muller records these circumstances with his usual particularity, as
part of his witness to the Living God, and to the goodness and mercy
that closely and continually followed him.

During the next year, 1865-6, scarlet fever broke out in the orphanage.
In all thirty-nine children were ill, but all recovered. Whooping-cough
also made its appearance; but though, during that season, it was not
only very prevalent but very malignant in Bristol, in all the three
houses there were but seventeen cases, and the only fatal one was that
of a little girl with constitutionally weak lungs.

During this same year, however, the Spirit of God wrought mightily among
the girls, as in the previous year among the boys, so that over one
hundred became deeply earnest seekers after salvation; and so, even in
tribulation, consolation abounded in Christ. Mr. Muller and his wife and
helpers now implored God to deepen and broaden this work of His Spirit.
Towards the end of the year closing in May, 1866, Emma Bunn, an orphan
girl of seventeen, was struck with consumption. Though, for fourteen
years, she had been under Mr. Muller's care, she was, in this dangerous
illness, still careless and indifferent; and, as she drew near to death,
her case continued as hopeless as ever. Prayer was unceasing for her;
and it pleased God suddenly to reveal Christ to her as her Saviour.
Great self-loathing now at once took the place of former indifference;
confession of sin, of previous callousness of conscience; and
unspeakable joy in the Lord, of former apathy and coldness. It was a
spiritual miracle--this girl's sudden transformation into a witness for
God, manifesting deepest conviction for past sin and earnest concern for
others. Her thoughtless and heedless state had been so well known that
her conversion and dying messages were now the Lord's means of the _most
extensive and God-glorifying work ever wrought up to that time among the
orphans._ In one house alone three hundred and fifty were led to seek
peace in believing.

What lessons lie hidden--nay, lie on the very surface--to be read of
every willing observer of these events! Prayer can break even a hard
heart; a memory, stored with biblical truth and pious teaching, will
prove, when once God's grace softens the heart and unlooses the tongue,
a source of both personal growth in grace and of capacity for wide
service to others. We are all practically too careless of the training
of children, and too distrustful of young converts. Mr. Muller was more
and more impressed by the triumphs of the grace of God as seen in
children converted at the tender age of nine or ten and holding the
beginning of their confidence steadfast unto the end.

These facts and experiences, gleaned, like handfuls of grain, from a
wide field, show the character both of the seed sown and the harvest
reaped, from the sowing.

Again, when, in 1866, cholera developed in England, in answer to special
prayer _not one_ case of this disease was known in the orphan houses;
and when, in the same autumn, whooping-cough and measles broke out,
though eight children had the former and two hundred and sixty-two, the
latter, not one child died, or was afterward debilitated by the attack.
From May, 1866, to May, 1867, out of over thirteen hundred children
under care, only eleven died, considerably less than one per cent.

That severe and epidemic disease should find its way into the orphanages
at all may seem strange to those who judge God's faithfulness by
appearances, but many were the compensations for such trials. By them
not only were the hearts of the children often turned to God, but the
hearts of helpers in the Institution were made more sympathetic and
tender, and the hearts of God's people at large were stirred up to
practical and systematic help. God uses such seeming calamities as
'advertisements' of His work; many who would not have heard of the
Institution, or on whom what they did hear would have made little
impression, were led to take a deep interest in an orphanage where
thousands of little ones were exposed to the ravages of some malignant
and dangerous epidemic.

Looking back, in 1865, after thirty-one years, upon the work thus far
done for the Lord, Mr. Muller gratefully records that, during the entire
time, he had been enabled to hold fast the original principles on which
the work was based on March 5, 1834. He had never once gone into debt;
he had sought for the Institution no patron but the Living God; and he
had kept to the line of demarcation between believers and unbelievers,
in all his seeking for active helpers in the work.

His grand purpose, in all his labours, having been, from the beginning,
the glory of God, in showing what could be done through prayer and
faith, without any leaning upon man, his unequivocal testimony is:
"Hitherto hath the Lord helped us." Though for about five years they
had, almost daily, been in the constant trial of faith, they were as
constantly proving His faithfulness. The work had rapidly grown, till it
assumed gigantic proportions, but so did the help of God keep pace with
all the needs and demands of its growth.

In January, 1866, Mr. Henry Craik, who had for thirty-six years been Mr.
Muller's valued friend, and, since 1832, his coworker in Bristol, fell
asleep after an illness of seven months. In Devonshire these two
brethren had first known each other, and the acquaintance had
subsequently ripened, through years of common labour and trial, into an
affection seldom found among men. They were nearly of an age, both being
a little past sixty when Mr. Craik died. The loss was too heavy to have
been patiently and serenely borne, had not the survivor known and felt
beneath him the Everlasting Arms. And even this bereavement, which in
one aspect was an irreparable loss, was seen to be only another proof of
God's love. The look ahead might be a dark one, the way desolate and
even dangerous, but goodness and mercy were still following very close
behind, and would in every new place of danger or difficulty be at hand
to help over hard places and give comfort and cheer in the night season.


CHAPTER XVI

THE SHADOW OF A GREAT SORROW

"WITH clouds He covereth the light." No human life is without some
experience of clouded skies and stormy days, and sometimes "the clouds
return after the rain." It is a blessed experience to recognize the
silver lining on the darkest storm cloud, and, better still, to be sure
of the shining of God's light behind a sky that seems wholly and
hopelessly overcast.

The year 1870 was made forever pathetically memorable by the decease of
Mrs. Muller, who lived just long enough to see the last of the New
Orphan Houses opened. From the outset of the work in November, 1835, for
more than thirty-four years, this beloved, devoted wife had been also a
sympathetic helper.

This wedded life had approached very near to the ideal of connubial
bliss, by reason of mutual fitness, common faith in God and love for His
work, and long association in prayer and service. In their case, the
days of courtship were never passed; indeed the tender and delicate
mutual attentions of those early days rather increased than decreased as
the years went on; and the great maxim was both proven and illustrated,
that the secret of winning love is the secret of keeping it. More than
that, such affection grows and becomes more and more a fountain of
mutual delight. Never had his beloved "Mary" been so precious to her
husband as during the very year of her departure.

This marriage union was so happy that Mr. Muller could not withhold his
loving witness that he never saw her at any time after she became his
wife, without a new feeling of delight. And day by day they were wont to
find at least a few moments of rest together, sitting after dinner, hand
in hand, in loving intercourse of mind and heart, made the more complete
by this touch of physical contact, and, whether in speech or silence,
communing in the Lord. Their happiness in God and in each other was
perennial, perpetual, growing as the years fled by.

Mr. Muller's solemn conviction was that all this wedded bliss was due to
the fact that she was not only a devoted Christian, but that their one
united object was to live only and wholly for God; that they had always
abundance of work for God, in which they were heartily united; that this
work was never allowed to interfere with the care of their own souls, or
their seasons of private prayer and study of the Scriptures; and that
they were wont daily, and often thrice a day, to secure a time of united
prayer and praise when they brought before the Lord the matters which at
the time called for thanksgiving and supplication.

Mrs. Muller had never been a very vigorous woman, and more than once had
been brought nigh unto death. In October, 1859, after twenty-nine years
of wedded life and love, she had been laid aside by rheumatism and had
continued in great suffering for about nine months, quite helpless and
unable to work; but it was felt to be a special mark of God's love and
faithfulness that this very affliction was used by Him to reestablish
her in health and strength, the compulsory rest made necessary for the
greater part of a year being in Mr. Muller's judgment a means of
prolonging her life and period of service for the ten years following.
Thus a severe trial met by them both in faith had issued in much
blessing both to soul and body.

The closing scenes of this beautiful life are almost too sacred to be
unveiled to common eyes. For some few years before her departure, it was
plain that her health and vitality were declining. With difficulty could
she be prevailed on, however, to abate her activity, or, even when a
distressing cough attacked her, to allow a physician to be called. Her
husband carefully guarded and nursed her, and by careful attention to
diet and rest, by avoidance of needless exposure, and by constant resort
to prayer, she was kept alive through much weakness and sometimes much
pain. But, on Saturday night, February 5th, she found that she had not
the use of one of her limbs, and it was obvious that the end was nigh.
Her own mind was clear and her own heart at peace. She herself remarked,
"He will soon come." And a few minutes after four in the afternoon of
the Lord's day, February 6, 1870, she sweetly passed from human toils
and trials, to be forever with the Lord.

Under the weight of such a sorrow, most men would have sunk into depths
of almost hopeless despair. But this man of God, sustained by a divine
love, at once sought for occasions of thanksgiving; and, instead of
repining over his loss, gratefully remembered and recorded the goodness
of God in _taking_ such a wife, releasing her saintly spirit from the
bondage of weakness, sickness, and pain, rather than leaving her to a
protracted suffering and the mute agony of helplessness; and, above all,
introducing her to her heart's desire, the immediate presence of the
Lord Jesus, and the higher service of a celestial sphere. Is not that
grief akin to selfishness which dwells so much on our own deprivations
as to be oblivious of the ecstatic gain of the departed saints who,
withdrawn from us and absent from the body, are at home with the Lord?

It is only in those circumstances of extreme trial which prove to
ordinary men a crushing weight, that implicit faith in the Father's
unfailing wisdom and love proves its full power to sustain. Where
self-will is truly lost in the will of God, the life that is hidden in
Him is most radiantly exhibited in the darkest hour.

The death of this beloved wife afforded an illustration of this. Within
a few hours after this withdrawal of her who had shared with him the
planning and working of these long years of service, Mr. Muller went to
the Monday-evening prayer meeting, then held in Salem Chapel, to mingle
his prayers and praises as usual with those of his brethren. With a
literally shining countenance, he rose and said: "Beloved brethren and
sisters in Christ, I ask you to join with me in hearty praise and
thanksgiving to my precious Lord for His loving kindness in having taken
my darling, beloved wife out of the pain and suffering which she has
endured, into His own presence; and as I rejoice in everything that is
for her, happiness, so I now rejoice as I realize how far happier she
is, in beholding her Lord whom she loved so well, than in any joy she
has known or could know here. I ask you also to pray that the Lord will
so enable me to have fellowship in her joy that my bereaved heart may be
occupied with her blessedness instead of my unspeakable loss." These
remarkable words are supplied by one who was himself present and on
whose memory they made an indelible impression.

This occurrence had a marked effect upon all who were at that meeting.
Mrs. Muller was known by all as a most valuable, lovely, and holy woman
and wife. After nearly forty years of wedded life and love, she had left
the earthly home for the heavenly. To her husband she had been a
blessing beyond description, and to her daughter Lydia, at once a wise
and tender mother and a sympathetic companion. The loss to them both
could never be made up on earth. Yet in these circumstances this man of
God had grace given to forget his own and his daughter's irreparable
loss, and to praise God for the unspeakable gain to the departed wife
and mother.

The body was laid to rest on February 11th, many thousands of sorrowing
friends evincing the deepest sympathy. Twelve hundred orphans mingled in
the funeral procession, and the whole staff of helpers so far as they
could be spared from the houses. The bereaved husband strangely upheld
by the arm of the Almighty Friend in whom he trusted, took upon himself
the funeral service both at chapel and cemetery. He was taken seriously
ill afterward, but, as soon as his returning strength allowed, he
preached his wife's funeral sermon--another memorable occasion. It was
the supernatural serenity of his peace in the presence of such a
bereavement that led his attending physician to say to a friend, "I have
never before seen so _unhuman_ a man." Yes, _un_human indeed, though far
from _in_human, lifted above the weakness of mere humanity by a power
not of man.

That funeral sermon was a noble tribute to the goodness of the Lord even
in the great affliction of his life. The text was:

        _"Thou art good and doest good."_ (Psalm cxix. 68.)

Its three divisions were: "The Lord was good and did good: first, in
giving her to me; second in so long leaving her to me; and third, in
taking her from me." It is happily preserved in Mr. Muller's journal,
and must be read to be appreciated.*

* Narrative, III. 575-594.

This union, begun in prayer, was in prayer sanctified to the end. Mrs.
Muller's chief excellence lay in her devoted piety. She wore that one
ornament which is in the sight of God of great price--the meek and quiet
spirit; the beauty of the Lord her God was upon her. She had
sympathetically shared her husband's prayers and tears during all the
long trial-time of faith and patience, and partaken of all the joys and
rewards of the triumph hours. Mr. Muller's own witness to her leaves
nothing more to be added, for it is the tribute of him who knew her
longest and best. He writes:

"She was God's own gift, exquisitely suited to me even in natural
temperament. Thousands of times I said to her, 'My darling, God Himself
singled you out for me, as the most suitable wife I could possibly wish
to have had.'"

As to culture, she had a basis of sensible practical education,
surmounted and adorned by ladylike accomplishments which she had neither
time nor inclination to indulge in her married life. Not only was she
skilled in the languages and in such higher studies as astronomy, but in
mathematics also; and this last qualification made her for thirty-four
years an invaluable help to her husband, as month by month she examined
all the account-books, and the hundreds of bills of the matrons of the
orphan houses, and with the eye of an expert detected the least mistake.

All her training and natural fitness indicated a providential adaptation
to her work, like "the round peg in the round hole." Her practical
education in needlework, and her knowledge of the material most
serviceable for various household uses, made her competent to direct
both in the purchase and manufacture of cloths and other fabrics for
garments, bed-linen, etc. She moved about those orphan houses like an
angel of Love, taking unselfish delight in such humble ministries as
preparing neat, clean beds to rest the little ones, and covering them
with warm blankets in cold weather. For the sake of Him who took little
children in His arms, she became to these thousands of destitute orphans
a nursing mother.

Shortly after her death, a letter was received from a believing orphan
some seventeen years before sent out to service, asking, in behalf also
of others formerly in the houses, permission to erect a stone over Mrs.
Muller's grave as an expression of love and grateful remembrance.
Consent being given, hundreds of little offerings came in from orphans
who during the twenty-five years previous had been under her motherly
oversight--a beautiful tribute to her worth and a touching offering from
those who had been to her as her larger family.

The dear daughter Lydia had, two years before Mrs. Muller's departure,
found in one of her mother's pocketbooks a sacred memorandum in her own
writing, which she brought to her bereaved father's notice two days
after his wife had departed. It belongs among the precious relics of her
history. It reads as follows:

"Should it please the Lord to remove M. M. [Mary Muller] by a sudden
dismissal, let none of the beloved survivors consider that it is in the
way of judgment, either to her or to them. She has so often, when
enjoying conscious nearness to the Lord, felt how sweet it would be now
to depart and to be _forever_ with Jesus, that nothing but the shock it
would be to her beloved husband and child, etc. has checked in her the
longing desire that _thus_ her happy spirit might take its flight.
Precious Jesus! Thy will in this as in everything else, and not hers, be
done!"

These words were to Mr. Muller her last legacy; and with the comfort
they gave him, the loving sympathy of his precious Lydia who did all
that a daughter could do to fill a mother's place, and with the
remembrance of Him who hath said, 'I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee,' he went on his lonely pilgrim way, rejoicing in the Lord, feeling
nevertheless a wound in his heart, that seemed rather to deepen than to
heal.

Sixteen months passed, when Mr. James Wright, who like Mr. Muller had
been bereft of his companion, asked of him the hand of the beloved Lydia
in marriage. The request took Mr. Muller wholly by surprise, but he felt
that, to no man living, could he with more joyful confidence commit and
intrust his choicest remaining earthly treasure; and, ever solicitous
for others' happiness rather than his own, he encouraged his daughter to
accept Mr. Wright's proffered love, when she naturally hesitated on her
father's account. On November 16, 1871, they were married, and began a
life of mutual prayer and sympathy which, like that of her father and
mother, proved supremely and almost ideally happy, helpful, and useful.

While as yet this event was only in prospect, Mr. Muller felt his own
lonely condition keenly, and much more in view of his daughter's
expected departure to her husband's home. He felt the need of some one
to share intimately his toils and prayers, and help him in the Lord's
work, and the persuasion grew upon him that it was God's will that he
should marry again. After much prayer, he determined to ask Miss
Susannah Grace Sangar to become his wife, having known her for more than
twenty-five years as a consistent disciple, and believing her to be well
fitted to be his helper in the Lord. Accordingly, fourteen days after
his daughter's marriage to Mr. Wright, he entered into similar relations
with Miss Sangar, who for years after joined him in prayer, unselfish
giving, and labours for souls.

The second Mrs. Muller was of one mind with her husband as to the
stewardship of the Lord's property. He found her poor, for what she had
once possessed she had lost; and had she been rich he would have
regarded her wealth as an obstacle to marriage, unfitting her to be his
companion in a self-denial based on scriptural principle. Riches or
hoarded wealth would have been to both of them a snare, and so she also
felt; so that, having still, before her marriage, a remnant of two
hundred pounds, she at once put it at the Lord's disposal, thus joining
her husband in a life of voluntary poverty; and although subsequent
legacies were paid to her, she continued to the day of her death to be
poor for the Lord's sake.

The question had often been asked Mr. Muller what would become of the
work when he, the master workman, should be removed. Men find it hard to
get their eyes off the instrument, and remember that there is only,
strictly speaking, one AGENT, for an agent is _one who works,_ and an
instrument is what _the agent works with._ Though provision might be
made, in a board of trustees, for carrying on the orphan work, where
would be found the man to take the direction of it, a man whose spirit
was so akin to that of the founder that he would trust in God and depend
on Him just as Mr. Muller had done before him? Such were the inquiries
of the somewhat doubtful or fearful observers of the great and
many-branched work carried on under Mr. Muller's supervision.

To all such questions he had always one answer ready--his one uniform
solution of all cares and perplexities: _the Living God._ He who had
built the orphan houses could maintain them; He who had raised up one
humble man to oversee the work in His name, could provide for a worthy
successor, like Joshua who not only _followed_ but _succeeded_ Moses.
Jehovah of hosts is not limited in resources.

Nevertheless much prayer was offered that the Lord would provide such a
successor, and, in Mr. James Wright, the prayer was answered. He was not
chosen, as Mr. Muller's son-in-law, for the choice was made before his
marriage to Lydia Muller was even thought of by him. For more than
thirty years, even from his boyhood, Mr. Wright had been well known to
Mr. Muller, and his growth in the things of God had been watched by him.
For thirteen years he had already been his "right hand" in all most
important matters; and, for nearly all of that time, had been held up
before God as his successor, in the prayers of Mr. and Mrs. Muller, both
of whom felt divinely assured that God would fit him more and more to
take the entire burden of responsibility.

When, in 1870, the wife fell asleep in Jesus, and Mr. Muller was himself
ill, he opened his heart to Mr. Wright as to the succession. Humility
led him to shrink from such a post, and his then wife feared it would
prove too burdensome for him; but all objections were overborne when it
was seen and felt to be God's call. It was twenty-one months after this,
when, in November, 1871, Mr. Wright was married to Mr. Muller's only
daughter and child, so that it is quite apparent that he had neither
sought the position he now occupies, nor was he appointed to it because
he was Mr. Muller's son-in-law, for, at that time, his first wife was
living and in health. From May, 1872, therefore, Mr. Wright _shared_
with his father-in-law the responsibilities of the Institution, and gave
him great joy as a partner and successor in full sympathy with all the
great principles on which his work had been based.

A little over three years after Mr. Muller's second marriage, in March,
1874, Mrs. Muller was taken ill, and became, two days later, feverish
and restless, and after about two weeks was attacked with hemorrhage
which brought her also very near to the gates of death. She rallied; but
fever and delirium followed and obstinate sleeplessness, till, for a
second time, she seemed at the point of death. Indeed so low was her
vitality that, as late as April 17th, a most experienced London
physician said that he had never known any patient to recover from such
an illness; and thus a third time all human hope of restoration seemed
gone. And yet, in answer to prayer, Mrs. Muller was raised up, and in
the end of May, was taken to the seaside for change of air, and grew
rapidly stronger until she was entirely restored. Thus the Lord spared
her to be the companion of her husband in those years of missionary
touring which enabled him to bear such worldwide witness. Out of the
shadow of his griefs this beloved man of God ever came to find that
divine refreshment which is as the "shadow of a great rock in a weary
land."


CHAPTER XVII

THE PERIOD OF WORLD-WIDE WITNESS

GOD'S real answers to prayer are often seeming denials. Beneath the
outward request He hears the voice of the inward desire, and He responds
to the mind of the Spirit rather than to the imperfect and perhaps
mistaken words in which the yearning seeks expression. Moreover, His
infinite wisdom sees that a larger blessing may be ours only by the
withholding of the lesser good which we seek; and so all true prayer
trusts Him to give His own answer, not in our way or time, or even to
our own expressed desire, but rather to His own unutterable groaning
within us which He can interpret better than we.

Monica, mother of Augustine, pleaded with God that her dissolute son
might not go to Rome, that sink of iniquity; but he was permitted to go,
and thus came into contact with Ambrose, bishop of Milan, through whom
he was converted. God fulfilled the mother's _desire_ while denying her
_request._

When George Muller, five times within the first eight years after
conversion, had offered himself as a missionary, God had blocked his
way; now, at sixty-five, He was about to permit him, in a sense he had
never dreamed of, to be a missionary to the world. From the beginning of
his ministry he had been more or less an itinerant, spending no little
time in wanderings about in Britain and on the Continent; but now he was
to go to the regions beyond and spend the major part of seventeen years
in witnessing to the prayer-hearing God.

These extensive missionary tours occupied the evening of Mr. Muller's
useful life, from 1875 to 1892. They reached, more or less, over Europe,
America, Asia, Africa, and Australia; and would of themselves have
sufficed for the work of an ordinary life.

They had a singular suggestion. While, in 1874, compelled by Mrs.
Muller's health to seek a change of air, he was preaching in the Isle of
Wight, and a beloved Christian brother for whom he had spoken, himself a
man of much experience in preaching, told him how 'that day had been the
happiest of his whole life'; and this remark, with others like it
previously made, so impressed him that the Lord was about to use him to
help on believers outside of Bristol, that he determined no longer to
confine his labours in the Word and doctrine to any one place, but to go
wherever a door might open for his testimony.

In weighing this question he was impressed with seven reasons or
motives, which led to these tours:

1. To _preach the gospel_ in its simplicity, and especially to show how
salvation is based, not upon feelings or even upon faith, but upon the
finished work of Christ; that justification is ours the moment we
believe, and we are to accept and claim our place as accepted in the
Beloved without regard to our inward states of feeling or emotion.

2. To _lead believers to know their saved state,_ and to realize their
standing in Christ, great numbers not only of disciples, but even
preachers and pastors, being themselves destitute of any real peace and
joy in the Lord, and hence unable to lead others into joy and peace.

3. To _bring believers back to the Scriptures,_ to search the Word and
find its hidden treasures; to test everything by this divine touchstone
and hold fast only what will stand this test; to make it the daily
subject of meditative and prayerful examination in order to translate it
into daily obedience.

4. To _promote among all true believers, brotherly love;_ to lead them
to make less of those non-essentials in which disciples differ, and to
make more of those great essential and foundation truths in which all
true believers are united; to help all who love and trust one Lord to
rise above narrow sectarian prejudices, and barriers to fellowship.

5. To _strengthen the faith of believers,_ encouraging a simpler trust,
and a more real and unwavering confidence in God, and particularly in
the sure answers to believing prayer, based upon His definite promises.

6. To _promote separation from the world_ and deadness to it, and so to
increase heavenly-mindedness in children of God; at the same time
warning against fanatical extremes and extravagances, such as sinless
perfection while in the flesh.

7. And finally to _fix the hope of disciples on the blessed coming of
our Lord Jesus;_ and, in connection therewith, to instruct them as to
the true character and object of the present dispensation, and the
relation of the church to the world in this period of the out-gathering
of the Bride of Christ.

These seven objects may be briefly epitomized thus: Mr. Muller's aim was
to lead sinners to believe on the name of the Son of God, and so to
_have eternal life;_ to help those who have thus believed, to _know_
that they have this life; to teach them so to _build up_ themselves on
their most holy faith, by diligent searching into the word of God, and
praying in the Holy Ghost, as that this life shall be more and more a
real possession and a conscious possession; to promote among all
disciples the _unity of the Spirit_ and the _charity_ which is the bond
of perfectness, and to help them to exhibit that life before the world;
to incite them to cultivate an _unworldly and spiritual type of
character_ such as conforms to the life of God in them; to lead them to
the _prayer of faith_ which is both the expression and the expansion of
the life of faith; and to direct their hope to the _final appearing of
the Lord,_ so that they should purify themselves even as He is pure, and
occupy till He comes. Mr. Muller was thus giving himself to the double
work of evangelization and edification, on a scale commensurate with his
love for a dying world, as opportunity afforded doing good unto all men,
and especially to them who are of the household of faith.

Of these long and busy missionary journeys, it is needful to give only
the outline, or general survey. March 263 1875, is an important date,
for it marks the starting-point. He himself calls this "the beginning of
his missionary tours."

From Bristol he went to Brighton, Lewes, and Sunderland--on the way to
Sunderland preaching to a great audience in the Metropolitan Tabernacle,
at Mr. Spurgeon's request--then to Newcastle-on-Tyne, and back to London,
where he spoke at the Mildmay Park Conference, Talbot Road Tabernacle,
and 'Edinburgh Castle.' This tour closed, June 5th, after seventy
addresses in public, during about ten weeks.

Less than six weeks passed, when, on August 14th, the second tour began,
in which case the special impulse that moved him was a desire to follow
up the revival work of Mr. Moody and Mr. Sankey. Their short stay in
each place made them unable to lead on new converts to higher
attainments in knowledge and grace, and there seemed to be a call for
some instruction fitted to confirm these new believers in the life of
obedience. Mr. Muller accordingly followed these evangelists in England,
Ireland, and Scotland, staying in each place from one week to six, and
seeking to educate and edify those who had been led to Christ. Among the
places visited on this errand in 1875, were London; then Kilmarnock,
Saltwater, Dundee, Perth, Glasgow, Kirkentilloch in Scotland, and Dublin
in Ireland; then, returning to England, he went to Leamington, Warwick,
Kenilworth, Coventry, Rugby, etc. In some cases, notably at Mildmay
Park, Dundee and Glasgow, Liverpool and Dublin, the audiences numbered
from two thousand to six thousand, but everywhere rich blessing came
from above. This second tour extended into the new year, 1876, and took
in Liverpool, York, Kendal, Carlisle, Annan, Edinburgh, Arbroath,
Montrose, Aberdeen, and other places; and when it closed in July, having
lasted nearly eleven months, Mr. Muller had preached at least three
hundred and six times, an average of about one sermon a day, exclusive
of days spent in travel. So acceptable and profitable were these labours
that there were over one hundred invitations urged upon him which he was
unable to accept.

The third tour was on the Continent. It occupied most of the year
closing May 26, 1877, and embraced Paris, various places in Switzerland,
Prussia and Holland, Alsace, Wurtemberg, Baden, Hesse Darmstadt, etc.
Altogether over three hundred addresses were given in about seventy
cities and villages to all of which he had been invited by letter. When
this tour closed more than sixty written invitations remained
unaccepted, and Mr. Muller found that, through his work and his
writings, he was as well known in the continental countries visited, as
in England.

Turning now toward America, the fourth tour extended from August, 1877,
to June of the next year. For many years invitations had been coming
with growing frequency, from the United States and Canada; and of late
their urgency led him to recognize in them the call of God, especially
as he thought of the many thousands of Germans across the Atlantic, who
as they heard him speak in their own native tongue would keep the more
silence. (Acts xxii. 2.)

Mr. and Mrs. Muller, landing at Quebec, thence went to the United
States, where, during ten months, his labours stretched over a vast
area, including the States of New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, District of Columbia, Virginia, South Carolina,
Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Louisiana, and Missouri. Thus having swept
round the Atlantic sea-border, he crossed to the Pacific coast, and
returning visited Salt Lake City in Utah--the very centre and stronghold
of Mormonism--Illinois, Ohio, etc. He spoke frequently to large
congregations of Germans, and, in the Southern States, to the coloured
population; but he regarded no opportunity for service afforded him on
this tour as so inspiring as the repeated meetings with and for
ministers, evangelists, pastors, and Christian workers; and, next to
them in importance, his interviews with large bodies of students and
professors in the universities, colleges, theological seminaries, and
other higher schools of education. To cast the salt of the gospel into
the very springs of social influence, the sources whence power flows,
was to him a most sacred privilege. His singular catholicity, charity,
and humility drew to him even those who differed with him, and all
denominations of Christians united in giving him access to the people.
During this tour he spoke three hundred times, and travelled nearly ten
thousand miles; over one hundred invitations being declined, for simple
lack of time and strength.

After a stay in Bristol of about two months, on September 5, 1878, he
and his wife began the fifth of these missionary tours. In this case, it
was on the Continent, where he ministered in English, German, and
French; and in Spain and Italy, when these tongues were not available,
his addresses were through an interpreter. Many open doors the Lord set
before him, not only to the poorer and humbler classes, but to those in
the middle and higher ranks. In the Riviera, he had access to many of
the nobility and aristocracy, who from different countries sought health
and rest in the equable climate of the Mediterranean, and at Mentone he
and Mr. Spurgeon held sweet converse. In Spain Mr. Muller was greatly
gladdened by seeing for himself the schools, entirely supported by the
funds of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution, and by finding that, in
hundreds of cases, even popish parents so greatly valued these schools
that they continued to send their children, despite both the threats and
persuasions of the Romish priests. He found, moreover, that the pupils
frequently at their homes read to their parents the word of God and sang
to them the gospel hymns learned at these schools, so that the influence
exerted was not bounded by its apparent horizon, as diffused or
refracted sunlight reaches with its illumining rays far beyond the
visible track of the orb of day.

The work had to contend with governmental opposition. When a place was
first opened at Madrid for gospel services, a sign was placed outside,
announcing the fact. Official orders were issued that the sign should be
painted over, so as to obliterate the inscription. The painter of the
sign, unwilling both to undo his own work and to hinder the work of God,
painted the sign over with water-colours, which would leave the original
announcement half visible, and would soon be washed off by the rains;
whereupon the government sent its own workman to daub the sign over with
thick oil-colour.

Mr. Muller, ready to preach the gospel to those at Rome also, felt his
spirit saddened and stirred within him, as he saw that city wholly given
to idolatry--not pagan but papal idolatry--the Rome not of the Caesars,
but of the popes. While at Naples he ascended Vesuvius. Those masses of
lava, which seemed greater in bulk than the mountain itself, more
impressed him with the power of God than anything else he had ever seen.
As he looked upon that smoking cone, and thought of the liquid death it
had vomited forth, he said within himself, "What cannot God do!" He had
before felt somewhat of His Almightiness in love and grace, but he now
saw its manifestation in judgment and wrath. His visit to the Vaudois
valleys, where so many martyrs had suffered banishment and imprisonment,
loss of goods and loss of life for Jesus' sake, moved him to the depths
of his being and stimulated in him the martyr spirit.

When he arrived again in Bristol, June 18, 1879, he had been absent nine
months and twelve days, and preached two hundred and eighty-six times
and in forty-six towns and cities. After another ten weeks in Bristol,
he and his wife sailed again for America, the last week of August, 1879,
landing at New York the first week in September. This visit took in the
States lying between the Atlantic Ocean and the valley of the
Mississippi--New York and New Jersey, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan and
Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota--and, from London and Hamilton to
Quebec, Canada also shared the blessing. This visit covered only two
hundred and seventy-two days, but he preached three hundred times, and
in over forty cities. Over one hundred and fifty written invitations
still remained without response, and the number increased the longer his
stay. Mr. Muller therefore assuredly gathered that the Lord called him
to return to America, after another brief stay at Bristol, where he felt
it needful to spend a season annually, to keep in close touch with the
work at home and relieve Mr. and Mrs. Wright of their heavy
responsibilities, for a time.

Accordingly on September 15, 1880, again turning from Bristol, these
travellers embarked the next day on their seventh mission tour, landing,
ten days later, at Quebec. Mr. Muller had a natural antipathy to the
sea, in his earlier crossing to the Continent having suffered much from
sea-sickness; but he had undertaken these long voyages, not for his own
pleasure or profit, but wholly on God's errand; and he felt it to be a
peculiar mark of the loving-kindness of the Lord that, while he was
ready to endure any discomfort, or risk his life for His sake, he had
not in his six crossings of the Atlantic suffered in the least, and on
this particular voyage was wholly free from any indisposition.

From Quebec he went to Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
and Pennsylvania. Among other places of special interest were Boston,
Plymouth--the landing-place of the Pilgrims,--Wellesley and South Hadley
colleges--the great schools for woman's higher education,--and the
centres farther westward, where he had such wide access to Germans. This
tour extended over a smaller area than before, and lasted but eight
months; but the impression on the people was deep and permanent. He had
spoken about two hundred and fifty times in all; and Mrs. Muller had
availed herself of many opportunities of personal dealing with
inquirers, and of distributing books and tracts among both believers and
unbelievers. She had also written for her husband more than seven
hundred letters,--this of itself being no light task, inasmuch as it
reaches an average of about three a day. On May 30, 1881, they were
again on British shores.

The eighth long preaching tour, from August 23, 1881, to May 30, 1882,
was given to the Continent of Europe, where again Mr. Muller felt led by
the low state of religious life in Switzerland and Germany.

This visit was extended to the Holy Land in a way strikingly
providential. After speaking at Alexandria, Cairo, and Port Said, he
went to Jaffa, and thence to Jerusalem, on November 28. With reverent
feet he touched the soil once trodden by the feet of the Son of God,
visiting, with pathetic interest, Gethsemane and Golgotha, and crossing
the Mount of Olives to Bethany, thence to Bethlehem and back to Jaffa,
and so to Haipha, Mt. Carmel, and Beirut, Smyrna, Ephesus,
Constantinople, Athens, Brindisi, Rome, and Florence. Again were months
crowded with services of all sorts whose fruit will appear only in the
Day of the Lord Jesus, addresses being made in English, German, and
French, or by translation into Arabic, Armenian, Turkish, and modern
Greek. Sightseeing was always but incidental to the higher service of
the Master. During this eighth tour, covering some eight months, Mr.
Muller spoke hundreds of times, with all the former tokens of God's
blessing on his seed-sowing.

The _ninth_ tour, from August 8, 1882, to June 1, 1883, was occupied
with labours in Germany, Austria, and Russia, including Bavaria,
Hungary, Bohemia, Saxony, and Poland. His special joy it was to bear
witness in Kroppenstadt, his birthplace, after an absence of about
sixty-four years. At St. Petersburg, while the guest of Princess Lieven,
at her mansion he met and ministered to many of high rank; he also began
to hold meetings in the house of Colonel Paschkoff, who had suffered not
only persecution but exile for the Lord's sake. While the Scriptures
were being read one day in Buss, with seven poor Russians, a policeman
summarily broke up the meeting and dispersed the little company. At Lodz
in Poland, a letter was received, in behalf of almost the whole
population begging him to remain longer; and so signs seemed to
multiply, as he went forward, that he was in the path of duty and that
God was with him.

On September 26, 1883, the _tenth_ tour began, this time his face being
turned toward the Orient. Nearly sixty years before he had desired to go
to the East Indies as a missionary; now the Lord permitted him to carry
out the desire in a new and strange way, and _India_ was the
twenty-third country visited in his tours. He travelled over 21,000
miles, and spoke over two hundred times, to missionaries and Christian
workers, European residents, Eurasians, Hindus, Moslems, educated
natives, native boys and girls in the orphanage at Colar, etc. Thus, in
his seventy-ninth year, this servant of God was still in labours
abundant, and in all his work conspicuously blessed of God.

After some months of preaching in England, Scotland, and Wales, on
November 19, 1885, he and his wife set out on their fourth visit to the
United States, and their _eleventh longer mission tour._ Crossing to the
Pacific, they went to Sydney, New South Wales, and, after seven months
in Australia, sailed for Java, and thence to China, arriving at Hong
Kong, September 12th; Japan and the Straits of Malacca were also
included in this visit to the Orient. The return to England was by way
of Nice; and, after travelling nearly 38,000 miles, in good health Mr.
and Mrs. Muller reached home on June 14, 1887, having been absent more
than one year and seven months, during which Mr. Muller had preached
whenever and wherever opportunity was afforded.

Less than two months later, on August 12, 1887, he sailed for South
Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, Ceylon, and India. This twelfth long
tour closed in March, 1890, having covered thousands of miles. The
intense heat at one time compelled Mr. Muller to leave Calcutta, and on
the railway journey to Darjeeling his wife feared he would die. But he
was mercifully spared.

It was on this tour and in the month of January, 1890, while at
Jubbulpore, preaching with great help from the Lord, that a letter was
put into Mr. Muller's hands, from a missionary at Agra, to whom Mr.
Wright had sent a telegram, informing his father-in-law of his dear
Lydia's death. For nearly thirty years she had laboured gratuitously at
the orphan houses and it would he difficult to fill that vacancy; but
for fourteen years she had been her husband's almost ideal companion,
and for nearly fifty-eight years her father's unspeakable treasure--and
here were two other voids which could never be filled. But Mr. Muller's
heart, as also Mr. Wright's, was kept at rest by the strong confidence
that, however mysterious God's ways, all His dealings belong to one
harmonious spiritual mechanism in which every part is perfect and all
things work together for good. (Romans viii. 28.)

This sudden bereavement led Mr. Muller to bring his mission tour in the
East to a close and depart for Bristol, that he might both comfort Mr.
Wright and relieve him of undue pressure of work.

After a lapse of two months, once more Mr. and Mrs. Muller left home for
other extensive missionary journeys. They went to the Continent and were
absent from July, 1890, to May, 1892. A twelvemonth was spent in Germany
and Holland, Austria and Italy. This absence in fact included two tours,
with no interval between them, and concluded the series of extensive
journeys reaching through seventeen years.

This man--from his seventieth to his eighty-seventh year--when most men
are withdrawing from all activities, had travelled in forty-two
countries and over two hundred thousand miles, a distance equivalent to
nearly eight journeys round the globe! He estimated that during these
seventeen years he had addressed over three million people; and from all
that can be gathered from the records of these tours, we estimate that
he must have spoken, outside of Bristol, between five thousand and six
thousand times. What sort of teaching and testimony occupied these
tours, those who have known the preacher and teacher need not be told.
While at Berlin in 1891, he gave an address that serves as an example of
the vital truths which he was wont to press on the attention of fellow
disciples. We give a brief outline:

He first urged that believers should never, even under the greatest
difficulties, be discouraged, and gave for his position sound scriptural
reasons. Then he pointed out to them that the chief business of every
day is first of all to seek to be truly at rest and happy in God. Then
he showed how, from the word of God, all saved believers may know their
true standing in Christ, and how in circumstances of particular
perplexity they might ascertain the will of God. He then urged disciples
to seek with intense earnestness to become acquainted with God Himself
as revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and carefully to form and maintain
godly habits of systematic Bible study and prayer, holy living and
consecrated giving. He taught that God alone is the one all-satisfying
portion of the soul, and that we must determine to possess and enjoy Him
as such. He closed by emphasizing it as the one, single, all-absorbing,
daily aim to glorify God in a complete surrender to His will and
service.

In all these mission tours, again, the faithfulness of God
conspicuously seen, in the bounteous supply of every need. Steamer fares
and long railway journeys; hotel accommodations, ordinarily preferred to
private hospitality, which seriously interfered with private habits of
devotion, public work, and proper rest--such expenses demanded a heavy
outlay; the new mode of life, now adopted for the Lord's sake, was at
least three times as costly as the former frugal housekeeping; and yet,
in answer to prayer and without any appeal to human help, the Lord
furnished all that was required.

Accustomed to look, step by step, for such tokens of divine approval, as
emboldened him to go forward, Mr. Muller records how, when one hundred
pounds was sent to him for personal uses, this was recognized as a
foretoken from his great Provider, "by which," he writes, "God meant to
say to my own heart, 'I am pleased with thy work and service in going
about on these long missionary tours. I will pay the expenses thereof,
and I give thee here a specimen of what I am yet willing to do for
thee.'"

Two other facts Mr. Muller specially records in connection with these
tours: first, God's gracious guiding and guarding of the work at Bristol
so that it suffered nothing from his absence; and secondly, the fact
that these journeys had no connection with collecting of money for the
work or even informing the public of it. No reference was made to the
Institution at Bristol, except when urgently requested, and not always
even then; nor were collections ever made for it. Statements found their
way into the press that in America large sums were gathered, but their
falsity is sufficiently shown by the fact that in his first tour in
America, for example, the sum total of all such gifts was less than
sixty pounds, not more than two thirds of the outlay of every day at the
orphan houses.

These missionary tours were not always approved even by the friends and
advisers of Mr. Muller. In 1882, while experiencing no little difficulty
and trial, especially as to funds, there were not a few who felt a deep
interest in the Institution on Ashley Down, who would have had God's
servant discontinue his long absences, as to them it appeared that these
were the main reason for the falling off in funds. He was always open to
counsel, but he always reserved to himself an independent decision; and,
on weighing the matter well, these were some of the reasons that led him
to think that the work of God at home did not demand his personal
presence:

1. He had observed year after year that, under the godly and efficient
supervision of Mr. Wright and his large staff of helpers, every branch
of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution had been found as healthy and
fruitful during these absences as when Mr. Muller was in Bristol.

2. The Lord's approval of this work of wider witness had been in manner
conclusive and in measure abundant, as in the ample supply of funds for
these tours, in the wide doors of access opened, and in the large fruit
already evident in blessing to thousands of souls.

3. The strong impression upon his mind that this was the work which was
to occupy the 'evening of his life,' grew in depth, and was confirmed by
so many signs of God's leading that he could not doubt that he was led
both of God's providence and Spirit.

4. Even while absent, he was never out of communication with the helpers
at home. Generally he heard at least weekly from Mr. Wright, and any
matters needing his counsel were thus submitted to him by letter; prayer
to God was as effectual at a distance from Bristol as on the spot; and
his periodical returns to that city for some weeks or months between
these tours kept him in close touch with every department of the work.

5. The supreme consideration, however, was this: To suppose it necessary
for Mr. Muller himself to be at home _in order that sufficient means
should be supplied,_ was a direct contradiction of the very principles
upon which, and to maintain which, the whole work had been begun. _Real
trust in God is above circumstances and appearances._ And this had been
proven; for, during the third year after these tours began, the income
for the various departments of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution was
larger than ever during the preceding forty-four years of its existence;
and therefore, notwithstanding the loving counsel of a few donors and
friends who advised that Mr. Muller should stay at home, he kept to his
purpose and his principles, partly to demonstrate that no man's presence
is indispensable to the work of the Lord. "Them that honour Me I will
honour." (1 Samuel ii. 39.) He regarded it the greatest honour of his
life to bear this wide witness to God, and God correspondingly honoured
His servant in bearing this testimony.

It was during the first and second of these American tours that the
writer had the privilege of coming into personal contact with Mr.
Muller. While I was at San Francisco, in 1878, he was to speak on
Sabbath afternoon, May 12th, at Oakland, just across the bay, but
conscientious objections to needless Sunday travel caused me voluntarily
to lose what then seemed the only chance of seeing and hearing a man
whose career had been watched by me for over twenty years, as he was to
leave for the East a few days earlier than myself and was likely to be
always a little in advance. On reaching Ogden, however, where the branch
road from Salt Lake City joins the main line, Mr. and Mrs. Muller
boarded my train and we travelled to Chicago together. I introduced
myself, and held with him daily converse about divine things, and, while
tarrying at Chicago, had numerous opportunities for hearing him speak
there.

The results of this close and frequent contact were singularly blessed
to me, and at my invitation he came to Detroit, Michigan, in his next
tour, and spoke in the Fort Street Presbyterian Church, of which I was
pastor, on Sundays, January 18 and 25, 1880, and on Monday and Friday
evenings, in the interval.

In addition to these numerous and favourable opportunities thus
providentially afforded for hearing and conversing with Mr. Muller, he
kindly met me for several days in my study, for an hour at a time, for
conference upon those deeper truths of the word of God and deeper
experiences of the Christian life, upon which I was then very desirous
of more light. For example, I desired to understand more clearly the
Bible teaching about the Lord's coming. I had opposed with much
persistency what is known as the premillennial view, and brought out my
objections, to all of which he made one reply: "My beloved brother, I
have heard all your arguments and objections against this view, but they
have one fatal defect: _not one of them is based upon the word of God._
You will never get at the truth upon any matter of divine revelation
unless you lay aside your prejudices and like a little child ask simply
what is the testimony of Scripture."

With patience and wisdom he unravelled the tangled skein of my
perplexity and difficulty, and helped me to settle upon biblical
principles all matters of so-called expediency. As he left me, about to
visit other cities, his words fixed themselves in my memory. I had
expressed to him my growing conviction that the worship in the churches
had lost its primitive simplicity; that the pew-rent system was
pernicious; that fixed salaries for ministers of the gospel were
unscriptural; that the church of God should be administered only by men
full of the Holy Ghost, and that the duty of Christians to the
non-church-going masses was grossly neglected, etc. He solemnly said to
me: "My beloved brother, the Lord has given you much light upon these
matters, and will hold you correspondingly responsible for its use. If
you obey Him and walk in the light, you will have more; if not, the
light will be withdrawn."

It is a singular lesson on the importance of an anointed tongue, that
forty simple words, spoken over twenty years ago, have had a daily
influence on the life of him to whom they were spoken. Amid subtle
temptations to compromise the claims of duty and hush the voice of
conscience, or of the Spirit of God, and to follow the traditions of men
rather than the word of God, those words of that venerated servant of
God have recurred to mind with ever fresh force. We risk the forfeiture
of privileges which are not employed for God, and of obscuring
convictions which are not carried into action. God's word to us is _"use
or lose."_ "To him that hath shall be given: from him that hath not
shall be taken away even that which he seemeth to have." It is the hope
and the prayer of him who writes this memoir that the reading of these
pages may prove to be an interview with the man whose memorial they are,
and that the witness borne by George Muller may be to many readers a
source of untold and lifelong blessing.

It need not be said that to carry out conviction into action is a costly
sacrifice. It may make necessary renunciations and separations which
leave one to feel a strange sense both of deprivation and loneliness.
But he who will fly as an eagle does into the higher levels where
cloudless day abides, and live in the sunshine of God, must consent to
live a comparatively lonely life. No bird is so solitary as the eagle.
Eagles never fly in flocks: one, or at most two, and the two, mates,
being ever seen at once. But the life that is lived unto God, however it
forfeits human companionship, knows divine fellowship, and the child of
God who like his Master undertakes to "do always the things that please
Him," can like his Master say, "The Father hath not left me alone." "I
am alone; yet not alone, for the Father is with me." Whosoever will
promptly follow whatever light God gives, without regard to human
opinion, custom, tradition, or approbation, will learn the deep meaning
of these words: "Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord."


CHAPTER XVIII

FAITH AND PATIENCE IN SERVING

QUANTITY of service is of far less importance than quality. To do well,
rather than to do much, will be the motto of him whose main purpose is
to please God. Our Lord bade His disciples tarry until endued with power
from on high, because it is such enduement that gives to all witness and
work the celestial savour and flavour of the Spirit.

Before we come to the closing scenes, we may well look back over the
life-work of George Muller, which happily illustrates both quantity and
quality of service. It may be doubted whether any other one man of this
century accomplished as much for God and man, and yet all the abundant
offerings which he brought to his Master were characterized by a
heavenly fragrance.

The orphan work was but one branch of that tree--the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution--which owed its existence to the fact that its
founder devised large and liberal things for the Lord's cause. He sought
to establish or at least to aid Christian schools wherever needful, to
scatter Bibles and Testaments, Christian books and tracts; to aid
missionaries who were witnessing to the truth and working on a
scriptural basis in destitute parts; and though each of these objects
might well have engrossed his mind, they were all combined in the
many-sided work which his love for souls suggested.

An aggressive spirit is never content with what has been done, but is
prompt to enter any new door that is providentially opened. When the
Paris Exposition of 1867 offered such rare opportunities, both for
preaching to the crowds passing through the French capital, and for
circulating among them the Holy Scriptures, he gladly availed himself of
the services of two brethren whom God had sent to labour there, one of
whom spoke three, and the other, eight, modern languages; and through
them were circulated, chiefly at the Exposition, and in thirteen
different languages, nearly twelve thousand copies of the word of God,
or portions of the same. It has been estimated that at this
International Exhibition there were distributed in all over one and a
quarter million Bibles, in sixteen tongues, which were gratefully
accepted, even by Romish priests. Within six months those who thus
entered God's open door scattered more copies of the Book of God than in
ordinary circumstances would have been done by ten thousand colporteurs
in twenty times that number of months, and thousands of souls are known
to have found salvation by the simple reading of the New Testament. Of
this glorious work, George Muller was permitted to be so largely a
promoter.

At the Havre Exhibition of the following year, 1868, a similar work was
done; and in like manner, when a providential door was unexpectedly
opened into the Land of the Inquisition, Mr. Muller promptly took
measures to promote the circulation of the Word in Spain. In the
streets of Madrid the open Bible was seen for the first time, and
copies were sold at the rate of two hundred and fifty in an hour, so
that the supply was not equal to the demand. The same facts were
substantially repeated when free Italy furnished a field for sowing the
seed of the Kingdom. This wide-awake servant of God watched the signs of
the times and, while others slept, followed the Lord's signals of
advance.

One of the most fascinating features of the Narrative is found in the
letters from his Bible distributors. It is interesting also to trace the
story of the growth of the tract enterprise, until, in 1874, the
circulation exceeded three and three-quarter millions, God in His
faithfulness supplying abundant means.*

* Narrative, IV. 244.

The good thus effected by the distributors of evangelical literature
must not be overlooked in this survey of the many useful agencies
employed or assisted by Mr. Muller. To him the world was a field to be
sown with the seed of the Kingdom, and opportunities were eagerly
embraced for widely disseminating the truth. Tracts were liberally used,
given away in large quantities at open-air services, fairs, races and
steeplechases, and among spectators at public executions, or among
passengers on board ships and railway trains, and by the way. Sometimes,
at a single gathering of the multitudes, fifteen thousand were
distributed judiciously and prayerfully, and this branch of the work
has, during all these years, continued with undiminished fruitfulness to
yield its harvest of good.

All this was, from first to last, and of necessity, a work of faith. How
far faith must have been kept in constant and vigorous exercise can be
appreciated only by putting one's self in Mr. Muller's place. In the
year 1874, for instance, about forty-four thousand pounds were needed,
and he was compelled to count the cost and face the situation. Two
thousand and one hundred hungry mouths were daily to be fed, and as many
bodies to be clad and cared for. One hundred and eighty-nine
missionaries were needing assistance; one hundred schools, with about
nine thousand pupils, to be supported; four million pages of tracts and
tens of thousands of copies of the Scriptures to be yearly provided for
distribution; and, beside all these ordinary expenses, inevitable crises
or emergencies, always liable to arise in connection with the conduct of
such extensive enterprises, would from time to time call for
extraordinary outlay. The man who was at the head of the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution had to look at this array of unavoidable expenses,
and at the same time face the human possibility and probability of an
empty treasury whence the last shilling had been drawn. Let him tell us
how he met such a prospect: "God, our infinitely rich Treasurer, remains
to us. It is this which gives me peace.... Invariably, with this
probability before me, I have said to myself: 'God who has raised up
this work through me; God who has led me generally year after year to
enlarge it; God, who has supported this work now for more than forty
years, will still help and will not suffer me to be confounded, because
I rely upon Him. I commit the whole work to Him, and He will provide me
with what I need, in future also, though I know not whence the means are
to come.'"*

* Narrative, IV. 386, 387.

Thus he wrote in his journal, on July 28, 1874. Since then twenty-four
years have passed, and to this day the work goes on, though he who then
had the guidance of it sleeps in Jesus. Whoever has had any such
dealings with God, on however small a scale, cannot even _think_ of the
Lord as failing to honour a faith so simple, genuine, and childlike a
faith which leads a helpless believer thus to cast himself and all his
cares upon God with utter abandonment of all anxiety. This man put God
to proof, and proved to himself and to all who receive his testimony
that it is blessed to wait only upon Him. The particular point which he
had in view, in making these entries in his journal is the object also
of embodying them in these pages, namely, to show that, while the annual
expenses of this Institution were so exceedingly large and the income so
apparently uncertain, the soul of this believer was, to use his own
words, "THROUGHOUT, without the least wavering, stayed upon God,
believing that He who had through him begun the Institution, enlarged it
almost year after year, and upheld it for forty years in answer to
prayer by faith, would do this still and not suffer this servant of His
to be confounded."* Believing that God would still help, and supply the
means, George Muller was willing, and THOROUGHLY in heart prepared, if
necessary, to pass again through similar severe and prolonged seasons of
trial as he had already endured.

* Narrative, IV. 389.

The Living God had kept him calm and restful, amid all the ups and downs
of his long experience as the superintendent and director of this
many-sided work, though the tests of faith had not been light or short
of duration. For more than ten years at a time--as from August, 1838, to
April, 1849, day by day, and for months together from meal to meal--it
was necessary to look to God, almost without cessation, for daily
supplies. When, later on, the Institution was twentyfold larger and the
needs proportionately greater, for months at a time the Lord likewise
constrained His servant to lean from hour to hour, in the same
dependence, upon Him. All along through these periods of unceasing want,
the Eternal God was his refuge and underneath were the Everlasting Arms.
He reflected that God was aware of all this enlargement of the work and
its needs; he comforted himself with the consoling thought that he was
seeking his Master's glory; and that if in this way the greater glory
would accrue to Him for the good of His people and of those who were
still unbelievers, it was no concern of the servant; nay, more than
this, it behooved the servant to be willing to go on in this path of
trial, even unto the end of his course, if so it should please his
Master, who guides His affairs with divine discretion.

The trials of faith did not cease even until the end. July 28, 1881,
finds the following entry in Mr. Muller's journal:

"The income has been for some time past only about a third part of the
expenses. Consequently all we have for the support of the orphans is
nearly gone; and for the first four objects of the Institution we have
nothing at all in hand. The natural appearance now is that the work
cannot be carried on. But I BELIEVE that the Lord will help, both with
means for the orphans and also for other objects of the Institution, and
that we shall not be confounded; also that the work shall not need to be
given up. I am fully expecting help, and have written this to the glory
of God, that it may be recorded hereafter for the encouragement of His
children. The result will be seen. I expect that we shall not be
confounded, though for some years we have not been so poor."

While faith thus leaned on God, prayer took more vigorous hold. Six,
seven, eight times a day, he and his dear wife were praying for means,
looking for answers, and firmly persuaded that their expectations would
not be disappointed. Since that entry was made, seventeen more years
have borne their witness that this trust was not put to shame. Not a
branch of this tree of holy enterprise has been cut off by the sharp
blade of a stern necessity.

Though faith had thus tenaciously held fast to the promises, the
pressure was not at once relieved. When, a fortnight after these
confident records of trust in God had been spread on the pages of the
journal, the balance for the orphans was less than it had been for
twenty-five years, it would have seemed to human sight as though God had
forgotten to be gracious. But, on August 22nd, over one thousand pounds
came in for the support of the orphans and thus relief was afforded for
a time.

Again, let us bear in mind how in the most unprecedented straits God
alone was made the confidant, even the best friends of the Institution,
alike the poor and the rich, being left in ignorance of the pressure of
want. It would have been no sin to have made known the circumstances, or
even to have made an appeal for aid to the many believers who would
gladly have come to the relief of the work. But the _testimony to the
Lord_ was to be jealously guarded, and the main object of this work of
faith would have been imperilled just so far as by any appeal to men
this witness to God was weakened.

In this crisis, and in every other, faith triumphed, and so the
testimony to a prayer-hearing God grew in volume and power as the years
went on. It was while as yet this period of testing was not ended, and
no permanent relief was yet supplied, that Mr. Muller, with his wife,
left Bristol on August 23rd, for the Continent, on his eighth long
preaching tour. Thus, at a time when, to the natural eye, his own
presence would have seemed well-nigh indispensable, he calmly departed
for other spheres of duty, leaving the work at home in the hands of Mr.
Wright and his helpers. The tour had been already arranged for, under
God's leading, and it was undertaken, with the supporting power of a
deep conviction that God is as near to those who in prayer wait on Him
in distant lands, as on Ashley Down, and needs not the personal presence
of any man in any one place, or at any time, in order to carry on His
work.

In an American city, a half-idiotic boy who was bearing a heavy burden
asked a drayman, who was driving an empty cart, for a ride. Being
permitted, he mounted the cart with his basket, but thinking he might so
relieve the horse a little, while still himself riding, lifted his load
and carried it. We laugh at the simplicity of the idiotic lad, and yet
how often we are guilty of similar folly! We profess to cast ourselves
and our cares upon the Lord, and then persist in bearing our own
burdens, as if we felt that He would be unequal to the task of
sustaining us and our loads. It is a most wholesome lesson for Christian
workers to learn that all true work is primarily the Lord's, and only
secondarily ours, and that therefore all 'carefulness' on our part is
distrust of Him, implying a sinful self-conceit which overlooks the fact
that He is the one Worker and all others are only His instruments.

As to our trials, difficulties, losses, and disappointments, we are
prone to hesitate about committing them to the Lord, trustfully and
calmly. We think we have done well if we take refuge in the Lord's
promise to his reluctant disciple Peter, "What I do thou knowest not
now, but thou shalt know hereafter," referring this 'hereafter' to the
future state where we look for the solution of all problems. In Peter's
case the hereafter appears to have come when the feet-washing was done
and Christ explained its meaning; and it is very helpful to our faith to
observe Mr. Muller's witness concerning all these trying and
disappointing experiences of his life, that, without one exception, he
had found already in this life that they worked together for his good;
so that he had reason to praise God for them all. In the ninetieth psalm
we read:

    "Make us glad according to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us
     And the years wherein we have seen evil."
                                        (Psalm xc. 15.)

This is an inspired prayer, and such prayer is a prophecy. Not a few
saints have found, this side of heaven, a divine gladness for every year
and day of sadness, when their afflictions and adversities have been
patiently borne.

Faith is the secret of both peace and steadfastness, amid all tendencies
to discouragement and discontinuance in well-doing. James was led by the
Spirit of God to write that the unstable and unbelieving man is like the
"wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed." There are two motions
of the waves--one up and down, which we call undulation, the other to
and fro, which we call fluctuation. How appropriately both are referred
to--"tossed" up and down, "driven" to and fro! The double-minded man
lacks steadiness in both respects: his faith has no uniformity of
experience, for he is now at the crest of the wave and now in the trough
of the sea; it has no uniformity of progress, for whatever he gains
to-day he loses to-morrow.

Fluctuations in income and apparent prosperity did not take George
Muller by surprise. He expected them, for if there were no crises and
critical emergencies how could there be critical deliverances? His trust
was in God, not in donors or human friends or worldly circumstances: and
because he trusted in the Living God who says of Himself, "I am the
Lord, I change not," amid all other changes, his feet were upon the one
Rock of Ages that no earthquake shock can move from its eternal
foundations.

Two facts Mr. Muller gratefully records at this period of his life:
(Narrative, IV. 411, 418.)

First. "For above fifty years I have now walked, by His grace, in a path
of complete reliance upon Him who is the faithful one, for everything I
have needed; and yet I am increasingly convinced that it is by His help
alone I am enabled to continue in this course; for, if left to myself,
even after the precious enjoyment so long experienced of walking thus in
fellowship with God, I should yet be tempted to abandon this path of
entire dependence upon Him. To His praise, however, I am able to state
that for more than half a century I have never had the least desire to
do so."

Second. From May, 1880, to May 1881, a gracious work of the Spirit had
visited the orphans on Ashley Down and in many of the schools. During
the three months spent by Mr. Muller at home before sailing for America
in September, 1880, he had been singularly drawn out in prayer for such
a visitation of grace, and had often urged it on the prayers of his
helpers. The Lord is faithful, and He cheered the heart of His servant
in his absence by abundant answers to his intercessions. Before he had
fairly entered on his work in America, news came from home of a blessed
work of conversion already in progress, and which went on for nearly a
year, until there was good ground for believing that in the five houses
five hundred and twelve orphans had found God their Father in Christ,
and nearly half as many more were in a hopeful state.

The Lord did not forget His promise, and He did keep the plant He had
permitted His servant to set in His name in the soil on Ashley Down.
Faith that was tried, triumphed. On June 7, 1884, a legacy of over
eleven thousand pounds reached him, the _largest single gift_ ever yet
received, the largest donations which had preceded being respectively
one thousand, two thousand, three thousand, five thousand, eight
thousand one hundred, and nine thousand and ninety-one pounds.

This last amount, eleven thousand, had been due for over six years from
an estate, but had been kept back by the delays of the Chancery Court.
Prayer had been made day by day that the bequest might be set free for
its uses, and now the full answer had come; and God had singularly timed
the supply to the need, for there was at that time only forty-one pounds
ten shillings in hand, not one half of the average daily expenses, and
certain sanitary improvements were just about to be carried out which
would require an outlay of over two thousand pounds.

As Mr. Muller closed the solemn and blessed records of 1884, he wrote:

"Thus ended the year 1884, during which we had been tried, greatly
tried, in various ways, no doubt for the exercise of our faith, and to
make us know God more fully; but during which we had also been helped
and blessed, and greatly helped and blessed. Peacefully, then, we were
able to enter upon the year 1885, fully assured that, as we had God FOR
us and WITH us, ALL, ALL would be well." John Wesley had in the same
spirit said a century before, "Best of all, God is with us."

Of late years the orphanage at Ashley Down has not had as many inmates
as formerly, and some four or five hundred more might now be received.
Mr. MUller felt constrained, for some years previous to his death, to
make these vacancies known to the public, in hopes that some destitute
orphans might find there a home. But it must be remembered that the
provision for such children has been greatly enlarged since this orphan
work was begun. In 1834 the total accommodation for all orphans, in
England, reached thirty-six hundred, while the prisons contained nearly
twice as many children under eight years of age. This state of things
led to the rapid enlargement of the work until over two thousand were
housed on Ashley Down alone; and this colossal enterprise stimulated
others to open similar institutions until, fifty years after Mr. Muller
began his work, at least one hundred thousand orphans were cared for in
England alone. Thus God used Mr. Muller to give such an impetus to this
form of philanthropy, that destitute children became the object of a
widely organized charity both on the part of individuals and of
societies, and orphanages now exist for various classes.

In all this manifold work which Mr. Muller did he was, to the last,
self-oblivious. From the time when, in October, 1830, he had given up
all stated salary, as pastor and minister of the gospel, he had never
received any salary, stipend nor fixed income, of any sort, whether as a
pastor or as a director of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution. Both
principle and preference led him to wait only upon God for all personal
needs, as also for all the wants of his work. Nevertheless God put into
the hearts of His believing children in all parts of the world, not only
to send gifts in aid of the various branches of the work which Mr.
Muller superintended, but to forward to him money for his own uses, as
well as clothes, food, and other temporal supplies. He never
appropriated one penny which was not in some way indicated or designated
as for his own personal needs, and subject to his personal judgment. No
straits of individual or family want ever led him to use, even for a
time, what was sent to him for other ends. Generally gifts intended for
himself were wrapped up in paper with his name written thereon, or in
other equally distinct ways designated as meant for him. Thus as early
as 1874 his year's income reached upwards of twenty-one hundred pounds.
Few nonconformist ministers, and not one in twenty of the clergy of the
establishment, have any such income, which averages about six pounds for
every day in the year--and all this came from the Lord, simply in answer
to prayer, and without appeal of any sort to man or even the revelation
of personal needs. If we add legacies paid at the end of the year 1873,
Mr. Muller's entire income in about thirteen months exceeded thirty-one
hundred pounds. Of this he gave, out and out to the needy, and to the
work of God, the whole amount save about two hundred and fifty, expended
on personal and family wants; and thus started the year 1875 as poor as
he had begun forty-five years before; and if his personal expenses were
scrutinized it would be found that even what he ate and drank and wore
was with equal conscientiousness expended for the glory of God, so that
in a true sense we may say he spent nothing on himself.

In another connection it has already been recorded that, when at
Jubbulpore in 1890, Mr. Muller received tidings of his daughter's death.
To any man of less faith that shock might have proved, at his advanced
age, not only a stunning but a fatal blow. His only daughter and only
child, Lydia, the devoted wife of James Wright, had been called home, in
her fifty-eighth year, and after nearly thirty years of labour at the
orphan houses. What this death meant to Mr. Muller, at the age of
eighty-four, no one can know who has not witnessed the mutual devotion
of that daughter and that father: and what that loss was to Mr. Wright,
the pen alike fails to portray. If the daughter seemed to her father
humanly indispensable, she was to her husband a sort of inseparable part
of his being; and over such experiences as these it is the part of
delicacy to draw the curtain of silence. But it should be recorded that
no trait in Mrs. Wright was more pathetically attractive than her
humility. Few disciples ever felt their own nothingness as she did, and
it was this ornament of a meek and quiet spirit--the only ornament she
wore--that made her seem so beautiful to all who knew her well enough
for this 'hidden man of the heart' to be disclosed to their vision. Did
not that ornament in the Lord's sight appear as of great price? Truly
"the beauty of the Lord her God was upon her."

James Wright had lived with his beloved Lydia for more than eighteen
years, in "unmarred and unbroken felicity." They had together shared in
prayers and tears before God, bearing all life's burdens in common. Weak
as she was physically, he always leaned upon her and found her a tower
of spiritual strength in time of heavy responsibility. While, in her
lowly-mindedness, she thought of herself as a 'little useless thing,' he
found her both a capable and cheerful supervisor of many most important
domestic arrangements where a competent woman's hand was needful: and,
with rare tact and fidelity, she kept watch of the wants of the orphans
as her dear mother had done before her. After her decease, her husband
found among her personal effects a precious treasure--a verse written
with her own hand:

       "I have seen the face of Jesus,
        Tell me not of aught beside;
        I have heard the voice of Jesus,
        All my soul is satisfied."

This invaluable little fragment, like that other writing found by this
beloved daughter among her mother's effects, became to Mr. Wright what
that had been to Mr. Muller, a sort of last legacy from his departed and
beloved wife. Her desires were fulfilled; she had seen the face and
heard the voice of Him who alone could satisfy her soul.

In the Fifty-third Report, which extends to May 26, 1892, it is stated
that the expenses exceeded the income for the orphans by a total of over
thirty-six hundred pounds, so that many dear fellow labourers, without
the least complaint, were in arrears as to salaries. This was the second
time only, in fifty-eight years, that the income thus fell short of the
expenses. Ten years previous, the expenses had been in excess of the
income by four hundred and eighty-eight pounds, but, within one month
after the new financial year had begun, by the payment of legacies three
times as much as the deficiency was paid in; and, adding donations, six
times as much. And now the question arose whether God would not have Mr.
Muller contract rather than expand the work.

He says: "The Lord's dealings with us during the last year indicate that
it is His will we should contract our operations, and we are waiting
upon Him for directions as to how and to what extent this should be
done; for we have but one single object--the glory of God. When I
founded this Institution, one of the principles stated was, 'that there
would be no enlargement of the work by going into debt': and in like
manner we cannot go on with _that which already exists_ if we have not
sufficient means coming in to meet the current expenses." Thus the godly
man who loved to expand his service for God was humble enough to bow to
the will of God if its contraction seemed needful.

Prayer was much increased, and faith did not fail under the trial, which
continued for weeks and months, but was abundantly sustained by the
promises of an unfailing Helper. This distress was relieved in March by
the sale of ten acres of land, at one thousand pounds an acre, and at
the close of the year there was in hand a balance of over twenty-three
hundred pounds.

The exigency, however, continued more or less severe until again, in
1893-4, after several years of trial, the Lord once more bountifully
supplied means. And Mr. Muller is careful to add that though the
_appearance_ during those years of trial was many times as if God had
forgotten or forsaken them and would never care any more about the
Institution, it was only in appearance, for he was as mindful of it as
ever, and he records how by this discipline faith was still further
strengthened, God was glorified in the patience and meekness whereby He
enabled them to endure the testing, and tens of thousands of believers
were blessed in afterward reading about these experience's of divine
faithfulness.*

* Fifty-fifth Report, p. 32.

Five years after Mrs. Wright's death, Mr. Muller was left again a
widower. His last great mission tour had come to an end in 1892, and in
1895, on the 13th of January, the beloved wife who in all these long
journeys had been his constant companion and helper, passed to her rest,
and once more left him peculiarly alone, since his devoted Lydia had
been called up higher. Yet by the same grace of God which had always
before sustained him he was now upheld, and not only kept in unbroken
peace, but enabled to "kiss the Hand which administered the stroke."

At the funeral of his second wife, as at that of the first, he made the
address, and the scene was unique in interest. Seldom does a man of
ninety conduct such a service. The faith that sustained him in every
other trial held him up in this. He lived in such habitual communion
with the unseen world, and walked in such uninterrupted fellowship with
the unseen God, that the exchange of worlds became too real for him to
mourn for those who had made it, or to murmur at the infinite Love that
numbers our days. It moved men more deeply than any spoken word of
witness to see him manifestly borne up as on everlasting Arms.

I remember Mr. Muller remarking that he waited eight years before he
understood at all the purpose of God in removing his first wife, who
seemed so indispensable to him and his work. His own journal explains
more fully this remark. When it pleased God to take from him his second
wife, after over twenty-three years of married life, again he rested on
the promise that "All things work together for good to them that love
God" and reflected on his past experiences of its truth. When he lost
his first wife after over thirty-nine years of happy wedlock, while he
bowed to the Father's will, how that sorrow and bereavement could work
good had been wholly a matter of _faith,_ for no compensating good was
apparent to sight; yet he believed God's word and waited to see how it
would be fulfilled. That loss seemed one that could not be made up. Only
a little before, two orphan houses had been opened for nine hundred more
orphans, so that there were total accommodations for over two thousand;
she, who by nature, culture, gifts, and graces, was so wonderfully
fitted to be her husband's helper, and who had with motherly love cared
for these children, was suddenly removed from his side. Four years after
Mr. Muller married his second wife, he saw it plainly to be God's will
that he should spend life's evening-time in giving witness to the
nations. These mission tours could not be otherwise than very trying to
the physical powers of endurance, since they covered over two hundred
thousand miles and obliged the travellers to spend a week at a time in a
train, and sometimes from four to six weeks on board a vessel. Mrs.
Muller, though never taking part in public, was severely taxed by all
this travel, and always busy, writing letters, circulating books and
tracts, and in various ways helping and relieving her husband. All at
once, while in the midst of these fatiguing journeys and exposures to
varying climates, it flashed upon Mr. Muller that his first wife, who
had died in her seventy-third year, _could never have undertaken these
tours,_ and that the Lord had thus, in taking her, left him free to make
these extensive journeys. She would have been over fourscore years old
when these tours began, and, apart from age, could not have borne the
exhaustion, because of her frail health; whereas the second Mrs. Muller,
who, at the time, was not yet fifty-seven, was both by her age and
strength fully equal to the strain thus put upon her.


CHAPTER XIX

AT EVENING-TIME--LIGHT

THE closing scene of this beautiful and eventful life-history has an
interest not altogether pathetic. Mr. Muller seems like an elevated
mountain, on whose summit the evening sun shines in lingering splendour,
and whose golden peak rises far above the ordinary level and belongs to
heaven more than earth, in the clear, cloudless calm of God.

From May, 1892, when the last mission tour closed; he devoted himself
mainly to the work of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution, and to
preaching at Bethesda and elsewhere as God seemed to appoint. His health
was marvelous, especially considering how, when yet a young man,
frequent and serious illnesses and general debility had apparently
disqualified him from all military duty, and to many prophesied early
death or hopeless succumbing to disease. He had been in tropic heat and
arctic cold, in gales and typhoons at sea, and on journeys by rail,
sometimes as continuously long as a sea-voyage. He had borne the pest of
fleas, mosquitoes, and even rats. He had endured changes of climate,
diet, habits of life, and the strain of almost daily services, and come
out of all unscathed. This man, whose health was never robust, had gone
through labours that would try the mettle of an iron constitution; this
man, who had many times been laid aside by illness and sometimes for
months and who in 1837 had feared that a persistent head trouble might
unhinge his mind, could say, in his ninety-second year: "I have been
able, every day and all the day, to work, and that with ease, as seventy
years since." When the writer was holding meetings in Bristol in 1896,
on an anniversary very sacred to himself, he asked his beloved father
Muller to speak at the closing meeting of the series, in the Y.M.C.A.
Hall; and he did so, delivering a powerful address of forty-five
minutes, on Prayer in connection with Missions, and giving his own
life-story in part, with a vigour of voice and manner that seemed a
denial of his advanced age.*

* Appendix K.

The marvelous preservation of such a man at such an age reminds one of
Caleb, who at eighty-five could boast in God that he was as strong even
for war as in the day that he was sent into the land as one of the
spies; and Mr. Muller himself attributed this preservation to three
causes: first, the exercising of himself to have always a conscience
void of offence both toward God and toward men; secondly to the love he
felt for the Scriptures, and the constant recuperative power they
exercised upon his whole being; and third, to that happiness he felt in
God and His work, which relieved him of all anxiety and needless wear
and tear in his labours.

The great fundamental truth that this heroic man stamped on his
generation was that the Living God is the same to-day and forever as
yesterday and in all ages past, and that, with equal confidence with the
most trustful souls of any age, we may believe His word, and to every
promise add, like Abraham, our 'Amen'--IT SHALL BE SO!* When, a few
days after his death, Mr. E. H. Glenny, who is known to many as the
beloved and self-sacrificing friend of the North African Mission, passed
through Barcelona, he found written in an album over his signature the
words: "Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and to-day and for ever." And,
like the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews, quoting from the 102nd
Psalm, we may say of Jehovah, while all else changes and perishes:

        "THOU REMAINEST";
        "THOU ART THE SAME."

Toward the close of life Mr. Muller, acting under medical advice, abated
somewhat of his active labours, preaching commonly but once a Sunday. It
was my privilege to hear him on the morning of the Lord's day, March 22,
1896. He spoke on the 77th Psalm; of course he found here his favourite
theme--prayer; and, taking that as a fair specimen of his average
preaching, he was certainly a remarkable expositor of Scripture even at
ninety-one years of age. Later on the outline of this discourse will be
found.

* Gen. xv. 6. (Hebrew.)

On Sunday morning, March 6, 1898, he spoke at Alma Road Chapel, and on
the Monday evening following was at the prayer service at Bethesda, on
both occasions in his usual health. On Wednesday evening following, he
took his wonted place at the Orphan House prayer meeting and gave out
the hymns:

        "The countless multitude on high."
and
        "We'll sing of the Shepherd that died."

When he bade his beloved son-in-law "good-night," there was no outward
sign of declining strength. He seemed to the last the vigorous old man,
and retired to rest as usual. It had been felt that one so advanced in
years should have some night-attendant, especially as indications of
heart-weakness had been noticed of late, and he had yielded to the
pressure of love and consented to such an arrangement _after that
night._ But the consent came too late. He was never more to need human
attendance or attention. On Thursday morning, March 10th, at about seven
o'clock, the usual cup of tea was taken to his room. To the knock at the
door there was no response save an ominous silence. The attendant opened
the door, only to find that the venerable patriarch lay dead, on the
floor beside the bed. He had probably risen to take some nourishment--a
glass of milk and a biscuit being always put within reach--and, while
eating the biscuit, he had felt faint, and fallen, clutching at the
table-cloth as he fell, for it was dragged off, with certain things that
had lain on the table. His medical adviser, who was promptly summoned,
gave as his opinion that he had died of heart-failure some hour or two
before he had been found by his attendant.

Such a departure, even at such an age, produced a worldwide sensation.
That man's moral and spiritual forces reached and touched the earth's
ends. Not in Bristol, or in Britain alone, but across the mighty waters
toward the sunrise and sunset was felt the responsive pulse-beat of a
deep sympathy. Hearts bled all over the globe when it was announced, by
telegraph wire and ocean cable, that George Muller was dead. It was said
of a great Englishman that his influence could be measured only by
"parallels of latitude"; of George Muller we may add, and by meridians
of longitude. He belonged to the whole church and the whole world, in a
unique sense; and the whole race of man sustained a loss when he died.

The funeral, which took place on the Monday following, was a popular
tribute of affection, such as is seldom seen. Tens of thousands of
people reverently stood along the route of the simple procession; men
left their workshops and offices, women left their elegant homes or
humble kitchens, all seeking to pay a last token of respect. Bristol had
never before witnessed any such scene.

A brief service was held at Orphan House No. 3, where over a thousand
children met, who had for a second time lost a 'father'; in front of the
reading-desk in the great dining-room, a coffin of elm, studiously
plain, and by request without floral offerings, contained all that was
mortal of George Muller, and on a brass plate was a simple inscription,
giving the date of his death, and his age.

Mr. James Wright gave the address, reminding those who were gathered
that, to all of us, even those who have lived nearest God, death comes
while the Lord tarries; that it is blessed to die in the Lord; and that
for believers in Christ there is a glorious resurrection waiting. The
tears that ran down those young cheeks were more eloquent than any
words, as a token of affection for the dead. The procession silently
formed. Among those who followed the bier were four who had been
occupants of that first orphan home in Wilson Street. The children's
grief melted the hearts of spectators, and eyes unused to weeping were
moistened that day. The various carriages bore the medical attendants,
the relatives and connections of Mr. Muller, the elders and deacons of
the churches with which he was associated, and his staff of helpers in
the work on Ashley Down. Then followed forty or fifty other vehicles
with deputations from various religious bodies, etc.

At Bethesda, every foot of space was crowded, and hundreds sought in
vain for admission. The hymn was sung which Mr. Muller had given out at
that last prayer meeting the night before his departure. Dr. Maclean of
Bath offered prayer, mingled with praise for such a long life of service
and witness, of prayer and faith, and Mr. Wright spoke from Hebrews
xiii. 7, 8:

   "Remember them which have the rule over you,
    Who have spoken unto you the word of God:
    Whose faith follow,
    Considering the end of their conversation:
    Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and to-day and forever."

He spoke of those spiritual rulers and guides whom God sets over his
people; and of the privilege of imitating their faith, calling attention
to the two characteristics of his beloved father-in-law's faith: first,
that it was based on that immovable Rock of Ages, God's written word;
and secondly, that it translated the precepts and promises of that word
into daily life.

Mr. Wright made very emphatic Mr. Muller's acceptance of the whole
Scriptures, as divinely inspired. He had been wont to say to young
believers, "Put your finger on the passage on which your faith rests,"
and had himself read the Bible from end to end nearly two hundred times.
He fed on the Word and therefore was strong. He found the centre of that
Word in the living Person it enshrines, and his one ground of confidence
was His atoning work. Always in his own eyes weak, wretched, and vile,
unworthy of the smallest blessing, he rested solely on the merit and
mediation of His great High Priest.

George Muller _cultivated_ faith. He used to say to his helpers in
prayer and service, "Never let enter your minds a shadow of doubt as to
the love of the Father's heart or the power of the Father's arm." And he
projected his whole life forward, and looked at it in the light of the
Judgment Day.

Mr. Wright's address made prominent one or two other most important
lessons, as, for example, that the Spirit bids us imitate, not the
idiosyncrasies or philanthropy of others, but _their faith._ And he took
occasion to remind his hearers that philanthropy was not the foremost
aim or leading feature of Mr. Muller's life, but above all else to
magnify and glorify God, _"as still the living God who, now as well as
thousands of years ago, hears the prayers of His children and helps
those who trust Him."_ He touchingly referred to the humility that led
Mr. Muller to do the mightiest thing for God without self-consciousness,
and showed that God can take up and use those who are willing to be only
instruments.

Mr. Wright further remarked: "I have been asked again and again lately
as to whether the orphan work would go on. It is going on. Since the
commencement of the year we have received between forty and fifty fresh
orphans, and this week expect to receive more. The other four objects of
the Institution, according to the ability God gives us, are still being
carried on. We believe that whatever God would do with regard to the
future will be worthy of Him. We do not know much more, and do not want
to. He knows what He will do. I cannot think, however, that the God who
has so blessed the work for so long will leave our prayers as to the
future unanswered."

Mr. Benjamin Perry then spoke briefly, characterizing Mr. Muller as the
greatest personality Bristol had known as a citizen. He referred to his
power as an expounder of Scripture, and to the fact that he brought to
others for their comfort and support what had first been food to his own
soul. He gave some personal reminiscences, referring, for instance, to
his ability at an extreme old age still to work without hindrance either
mental or physical, free from rheumatism, ache, or pain, and seldom
suffering from exhaustion. He briefly described him as one who, in
response to the infinite love of God, which called him from a life of
sin to a life of salvation and service, wholly loved God above everybody
and everything, so that his highest pleasure was to please and serve
Him. As an illustration of his humility, he gave an incident. When of
late a friend had said, "When God calls you home, it will be like a
ship going into harbour, full sail."--"Oh no!" said Mr. Muller, "it is
poor George Muller who needs daily to pray, 'Hold Thou me up in my
goings, that my footsteps slip not.'" The close of such lives as those
of Asa and Solomon were to Mr. Muller a perpetual warning, leading him
to pray that he might never thus depart from the Lord in his old age.

After prayer by Mr. J. L. Stanley, Col. Molesworth gave out the hymn,

        "'Tis sweet to think of those at rest."

And after another prayer by Mr. Stanley Arnot, the body was borne to its
resting-place in Arno's Vale Cemetery, and buried beside the bodies of
Mr. Muller's first and second wives, some eighty carriages joining in the
procession to the grave. Everything from first to last was as simple and
unostentatious as he himself would have wished. At the graveside Col.
Molesworth prayed, and Mr. George F. Bergin read from 1 Cor. xv. and
spoke a few words upon the tenth verse, which so magnifies the grace of
God both in what we _are_ and what we _do._

Mr. E. K. Groves, nephew of Mr. Muller, announced as the closing hymn
the second given out by him at that last prayer meeting at the
orphanage.

        "We'll sing of the Shepherd that died."

Mr. E. T. Davies then offered prayer, and the body was left to its
undisturbed repose, until the Lord shall come.

Other memorial services were held at the Y.M.C.A. Hall, and very
naturally at Bethesda Chapel, which brought to a fitting close this
series of loving tributes to the departed. On the Lord's day preceding
the burial, in nearly all the city pulpits, more or less extended
reference had been made to the life, the character, and the career of
the beloved saint who had for so many years lived his irreproachable
life in Bristol. Also the daily and weekly press teemed with obituary
notices, and tributes to his piety, worth, and work.

It was touchingly remarked at his funeral that he first confessed to
feeling weak and weary in his work that last night of his earthly
sojourn; and it seemed specially tender of the Lord not to allow that
sense of exhaustion to come upon him until just as He was about to send
His chariot to bear him to His presence. Mr. Muller's last sermon at
Bethesda Chapel, after a ministry of sixty-six years, had been from 2
Cor. v. 1:

"For we know that, if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens."

It was as though he had some foretokens of his being about shortly to
put off this his tabernacle. Evidently he was not taken by surprise. He
had foreseen that his days were fast completing their number. Seven
months before his departure, he had remarked to his medical attendant,
in connection with the irregularity of his pulse: "It means _death."_

Many of the dear orphans--as when the first Mrs. Muller died--wrote,
asking that they might contribute toward the erection of a monument to
the memory of their beloved benefactor. Already one dear young servant
had gathered, for the purpose, over twenty pounds. In conformity with
the known wishes of his father-in-law that only the simplest headstone
be placed over his remains, Mr. Wright thought necessary to check the
inflow of such gifts, the sum in hand being quite sufficient.

Further urgent appeals were made both from British and American friends,
for the erection of some statue or other large visible monument or
memorial, and in these appeals the local newspapers united. At length
private letters led Mr. Wright to communicate with the public press, as
the best way at once to silence these appeals and express the ground of
rejecting such proposals. He wrote as follows:

"You ask me, as one long and closely associated with the late Mr. George
Muller, to say what I think would be most in accordance with his own
wishes as a fitting memorial of himself.

"Will not the best way of replying to this question be to let him speak
for himself?

"1st. When he erected Orphan House No. 1, and the question came what is
the building to be called, he deliberately avoided associating his own
name with it, and named it 'The New Orphan House, Ashley Down.' N.B.--To
the end of his life he _disliked_ hearing or reading the words 'Muller's
Orphanage.' In keeping with this, for years, in _every Annual Report,_
when referring to the Orphanage he reiterated the statement, 'The New
Orphan Houses on Ashley Down, Bristol, are not _my_ Orphan Houses,...
they are God's Orphan Houses.' (See, for example, the Report for 1897,
p. 69.)

"2nd. For years, in fact until he was nearly eighty years old, he
steadily refused to allow any _portrait_ of himself to be published; and
only most reluctantly (for reasons which he gives with characteristic
minuteness in the preface to 'Preaching Tours') did he at length give
way on this point.

"3rd. In the last published Report, at page 66, he states: 'The primary
object I had in view in carrying on this work,' viz., 'that it might be
seen that now, in the nineteenth century, _God is still the Living God,
and that now, as well as thousands of years ago, He listens to the
prayers of His children and helps those who trust in Him.'_ From these
words and ways of acting, is it not evident, that the only 'memorial'
that George Muller cared about was that which consists in the effect of
his example, Godward, upon his fellow men? Every soul converted to God
(instrumentally) through his words or example constitutes a permanent
memorial to him as the father in Christ of such an one. Every believer
strengthened in faith (instrumentally) through his words or example
constitutes a similar memorial to his spiritual teacher.

"He knew that God had, already, in the riches of His grace, given him
many such memorials; and he departed this life, as I well know,
cherishing the most lively hope that he should greet _above_ thousands
more to whom it had pleased God to make him a channel of rich spiritual
blessing.

"He used often to say to me, when he opened a letter in which the writer
poured out a tale of sore pecuniary need, and besought his help to an
extent twice or three or ten times exceeding the sum total of his (Mr.
Muller's) earthly possessions at the moment, 'Ah! these dear people
entirely miss the lesson I am _trying_ to teach them, for they come to
_me,_ instead of going to _God.'_ And if he could come back to us for an
hour, and listen to an account of what his sincerely admiring, but
mistaken, friends are proposing to do to _perpetuate_ his memory, I can
hear him, with a sigh, exclaiming, 'Ah! these _dear_ friends are
entirely missing the lesson that I tried for seventy years to teach
them,' viz., 'That a _man_ can receive nothing except it be _given_ him
_from above,'_ and that, therefore, it is the Blessed _Giver,_ and not
the poor receiver, that is to be glorified.

    "Yours faithfully,
        "JAMES WRIGHT."


CHAPTER XX

THE SUMMARY OF THE LIFE-WORK

DEATH shuts the door upon earthly service, whatever door it may open to
other forms and spheres of activity. There are many intimations that
service beyond the grave is both unceasing and untiring: the blessed
dead "rest indeed from their _labours"_--toilsome and painful
tasks--"but their works"--activities for God--"do follow them," where
exertion is without exhaustion.

This is therefore a fit point for summing up the results of the work
over which, from its beginning, one man had specially had charge. One
sentence from Mr. Muller's pen marks the purpose which was the very
pivot of his whole being: "I have joyfully dedicated my whole life to
the object of exemplifying how much may be accomplished by prayer and
faith." This prepared both for the development of the character of him
who had such singleness of aim, and for the development of the work in
which that aim found action. Mr. Muller's oldest friend, Robert C.
Chapman of Barnstaple, beautifully says that "when a man's chief
business is to serve and please the Lord, all his circumstances become
his servants"; and we shall find this maxim true in Mr. Muller's
life-work.

The Fifty-ninth Report, issued May 26, 1898, was the last up to the date
of the publication of this volume, and the first after Mr. Muller's
death. In this, Mr. Wright gives the brief but valuable summary not only
of the whole work of the year preceding, but of the whole work from its
beginning, and thus helps us to a comprehensive survey.

This report is doubly precious as it contains also the last contribution
of Mr. Muller's own pen to the record of the Lord's dealings. It is
probable that on the afternoon of March 9th he laid down his pen, for
the last time, all unconscious that he was never again to take it up. He
had made, in a twofold sense, his closing entry in life's solemn
journal! In the evening of that day he took his customary part in the
prayer service in the orphan house--then went to sleep for the last time
on earth; there came a waking hour, when he was alone with God, and
suddenly departed, leaving his body to its long sleep that knows no
waking until the day of the Lord's coming, while his spirit returned
unto God who gave it.

The afternoon of that day of death, and of 'birth' into the heavenly
life--as the catacomb saints called it--found the helpers again
assembled in the same prayer room to commit the work to him "who only
hath immortality," and who, amid all changes of human administration,
ever remains the divine Master Workman, never at a loss for His own
chosen instruments.

Mr. Wright, in this report, shows himself God's chosen successor in the
work, evidently like-minded with the departed director. The first
paragraph, after the brief and touching reference to his father-in-law,
serves to convey to all friends of this work the assurance that he to
whom Mr. Muller left its conduct has also learned the one secret of all
success in coworking with God. It sounds, as the significant _keynote_
for the future, the same old keynote of the past, carrying on the melody
and harmony, without change, into the new measures. It is the same
oratorio, without alteration of theme, time, or even key: the leading
performer is indeed no more, but another hand takes up his instrument
and, trembling with emotion, continues the unfinished strain so that
there is no interruption. Mr. Wright says:

"It is written (Job xxvi. 7): 'He hangeth the earth upon
_nothing'_--that is, no _visible_ support. And so we exult in the fact
that 'the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad' hangs,
as it has ever hung, since its commencement, now more than sixty-four
years ago, 'upon nothing,' that is, upon no VISIBLE support. It hangs
upon no human patron, upon no endowment or funded property, but solely
upon the good pleasure of the blessed God."

Blessed lesson to learn! that to hang upon the invisible God is not to
hang "upon nothing," though it be upon nothing _visible._ The power and
permanence of the invisible forces that hold up the earth after sixty
centuries of human history are sufficiently shown by the fact that this
great globe still swings securely in space and is whirled through its
vast orbit, and that, without variation of a second, it still moves with
divine exactness in its appointed path. We can therefore trust the same
invisible God to sustain with His unseen power all the work which faith
suspends upon His truth and love and unfailing word of promise, though
to the natural eye all these may seem as nothing.

Mr. Wright records also a very striking answer to long-continued prayer,
and a most impressive instance of the tender care of the Lord, in the
_providing of an associate,_ every way like-minded, and well fitted to
share the responsibility falling upon his shoulders at the decease of
his father-in-law.

Feeling the burden too great for him, his one resource
was to cast his burden on the Lord. He and Mr. Muller had asked of God
such a companion in labour for three years before his departure, and Mr.
Wright and his dear wife had, for twenty-five years before that--from
the time when Mr. Muller's long missionary tours began to withdraw him
from Bristol--besought of the Lord the same favour. But to none of them
had any _name_ been suggested, or, if so, it had never been mentioned.

After that day of death, Mr. Wright felt that a gracious Father would
not long leave him to sustain this great burden alone, and about a
fortnight later he felt assured that it was the will of God that he
should ask Mr. George Frederic Bergin to join him in the work, who
seemed to him a _"true yoke-fellow."_ He had known him well for a
quarter-century; he had worked by his side in the church; and though
they were diverse in temperament, there had never been a break in unity
or sympathy. Mr. Bergin was seventeen years his junior, and so likely to
survive and succeed him; he was very fond of children, and had been much
blessed in training his own in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
and hence was fitted to take charge of this larger family of orphans.
Confident of being led of God, he put the matter before Mr. Bergin,
delighted but not surprised to find that the same God had moved on his
mind also, and in the same direction; for not only was he ready to
respond to Mr. Wright's appeal, but he had been led of God to feel that
he should, after a certain time, _go to Mr. Wright and offer himself._
The Spirit who guided Philip to the Eunuch and at the same time had made
the Eunuch to inquire after guidance; who sent men from Cornelius and,
while they were knocking at Simon's house, was bidding Peter go with
them, still moves in a mysterious way, and simultaneously, on those whom
He would bring together for cooperation in loving service. And thus Mr.
Wright found the Living God the same Helper and Supplier of every need,
after his beloved father-in-law had gone up higher; and felt constrained
to feel that the God of Elijah was still at the crossing of the Jordan
and could work the same wonders as before, supplying the need of the
hour when the need came.

Mr. Muller's own gifts to the service of the Lord find in this
posthumous report their first full record and recognition. Readers of
the Annual Reports must have noticed an entry, recurring with strange
frequency during all these thirty or forty years, and therefore
suggesting a giver that must have reached a very ripe age: "from a
servant of the Lord Jesus, who, constrained by the love of Christ, seeks
to lay up treasure in heaven." If that entry be carefully followed
throughout and there be added the personal gifts made by Mr. Muller to
various benevolent objects, it will be found that the aggregate sum from
this "servant" reaches, up to March 1, 1898, a total of _eighty-one
thousand four hundred and ninety pounds eighteen shillings and
eightpence._ Mr. Wright, now that this "servant of the Lord Jesus" is
with his Master, who promised, "Where I am there shall also My servant
be," feels free to make known that this donor was no other than _George
Muller himself_ who thus gave out of his own money--money given to him
for his own use or left to him by legacies--the total sum of about
sixty-four thousand five hundred pounds to the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution, and, in other directions, seventeen thousand more.

This is a record of personal gifts to which we know no parallel. It
reminds us of the career of John Wesley, whose simplicity and frugality
of habits enabled him not only to limit his own expenditure to a very
small sum, but whose Christian liberality and unselfishness prompted him
to give all that he could thus save to purely benevolent
objects. While he had but thirty pounds a year, he lived on twenty-eight
and gave away forty shillings. Receiving twice as much the next year, he
still kept his living expenses down to the twenty-eight pounds and had
thirty-two to bestow on the needy; and when the third year his income
rose to ninety pounds, he spent no more than before and gave away
sixty-two. The fourth year brought one hundred and twenty, and he
disbursed still but the same sum for his own needs, having ninety-two to
spare. It is calculated that in the course of his life he thus gave away
at least thirty thousand pounds, and four silver spoons comprised all
the silver plate that he possessed when the collectors of taxes called
upon him. Such economy on the one hand and such generosity on the other
have seldom been known in human history. But George Muller's record will
compare favourably with this or any other of modern days. His frugality,
simplicity, and economy were equal to Wesley's, and his gifts aggregated
eighty-one thousand pounds. Mr. Muller had received increasingly large
sums from the Lord which he _invested_ well and most profitably, so that
for over sixty years he never lost a penny through a bad speculation!
But his investments were not in lands or banks or railways, but in the
_work of God._ He made friends out of the mammon of unrighteousness that
when he failed received him into everlasting habitations. He continued,
year after year, to make provision for himself, his beloved wife and
daughter, by laying up treasure--in heaven. Such a man had certainly a
right to exhort others to systematic beneficence. He gave--as not one in
a million gives--not a tithe, not any fixed proportion of annual income,
but _all that was left_ after the simplest and most necessary supply of
actual wants. While most Christians regard themselves as doing their
duty if, after they have given a portion to the Lord, they spend all the
rest on themselves, God led George Muller to reverse this rule and
reserve only the most frugal sum for personal needs, that the entire
remainder might be given to him that needeth. The utter _revolution_
implied in our habits of giving which would be necessary were such a
rule adopted is but too obvious. Mr. Muller's own words are:

"My aim never was, how much I could _obtain,_ but rather how much I
could give."

He kept continually before him _his stewardship_ of God's property; and
sought to make the most of the one brief life on earth, and to use for
the best and largest good the property held by him in trust. The things
of God were deep realities, and, projecting every action and decision
and motive into the light of the judgment-seat of Christ, he asked
himself how it would appear to him in the light of that tribunal. Thus
he sought prayerfully and conscientiously so to live and labour, so to
deny himself, and, by love, serve God and man, as that he should not be
ashamed before Him at His coming. But not in a spirit of _fear_ was this
done; for if any man of his generation knew the perfect love that casts
out fear, it was George Muller. He felt that God is love, and love is of
God. He saw that love manifested in the greatest of gifts--His
only-begotten Son at Calvary--he knew and believed the Love that God
hath to us; he received it into his own heart; it became an abiding
presence, manifested in obedience and benevolence, and, subduing him
more and more, it became perfected so as to expel tormenting fear and
impart a holy confidence and delight in God.

Among the texts which strongly impressed and moulded Mr. Muller's habits
of giving was Luke vi. 38:

"Give and it shall be given unto you. Good measure, pressed down, shaken
together and running over shall men give into your bosom."

He believed this promise and he verified it. His testimony is: "I had
GIVEN, and God had caused to be GIVEN TO ME AGAIN, and bountifully."

Again he read: "It is more blessed to give than to receive."

He says that he BELIEVED what he found in the word of God, and by His
grace sought to ACT ACCORDINGLY, and thus again records that he was
blessed abundantly and his peace and joy in the Holy Ghost increased
more and more.

It will not be a surprise, therefore, that, as has been already noted,
Mr. Muller's _entire personal estate_ at his death, as sworn to, when
the will was admitted to probate, was only 169 pounds 9s. 4d., of which
books, household furniture, etc., were reckoned at over one hundred
pounds, the only _money_ in his possession being a trifle over sixty
pounds, and even this only awaiting disbursement as God's steward.

The will of Mr. Muller contains a pregnant clause which should not be
forgotten in this memorial. It closes with a paragraph which is deeply
significant as meant to be his posthumous word of testimony--"a last
testament":

"I cannot help admiring God's wondrous grace in bringing me to the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus when I was an entirely careless and
thoughtless young man, and that He has kept me in His fear and truth,
allowing me the great honour, for so long a time, of serving Him."

In the comprehensive summary contained in this Fifty-ninth Report,
remarkable growth is apparent during the sixty-four years since the
outset of the work in 1834. During the year ending May 26, 1898, the
number of day-schools was 7, and of pupils, 354; the number of children
in attendance from the beginning, 81,501. The number of home
Sunday-schools, 12, and of children in them, 1341; but from the
beginning, 32,944. The number of Sunday-schools _aided_ in England and
Wales, 25. The amount expended in connection with home schools, 736
pounds 13s. 10d.; from the outset, 109,992 pounds 19s. 10d. The Bibles
and parts thereof circulated, 15,411; from the beginning, 1,989,266.
Money expended for this purpose the past year, 439 pounds; from the
first, 41,090 pounds 13s. 3d. Missionary labourers aided, 115. Money
expended, 2082 pounds 9s. 6d; from the outset, 261,859 pounds 7s. 4d.
Circulation of books and tracts, 3,101,338. Money spent, 1001 pounds
3s.; and from the first, 47,188 pounds 11s. 10d. The number of orphans
on Ashley Down, 1620; and from the first, 10,024. Money spent in orphan
houses, last year, 22,523 pounds 13s. 1d.; and from the beginning,
988,829 pounds.

To carry out conviction into action is sometimes a costly sacrifice; but
whatever Mr. Muller's fidelity to conviction cost in one way, he had
stupendous results of his life-work to contemplate, even while he lived.
Let any one look at the above figures and facts, and remember that here
was one poor man who, dependent on the help of God only in answer to
prayer, could look back over threescore years and see how he had built
five large orphan houses and taken into his family over ten thousand
orphans, expending, for their good, within twelve thousand pounds of a
round million. He had given aid to day-schools and Sunday-schools, in
this and other lands, where nearly one hundred and fifty thousand
children have been taught, at a cost of over one hundred and ten
thousand pounds more. He had circulated nearly two million Bibles and
parts thereof at the cost of over forty thousand pounds; and over three
million books and tracts, at a cost of nearly fifty thousand pounds
more. And besides all this he had spent over two hundred and sixty
thousand pounds to aid missionary labourers in various lands. The sum
total of the money thus spent during sixty years has thus reached very
nearly the astonishing aggregate of one and a half million of pounds
sterling ($7,500,000).

To summarize Mr. Muller's service we must understand his great secret.
Such a life and such a work are the result of one habit more than all
else,--daily and frequent communion with God. Unwearied in supplications
and intercessions, we have seen how, in every new need and crisis,
prayer was the one resort, the prayer of faith. He first satisfied
himself that he was in the way of duty; then he fixed his mind upon the
unchanging word of promise; then, in the boldness of a suppliant who
comes to a throne of grace in the name of Jesus Christ and pleads the
assurance of the immutable Promiser, he presented every petition. He was
an unwearied intercessor. No delay discouraged him. This is seen
particularly in the case of individuals for whose conversion or special
guidance into the paths of full obedience he prayed. On his prayer list
were the names of some for whom he had besought God, daily, by name, for
one, two, three, four, six, ten years before the answer was given. The
year just before his death, he told the writer of two parties for whose
reconciliation to God he had prayed, day by day, _for over sixty years,_
and who had not as yet to his knowledge turned unto God: and he
significantly added, "I have not a doubt that I shall meet them both in
heaven; for my Heavenly Father would not lay upon my heart a burden of
prayer for them for over threescore years, if He had not concerning them
purposes of mercy."

This is a sufficient example of his almost unparalleled perseverance and
importunity in intercession. However long the delay, he held on, as with
both hands clasping the very horns of the altar; and his childlike
spirit reasoned simply but confidently, that the very fact of his own
spirit being so long drawn out in prayer for one object, and of the
Lord's enabling him so to continue patiently and believingly to wait on
Him for the blessing, was a promise and prophecy of the answer; and so
he waited on, so assured of the ultimate result that he praised God in
advance, believing that he had practically received that for which he
asked.

It is most helpful here to add that one of the parties for whom for so
many years he unceasingly prayed has recently died in faith, having
received the promises and embraced them and confessed Jesus as his Lord.
Just before leaving Bristol with this completed manuscript of Mr.
Muller's life, I met a lady, a niece of the man referred to, through
whom I received a knowledge of these facts. He had, before his
departure, given most unequivocal testimony to his faith and hope in the
Saviour of sinners.

If George Muller could still speak to us, he would again repeat the
warning so frequently found in his journal and reports, that his fellow
disciples must not regard him as a _miracle-worker,_ as though his
experience were to be accounted so exceptional as to have little
application in our ordinary spheres of life and service. With patient
repetition he affirms that in all essentials such an experience is the
privilege of all believers. God calls disciples to various forms of
_work,_ but all alike to the same _faith._ To say, therefore, "I am not
called to build orphan houses, etc., and have no right to expect answers
to my prayers as Mr. Muller did," is wrong and unbelieving. Every child
of God, he maintained, is first to get into the sphere appointed of God,
and therein to exercise full trust, and live by faith upon God's sure
word of promise.

Throughout all these thousands of pages written by his pen, he teaches
that every experience of God's faithfulness is both the reward of past
faith and prayer, and the preparation of the servant of God for larger
work and more efficient service and more convincing witness to his Lord.

No man can understand such a work who does not see in it the
_supernatural_ power of God. Without that the enigma defies solution;
with that all the mystery is at least an open mystery. He himself felt
from first to last that this supernatural factor was the key to the
whole work, and without that it would have been even to himself a
problem inexplicable. How pathetically we find him often comparing
himself and his work for God to "the Burning Bush in the Wilderness"
which, always aflame and always threatened with apparent destruction,
was not consumed, so that not a few turned aside wondering to see this
great sight. And why was it not burnt? Because Jehovah of hosts, who was
in the Bush, dwelt in the man and in his work: or, as Wesley said with
almost his last breath, "Best of all, God is with us."

This simile of the Burning Bush is the more apt when we consider the
_rapid growth of the work._ At first so very small as to seem almost
insignificant, and conducted in one small rented house, accommodating
thirty orphans, then enlarged until other rented premises became
necessary; then one, two, three, four, and even five immense structures
being built, until three hundred, seven hundred, eleven hundred and
fifty, and finally two thousand and fifty inmates could find shelter
within them,--how seldom has the world seen such vast and, at the same
time, rapid enlargement! Then look at the outlay! At first a trifling
expenditure of perhaps five hundred pounds for the first year of the
Scriptural Knowledge Institution, and of five hundred pounds for the
first twelve month of the orphan work, and in the last year of Mr.
Muller's life a grand total of over twenty-seven thousand five hundred,
for all the purposes of the Institution.

The cost of the houses built on Ashley Down might have staggered a man
of large capital, but this poor man only cried and the Lord helped him.
The first house cost fifteen thousand pounds; the second, over
twenty-one thousand; the third, over twenty-three thousand; and the
fourth and fifth, from fifty thousand to sixty thousand more--so that
the total cost reached about one hundred and fifteen thousand. Besides
all this, there was a yearly expenditure which rose as high as
twenty-five thousand for the orphans alone, irrespective of those
occasional outlays made needful for emergencies, such as improved
sanitary precautions, which in one case cost over two thousand pounds.

Here is a burning bush indeed, always in seeming danger of being
consumed, yet still standing on Ashley Down, and still preserved because
the same presence of Jehovah burns in it. Not a branch of this
many-sided work has utterly perished, while the whole bush still
challenges unbelievers to turn aside and see the great sight, and take
off the shoes from their feet as on holy ground where God manifests
Himself.

Any complete survey of this great life-work must include much that was
wholly outside of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution; such as that
service which Mr. Muller was permitted to render to the church of Christ
and the world at large as a preacher, pastor, witness for truth, and
author of books and tracts.

His preaching period covered the whole time from 1826 to 1898, the year
of his departure, over seventy years; and from 1830, when he went to
Teignmouth, his preaching continued, without interruption except from
ill health, until his life closed, with an average through the whole
period of probably three sermons a week, or over ten thousand for his
lifetime. This is probably a low estimate, for during his missionary
tours, which covered over two hundred thousand miles and were spread
through' seventeen years, he spoke on an average about once a day
notwithstanding already advanced age.

His church life was much blessed even in visible and tangible results.
During the first two and a half years of work in Bristol, two hundred
and twenty-seven members were added, about half of whom were new
converts, and it is probable that, if the whole number brought to the
knowledge of Christ by his preaching could now be ascertained, it would
be found to aggregate full as many as the average of those years, and
would thus reach into the thousands, exclusive of orphans converted on
Ashley Down. Then when we take into account the vast numbers addressed
and impressed by his addresses, given in all parts of the United
Kingdom, on the Continent of Europe, and in America, Asia, and
Australia, and the still vaster numbers who have read his Narrative, his
books and tracts, or who have in various other ways felt the quickening
power of his example and life, we shall get some conception--still, at
best, inadequate--of the range and scope of the influence he wielded by
his tongue and pen, his labours, and his life. Much of the best
influence defies all tabulated statistics and evades all mathematical
estimates; it is like the fragrance of the alabaster flask which fills
all the house but escapes our grosser senses of sight, hearing, and
touch. This part of George Muller's work we cannot summarize: it belongs
to a realm where we cannot penetrate. But God sees, knows, and rewards
it.


CHAPTER XXI

THE CHURCH LIFE AND GROWTH

THROUGHOUT Mr. Muller's journal we meet scattered and fragmentary
suggestions as to the true conception of Christian teaching and
practice, the nature and office of the Christian ministry, the
principles which should prevail in church conduct, the mutual relations
of believers, and the Spirit's relation to the Body of Christ, to pure
worship, service, and testimony. These hints will be of more value if
they are crystallized into unity so as to be seen in their connection
with each other.

The founder of the orphan houses began and ended his public career as a
preacher, and, for over sixty years, was so closely related to one body
of believers that no review of his life can be complete without a
somewhat extended reference to the church in Bristol of which he was one
of the earliest leaders, and, of all who ministered to it, the longest
in service.

His church-work in Bristol began with his advent to that city and ended
only with his departure from it for the continuing city and the Father's
House. The joint ministry of himself and Mr. Henry Craik has been traced
already in the due order of events; but the development of church-life,
under this apostolic ministry, furnishes instructive lessons which yield
their full teaching only when gathered up and grouped together so as to
secure unity, continuity, and completeness of impression.

When Mr. Muller and Mr. Craik began joint work in Bristol, foundations
needed to be relaid. The church-life, as they found it, was not on a
sufficiently scriptural basis, and they waited on God for wisdom to
adjust it more completely to His word and will. This was the work of
time, for it required the instruction of fellow believers so that they
might be prepared to cooperate, by recognizing scriptural and spiritual
teaching; it required also the creation of that bond of sympathy which
inclines the flock to hear and heed the shepherd's voice, and follow a
true pastoral leadership. At the outset of their ministry, these
brethren carefully laid down some principles on which their ministry was
to be based. On May 23, 1832, they frankly stated, at Gideon Chapel,
certain terms on which alone they could take charge of the church: they
must be regarded as simply God's servants to labour among them so long
as, and in such way as might be His will, and under no bondage of fixed
rules; they desired pew-rents to be done away with, and voluntary
offerings substituted, etc.

There was already, however, a strong conviction that a new start was in
some respects indispensable if the existing church-life was to be
thoroughly modelled on a scriptural pattern. These brethren determined
to stamp upon the church certain important features such as these:
Apostolic simplicity of worship, evangelical teaching, evangelistic
work, separation from the world, systematic giving, and dependence on
prayer. They desired to give great prominence to the simple testimony of
the Word, to support every department of the work by free-will
offerings, to recognize the Holy Spirit as the one presiding and
governing Power in all church assemblies, and to secure liberty for all
believers in the exercise of spiritual gifts as distributed by that
Spirit to all members of the Body of Christ for service. They believed
it scriptural to break bread every Lord's day, and to baptize by
immersion; and, although this latter has not for many years been a term
of communion or of fellowship, believers have always been carefully
taught that this is the duty of all disciples.

It has been already seen that in August, 1832, seven persons in all,
including these two pastors, met at Bethesda Chapel to unite in
fellowship, without any formal basis or bond except that of loyalty to
the Word and Spirit of God. This step was taken in order to start anew,
without the hindrance of customs already prevailing, which were felt to
be unscriptural and yet were difficult to abolish without discordant
feeling; and, from that date on, Bethesda Chapel has been the home of an
assembly of believers who have sought steadfastly to hold fast the New
Testament basis of church-life.

Such blessed results are largely due to these beloved colleagues in
labour who never withheld their testimony, but were intrepidly
courageous and conscientiously faithful in witnessing against whatever
they deemed opposed to the Word. Love ruled, but was not confounded with
laxity in matters of right and wrong; and, as they saw more clearly what
was taught in the Word, they sought to be wholly obedient to the Lord's
teaching and leading, and to mould and model every matter, however
minute, in every department of duty, private or public, according to the
expressed will of God.

In January, 1834, all teachers who were not believers were dismissed
from the Sunday-school; and, in the Dorcas Society, only believing
sisters were accepted to make clothes for the destitute. The reason was
that it had been found unwise and unwholesome to mix up or yoke together
believers and unbelievers.* Such association proved a barrier to
spiritual converse and injurious to both classes, fostering in the
unbelievers a false security, ensnaring them in a delusive hope that to
help in Christian work might somehow atone for rejection of Jesus Christ
as a Saviour, or secure favour from God and an open door into heaven. No
doubt all this indiscriminate association of children of God with
children of the world in a "mixed multitude" is unscriptural.
Unregenerate persons are tempted to think there is some merit at least
in mingling with worshippers and workers, and especially in giving to
the support of the gospel and its institutions. The devil seeks to
persuade such that it is acceptable to God to conform externally to
religious rites, and forms, and take part in outward acts of service and
sacrifice, and that He will deal leniently with them, despite their
unbelief and disobedience. Mr. Muller and Mr. Craik felt keenly that
this danger existed and that even in minor matters there must be a line
of separation, for the sake of all involved.

* 2 Cor. vi. 14-18.

When, in 1837, in connection with the congregation at Bethesda, the
question was raised--commonly known as that of close communion--whether
believers who had not been baptized as such should be received into
fellowship, it was submitted likewise to the one test of clear scripture
teaching. Some believers were conscientiously opposed to such reception,
but the matter was finally and harmoniously settled by "receiving all
who love our Lord Jesus into full communion, irrespective of baptism,"
and Mr. Muller, looking back forty-four years later upon this action,
bears witness that the decision never became a source of dissension.*

* Appendix L.

In all other church matters, prayer and searching the Word, asking
counsel of the Holy Oracles and wisdom from above, were the one resort,
and the resolution of all difficulties. When, in the spring of 1838,
sundry questions arose somewhat delicate and difficult to adjust, Mr.
Muller and Mr. Craik quietly withdrew from Bristol for two weeks, to
give themselves to prayer and meditation, seeking of God definite
direction.

The matters then at issue concerned the scriptural conception, mode of
selection and appointment, scope of authority and responsibility, of
_the Eldership;_ the proper mode of observance of the _Lord's Supper,_
its frequency, proper subjects, etc. Nothing is ever settled finally
until settled rightly, nor settled rightly until settled scripturally. A
serious peril confronted the church--not of controversy only, but of
separation and schism; and in such circumstances mere discussion often
only fans the embers of strife and ends in hopeless alienation. These
spiritually minded pastors followed the apostolic method, referring all
matters to the Scriptures as the one rule of faith and practice, and to
the Holy Spirit as the presiding Presence in the church of God; and they
purposely retired into seclusion from the strife of tongues and of
conflicting human opinion, that they might know the mind of the Lord and
act accordingly. The results, as might be foreseen, were clear light
from above for themselves, and a united judgment among the brethren; but
more than this, God gave them wisdom so to act, combining the courage of
conviction with the meekness and gentleness of Christ, as that all
clouds were dispelled and peace restored.*

* Appendix M.

For about eight years, services had been held in both Gideon and
Bethesda chapels; but on April 19, 1840, the last of the services
conducted by Mr. Muller and Mr. Craik was held at Gideon,--Bethesda,
from this time on, becoming the central place of assembly. The reasons
for this step were somewhat as follows:

These joint pastors strongly felt, with some others, that not a few of
the believers who assembled at Gideon Chapel were a hindrance to the
clear, positive, and united testimony which should be given both to the
church and world; and it was on this account that, after many meetings
for prayer and conference, seeking to know God's mind, it was determined
to relinquish Gideon as a place of worship. The questions involved
affected the preservation of the purity and simplicity of apostolic
worship, and so the conformity of church-life to the New Testament
pattern. These well-yoked pastors were very jealous for the Lord God of
hosts, that, among the saints to whom they ministered, nothing should
find a lodgment which was not in entire accord with scriptural
principles, precepts, and practices.

Perhaps it is well here to put on record, even at risk of repetition,
the principles which Mr. Muller and his colleague were wont to enforce
as guards or landmarks which should be set up and kept up, in order to
exclude those innovations which always bring spiritual declension.

1. Believers should meet, simply as such, without reference to
denominational lines, names, or distinctions, as a corrective and
preventive of sectarianism.

2. They should steadfastly maintain the Holy Scriptures as the divine
rule and standard of doctrine, deportment, and discipline.

3. They should encourage freedom for the exercise of whatever spiritual
gifts the Lord might be pleased by His Spirit to bestow for general
edification.

4. Assemblies on the Lord's day should be primarily for believers, for
the breaking of bread, and for worship; unbelievers sitting
promiscuously among saints would either hinder the appearance of meeting
for such purposes, or compel a pause between other parts of the service
and the Lord's Supper.

5. The pew-rent system should be abolished, as promoting the caste
spirit, or at least the outward appearance of a false distinction
between the poorer and richer classes, especially as pew-holders
commonly look on their sittings as private property.

6. All money contributed for pastoral support, church work, and
missionary enterprises at home and abroad should be by free-will
offerings.

It was because some of these and other like scriptural principles were
thought to be endangered or compromised by practices prevailing at
Gideon Chapel before Mr. Muller and Mr. Craik took charge, that it
seemed best on the whole to relinquish that chapel as a place of
worship. As certain customs there obtaining had existed previously, it
seemed to these godly-minded brethren that it would be likely to cause
needless offence and become a root of bitterness should they require
what they deemed unscriptural to be renounced; and it seemed the way of
love to give up Gideon Chapel after these eight years of labour there,
and to invite such as felt called on to separate from every sectarian
system, and meet for worship where free exercise would be afforded for
every spiritual gift, and where New Testament methods might be more
fully followed, to assemble with other believers at Bethesda, where
previous hindering conditions had not existed.

Mr. Muller remained very intimately connected with Bethesda and its
various outgrowths, for many years, as the senior pastor, or
elder,--though only _primus inter pares,_ i.e., leader among equals. His
opinions about the work of the ministry and the conduct of church-life,
which did so much to shape the history of these churches, therefore form
a necessary part of this sketch of the development of church-life.

It was laid upon his heart frequently to address his brethren in the
ministry of the Word and the curacy of souls. Everywhere, throughout the
world, he welcomed opportunities for interviews, whether with many or
few, upon whom he could impress his own deep convictions as to the vital
secrets of effective service in the pulpit and pastorate. Such meetings
with brethren in the ministry numbered hundreds and perhaps thousands in
the course of his long life, and as his testimony was essentially the
same on all occasions, a single utterance may be taken as the type of
all. During his American tours, he gave an hour's address which was
reported and published, and the substance of which may therefore be
given.

First of all he laid great stress upon the _need of conversion._ Until a
man is both truly turned unto God and sure of this change in himself he
is not fitted to convert others. The ministry is not a human profession,
but a divine vocation. The true preacher is both a _herald_ and a
_witness,_ and hence must back up his message by his personal testimony
from experience.

But even conversion is not enough: there must be an _intimate knowledge
of the Lord Jesus._ One must know the Lord as coming near to himself,
and know the joy and strength found in hourly access. However it be
done, and at any cost, the minister of Christ must reach this close
relationship. It is an absolute necessity to peace and power.

_Growth in happiness and love_ was next made very prominent. It is
impossible to set limits to the experience of any believer who casts
himself wholly on God, surrenders himself wholly to God, and cherishes
deep love for His word and holy intimacy with Himself. The first
business of every morning should be to secure happiness in God.

He who is to nourish others must carefully _feed his own soul._ Daily
reading and study of the Scriptures, with much prayer, especially in the
early morning hours, was strenuously urged. Quietness before God should
be habitually cultivated, calming the mind and freeing it from
preoccupation. Continuous reading of the Word, in course, will throw
light upon the general teaching of the Word, and reveal God's thoughts
in their variety and connection, and go far to correct erroneous views.

_Holiness_ must be the supreme aim: prompt obedience to all known truth,
a single eye in serving God, and zeal for His glory. Many a life has
been more or less a failure because habits of heart well pleasing to God
have been neglected. Nothing is more the crowning grace than the
unconscious grace of _humility._ All praise of man robs God of His own
honour. Let us therefore be humble and turn all eyes unto God.

The _message_ must be gotten from God, if it is to be with power. "Ask
God for it," said Mr. Muller, "and be not satisfied until the heart is
at rest. When the text is obtained ask further guidance in meditating
upon it, and keep in constant communion so as to get God's mind in the
matter and His help in delivery. Then, after the work is done, pray much
for blessing, as well as in advance." He then told some startling facts
as to seed sown many years before, but even now yielding fruit in answer
to prayer.

He laid also special emphasis upon _expounding the Scripture._ The word
of God is the staple of all preaching; Christ and nothing else the
centre of all true ministry of the Word. Whoever faithfully and
constantly preaches Christ will find God's word not returning to him
void. Preach simply. Luther's rule was to speak so that an ignorant
maid-servant could understand; if she does, the learned professor
certainly will; but it does not hold true that the simple understand all
that the wise do.

Mr. Muller seldom addressed his brethren in the ministry without giving
more or less counsel as to the conduct of church-life, giving plain
witness against such hindrances as unconverted singers and choirs,
secular methods of raising money, pew-rents and caste distinctions in
the house of prayer, etc.; and urging such helps as inquirers' meetings,
pastoral visits, and, above all else, believing prayer. He urged
definite praying and importunate praying, and remarked that Satan will
not mind how we labour in prayer for a few days, weeks, or even months,
if he can at last discourage us so that we cease praying, as though it
were of no use.

As to prayers for past seed-sowing, he told the writer of this memoir
how in all supplication to God he looked not only forward but
_backward._ He was wont to ask that the Lord would be pleased to bless
seed long since sown and yet apparently unfruitful; and he said that, in
answer to these prayers, he had up to that day evidence of God's loving
remembrance of his work of faith and labour of love in years long gone
by. He was permitted to know that messages delivered for God, tracts
scattered, and other means of service had, after five, ten, twenty, and
even sixty years, at last brought forth a harvest. Hence his urgency in
advising fellow labourers to pray unceasingly that God would work
mightily in the hearts of those who had once been under their care,
bringing to their remembrance the truth which had been set before them.

The humility Mr. Muller enjoined he practised. He was ever only the
_servant_ of the Lord. Mr. Spurgeon, in one of his sermons, describes
the startling effect on London Bridge when he saw one lamp after another
lit up with flame, though in the darkness he could not see the
lamplighter; and George Muller set many a light burning when he was
himself content to be unseen, unnoticed, and unknown. He honestly sought
not his own glory, but had the meek and quiet spirit so becoming a
minister of Jesus Christ.

Mr. Henry Craik's death in 1866, after thirty-four years of co-labour in
the Lord, left Mr. Muller comparatively alone with a double burden of
responsibility, but his faith was equal to the crisis and his peace
remained unbroken. A beloved brother, then visiting Bristol, after
crowded services conducted by him at Bethesda, was about leaving the
city; and he asked Mr. Muller, "What are you going to do, now that Mr.
Craik is dead, to hold the people and prevent their scattering?" "My
beloved brother," was the calm reply, "we shall do what we have always
done, _look only to the Lord."_

This God has been the perpetual helper. Mr. Muller almost totally
withdrew from the work, during the seventeen years of his missionary
tours, between 1875 and 1892, when he was in Bristol but a few weeks or
months at a time, in the intervals between his long journeys and
voyages. This left the assembly of believers still more dependent upon
the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls. But Bethesda has never, in a
sense, been limited to any one or two men, as the only acknowledged
leaders; from the time when those seven believers gathered about the
Lord's table in 1832, the New Testament conception of the equality of
believers in privilege and duty has been maintained. The one supreme
Leader is the Holy Ghost, and under Him those whom He calls and
qualifies. One of the fundamental principles espoused by these brethren
is that the Spirit of God controls in the assemblies of the saints; that
He sets the members, every one of them, in the Body as it pleaseth Him,
and divides unto them, severally as He will, gifts for service in the
Body; that the only true ordination is His ordination, and that the
manifestation of His gifts is the sufficient basis for the recognition
of brethren as qualified for the exercise of an office or function, the
possession of spiritual gifts being sufficient authority for their
exercise. It is with the Body of Christ as with the human body: the eye
is manifestly made for seeing and the ear for hearing, the hand and foot
for handling and walking; and this adaptation both shows the design of
God and their place in the organism. And so for more than threescore
years the Holy Spirit has been safely trusted to supply and qualify all
needed teachers, helpers, and leaders in the assembly. There has always
been a considerable number of brethren and sisters fitted and disposed
to take up the various departments of service to which they were
obviously called of the Spirit, so that no one person has been
indispensable. Various brethren have been able to give more or less time
and strength to preaching, visiting, and ruling in the church; while
scores of others, who, like Paul, Priscilla and Aquila, the tent-makers,
have their various business callings and seek therein to "abide with
God," are ready to aid as the Lord may guide in such other forms of
service as may consist with their ordinary vocations. The prosperity of
the congregation, its growth, conduct, and edification, have therefore
been dependent only on God, who, as He has withdrawn one worker after
another, has supplied others in their stead, and so continues to do.

To have any adequate conception of the fruits of such teaching and such
living in church-life, it is needful to go at least into one of the
Monday-night prayer meetings at Bethesda. It is primitive and apostolic
in simplicity. No one presides but the unseen Spirit of God. A hymn is
suggested by some brother, and then requests for prayer are read,
usually with definite mention of the names of those by and for whom
supplication is asked. Then prayer, scripture reading, singing, and
exhortation follow, without any prearrangement as to subject, order in
which or persons by whom, the exercises are participated in. The fullest
liberty is encouraged to act under the Spirit's guidance; and the fact
of such guidance is often strikingly apparent in the singular unity of
prayer and song, scripture reading and remarks, as well as in the
harmonious fellowship apparent. After more than half a century these
Monday-night prayer services are still a hallowed centre of attraction,
a rallying-point for supplication, and a radiating-point for service,
and remain unchanged in the method of their conduct.

The original congregation has proved a tree whose seed is in itself
after its kind. At the time of Mr. Muller's decease it was nearly
sixty-six years since that memorable evening in 1832 when those seven
believers met to form a church; and the original body of disciples
meeting in Bethesda had increased to ten, six of which are now
independent of the mother church, and four of which still remain in
close affiliation and really constitute one church, though meeting in
Bethesda, Alma Road, Stokes Croft, and Totterdown chapels. The names of
the other churches which have been in a sense offshoots from Bethesda
are as follows: Unity, Bishopston, Cumberland Hall, Charleton Hall,
Nicholas Road, and Bedminster.

At the date of Mr. Muller's decease the total membership of the four
affiliated congregations was upwards of twelve hundred.

In this brief compass no complete outline could be given of the church
life and work so dear to him, and over which he so long watched and
prayed. This church has been and is a missionary church. When on March
1, 1836, Mr. and Mrs. Groves, with ten helpers, left Bristol to carry on
mission work in the East Indies, Mr. Muller felt deeply moved to pray
that the body of disciples to whom he ministered might send out from
their own members labourers for the wide world-field. That prayer was
not forgotten before God, and has already been answered exceeding
abundantly above all he then asked or thought. Since that time some
sixty have gone forth to lands afar to labour in the gospel, and at the
period of Mr. Muller's death there were at work, in various parts of the
world, at least twenty, who are aided by the free-will offerings of
their Bristol brethren.

When, in 1874, Mr. Muller closed the third volume of his Narrative, he
recorded the interesting fact that, of the many nonconformist ministers
of the gospel resident in Bristol when he took up work there more than
forty-two years before, _not one remained,_ all having been removed
elsewhere or having died; and that, of all the Evangelical clergy of the
establishment, only _one_ survived. Yet he himself, with very rare
hindrance through illness, was permitted to preach and labour with
health and vigour both of mind and body; over a thousand believers were
already under his pastoral oversight, meeting in three different
chapels, and over three thousand had been admitted into fellowship.

It was the writer's privilege to hear Mr. Muller preach on the morning
of March 22, 1896, in Bethesda Chapel. He was in his ninety-first year,
but there was a freshness, vigour, and terseness in his preaching that
gave no indication of failing powers; in fact, he had never seemed more
fitted to express and impress the thoughts of God.

His theme was the seventy-seventh psalm, and it afforded him abundant
scope for his favourite subject--prayer. He expounded the psalm verse by
verse, clearly, sympathetically, effectively, and the outline of his
treatment strongly engraved itself on my memory and is here reproduced.

"I cried unto God with my voice." Prayer seeks a voice--to utter itself
in words: the effort to clothe our desires in language gives
definiteness to our desires and keeps the attention on the objects of
prayer.

"In the day of my trouble." The Psalmist was in trouble; some distress
was upon him, perhaps physical as well as mental, and it was an
unceasing burden night and day.

"My soul refused to be comforted." The words, "my sore ran in the
night," may be rendered, "my hand reached out"--that is in prayer. But
unbelief triumphed, and his soul refused all comfort--even the comfort
of God's promises. His trouble overshadowed his faith and shut out the
vision of God.

"I remembered, or thought of God, and was troubled." Even the thought of
God, instead of bringing peace, brought distress; instead of silencing
his complaint, it increased it, and his spirit was overwhelmed--the sure
sign, again, of unbelief. If in trouble God's promises and the thought
of God bring no relief, they will only become an additional burden.

"Thou holdest mine eyes waking." There was no sleep because there was no
rest or peace. Care makes wakeful. Anxiety is the foe of repose. His
spirit was unbelieving and therefore rebellious. He would not take God
at His word.

"I have considered the days of old." Memory now is at work. He calls to
remembrance former experiences of trouble and of deliverance. He had
often sought God and been heard and helped, and why not now? As he made
diligent search among the records of his experience and recollected all
God's manifest and manifold interpositions, he began to ask whether God
could be fickle and capricious, whether His mercy was exhausted and His
promise withdrawn, whether He had forgotten His covenant of grace, and
shut up His fountains of love.

Thus we follow the Psalmist through six stages of unbelief:

1. The thought of God is a burden instead of a blessing.

2. The complaining spirit increases toward God.

3. His spirit is agitated instead of soothed and calmed.

4. Sleep departs, and anxiety forbids repose of heart.

5. Trouble only deepens and God seems far off.

6. Memory recalls God's mercies, but only to awaken distrust.

At last we reach the _turning-point_ in the psalm: he asks as he reviews
former experiences, WHERE IS THE DIFFERENCE? IS THE CHANGE IN GOD OR IN
ME? "Selah"--the pause marks this turning-point in the argument or
experience.

"And I said, This is _my infirmity."_ In other words, "I HAVE BEEN A
FOOL!" God is faithful. He never casts off. His children are always dear
to Him. His grace is exhaustless and His promise unfailing. Instead of
fixing his eyes on his trouble he now fixes his whole mind on God. He
remembers His work, and meditates upon it; instead of rehearsing his own
trials, he talks of His doings. He gets overwhelmed now, not with the
greatness of his troubles, but the greatness of his Helper. He recalls
His miracles of power and love, and remembers the mystery of His mighty
deeds--His way in the sea, His strange dealings and leadings and their
gracious results--and so faith once more triumphs.

What is the conclusion, the practical lesson?

Unbelief is folly. It charges God foolishly. Man's are the weakness and
failure, but never God's. My faith may be lacking, but not His power.
Memory and meditation, when rightly directed, correct unbelief. God has
shown Himself great. He has always done wonders. He led even an
unbelieving and murmuring people out of Egypt and for forty years
through the wilderness, and His miracles of power and love were
marvelous.

The psalm contains a _great lesson._ Affliction is inevitable. But our
business is never to lose sight of the Father who will not leave His
children. We are to roll all burdens on Him and wait patiently, and
deliverance is sure. Behind the curtain He carries on His plan of love,
never forgetting us, always caring for His own. His ways of dealing we
cannot trace, for His footsteps are in the trackless sea, and unknown to
us. But HE IS SURELY LEADING, and CONSTANTLY LOVING. Let us not be
fools, but pray in faith to a faithful God.

This is the substance of that morning exposition, and is here given very
inadequately, it is true, yet it serves not only to illustrate Mr.
Muller's mode of expounding and applying the Word, but the exposition of
this psalm is a sort of exponent also of his life. It reveals his habits
of prayer, the conflicts with unbelief, and how out of temptations to
distrust God he found deliverance; and thus is doubly valuable to us as
an experimental commentary upon the life-history we are studying.


CHAPTER XXII

A GLANCE AT THE GIFTS AND THE GIVERS

THERE is One who still sits over against the Treasury, watching the
gifts cast into it, and impartially weighing their worth, estimating the
rich man's millions and the widow's mites, not by the amount given, but
by the motives which impel and the measure of self-sacrifice accepted
for the Lord's sake.

The ample supplies poured into Mr. Muller's hands came alike from those
who had abundance of wealth and from those whose only abundance was that
of deep poverty, but the rills as well as the rivers were from God. It
is one of the charms of this life-story to observe the variety of
persons and places, sums of money and forms of help, connected with the
donations made to the Lord's work; and the exact adaptation between the
need and the supply, both as to time and amount. Some instances of this
have been given in the historic order; but to get a more complete view
of the lessons which they suggest it is helpful to classify some of the
striking and impressive examples, which are so abundant, and which
afford such valuable hints as to the science and the art of giving.

Valuable lessons may be drawn from the beautiful spirit shown by givers
and from the secret history of their gifts.

In some cases the facts were not known till long after, even by Mr.
Muller himself; and when known, could not be disclosed to the public
while the parties were yet alive. But when it became possible and proper
to unveil these hidden things they were revealed for the glory of God
and the good of others, and shine on the pages of this record like stars
in the sky. Paul rejoiced in the free-will offerings of Philippian
disciples, not because he desired a gift, but fruit that might abound to
their account; not because their offerings ministered to his necessity,
but because they became a sacrifice of a sweet smell acceptable, well
pleasing to God. Such joy constantly filled Mr. Muller's heart. He was
daily refreshed and reinvigorated by the many proofs that the gifts
received had been first sanctified by prayer and self-denial. He lived
and breathed amid the fragrance of sweet-savour offerings, permitted for
more than threescore years to participate in the joy of the Lord Himself
over the cheerful though often costly gifts of His people. By reason of
identification with his Master, the servant caught the sweet scent of
these sacrifices as their incense rose from His altars toward heaven.
Even on earth the self-denials of his own life found compensation in
thus acting in the Lord's behalf in receiving and disbursing these
gifts; and, he says, "the Lord thus impressed on me from the beginning
that the orphan houses and work were HIS, _not_ MINE."

Many a flask of spikenard, very precious, broken upon the feet of the
Saviour, for the sake of the orphans, or the feeding of starving souls
with the Bread of Life, filled the house with the odour of the ointment,
so that to dwell there was to breathe a hallowed atmosphere of devotion.

Among the first givers to the work was a poor needlewoman, who, to Mr.
Muller's surprise, brought _one hundred pounds._ She earned by her work
only an _average, per week,_ of _three shillings and sixpence,_ and was
moreover weak in body. A small legacy of less than five hundred pounds
from her grandmother's estate had come to her at her father's death by
the conditions of her grandmother's will. But that father had died a
drunkard and a bankrupt, and her brothers and sisters had settled with
his creditors by paying them five shillings to the pound. To her
conscience, this seemed robbing the creditors of three fourths of their
claim, and, though they had no legal hold upon her, she privately paid
them the other fifteen shillings to the pound, of the unpaid debts of
her father. Moreover, when her unconverted brother and two sisters gave
each fifty pounds to the widowed mother, she as a child of God felt that
she should give double that amount. By this time her own share of the
legacy was reduced to a small remainder, and it was out of this that she
gave the one hundred pounds for the orphan work!

As Mr. Muller's settled principle was _never to grasp eagerly at any
gift whatever the need or the amount of the gift,_ before accepting this
money he had a long conversation with this woman, seeking to prevent her
from giving either from an unsanctified motive or in unhallowed haste,
without counting the cost. He would in such a case dishonour his Master
by accepting the gift, as though God were in need of our offerings.
Careful scrutiny, however, revealed no motives not pure and Christlike;
this woman had calmly and deliberately reached her decision. "The Lord
Jesus," she said, "has given His last drop of blood for me, and should I
not give Him this hundred pounds?" He who comes into contact with such
givers in his work for God finds therein a means of grace.

This striking incident lends a pathetic interest to the beginnings of
the orphan work, and still more as we further trace the story of this
humble needlewoman. She had been a habitual giver, but so unobtrusively
that, while she lived, not half a dozen people knew of either the legacy
or of this donation. Afterward, however, it came to the light that in
many cases she had quietly and most unostentatiously given food,
clothing, and like comforts to the deserving poor. Her gifts were so
disproportionate to her means that her little capital rapidly
diminished. Mr. Muller was naturally very reluctant to accept what she
brought, until he saw that the love of Christ constrained her. He could
then do no less than to receive her offering, in his Master's name,
while like the Master he exclaimed, "O woman, great is thy faith!"

Five features made her benevolence praiseworthy. First, all these deeds
of charity were done in secret and without any show; and she therefore
was kept humble, not puffed up with pride through human applause; her
personal habits of dress and diet remained as simple after her legacy as
before, and to the last she worked with her needle for her own support;
and, finally, while her _earnings_ were counted in shillings and pence,
her _givings_ were counted in sovereigns or five-pound notes, and in one
case by the hundred pounds. Her money was entirely gone, years before
she was called higher, but the faithful God never forgot His promise: "I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee." Never left to want, even after
bodily weakness forbade her longer to ply her needle, she asked no human
being for help, but in whatever straits made her appeal to God, and was
not only left to suffer no lack, but, in the midst of much bodily
suffering, her mouth was filled with holy song.

Mr. Muller records the _first bequest_ as from a dear lad who died in
the faith. During his last illness, he had received a gift of some new
silver coins; and he asked that this, his only treasure in money, might
be sent for the orphans. With pathetic tenderness Mr. Muller adds that
this precious little legacy of _six shillings sixpence halfpenny,_
received September 15, 1837, was the first they ever had. Those who
estimate all donations by money-worth can little understand how welcome
such a bequest was; but to such a man this small donation, bequeathed by
one of Christ's little ones, and representing all he possessed, was of
inestimable worth.

In May, 1842, a gold watch and chain were accompanied by a brief note,
the contents of which suggest the possibilities of service, open to us
through the voluntary limitation of artificial or imaginary wants. The
note reads thus: "A pilgrim does not want such a watch as this to make
him happy; one of an inferior kind will do to show him how swiftly time
flies, and how fast he is hastening on to that Canaan where time will be
no more: so that it is for you to do with this what it seemeth good to
you. It is the last relic of earthly vanity, and, while I am in the
body, may I be kept from all idolatry!"

In March, 1884, a contribution reached Mr. Muller from one who had been
enabled in a like spirit to increase the amount over all previous gifts
by the sale of some jewelry which had been put away in accordance with 1
Peter iii. 3. How much superfluous ornament, worn by disciples, might be
blessedly sacrificed for the Lord's sake! The one ornament which is in
His sight of great price would shine with far more lustre if it were the
only one worn.

Another instance of turning all things to account was seen in the case
of a giver who sent a box containing four old crown pieces which had a
curious history. They were the wedding-day present of a bridegroom to
his bride, who, reluctant to spend her husband's first gift, kept them
until she passed them over, as heirlooms, to her four grand-children.
They were thus at last put out to usury, after many years of gathering
"rust" in hoarded idleness and uselessness. Little did bridegroom or
bride foresee how these coins, after more than a hundred years, would
come forth from their hiding-place to be put to the Lord's uses. Few
people have ever calculated how much is lost to every good cause by the
simple withdrawal of money from circulation. Those four crown pieces had
they been carefully invested, so as to double in value, by compound
interest, every ten years, would have increased to one thousand pounds
during the years they had lain idle!

One gift was sent in, as an offering to the Lord, instead of being used
to purchase an engagement-ring by two believers who desired their lives
to be united by that highest bond, the mutual love of the Lord who
spared not His own blood for them.

At another time, a box came containing a new satin jacket, newly bought,
but sacrificed as a snare to pride. Its surrender marked an epoch, for
henceforth the owner determined to spend in dress only what is needful,
and not waste the Lord's money on costly apparel. Enlightened believers
look on all things as inalienably God's, and, even in the voluntary
diversion of money into sacred rather than selfish channels, still
remember that they give to Him only what is His own! "The little child
feels proud that he can drop the money into the box after the parent has
supplied the means, and told him to do so; and so God's children are
sometimes tempted to think that they are giving of their own, and to be
proud over their gifts, forgetting the divine Father who both gives us
all we have and bids us give all back to Him."

A gift of two thousand pounds on January 29,1872, was accompanied by a
letter confessing that the possession of property had given the writer
much trouble of mind, and it had been disposed of from a conviction that
the Lord "saw it not good" for him to _hold so much_ and therefore
allowed its possession to be a curse rather than a blessing. Fondness
for possessions always entails curse, and external riches thus become a
source of internal poverty. It is doubtful whether any child of God ever
yet hoarded wealth without losing in spiritual attainment and enjoyment.
Greed is one of the lowest and most destructive of vices and turns a man
into the likeness of the coin he worships, making him hard, cold,
metallic, and unsympathetic, so that, as has been quaintly said, he
drops into his coffin "with a chink."

God estimates what we _give_ by what we _keep,_ for it is possible to
bestow large sums and yet reserve so much larger amounts that no
self-denial is possible. Such giving to the Lord _costs us nothing._

In 1853, a brother in the Lord took out of his pocket a roll of
bank-notes, amounting to one hundred and ten pounds, and put it into Mr.
Muller's hand, it being _more than one half of his entire worldly
estate._ Such giving is an illustration of self-sacrifice on a large
scale, and brings corresponding blessing.

The _motives_ prompting gifts were often unusually suggestive. In
October, 1857, a donation came from a Christian merchant who, having
sustained a heavy pecuniary loss, _wished to sanctify his loss by a gift
to the Lord's work._ Shortly after, another offering was handed in by a
young man in thankful remembrance that twenty-five years before Mr.
Muller had prayed over him, as a child, that God would convert him. Yet
another gift, of thirty-five hundred pounds, came to him in 1858, with a
letter stating that the giver had further purposed to give to the orphan
work the chief preference in his will, but had now seen it to be far
better to _act as his own executor_ and give the whole amount while he
lived. Immense advantage would accrue, both to givers and to the causes
they purpose to promote, were this principle generally adopted! There is
"many a slip betwixt the cup" of the legator and "the lip" of the
legatee. Even a wrong wording of a will has often forfeited or defeated
the intent of a legacy. Mr. Muller had to warn intending donors that
nothing that was reckoned as real estate was available for legacies for
charitable institutions, nor even money lent on real estate or in any
other way derived therefrom. These conditions no longer exist, but they
illustrate the ease with which a will may often be made void, and the
design of a bequest be defeated.

Many donors were led to send thank-offerings for _avoided_ or _averted
calamities:_ as, for example, for a sick horse, given up by the
veterinary surgeon as lost, but which recovered in answer to prayer.
Another donor, who broke his left arm, sends grateful acknowledgment to
God that it was not the _right_ arm, or some more vital part like the
head or neck.

The offerings were doubly precious because of the unwearied faithfulness
of God who manifestly prompted them, and who kept speaking to the hearts
of thousands, leading them to give so abundantly and constantly that no
want was unsupplied. In 1859, so great were the outlays of the work that
if day by day, during the whole three hundred and sixty-five, fifty
pounds had been received, the income would not have been more than
enough. Yet in a surprising variety and number of ways, and from persons
and places no less numerous and various, donations came in. Not one of
twenty givers was personally known to Mr. Muller, and no one of all
contributors had ever been asked for a gift, and yet, up to November,
1858, over _six hundred thousand pounds_ had already been received, and
in amounts varying from eighty-one hundred pounds down to a single
farthing.

Unique circumstances connected with some donations made them remarkable.
While resting at Ilfracombe, in September, 1865, a gentleman gave to Mr.
Muller a sum of money, at the same time narrating the facts which led to
the gift. He was a hard-working business man, wont to doubt the reality
of spiritual things, and strongly questioned the truth of the narrative
of answered prayers which he had read from Mr. Muller's pen. But, in
view of the simple straightforward story, he could not rest in his
doubts, and at last proposed to himself a test as to whether or not God
was indeed with Mr. Muller, as he declared. He wished to buy a certain
property if rated at a reasonable valuation; and he determined, if he
should secure it at the low price which he set for himself, he would
give to him one hundred pounds. He authorized a bid to be put in, in his
behalf, but, curious to get the earliest information as to the success
of his venture, he went himself to the place of sale, and was surprised
to find the property actually knocked off to him at his own price.
Astonished at what he regarded as a proof that God was really working
with Mr. Muller and for him, he made up his mind to go in person and pay
over the sum of money to him, and so make his acquaintance and see the
man whose prayers God answered. Not finding him at Bristol, he had
followed him to Ilfracombe.

Having heard his story, and having learned that he was from a certain
locality, Mr. Muller remarked upon the frequent proofs of God's strange
way of working on the minds of parties wholly unknown to him and leading
them to send in gifts; and he added: "I had a letter from a lawyer in
your very neighbourhood, shortly since, asking for the proper form for a
bequest, as a client of his, not named, wished to leave one thousand
pounds to the orphan work." It proved that the man with whom he was then
talking was this nameless client, who, being convinced that his doubts
were wrong, had decided to provide for this legacy.

In August, 1884, a Christian brother from the United States called to
see Mr. Muller. He informed him how greatly he had been blessed of God
through reading his published testimony to God's faithfulness; and that
having, through his sister's death, come into the possession of some
property, he had _come across the sea,_ that he might see the orphan
houses and know their founder, for himself, and hand over to him for the
Lord's work the entire bequest of about seven hundred pounds.

Only seventeen days later, a letter accompanying a donation gave further
joy to Mr. Muller's heart. It was from the husband of one of the orphans
who, in her seventeenth year, had left the institution, and to whom Mr.
Muller himself, on her departure, had given the first two volumes of the
Reports. Her husband had read them with more spiritual profit than any
volume except the Book of books, and had found his faith much
strengthened. Being a lay preacher in the Methodist Free Church, the
blessed impulses thus imparted to himself were used of God to inspire a
like self-surrender in the class under his care.

These are a few examples of the countless encouragements that led Mr.
Muller, as he reviewed them, to praise God unceasingly.

A Christian physician enclosed ten pounds in a letter, telling how first
he tried a religion of mere duty and failed; then, after a severe
illness, learned a religion of love, apprehending the love of God to
himself in Christ and so learning how to love others. In his days of
darkness he had been a great lover of flowers and had put up several
plant-houses; flower-culture was his hobby, and a fine collection of
rare plants, his pride. He took down and sold one of these
conservatories and sent the proceeds as _"the price of an idol,_ cast
down by God's power." Another giver enclosed a like amount from the sale
of unnecessary books and pictures; and a poor man his half-crown, "the
fruit of a little tree in his garden."

A poor woman, who had devoted the progeny of a pet rabbit to the orphan
work, when the young became fit for sale changed her mind and "kept back
a part of the price"; _that part,_ however, _two rabbits,_ she found
_dead_ on the day when they were to be sold.

In July, 1877, ten pounds from an anonymous source were accompanied by a
letter which conveys another instructive lesson. Years before, the
writer had resolved before God to discontinue a doubtful habit, and send
the cost of his indulgence to the Institution. The vow, made in time of
trouble, was unpaid until God brought the sin to remembrance by a new
trouble, and by a special message from the Word: "Grieve not the Spirit
of God." The victory was then given over the habit, and, the practice
having annually cost about twenty-six shillings, the full amount was
sent to cover the period during which the solemn covenant had not been
kept, with the promise of further gifts in redemption of the same
promise to the Lord. This instance conveys more than one lesson. It
reminds us of the costliness of much of our self-indulgence. Sir Michael
Hicks-Beach, in submitting the Budget for 1897, remarked that what is
annually wasted in the unsmoked remnants of cigars and cigarettes in
Britain is estimated at a million and a quarter pounds--the equivalent
of all that is annually spent on foreign missions by British Christians.
And many forms of self-gratification, in no way contributing to either
health or profit, would, if what they cost were dedicated to the Lord,
make His treasuries overflow. Again, this incident reminds us of the
many vows, made in time of trouble, which have no payment in time of
relief. Many sorrows come back, like clouds that return after the rain,
to remind of broken pledges and unfulfilled obligations, whereby we have
grieved the Holy Spirit of God. "Pay that which thou hast vowed; for God
hath no pleasure in fools." And again we are here taught how a sensitive
and enlightened conscience will make restitution to God as well as to
man; and that past unfaithfulness to a solemn covenant cannot be made
good merely by keeping to its terms _for the future._ No honest man
dishonours a past debt, or compromises with his integrity by simply
beginning anew and paying as he goes. Reformation takes a retrospective
glance and begins in restitution and reparation for all previous wrongs
and unfaithfulness. It is one of the worst evils of our day that even
disciples are so ready to bury the financial and moral debts of their
past life in the grave of a too-easy oblivion.

One donor, formerly living in Tunbridge Wells, followed a principle of
giving, the reverse of the worldly way. As his own family increased,
instead of decreasing his gifts, he gave, for each child given to him of
God, the average cost of maintaining one orphan, until, having seven
children, he was supporting seven orphans.

An anonymous giver wrote: "It was my idea that when a man had sufficient
for his own wants, he ought then to supply the wants of others, and
consequently I never had sufficient. I now clearly see that God expects
us to give of what we have and not of what we have not, and to leave the
rest to Him. I therefore give in faith and love, knowing that if I first
seek the kingdom of God and His righteousness, all other things will be
added unto me."

Another sends five pounds in fulfillment of a secret promise that, if he
succeeded in passing competitive examination for civil service, he would
make a thank-offering. And he adds that Satan had repeatedly tried to
persuade him that he could not afford it yet, and could send it better
in a little while. Many others have heard the same subtle suggestion
from the same master of wiles and father of lies. Postponement in giving
is usually its practical abandonment, for the habit of procrastination
grows with insensibly rapid development.

Habitual givers generally witnessed to the conscious blessedness of
systematic giving. Many who began by giving a tenth, and perhaps in a
legal spirit, felt constrained, by the growing joy of imparting, to
increase, not the amount only, but the proportion, to a fifth, a fourth,
a third, and even a half of their profits. Some wholly reversed the law
of appropriation with which they began; for at first they gave a tithe
to the Lord's uses, reserving nine tenths, whereas later on they
appropriated nine tenths to the Lord's uses, and reserved for themselves
only a tithe. Those who learn the deep meaning of our Lord's words, "It
is more blessed to give than to receive," find such joy in holding all
things at His disposal that even personal expenditures are subjected to
the scrutiny of conscience and love, lest anything be wasted in
extravagance or careless self-indulgence. Frances Ridley Havergal in her
later years felt herself and all she possessed to be so fully and
joyfully given up to God, that she never went into a shop to spend a
shilling without asking herself whether it would be for God's glory.

Gifts were valued by Mr. Muller only so far as they were the Lord's
money, procured by lawful means and given in the Lord's own way. To the
last his course was therefore most conscientious in the caution with
which he accepted offerings even in times of sorest extremity.

In October, 1842, he felt led to offer aid to a sister who seemed in
great distress and destitution, offering to share with her, if need be,
even his house and purse.

This offer drew out the acknowledgment that she had some five hundred
pounds of her own; and her conversation revealed that this money was
held as a provision against possible future want, and that she was
leaning upon that instead of upon God. Mr. Muller said but little to
her, but after her withdrawal he besought the Lord to make so real to
her the exhaustless riches she possessed in Christ, and her own heavenly
calling, that she might be constrained to lay down at His feet the whole
sum which was thus a snare to her faith and an idol to her love. _Not a
word spoken or written passed between him and her on the subject, nor
did he even see her;_ his express desire being that if any such step
were to be taken by her, it might result from no human influence or
persuasion, lest her subsequent regret might prove both a damage to
herself and a dishonour to her Master.

For nearly four weeks, however, he poured out his heart to God for her
deliverance from greed. Then she again sought an interview and told him
how she had been day by day seeking to learn the will of God as to this
hoarded sum, and had been led to a clear conviction that it should be
laid entire upon His altar. Thus the goodly sum of five hundred pounds
was within so easy reach, at a time of very great need, that a word from
Mr. Muller would secure it. Instead of saying that word, he exhorted her
to make no such disposition of the money at that time, but to count the
cost; to do nothing rashly lest she should repent it, but wait at least
a fortnight more before reaching a final decision. His correspondence
with this sister may be found fully spread out in his journal,* and is a
model of devout carefulness lest he should snatch at a gift that might
be prompted by wrong motives or given with an unprepared heart. When
finally given, unexpected hindrances arose affecting her actual
possession and transfer, so that more than a third of a year elapsed
before it was received; but meanwhile there was on his part neither
impatience nor distrust, nor did he even communicate further with her.
To the glory of God let it be added that she afterward bore cheerful
witness that never for one moment did she regret giving the whole sum to
His service, and thus transferring her trust from the money to the
Master.

* Narrative, I. 487 _et seq._

In August, 1853, a poor widow of sixty, who had sold the little house
which constituted her whole property, put into an orphan-house box
elsewhere, for Mr. Muller, the entire proceeds, ninety pounds. Those who
conveyed it to Mr. Muller, knowing the circumstances, urged her to
retain at least a part of this sum, and prevailed on her to keep five
pounds and sent on the other eighty-five. Mr. Muller, learning the
facts, and fearing lest the gift might result from a sudden impulse to
be afterward regretted, offered to pay her travelling expenses that he
might have an interview with her. He found her mind had been quite made
up for ten years before the house was sold that such disposition should
be made of the proceeds. But he was the more reluctant to accept the
gift lest, as she had already been prevailed on to take back five pounds
of the original donation, she might wish she had reserved more; and only
after much urgency had failed to persuade her to reconsider the step
would he accept it. Even then, however, lest he should be evil spoken of
in the matter, he declined to receive any part of the gift for personal
uses.

In October, 1867, a small sum was sent in by one who had years before
taken it from another, and who desired thus to _make restitution,_
believing that the Christian believer from whom it was taken would
approve of this method of restoring it. Mr. Muller promptly returned it,
irrespective of amount, that restitution might be made directly to the
party who had been robbed or wronged, claiming that such party should
first receive it and then dispose of it as might seem fit. As it did not
belong to him who took it, it was not his to give even in another's
behalf.

During a season of great straits Mr. Muller received a sealed parcel
containing money. He knew from whom it came, and that the donor was a
woman not only involved in debt, but frequently asked by creditors for
their lawful dues in vain. It was therefore clear that it was not _her_
money, and therefore not hers to _give;_ and without even opening the
paper wrapper he returned it to the sender--and this at a time when
there was _not in hand enough to meet the expenses of that very day._ In
June, 1838, a stranger, who confessed to an act of fraud, wished through
Mr. Muller to make restitution, with interest; and, instead of sending
the money by post, Mr. Muller took pains to transmit it by bank orders,
which thus enabled him, in case of need, to prove his fidelity in acting
as a medium of transmission--an instance of the often-quoted maxim that
it is the honest man who is most careful to provide things honest in the
sight of all men.

Money sent as proceeds of a musical entertainment held for the benefit
of the orphans in the south of Devon was politely returned, Mr. Muller
had no doubt of the kind intention of those who set this scheme on foot,
but he felt that money for the work of God _should not be obtained in
this manner,_ and he desired only money provided in God's way.

Friends who asked that they might know whether their gifts had come at a
particularly opportune time were referred to the next Report for answer.
To acknowledge that the help came very seasonably would be an indirect
revelation of need, and might be construed into an indirect appeal for
more aid--as help that was peculiarly timely would soon be exhausted.
And so this man of God consistently avoided any such disclosure of an
exigency, lest his chief object should be hindered, namely, "to show how
blessed it is to deal with God alone, and to trust Him in the darkest
moments." And though the need was continual, and one demand was no
sooner met than another arose, he did not find this a trying life nor
did he ever tire of it.

As early as May, 1846, a letter from a brother contained the following
paragraph:

"With regard to property, I do not see my way clearly. I trust it is all
indeed at the disposal of the Lord; and, if you would let me know of any
need of it in His service, any sum under two hundred pounds shall be at
your disposal at about a week's notice."

The need at that time was great. How easy and natural to write back that
the orphan work was then in want of help, and that, as Mr. Muller was
just going away from Bristol for rest, it would be a special comfort if
his correspondent would send on, say a hundred and ninety pounds or so!
But to deal with the Lord alone in the whole matter seemed so
indispensable, both for the strengthening of his own faith and for the
effectiveness of his testimony to the church and the world, that at once
this temptation was seen to be a snare, and he replied that only to the
Lord could the need of any part of the work be confided.

_Money to be laid up_ as a fund for his old age or possible seasons of
illness or family emergencies was always declined. Such a donation of
one hundred pounds was received October 12, 1856, with a note so
considerate and Christian that the subtle temptation to lay up for
himself treasures on earth would have triumphed but for a heart fixed
immovably in the determination that there should be no dependence upon
any such human provision. He had settled the matter beyond raising the
question again, that he would live from day to day upon the Lord's
bounty, and would make but _one investment,_ namely, using whatever
means God gave, to supply the necessities of the poor, depending on God
richly to repay him in the hour of his own need, according to the
promise:

       "He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord;
        And that which he hath given will He pay him again."
                                Proverbs xix. 17.

God so owned, at once, this disposition on Mr. Muller's part that his
courteous letter, declining the gift for himself, led the donor not only
to ask him to use the hundred pounds for the orphan work, but to add to
this sum a further gift of two hundred pounds more.


CHAPTER XXIII

GOD'S WITNESS TO THE WORK

THE eleventh chapter of Hebrews--that "Westminster Abbey" where Old
Testament saints have a memorial before God--gives a hint of a peculiar
reward which faith enjoys, even in this life, as an earnest and
foretaste of its final recompense.

By faith "the elders obtained a good report," that is, _they had witness
borne to them_ by God in return for witness borne to Him. All the marked
examples of faith here recorded show this twofold testimony. Abel
testified to his faith in God's Atoning Lamb, and God testified to his
gifts. Enoch witnessed to the unseen God by his holy walk with Him, and
He testified to Enoch, by his translation, and even before it, that he
pleased God. Noah's faith bore witness to God's word, by building the
ark and preaching righteousness, and God bore witness to him by bringing
a flood upon a world of the ungodly and saving him and his family in the
ark.

George Muller's life was one long witness to the prayer-hearing God;
and, throughout, God bore him witness that his prayers were heard and
his work accepted. The pages of his journal are full of striking
examples of this witness--the earnest or foretaste of the fuller
recompense of reward reserved for the Lord's coming.

Compensations for renunciations, and rewards for service, do not all
wait for the judgment-seat of Christ, but, as some men's sins are open
beforehand, going before to judgment, so the seed sown for God yields a
harvest that is 'open beforehand' to joyful recognition. Divine love
graciously and richly acknowledged these many years of self-forgetful
devotion to Him and His needy ones, by large and unexpected tokens of
blessing. Toils and trials, tears and prayers, were not in vain even
this side of the Hereafter.

For illustrations of this we naturally turn first of all to the orphan
work. Ten thousand motherless and fatherless children had found a home
and tender parental care in the institution founded by George Muller,
and were there fed, clad, and taught, before he was called up higher.
His efforts to improve their state physically, morally, and spiritually
were so manifestly owned of God that he felt his compensation to be both
constant and abundant, and his journal, from time to time, glows with
his fervent thanksgivings.

This orphan work would amply repay all its cost during two thirds of a
century, should only its _temporal benefits_ be reckoned. Experience
proved that, with God's blessing, one half of the lives sacrificed among
the children of poverty would be saved by better conditions of
body--such as regularity and cleanliness of habits, good food, pure air,
proper clothing, and wholesome exercise. At least two thirds, if not
three fourths, of the parents whose offspring have found a shelter on
Ashley Down had died of consumption and kindred diseases; and hence the
children had been largely tainted with a like tendency. And yet, all
through the history of this orphan work, there has been such care of
proper sanitary conditions that there has been singular freedom from all
sorts of ailments, and especially epidemic diseases; and when scarlet
fever, measles, and such diseases have found entrance, the cases of
sickness have been comparatively few and mild, and the usual percentage
of deaths exceedingly small.

This is not the only department of training in which the recompense has
been abundant. Ignorance is everywhere the usual handmaid of poverty,
and there has been very careful effort to secure proper _mental_
culture. With what success the education of these orphans has been
looked after will sufficiently appear from the reports of the school
inspector. From year to year these pupils have been examined in reading,
writing, arithmetic, Scripture, dictation, geography, history, grammar,
composition, and singing; and Mr. Horne reported in 1885 an average per
cent of all marks as high as 91.1, and even this was surpassed the next
year when it was 94, and, two years later, when it was 96.1.

But in the moral and spiritual welfare of these orphans, which has been
primarily sought, the richest recompense has been enjoyed. The one main
aim of Mr. Muller and his whole staff of helpers, from first to last,
has been to save these children--to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. The hindrances were many and formidable. If the
hereditary taint of disease is to be dreaded, what of the awful legacy
of sin and crime! Many of these little ones had no proper bringing up
till they entered the orphan houses; and not a few had been trained
indeed, but only in Satan's schools of drink and lust. And yet,
notwithstanding all these drawbacks, Mr. Muller records, with devout
thankfulness, that _"the Lord had constrained them,_ on the whole, to
behave exceedingly well, so much so as to attract the attention of
observers." Better still, large numbers have, throughout the whole
history of this work, given signs of a really regenerate state, and have
afterwards maintained a consistent character and conduct, and in some
cases have borne singular witness to the grace of God, both by their
complete transformation and by their influence for good.

In August, 1858, an orphan girl, Martha Pinnell, who had been for over
twelve years under Mr. Muller's care, and for more than five years ill
with consumption, fell asleep in Jesus. Before her death, she had, for
two and a half years, known the Lord, and the change in her character
and conduct had been remarkable. From an exceedingly disobedient and
troublesome child with a pernicious influence, she had become both very
docile and humble and most influential for good. In her unregenerate
days she had declared that, if she should ever be converted, she would
be "a thorough Christian," and so it proved. Her happiness in God, her
study of His word, her deep knowledge of the Lord Jesus, her earnest
passion for souls, seemed almost incredible in one so young and so
recently turned to God. And Mr. Muller has preserved in the pages of his
Journal four of the precious letters written by her to other inmates of
the orphan houses.*

* Narrative, III. 253-257.

At times, and frequently, extensive revivals have been known among them
when scores and hundreds have found the Lord. The year ending May 26,
1858 was especially notable for the unprecedented greatness and rapidity
of the work which the Spirit of God had wrought, in such conversions.
Within a few days and without any special apparent cause except the very
peaceful death of a Christian orphan, Caroline Bailey, more than fifty
of the one hundred and forty girls in Orphan House No. 1 were under
conviction of sin, and the work spread into the other departments, till
about sixty were shortly exercising faith. In July, 1859, again, in a
school of one hundred and twenty girls more than half were brought under
deep spiritual concern; and, after a year had passed, shewed the grace
of continuance in a new life. In January and February, 1860, another
mighty wave of Holy Spirit power swept over the institution. It began
among little girls, from six to nine years old, then extended to the
older girls, and then to the boys, until, inside of ten days, above two
hundred were inquiring and in many instances found immediate peace. The
young converts at once asked to hold prayer meetings among themselves,
and were permitted; and not only so, but many began to labour and pray
for others, and, out of the seven hundred orphans then in charge, some
two hundred and sixty were shortly regarded as either converted or in a
most hopeful state.

Again, in 1872, on the first day of the week of prayer, the Holy Spirit
so moved that, without any unusual occasion for deep seriousness,
hundreds were, during that season, hopefully converted. Constant prayer
for their souls made the orphan homes a hallowed place, and by August
1st, it was believed, after careful investigation, that seven hundred
and twenty-nine might be safely counted as being disciples of Christ,
the number of believing orphans being thus far in excess of any previous
period. A series of such blessings have, down to this date, crowned the
sincere endeavours of all who have charge of these children, to lead
them to seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness.

By far the majority of orphans sent out for service or apprenticeship,
had for some time before known the Lord; and even of those who left the
Institution unconverted, the after-history of many showed that the
training there received had made impossible continuance in a life of
sin.

Thus, precious harvests of this seed-sowing, gathered in subsequent
years, have shown that God was not unrighteous to forget this work of
faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope.

In April, 1874, a letter from a former inmate of the orphanage enclosed
a thank offering for the excellent Bible-teaching there received which
had borne fruit years after. So carefully had she been instructed in the
way of salvation that, while yet herself unrenewed, she had been God's
instrument of leading to Christ a fellow servant who had long been
seeking peace, and so, became, like a sign-board on the road, the means
of directing another to the true path, by simply telling her what she
had been taught, though not then following the path herself.

Another orphan wrote, in 1876, that often, when tempted to indulge the
sin of unbelief, the thought of that six years' sojourn in Ashley Down
came across the mind like a gleam of sunshine. It was remembered how the
clothes there worn, the food eaten, the bed slept on, and the very walls
around, were the visible answers to believing prayer, and the
recollection of all these things proved a potent prescription and remedy
for the doubts and waverings of the child of God, a shield against the
fiery darts of satanic suggestion.

During the thirty years between 1865 and 1895, two thousand five hundred
and sixty-six orphans were known to have left the institution as
believers, an average of eighty-five every year; and, at the close of
this thirty years, nearly six hundred were yet in the homes on Ashley
Down who had given credible evidence of a regenerate state.

Mr. Muller was permitted to know that not only had these orphans been
blessed in health, educated in mind, converted to God, and made useful
Christian citizens, but many of them had become fathers or mothers of
Christian households. One representative instance may be cited. A man
and a woman who had formerly been among these orphans became husband and
wife, and they have had eight children, all earnest disciples, one of
whom went as a foreign missionary to Africa.

From the first, God set His seal upon this religious training in the
orphan houses. The _first two children_ received into No. 1 both became
true believers and zealous workers: one, a Congregational deacon, who,
in a benighted neighbourhood, acted the part of a lay preacher; and the
other, a laborious and successful clergyman in the Church of England,
and both largely used of God in soul-winning. Could the full history be
written of all who have gone forth from these orphan homes, what a
volume of testimony would be furnished, since these are but a few
scattered examples of the conspicuously useful service to which God has
called those whose after-career can be traced!

In his long and extensive missionary tours, Mr. Muller was permitted to
see, gather, and partake of many widely scattered fruits of his work on
Ashley Down. When preaching in Brooklyn, N. Y., in September, 1877, he
learned that in Philadelphia a legacy of a thousand pounds was waiting
for him, the proceeds of a life-insurance, which the testator had willed
to the work, and in city after city he had the joy of meeting scores of
orphans brought up under his care.

He minutely records the remarkable usefulness of a Mr. Wilkinson, who,
up to the age of fourteen and a half years, had been taught at the
orphanage. Twenty years had elapsed since Mr. Muller had seen him, when,
in 1878, he met him in Calvary Church, San Francisco, six thousand five
hundred miles from Bristol. He found him holding fast his faith in the
Lord Jesus, a happy and consistent Christian. He further heard most
inspiring accounts of this man's singular service during the Civil War
in America. Being on the gunboat Louisiana, he had there been the
leading spirit and recognized head of a little Bethel church among his
fellow seamen, who were by him led so to engage in the service of Christ
as to exhibit a devotion that, without a trace of fanatical enthusiasm,
was full of holy zeal and joy. Their whole conversation was of God. It
further transpired that, months previous, when the cloud of impending
battle overhung the ship's company, he and one of his comrades had met
for prayer in the 'chain-locker'; and thus began a series of most
remarkable meetings which, without one night's interruption, lasted for
some twenty months. Wilkinson alone among the whole company had any
previous knowledge of the word of God, and he became not only the leader
of the movement, but the chief interpreter of the Scriptures as they met
to read the Book of God and exchange views upon it. Nor was he satisfied
to do thus much with his comrades daily, but at another stated hour he,
with some chosen helpers, gathered the coloured sailors of the ship to
teach them reading, writing, etc.

A member of the Christian Commission, Mr. J. E. Hammond, who gave these
facts publicity, and who was intimately acquainted with Mr. Wilkinson
and his work on shipboard, said that he seemed to be a direct "product
of Mr. Muller's faith, his calm confidence in God, the method in his
whole manner of life, the persistence of purpose, and the quiet
spiritual power," which so characterized the founder of the Bristol
orphanage, being eminently reproduced in this young man who had been
trained under his influence. When in a sail-loft ashore, he was
compelled for two weeks to listen to the lewd and profane talk of two
associates detailed with him for a certain work. For the most part he
took refuge in silence; but his manner of conduct, and one sentence
which dropped from his lips, brought both those rough and wicked sailors
to the Saviour he loved, one of whom in three months read the word of
God from Genesis to Revelation.

Mr. Muller went nowhere without meeting converted orphans or hearing of
their work, even in the far-off corners of the earth. Sometimes in great
cities ten or fifteen would be waiting at the close of an address to
shake the hand of their "father," and tell him of their debt of
gratitude and love. He found them in every conceivable sphere of
service, many of them having households in which the principles taught
in the orphan homes were dominant, and engaged in the learned
professions as well as humbler walks of life.

God gave His servant also the sweet compensation of seeing great
blessing attending the day-schools supported by the Scriptural Knowledge
Institution.

The master of the school at Clayhidon, for instance, wrote of a poor
lad, a pupil in the day-school, prostrate with rheumatic fever, in a
wretched home and surrounded by bitter opposers of the truth. Wasted to
a skeleton, and in deep anxiety about his own soul, he was pointed to
Him who says, "Come unto Me,... and I will give you rest." While yet
this conversation was going on, as though suddenly he had entered into a
new world, this emaciated boy began to repeat texts such as "Suffer the
little children to come unto me," and burst out singing:

       "Jesus loves me, this I know,
        For the Bible tells me so."

He seemed transported with ecstasy, and recited text after text and hymn
after hymn, learned at that school. No marvel is it if that schoolmaster
felt a joy, akin to the angels, in this one proof that his labour in the
Lord was not in vain. Such examples might be indefinitely multiplied,
but this handful of first-fruits of a harvest may indicate the character
of the whole crop.

Letters were constantly received from missionary labourers in various
parts of the world who were helped by the gifts of the Scriptural
Knowledge Institution. The testimony from this source alone would fill a
good-sized volume, and therefore its incorporation into this memoir
would be impracticable. Those who would see what grand encouragement
came to Mr. Muller from fields of labour where he was only represented
by others, whom his gift's aided, should read the annual reports. A few
examples may be given of the blessed results of such wide scattering of
the seed of the kingdom, as specimens of thousands.

Mr. Albert Fenn, who was labouring in Madrid, wrote of a civil guard
who, because of his bold witness for Christ and renunciation of the
Romish confessional, was sent from place to place and most cruelly
treated, and threatened with banishment to a penal settlement. Again he
writes of a convert from Borne who, for trying to establish a small
meeting, was summoned before the governor.

"Who pays you for this?" "No one." "What do you gain by it?" "Nothing."
"How do you live?" "I work with my hands in a mine." "Why do you hold
meetings?" "Because God has blessed my soul, and I wish others to be
blessed." "You? you were made a miserable day-labourer; I prohibit the
meetings." "I yield to force," was the calm reply, "but as long as I
have a mouth to speak I shall speak for Christ." How like those
primitive disciples who boldly faced the rulers at Jerusalem, and, being
forbidden to speak in Jesus' name, firmly answered: "We ought to obey
God rather than men. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken
unto you more than unto God judge ye: for we cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard."

A missionary labourer writes from India, of three Brahman priests and
scores of Santhals and Hindus, sitting down with four Europeans to keep
the supper of the Lord--all fruits of his ministry. Within a twelvemonth,
sixty-two men and women, including head men of villages, and four
Brahman women, wives of priests and of head men, were baptized,
representing twenty-three villages in which the gospel had been
preached. At one time more than one hundred persons were awakened in one
mission in Spain; and such harvests as these were not infrequent in
various fields to which the founder of the orphan work had the joy of
sending aid.

In 1885, a scholar of one of the schools at Carrara, Italy, was
confronted by a priest. "In the Bible," said he, "you do not find the
commandments of the church." "No, sir," said the child, "for it is not
for the church of God to _command,_ but to _obey."_ "Tell me, then,"
said the priest, "these commandments of God." "Yes, sir," replied the
child; "I am the Lord thy God. Thou shalt have no other God before me.
Neither shalt thou make any graven image." "Stop! stop!" cried the
priest, "I do not understand it so." "But so," quietly replied the
child, "it is written in God's word." This simple incident may
illustrate both the character of the teaching given in the schools, and
the character often developed in those who were taught.

Out of the many pages of Mr. Muller's journal, probably about one-fifth
are occupied wholly with extracts from letters like these from
missionaries, teachers, and helpers, which kept him informed of the
progress of the Lord's work at home and in many lands where the
labourers were by him enabled to continue their service.
Bible-carriages, open-air services, Christian schools, tract
distribution, and various other forms of holy labour for the benighted
souls near and far, formed part of the many-branching tree of life that
was planted on Ashley Down.

Another of the main encouragements and rewards which Mr. Muller enjoyed
in this life was the knowledge that his example had emboldened other
believers to attempt like work for God, on like principles. This he
himself regarded as the greatest blessing resulting from his life-work,
that hundreds of thousands of children of God had been led in various
parts of the world to trust in God in all simplicity; and when such
trust found expression in similar service to orphans, it seemed the
consummation of his hopes, for the work was thus proven to have its seed
in itself after its kind, a self-propagating life, which doubly
demonstrated it to be a tree of the Lord's own planting, that He might
be glorified.

In December, 1876, Mr. Muller learned, for instance, that a Christian
evangelist, simply through reading about the orphan work in Bristol, had
it laid on his heart to care about orphans, and encouraged by Mr.
Muller's example, solely in dependence on the Lord, had begun in 1863
with three orphans at Nimwegen in Holland, and had at that date, only
fourteen years after, over four hundred and fifty in the institution. It
pleased the Lord that he and Mrs. Muller should, with their own eyes,
see this institution, and he says that in "almost numberless instances"
the Lord permitted him to know of similar fruits of his work.

At his first visit to Tokyo, Japan, he gave an account of it, and as the
result, Mr. Ishii, a native Christian Japanese, started an orphanage
upon a similar basis of prayer, faith, and dependence upon the Living
God, and at Mr. Muller's second visit to the Island Empire he found this
orphan work prosperously in progress.

How generally fruitful the example thus furnished on Ashley Down has
been in good to the church and the world will never be known on earth. A
man living at Horfield, in sight of the orphan buildings, has said that,
whenever he felt doubts of the Living God creeping into his mind, he
used to get up and look through the night at the many windows lit up on
Ashley Down, and they gleamed out through the darkness as stars in the
sky.

It was the witness of Mr. Muller to a prayer-hearing God which
encouraged Rev. J. Hudson Taylor, in 1863, thirty years after Mr.
Muller's great step was taken, to venture wholly on the Lord, in
founding the China Inland Mission. It has been said that to the example
of A. H. Francke in Halle, or George Muller in Bristol, may be more or
less directly traced every form of 'faith work,' prevalent since.

The Scriptural Knowledge Institution was made in all its departments a
means of blessing. Already in the year ending May 26, 1860, a hundred
servants of Christ had been more or less aided, and far more souls had
been hopefully brought to God through their labours than during any year
previous. About six hundred letters, received from them, had cheered Mr.
Muller's heart during the twelvemonth, and this source of joy overflowed
during all his life. In countless cases children of God were lifted to a
higher level of faith and life, and unconverted souls were turned to God
through the witness borne to God by the institutions on Ashley Down. Mr.
Muller has summed up this long history of blessing by two statements
which are worth pondering.

First, that the Lord was pleased to give him far beyond all he at first
expected to accomplish or receive.

And secondly, that he was fully persuaded that all he had seen and known
would not equal the thousandth part of what he should see and know when
the Lord should come, His reward with Him, to give every man according
as his work shall be.

The _circulation of Mr. Muller's Narrative_ was a most conspicuous means
of untold good.

In November, 1856, Mr. James McQuilkin, a young Irishman, was converted,
and early in the next year, read the first two volumes of that Narrative
He said to himself: "Mr. Muller obtains all this simply by prayer; so
may I be blessed by the same means," and he began to pray. First of all
he received from the Lord, in answer, a spiritual companion, and then
two more of like mind; and they four began stated seasons of prayer in a
small schoolhouse near Kells, Antrim, Ireland, every Friday evening. On
the first day of the new year, 1858, a farm-servant was remarkably
brought to the Lord in answer to their prayers, and these _five_ gave
themselves anew to united supplication. Shortly a sixth young man was
added to their number by conversion, and so the little company of
praying souls slowly grew, only believers being admitted to these simple
meetings for fellowship in reading of the Scriptures, prayer, and mutual
exhortation.

About Christmas, that year, Mr. McQuilkin, with the two brethren who had
first joined him--one of whom was Mr. Jeremiah Meneely, who is still at
work for God--held a meeting by request at Ahoghill. Some believed and
some mocked, while others thought these three converts presumptuous; but
two weeks later another meeting was held, at which God's Spirit began to
work most mightily and conversions now rapidly multiplied. Some converts
bore the sacred coals and kindled the fire elsewhere, and so in many
places revival flames began to burn; and in Ballymena, Belfast, and at
other points the Spirit's gracious work was manifest.

Such was the starting-point, in fact, of one of the most widespread and
memorable revivals ever known in our century, and which spread the next
year in England, Wales, and Scotland. Thousands found Christ, and walked
in newness of life; and the results are still manifest after more than
forty years.

As early as 1868 it was found that one who had thankfully read this
Narrative had issued a compendium of it in Swedish. We have seen how
widely useful it has been in Germany; and in many other languages its
substance at least has been made available to native readers.

Knowledge came to Mr. Muller of a boy of ten years who got hold of one
of these Reports, and, although belonging to a family of unbelievers,
began to pray: "God, teach me to pray like George Muller, and hear me as
Thou dost hear George Muller." He further declared his wish to be a
preacher, which his widowed mother very strongly opposed, objecting that
the boy did not know enough to get into the grammar-school, which is the
first step toward such a high calling. The lad, however, rejoined: "I
will learn and pray, and God will help me through as He has done George
Muller." And soon, to the surprise of everybody, the boy had
successfully passed his examination and was received at the school.

A donor writes, September 20, 1879, that the reading of the Narrative
totally changed his inner life to one of perfect trust and confidence in
God. It led to the devoting of at least a tenth of his earnings to the
Lord's purposes, and showed him how much more blessed it is to give than
to receive; and it led him also to place a copy of that Narrative on the
shelves of a Town Institute library where three thousand members and
subscribers might have access to it.

Another donor suggests that it might be well if Prof. Huxley and his
sympathisers, who had been proposing some new arbitrary "prayer-gauge"
would, instead of treating prayer as so much waste of breath, try how
long they could keep five orphan houses running, with over two thousand
orphans, and without asking any one for help,--either "GOD or MAN."

In September, 1882, another donor describes himself as "simply astounded
at the blessed results of prayer and faith," and many others have found
this brief narrative "the most wonderful and complete refutation of
skepticism it had ever been their lot to meet with"--an array of facts
constituting the most undeniable "evidences of Christianity." There are
abundant instances of the power exerted by Mr. Muller's testimony, as
when a woman who had been an infidel, writes him that he was "the first
person by whose example she learned that there are some men who live by
faith," and that for this reason she had willed to him all that she
possessed.

Another reader found these Reports "more faith-strengthening and
soul-refreshing than many a sermon," particularly so after just wading
through the mire of a speech of a French infidel who boldly affirmed
that of all of the millions of prayers uttered every day, not one is
answered. We should like to have any candid skeptic confronted with Mr.
Muller's unvarnished story of a life of faith, and see how he would on
any principle of' compound probability' and 'accidental coincidences,'
account for the tens of thousand's of answers to believing prayer! The
fact is that one half of the infidelity in the world is dishonest, and
the other half is ignorant of the daily proofs that God is, and is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek Him.

From almost the first publication of his Narrative, Mr. Muller had felt
a conviction that it was thus to be greatly owned of God as a witness to
His faithfulness; and, as early as 1842, it was laid on his heart to
send a copy of his Annual Report gratuitously to every Christian
minister of the land, which the Lord helped him to do, his aim being not
to get money or even awaken interest in the work, but rather to
stimulate faith and quicken prayer.*

* The author of this memoir purposes to give a copy of it to every
foreign missionary, and to workers in the home fields, so far as means
are supplied in answer to prayer. His hope is that the witness of this
life may thus have still wider influence in stimulating prayer and
faith. The devout reader is asked to unite his supplications with those
of many others who are asking that the Lord may be pleased to furnish
the means whereby this purpose may be carried out. Already about one
hundred pounds sterling have been given for this end, and part of it,
small in amount but rich in self-denial, from the staff of helpers and
the orphans on Ashley Down. A. T. P.

Twenty-two years later, in 1868, it was already so apparent that the
published accounts of the Lord's dealings was used so largely to
sanctify and edify saints and even to convert sinners and convince
infidels, that he records this as _the greatest of all the spiritual
blessings_ hitherto resulting from his work for God. Since then thirty
years more have fled, and, during this whole period, letters from a
thousand sources have borne increasing witness that the example he set
has led others to fuller faith and firmer confidence in God's word,
power, and love; to a deeper persuasion that, though Elijah has been
taken up, God, the God of Elijah, is still working His wonders.

And so, in all departments of his work for God, the Lord to whom he
witnessed bore witness to him in return, and anticipated his final
reward in a recompense of present and overflowing joy. This was
especially true in the long tours undertaken, when past threescore and
ten, to sow in lands afar the seeds of the Kingdom! As the sower went
forth to sow he found not fallow fields only, but harvest fields also,
from which his arms were filled with sheaves. Thus, in a new sense the
reaper overtook the ploughman, and the harvester, him that scattered the
seed. In every city of the United Kingdom and in the "sixty-eight
cities" where, up to 1877, he had preached on the continents of Europe
and America, he had found converted orphans, and believers to whom
abundant blessing had come through reading his reports. After this date,
twenty-one years more yet remained crowded with experiences of good.
Thus, before the Lord called George Muller higher, He had given him a
foretaste of his reward, in the physical, intellectual and spiritual
profit of the orphans; in the fruits of his wide seed-sowing in other
lands as well as Britain; in the scattering of God's word and Christian
literature; in the Christian education of thousands of children in the
schools he aided; in the assistance afforded to hundreds of devoted
missionaries; in the large blessing imparted by his published narrative,
and in his personal privilege of bearing witness throughout the world to
the gospel of grace.


CHAPTER XXIV

LAST LOOKS, BACKWARD AND FORWARD.

THE mountain-climber, at the sunset hour, naturally takes a last
lingering look backward at the prospect visible from the lofty height,
before he begins his descent to the valley. And, before we close this
volume, we as naturally cast one more glance backward over this
singularly holy and useful life, that we may catch further inspiration
from its beauty and learn some new lessons in holy living and unselfish
serving.

George Muller was divinely fitted for, fitted into his work, as a
mortise fits the tenon, or a ball of bone its socket in the joint. He
had adaptations, both natural and gracious, to the life of service to
which he was called, and these adaptations made possible a career of
exceptional sanctity and service, because of his complete self-surrender
to the will of God and his childlike faith in His word.

Three qualities or characteristics stand out very conspicuous in him:
_truth, faith,_ and _love._ Our Lord frequently taught His disciples
that the childlike spirit is the soul of discipleship, and in the ideal
child these three traits are central. Truth is one centre, about which
revolve childlike frankness and sincerity, genuineness and simplicity.
Faith is another, about which revolve confidence and trust, docility and
humility. Love is another centre, around which gather unselfishness and
generosity, gentleness and restfulness of spirit. In the typical or
perfect child, therefore, all these beautiful qualities would coexist,
and, in proportion as they are found in a disciple, is he worthy to be
called _a child of God._

In Mr. Muller these traits were all found and conjoined in a degree very
seldom found in any one man, and this fact sufficiently accounts for his
remarkable likeness to Christ and fruitfulness in serving God and man.
No pen-portrait of him which fails to make these features very prominent
can either be accurate in delineation or warm in colouring. It is
difficult to overestimate their importance in their relation to what
George Muller _was_ and _did._

Truth is the corner-stone of all excellence, for without it nothing else
is true, genuine, or real. From the hour of his conversion his
truthfulness was increasingly dominant and apparent. In fact, there was
about him a scrupulous exactness which sometimes seemed unnecessary. One
smiles at the mathematical precision with which he states facts, giving
the years, days, and hours since he was brought to the knowledge of God,
or since he began to pray for some given object; and the pounds,
shillings, pence, halfpence, and even farthings that form the total sum
expended for any given purpose. We see the same conscientious exactness
in the repetitions of statements, whether of principles or of
occurrences, which we meet in his journal, and in which oftentimes there
is not even a change of a word. But all this has a significance. It
_inspires absolute confidence_ in the record of the Lord's dealings.

First, because it shows that the writer has disciplined himself to
accuracy of statement. Many a falsehood is not an intentional lie, but
an undesigned inaccuracy. Three of our human faculties powerfully affect
our veracity: one is memory, another is imagination, and another is
conscience. Memory takes note of facts, imagination colours facts with
fancies, and conscience brings the moral sense to bear in sifting the
real from the unreal. Where conscience is not sensitive and dominant,
memory and imagination will become so confused that facts and fancies
will fail to be separated. The imagination will be so allowed to invest
events and experiences with either a halo of glory or a cloud of
prejudice that the narrator will constantly tell, not what he clearly
sees written in the book of his remembrance, but what he beholds painted
upon the canvas of his own imagination. Accuracy will be, half
unconsciously perhaps, sacrificed to his own imaginings; he will
exaggerate or depreciate--as his own impulses lead him; and a man who
would not deliberately lie may thus be habitually untrustworthy: you
cannot tell, and often he cannot tell, what the exact truth would be,
when all the unreality with which it has thus been invested is
dissipated like the purple and golden clouds about a mountain, leaving
the bare crag of naked rock to be seen, just as it is in itself.

George Muller felt the immense importance of exact statement. Hence he
disciplined himself to accuracy. Conscience presided over his narrative,
and demanded that everything else should be scrupulously sacrificed to
veracity. But, more than this, God made him, in a sense, a _man without
imagination_--comparatively free from the temptations of an enthusiastic
temperament. He was a mathematician rather than a poet, an artisan
rather than an artist, and he did not see things invested with a false
halo. He was deliberate, not impulsive; calm and not excitable. He
naturally weighed every word before he spoke, and scrutinized every
statement before he gave it form with pen or tongue. And therefore the
very qualities that, to some people, may make his narrative bare of
charm, and even repulsively prosaic, add to its value as a plain,
conscientious, unimaginative, unvarnished, and trustworthy statement of
facts. Had any man of a more poetic mind written that journal, the
reader would have found himself constantly and unconsciously making
allowance for the writer's own enthusiasm, discounting the facts,
because of the imaginative colouring. The narrative might have been more
readable, but it would not have been so reliable; and, in this story of
the Lord's dealings, nothing was so indispensable as exact truth. It
would be comparatively worthless, were it not undeniable. The Lord
fitted the man who lived that life of faith and prayer, and wrote that
life-story, to inspire confidence, so that even skeptics and doubters
felt that they were reading, not a novel or a poem, but a history.

Faith was the second of these central traits in George Muller, and it
was purely the product of grace. We are told, in that first great lesson
on faith in the Scripture, that (Genesis xv. 6) Abram believed in
Jehovah--literally, _Amened_ Jehovah. The word "Amen" means not 'Let it
be so,' but rather _'it shall be so.'_ The Lord's word came to Abram,
saying this 'shall not be,' but something else 'shall be'; and Abram
simply said with all his heart, 'Amen'--'it shall be as God hath said.'
And Paul seems to be imitating Abram's faith when, in the shipwreck off
Malta, he said, "I believe God, that _it shall be_ even as it was told
me." That is faith in its simplest exercise and it was George Muller's
faith. He found the word of the Lord in His blessed Book, a new word of
promise for each new crisis of trial or need; he put his finger upon the
very text and then looked up to God and said: "Thou hast spoken. I
believe." Persuaded of God's unfailing truth, he rested on His word with
unwavering faith, and consequently he was at peace.

Nothing is more noticeable, in the entire career of this man of God,
reaching through sixty-five years, than the steadiness of his faith and
the steadfastness it gave to his whole character. To have a word of God
was enough. He built upon it, and, when floods came and beat against
that house, how could it fall! He was never confounded nor obliged to
flee. Even the earthquake may shake earth and heaven, but it leaves the
true believer the inheritor of a kingdom which cannot be moved; for the
object of all such shaking is to remove what can be shaken, that what
cannot be shaken may remain.

If Mr. Muller had any great mission, it was not to found a world-wide
institution of any sort, however useful in scattering Bibles and books
and tracts, or housing and feeding thousands of orphans, or setting up
Christian schools and aiding missionary workers. His main mission was to
teach men that it is _safe to trust God's word,_ to rest implicitly upon
whatever He hath said, and obey explicitly whatever He has bidden; that
prayer offered in faith, trusting His promise and the intercession of
His dear Son, is never offered in vain; and that the life lived by faith
is a walk with God, just outside the very gates of heaven.

_Love,_ the third of that trinity of graces, was the other great secret
and lesson of this life. And what is love? _Not_ merely a complacent
affection for what is lovable, which is often only a half-selfish taking
of pleasure in the society and fellowship of those who love us. Love is
the _principle of unselfishness:_ love 'seeketh not her own'; it is the
preference of another's pleasure and profit over our own, and hence is
exercised toward the unthankful and unlovely, that it may lift them to a
higher level. Such love is benevolence rather than complacence, and so
it is "of God," for He loveth the unthankful and the evil: and he that
loveth is born of God and knoweth God. Such love is obedience to a
principle of unselfishness, and makes self-sacrifice habitual and even
natural. While Satan's motto is 'Spare thyself!' Christ's motto is to
Deny thyself!' The sharpest rebuke ever administered by our Lord was
that to Peter when he became a Satan by counselling his Master to adopt
Satan's maxim.* We are bidden by Paul, _"Remember Jesus Christ,"_** and
by Peter, _"Follow His steps."_*** If we seek the inmost meaning of these
two brief mottoes, we shall find that, about Jesus Christ's character,
nothing was more conspicuous than the obedience of faith and
self-surrender to God: and in His career, which we are bidden to follow,
the renunciation of love, or self-sacrifice for man. The taunt was
sublimely true: "He saved others, Himself He cannot save"; it was
_because_ he saved others that He could not save Himself. The seed must
give up its own life for the sake of the crop; and he who will be life
to others must, like his Lord, consent to die.

* Matt. xvi.

** 2 Tim. II. (Greek).

*** 1 Pet. II. 21.

Here is the real meaning of that command, "Let him deny himself and take
up his cross." Self-denial is not cutting off an indulgence here and
there, but laying the axe at the root of the tree of self, of which all
indulgences are only greater or smaller branches. Self-righteousness and
self-trust, self-seeking and self-pleasing, self-will, self-defence,
self-glory--these are a few of the myriad branches of that deeply rooted
tree. And what if one or more of these be cut off, if such lopping off
of some few branches only throws back into others the self-life to
develop more vigorously in them?

And what is _cross_-bearing? We speak of our 'crosses'--but the word of
God never uses that word in the plural, for there is but _one_
cross--the cross on which the self-life is crucified, the cross of
voluntary self-renunciation. How did Christ come to the cross? We read
in Philippians the seven steps of his descent from heaven to Calvary. He
had everything that even the Son of God could hold precious, even to the
actual equal sharing of the glory of God. Yet for man's sake what did he
do? He did not hold fast even His equality with God, He emptied Himself,
took on Him the form of a servant, was made in the likeness of fallen
humanity; even more than this, He humbled Himself even as a man,
identifying Himself with our poverty and misery and sin; He accepted
death for our sakes, and that, the death of shame on the tree of curse.
Every step was downward until He who had been worshipped by angels was
reviled by thieves, and the crown of glory was displaced by the crown of
thorns! That is what the cross meant to _Him._ And He says: "If any man
will _come after Me,_ let him deny himself, and _take up the cross_ and
follow Me." This cross is not _forced upon_ us as are many of the little
vexations and trials which we call 'our crosses'; it is _taken up_ by
us, in voluntary self-sacrifice for His sake. We choose self-abnegation,
to lose our life in sacrifice that we may find it again in service. That
is the self-oblivion of love. And Mr. Muller illustrated it. From the
hour when he began to serve the Crucified One he entered more and more
fully into the fellowship of His sufferings, seeking to be made
conformable unto His death. He gave up fortune-seeking and fame-seeking;
he cut loose from the world with its snares and joys; he separated
himself from even its doubtful practices, he tested even churchly
traditions and customs by the word of God, and step by step conformed to
the pattern showed in that word. Every such step was a new self-denial,
but it was following _Him._ He chose voluntary poverty that others might
be rich, and voluntary loss that others might have gain. His life was
one long endeavour to bless others, to be the channel for conveying
God's truth and love and grace to them. Like Paul he rejoiced in such
sufferings for others, because thus he filled up that which is behind of
the afflictions of Christ in his flesh for His body's sake which is the
church.* And unless Love's voluntary sacrifice be taken into account,
George Muller's life will still remain an enigma. Loyalty to truth, the
obedience of faith, the sacrifice of love--these form the threefold key
that unlocks to us all the closed chambers of that life, and these will,
in another sense, unlock any other life to the entrance of God, and
present to Him an open door into all departments of one's being. George
Muller had no monopoly of holy living and holy serving. He followed his
Lord, both in self-surrender to the will of God and in self-sacrifice
for the welfare of man, and herein lay his whole secret.

* Coloss. 1: 24.

To one who asked him the secret of his service he said: "There was a day
when I died, _utterly died;"_ and, as he spoke, he bent lower and lower
until he almost touched the floor--"died to George Muller, his opinions,
preferences, tastes and will--died to the world, its approval or
censure--died to the approval or blame even of my brethren and
friends--and since then I have studied only to show myself approved unto
God."

When George Muller trusted the blood for salvation, he took Abel's
position; when he undertook a consecrated walk he took Enoch's; when he
came into fellowship with God for his life-work he stood beside Noah;
when he rested only on God's word, he was one with Abraham; and when he
died to self and the world, he reached the self-surrender of Moses.

The godlike qualities of this great and good man made him none the less
a man. His separation unto God implied no unnatural isolation from his
fellow mortals. Like Terence, he could say: "I am a man, and nothing
common to man is foreign to me." To be well known, Mr. Muller needed to
be known in his daily, simple, home life. It was my privilege to meet
him often, and in his own apartment at Orphan House No. 3. His room was
of medium size, neatly but plainly furnished, with table and chairs,
lounge and writing-desk, etc. His Bible almost always lay open, as a
book to which he continually resorted.

His form was tall and slim, always neatly attired, and very erect, and
his step firm and strong. His countenance, in repose, might have been
thought stern, but for the smile which so habitually lit up his eyes and
played over his features that it left its impress on the lines of his
face. His manner was one of simple courtesy and unstudied dignity: no
one would in his presence, have felt like vain trifling, and there was
about him a certain indescribable air of authority and majesty that
reminded one of a born prince; and yet there was mingled with all this a
simplicity so childlike that even children felt themselves at home with
him. In his speech, he never quite lost that peculiar foreign quality,
known as accent, and he always spoke with slow and measured
articulation, as though a double watch were set at the door of his lips.
With him that unruly member, the tongue, was tamed by the Holy Spirit,
and he had that mark of what James calls a 'perfect man, able also to
bridle the whole body.'

Those who knew but little of him and saw him only in his serious moods
might have thought him lacking in that peculiarly human quality,
_humour._ But neither was he an ascetic nor devoid of that element of
innocent appreciation of the ludicrous and that keen enjoyment of a good
story which seem essential to a complete man. His habit was sobriety,
but he relished a joke that was free of all taint of uncleanness and
that had about it no sting for others. To those whom he best knew and
loved he showed his true self, in his playful moods,--as when at
Ilfracombe, climbing with his wife and others the heights that overlook
the sea, he walked on a little in advance, seated himself till the rest
came up with him, and then, when they were barely seated, rose and
quietly said, "Well now, we have had a good rest, let us go on." This
one instance may suffice to show that his sympathy with his divine
Master did not lessen or hinder his complete fellow feeling with man.
That must be a defective piety which puts a barrier between a saintly
soul and whatsoever pertains to humanity. He who chose us out of the
world sent us back into it, there to find our sphere of service; and in
order to such service we must keep in close and vital touch with human
beings as did our divine Lord Himself.

Service to God was with George Muller a passion. In the month of May,
1897, he was persuaded to take at Huntly a little rest from his constant
daily work at the orphan houses. The evening that he arrived he said,
What opportunity is there here for services for the Lord? When it was
suggested to him that he had just come from continuous work, and that it
was a time for rest, he replied that, being now free from his usual
labours, he felt he must be occupied in some other way in serving the
Lord, to glorify whom was his object in life. Meetings were accordingly
arranged and he preached both at Huntly and at Teignmouth.

As we cast this last glance backward over this life of peculiar sanctity
and service, one lesson seems written across it in unmistakable letters:
PREVAILING PRAYER. If a consecrated human life is an _example_ used by
God to teach us the _philosophy_ of holy living, then this man was meant
to show us how _prayer, offered in simple faith, has power with God._

One paragraph of Scripture conspicuously presents the truth which George
Muller's living epistle enforces and illustrates; it is found in James
v. 16-18:

"The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much," is the
sentence which opens the paragraph. No translation has ever done it
justice. Rotherham renders it: "Much avails a righteous man's
supplication, working inwardly." The Revised Version translates, "avails
much in its working." The difficulty of translating lies not in the
_obscurity_ but in the _fulness_ of the meaning of the original. There