My Kalulu, Prince, King and Slave, by Henry M. Stanley.




MY KALULU, PRINCE, KING AND SLAVE, BY HENRY M. STANLEY.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE BEAUTIFUL AMINA, SHEIKH AMER'S WIFE--ARABS IN CONSULTATION--THE
COUNTRY OF RUA--BEAUTIFUL WOMEN OF RUA--THE CONSUL'S SON--SELIM AND ISA
ARE PERMITTED TO JOIN THE EXPEDITION--LUDHA DAMHA OFFERS TO LEND MONEY--
SELIM TELLS HIS MOTHER--SELIM'S MANLINESS AROUSED--SELIM ARGUES WITH HIS
MOTHER--THE EXPEDITION SETS SAIL FOR BAGAMOYO.

About four miles north of the city of Zanzibar, and about half a mile
removed from a beautiful bay, lived, not many years ago, surrounded by
his kinsmen and friends, a noble Arab of the tribe of Beni-Hassan,--
Sheikh Amer bin Osman.  [Amer bin Osman means, Amer, son of Osman.]

Sheikh Amer was a noble by descent and untarnished blood from a long
line of illustrious Arab ancestry; he was noble in disposition, noble in
his large liberal charity, and noble in his treatment of his numerous
black dependents.

Amer's wife--his favourite wife--was the sweet gazelle-eyed daughter of
Othman bin Ghees, of the tribe of the Beni-Abbas.  She was her husband's
counterpart in disposition and temper, and was qualified to reign queen
of his heart and harem for numerous other virtues.

Though few Arabs spoke of her in presence of her husband, or asked about
her health or well-being--as it is contrary to the custom of the Arabs--
still the friends of Amer knew well what transpired under his roof.  The
faithful slaves of Amer never omitted an opportunity to declare the
goodness and many virtues of Amina, Amer's wife.

A young European, chancing to ride on one of Prince Majid's horses by
the estate of Amer, one afternoon, casually obtained a glance at the
sweet face of Amina, which made such an impression on his mind that he
continually dwelt upon it as on a happy dream.  Some of this young
European's phrases deserve to be repeated in justice to the Arab lady
whom he so admired.  "She was the most beautiful woman my eyes ever
rested upon.  I felt a shock of admiration as I caught that one short
view of her face.  I felt a keen regret that I could see no more of the
exquisite features of her extraordinary face.  If I were a painter, I
know I should be for ever endeavouring to preserve a trace of the divine
beauty of that Arab woman; my brush would ever hover about the eyes in a
vain hope that I could transmit to canvas the marvellously limpid, yet
glowing look of her eyes, or near the finely chiselled lips, tinting
them with the rubiest of colours, or ever trying to imitate the pure
complexion, yet always despairing to approach the perfection, one glance
indelibly fixed on my memory."

Around Amer's large roomy mansion grew a grove of orange and mangoe
trees.  The fields of his estate numbered many acres, well-tilled and
planted with cinnamon, cloves, oranges, mangoes, pomegranates, guavas,
and numerous other fruit-trees; they produced also every variety of
vegetable and grain known on the Island of Zanzibar.  By dint of labour,
and personal exertion, and superintendence of the proprietor the estate
was considered to be one of the most flourishing on the island.  A
sacrifice of a large amount of ready money had so improved and
embellished the mansion, that the oldest inhabitant who remembered
Osman, Amer's father, hardly recognised it as the house of Osman.  A
large marble courtyard, in the centre of which stood a handsome fountain
of the same costly stone, was one of the many additions made to the
house by Amer after the demise of his father.  Marble troughs outside
the mansion had also been erected for the use of the Moslemised slaves,
that they might wash their feet and hands before attending the prayers
in the mesdjid [Chapel or church] of the mansion, which were rigidly
observed with all the ceremonies usual in Moslem temples.

Amer, the son of Osman, had but one son, called Selim, by his favourite
wife Amina.  Not less dear to him was this boy than was his wife.  In
the boy's handsome features, large glowing black eyes, and clear
complexion he saw what he had received from his lovely mother, and in
the boy's graceful vigorous form he recognised himself, when at his age
he looked up to his father Osman as the paragon of all men upon earth.

Selim's age, when this story begins, was a few months over fifteen; and
it is at the usual evening symposium, which takes place near the even
sloping beach of the little bay in front of Amer's mansion, that we are
first introduced to one of the heroes of our story.

It is near sunset, and a group composed of Amer bin Osman, Khamis bin
Abdullah--a wealthy African trader just returned from the interior of
Africa, with an immense number of ivory tusks and slaves--Sheikh
Mohammed, a native of Zanzibar, a neighbour and kinsman of Amer; Sheikh
Thani, son of Mussoud, an experienced old trader in Africa; Sheikh
Mussoud, son of Abdullah, a portly, fine-looking Arab of Muscat; Sheikhs
Hamdan and Amran, also natives of Zanzibar, though pure-blooded Arabs--
were seated on fine Persian carpets placed on the beach, near enough to
the pretty little wavelets which were rolled by the evening zephyrs up
the snowy sand to hear distinctly their music, but still far enough from
them to avoid any dampness.

Close to this group of elderly and noble-looking Arabs was another
consisting of young people who were the sons or near relatives of each
of the Arabs above-mentioned.  There were Suleiman and Soud, nephews of
Amer bin Osman, gaudily-dressed youths; there was Isa, a tall
dark-coloured boy, son of Sheikh Thani; there were Abdullah and Mussoud,
two boys of fourteen and twelve years respectively, sons of Sheikh
Mohammed, whose complexions were as purely white as black-eyed
descendants of Ishmael can well be; and lastly, there was the beloved
son of Amer, son of Osman--Selim, whose appearance at once challenged
attention from his frank, ingenuous, honest face, his clear complexion,
his beautiful eyes, and the promise which his well-formed graceful
figure gave of a perfect manhood in the future.

Selim was dressed in a short jacket of fine crimson cloth braided with
gold, a snowy white muslin disdasheh, or shirt, reaching below the
knees, bound around the waist by a rich Muscat sohari or check.  On his
head he wore a gold-tasselled red fez, folded around by a costly turban,
which enhanced the appearance of the handsome face beneath it.

While all eyes are directed west at the dark-blue loom of the African
continent away many miles beyond the greyish-green waters of the sea of
Zanzibar, Amer, son of Osman, remarks to his friends in a musing tone:

"I have sat here, close to my own mangoes, almost every evening for the
last twenty years looking towards that dark line of land, and always
wishing to go nearer to it, to see for myself the land where all the
ivory and slaves that the Arab traders bring to Zanzibar come from."

Directing his eyes towards Khamis bin Abdullah, Amer continued:

"And never has the desire to leave my house and travel to Africa been so
strong as this evening, when thou, Sheikh informest me that thou hast
brought with thee 600 slaves and 800 frasilah [a frasilah is equivalent
to 35 pounds in weight] of ivory from Ufipas and Marungu.  It is
wonderful!  Wallahi!  Five hundred slaves if they are tolerably healthy
are worth at least 10,000 dollars, and 800 frasilah of ivory are worth,
at 50 dollars the frasilah, 40,000 dollars, nearly half a lakh of rupees
altogether, and all this thou hast collected in five years' travels.
Wallahi! it is wonderful!  By the Prophet!--blessed be his name--I must
see the land for myself.  I shall see it, please God!" and as he
finished speaking he began to wipe his brow violently, a sign with him
that he was excited and determined.

"What I have spoken is God's truth," said Khamis bin Abdullah, "and
Allah knows it.  But there are many more wonderful countries than
Marungu and Ufipa.  Rua, several days further toward the setting of the
sun, is a great country, and few Arabs have been there yet.  Sayd, the
son of Habib, has been to Rua, and much further; he has been across to
the sea of the setting sun, and has married a wife from among the white
people who live at San Paul de Loanda.  Sayd is so great a traveller, I
should fear to say what land he has not seen.  Mashallah!  Sayd, I
believe, has seen all lands and all peoples.  He says that ivory is used
in Rua by the Pagans as we use wooden stanchions or posts to support the
eaves of our houses, that ivory holds their huts up, and he believes
great stores of it are known to the savages, where some of their great
hunters have killed a large number of elephants, and have left the ivory
to rot, not knowing how valuable it is, or where a great herd of
elephants have perished from thirst or disease.  However the knowledge
came to these people, or whatever the cause which left such a store of
ivory in that country, Sayd, the son of Habib, is certain that there is
an unlimited quantity of this precious stuff in Rua, and that we can
make ourselves richer than Prince Majid, our Sultan, if we go in time,
before the report is common among the Arabs.  What money I have made
this time on my last trip is so small, compared to what I might have
realised, that I mean to try my fortune again in Africa shortly,
Inshallah!--please God!  I intend going to Rua, and if thou, Amer bin
Osman, hast a mind to accompany me, I promise thee that thou wilt not
repent it."

"Amer bin Osman," replied Amer, "goes not back on his word.  By my
beard, I have said I shall go, and, if it be God's will, I shall be
ready for thee when thou goest.  But tell us, son of Abdullah, what of
the Pagans of Rua, and those lands near the Great Lakes?  Do they make
good slaves, and do they sell well in our market?  Yet I need hardly ask
thee, for I have two men whom I purchased when young, about twenty years
ago, who I believe are more faithful than any slave born in my house."

"Good slaves!" echoed Khamis.  "Thou hast said it.  Finer people are not
to be found, from Masr to Kilwa, than those of Rua and the lands
adjoining.  And clever slaves, too!  Those Pagans make the best spears,
and swords, and daggers found in Africa.  Indeed, some of their work
would shame that of our best Zanzibar artificers.  Near a place called
Kitanga--where that is I don't know, but Sayd, the son of Habib, can
tell--there is a hill almost entirely of pure copper, and from this hill
the people get vast quantities of copper, which they work into beautiful
bracelets, armlets, anklets, and such things.  Nothing to be seen in
Muscat even can equal the work the son of Habib has witnessed."

"Mashallah!" cried Amer, delighted; "thou makest me more and more
anxious to go to the strange land.  A hill of copper!--pure copper!  The
Pagans must really be a fine people, and rich, too.  If it were only
possible to catch two or three hundred slaves of the kind thou speakest
of, I might be able to laugh in the face of that dog of a Banyan Bamji,
and old Ludha Damha himself could not hold his head higher than I could
then.  I owe the dogs a turn, for the heavy usury they exacted of me
when I needed much ready money to make my courtyard and fountains.  But
the women, noble Khamis, thou hast said nothing of them.  Tell us what
kind of women are seen in those rich lands."

"Ah, yes, do tell us of the women," chimed in two or three others, who
had not yet spoken.

"I have seen but one of the women of Rua," answered Khamis, "and she was
the wife of the son of Sayd, the son of Habib, a tall, lithesome girl of
sixteen years or so.  Her lower limbs were as clean and well-made as
those of an antelope.  She walked like the daughter of a chief.  Her
eyes were like two deep wells of shining moving water.  Her face was
like the moon, in colour and form.  Oh! the colour was almost as clear
and light as thy son Selim's, Amer.  She was beautiful as a Peri-banou--
God be praised!"

"Thy tongue runs away with thee, Khamis," cried Amer, in a slightly
offended tone, "or hast thou imbibed too much of the strong drink of the
Nazarenes, for the celebration of thy late success?  Light-complexioned
women, of the colour of my son Selim's face!  Where art thou, Selim, son
of Amer, pride of the Beni-Hassan?  Thou chief's son by birth and blood,
and apple of thy father's eye!  Come hither."

"Behold me, my father, I am here," said Selim, who had bounded lightly
to his feet, and now stood before his father, after kissing his right
hand for the affectionate terms lavished on him.

"Speak, son of Abdullah; behold, my boy, and regard his colour, which is
like unto that of rich cream.  Is he not as white as any Nazarene? and
wilt thou repeat what thou hast said about the Pagan wife, of Sayd's
son?"

"Khamis, the son of Abdullah, debauches not himself with the strong
drink of the foolish Nazarenes.  I lie not.  I said I have seen a
daughter of the Warua whom Sayd's son has taken for wife, and she is
almost as light in colour as thy son, Selim, and far lighter than the
face of the boy, Isa, son of Sheikh Thani."

"Wonderful!  Wallahi!" echoed the group.  "It is most wonderful.  We
shall all go to obtain wives from the Warua."

"Then, kinsmen and friends," cried Amer, "Khamis speaks the truth, and
speaks of wonderful things.  Is it agreed that we go to Rua with the son
of Abdullah, to get ivory, slaves, and copper, and light-coloured
wives?"

"It is," they all replied, so deeply impressed were they with what
Khamis had said.

"I am glad to hear it, my friends," said Khamis; "but ye must now agree,
before we break up, as the sun is fast setting, upon the day of
departure.  I cannot wait long, because I am nearly ready, but I am
willing to wait a few days, if ye will all promise to be ready by the
new moon, twenty-four days from this evening.  Ye must also promise to
take as many of your slaves as ye can, that we may make a strong party.
Tell me, Sheikh Amer, how many of thy people armed canst thou take with
thee?"

"Who?--I?  I can take two hundred well-armed servants, besides my two
faithful fundis, Simba and Moto, as they are called by the slaves, who
are worth an army by themselves, and--"

"Let me go, my father," cried Selim, seating himself on the carpet close
to his father's knees, and looking up to his face with eager, entreating
eyes, "I can shoot.  Thou knowest the new gun which thou didst send for
to London, in the land of the English, and which the good balyuz [Balyuz
is an Arabic word for consul, or rather ambassador] taught me how to
use.  The balyuz told me the other day that I would be able to shoot
better than he could, by-and-by.  I can shoot a bird on the wing already
with it.  Give thy consent, and let me accompany thee, father.  I will
be both good and brave, I promise thee."

"Hear the boy!" said Amer, admiringly.  "A true Bedaween could not have
spoken otherwise.  But why dost thou wish to leave thy mother, child, so
soon?"

"My mother will regret me, I know, but I am now strong and big, and it
is not good for me to remain in the harem all my life.  I must quit my
mother some time, for work which all men must do."

"And who gave thee such ideas, son Selim?  Who told thee thou wert too
big to remain with thy mother?"

"The other day I went out with Suleiman, son of Prince Majid, and the
young son of the American balyuz--I can't pronounce his name--to shoot
wild birds.  The young American boy, who is smaller than I am, and
already thinks himself a man, though he is no bigger than my hand,
laughed at me; and when I asked him why he laughed, he said to me,
`Truly, Selim, thou appearest to me to be like a little girl whose
mother bathes her in new milk every day to preserve her complexion.  I
cannot understand the spirit of an Arab boy which contents itself with
looking no further out-doors than within sight of a mother's eyes.'
These are the words he spoke to me within hearing of Suleiman, Majid's
son, who also laughed at me, while I felt my cheeks were red with shame,
they tingled so."

"Tush, boy!  What is it to thee what the thoughts of a forward Nazarene
lad are?  Thou art not of his race or kin.  But I must own to ye, my
friends," said Amer, turning to the elders, "that the youths of the
Nazarenes [Nazarene is the Arabic term for Christian] are bolder than
ours, though they do not possess higher courage or loftier spirit than
our own children.  Who would have thought that such large independence
could hide within the little body of the American balyuz's son?  That
small child cannot be twelve years old, yet he talks with the wisdom of
a man.  All the Nazarenes are wonderful people--wonderful!  Who are
stronger, richer than the Nazarenes of England?"

"Ah, but, father," said Selim; "do you not think the Nazarenes are
accursed of God, and of the prophet Mohammed--blessed be his name?  The
American boy told me the Arabs are wicked, and are accursed of God.
Said he to me that same day in hearing of the Sultan's son, as if he was
not a bit afraid of the consequences, `The Lord God makes his anger
known against the Arabs by refusing knowledge and the gifts of
understanding unto them, because they are wicked, because they go forth
into Africa with armed servants a-plenty to destroy and kill the poor
black people, and to take slaves of parents and children, whom they
bring to Zanzibar to sell for their own profit.'  Is he not an
unbeliever, father?"

"Peace, Selim; let not thy tongue utter such words against the true
believers, though they may have been said by a young dog like that.
Cast them away from thee entirely, and let not thy father hear thee
utter aught against thine own race and kindred.  To the unbelievers God
has said, `Woe unto them; they shall be the prey of the flames.'"

"But, father, thou art not offended with me?  Thou hast not yet given
thy consent to my going with thee and my kinsman."

"Dost thou know, my child, that the Pagans are fierce, that they have
great spears and knives, and will cut that slim neck of thine, and
perhaps eat thee without compunction?" asked Amer, smiling.

"I fear them not," answered Selim, tossing his head back proudly.  "When
did a son of the great tribe of Beni-Hassan show fear? and shall I, the
son of a chief of that tribe--the son of Amer bin Osman--look upon the
faces of the Pagans with fear in my heart?"

"Then thou shalt go with me, were it only for those last words.  But
fear not, Allah will care for thee," said Amer, solemnly laying his
broad hand on his son's head.

"Let us end this before the sun sets," said Khamis impatiently, watching
the descent of the sun.  "How many men canst thou take with thee, Sheikh
Thani?"

"Thani has a son--Isa," answered that worthy trader.  "Thani is poor
compared to Amer, but he can call round him fifty well-armed slaves, who
will stand by him to the death."

"That is answered well, and Isa is a likely lad, though his skin is
dark; but he has the soul of an Arab father in him.  I see we shall have
a glorious company; and thou, Mussoud?" said Khamis, to that
florid-faced chief, who was proud of his intensely black and handsome
beard, "How many canst thou muster?"

"About the same as my friend Thani," replied Mussoud, caressing his
beard.  "All my people are Wahiyow, docile, and good; and, if cornered,
brave.  They will follow me anywhere."

"Good again!" ejaculated Khamis, evidently pleased.  "And thou, Sheikh
Mohammed?" he asked of the chief so named, who had a terrible reputation
in the interior among the Wafipa and Wa-marungu, and of whom many tribes
stood in awe,--"how many of thy people wilt thou take to Africa this
time?"

"Well," said Mohammed, in a deep voice, which resembled the bellow of a
wild buffalo, "for such a grand project as this I think I can take one
hundred men from my estate; my head men can take charge of the rest with
Bashid, my brother, very well.  I shall also take these young lions--
Abdullah and Mussoud--with me, to teach them how to catch slaves and
claw them, as I have done often."

"Thanks, father," replied the grateful youths, who as soon as they had
said these words looked up slyly to Selim, who smiled appreciatingly at
his boyfriends.

"Sultan, son of Ali," said Khamis, "thou art a strong and wise man.
Wilt thou be one of us?"

Sultan, son of Ali, was a man of about fifty, or perhaps fifty-five, of
strongly-marked features, who had keen black eyes.  Strong and wise, as
Khamis bin Abdullah had said he was, indeed no one looking at him would
doubt that he was one of the best specimens of a hardy Bedaween chief
that ever came to Zanzibar.  Besides, Sultan had been an officer of high
rank in the army of Prince Thouweynee of Muscat, who had often eulogised
Sultan for his daring, obstinacy, forethought, and skill in handling his
wild cavalry.  He was still, as might be seen, in the prime of mature
manhood, which age had not deteriorated in the least.

Sultan answered Khamis readily.  "Where my dear friend Amer bin Osman
goes, I go.  Shall I remain at Zanzibar eating mangoes when Amer, my
kinsman, is in danger?  No!  Son of Abdullah, thou mayest count me of
thy party for good or for evil, and I can raise eighty slaves to
shoulder guns for this journey."

"Good, good," the Arabs said, unanimously.  "Where the stout son of Ali
goes, the road is straight and danger is not known."

"Well," said Khamis bin Abdullah, "we have now four hundred and eighty
men promised; I will take with me a hundred and fifty men with guns, and
I dare say Sheikhs Hamdan and Amram and a few other friends will bring
the force up to seven hundred.  Isa, son of Salim, Mohammed son of
Bashid, Bashid bin Suleiman, tall young men, and kinsmen to me, have
already agreed to follow my fortunes.  A large number of Arabs is always
better than a few.  I have one thing more to say before we rise to
prayers--the sun is just sinking, I see--Ludha Damha, the collector of
customs, has told me that if a strong party went with me he would let us
have any amount of ready money at 50 per cent, annual interest, which is
half the usual price he asks--the old dog!--and if any of you desire
money, go to him for your outfit, for I will speak to him to-morrow
morning and give him your names."

"That is well-spoken, by my beard," said Mohammed.  "I was thinking that
we could not raise money under 100 per cent, interest from the Banyan
usurer."

"Very well, indeed," added Amer bin Osman.  "Ludha Damha must be sure of
a speedy return to let his money go so cheap.  My mind is now perfectly
made up; and, friends, the sun has set and we must to prayers."  Saying
which Amer rose--a signal which the Arabs readily understood.

After the usual salaams, courtesies, and benedictions had been uttered,
the Arabs departed each to his own home, at a slow and dignified pace,
while Amer and his son Selim retired into the mesdjid of their own
mansion.

When Amer and Selim had ended their evening prayers, and had left the
mesdjid or church belonging to the mansion, Selim asked, pulling at his
father's robe:

"Father, I see my mother at the lattice; may I go and tell her that I am
to go with you to Africa?"

"Ah, poor Amina!  I forgot all about her," said Amer, stopping and
speaking in a regretful tone.  "Selim, my son, this is sad.  Amina will
never permit thy departure.  It would break her heart."

"But I must go sometime from home, father.  Why not now?  With whom can
I be safer than with thee?  I am not going with strangers, nor am I
leaving my kindred.  I am going with thy kindred, thy household, and
thyself.  What can my mother object to?"

"Thou art right, Selim--thou art right!  She cannot object.  Our slaves,
our kindred are going--but--but--poor Amina, she will be left alone.
Go, Selim, tell her kindly.  It will pain her."  And Amer turned shortly
away, as if he had sudden and important business in another direction.

Selim, on the other hand, bounded lightly away, arrived at the great
carved door of the mansion, ran up the broad stairs, and made his way to
the harem, or the women's apartments, where Amina reigned queen and
mistress.

Few boys of Selim's age could have approached their mother with the
earnestly-respectful manner with which Selim approached Amina.  I doubt
even if the Queen of England's children ever observed such courteous
respect towards their august parent as Selim observed now, and as most
well-bred Arab boys do observe always toward their parents.

Selim left his slippers outside, and lifting the latch quietly, walked
in with bare feet, and, approaching his mother, kissed her right hand,
and then her forehead, and at her invitation seated himself by her side,
and suddenly remembering the all-important secret he had to communicate,
looked up to his mother, with his handsome features all aglow.

"Mother, canst thou tell me what I have come to say to thee?"

Amina looked for an instant fondly on her son, and then answered with a
smile--

"No, my son.  Hast thou anything very important to tell me?"

"Very important, mother," and he pursed his lips as if he would retain
it for a long time before imparting it, and as if it were worth some
trouble of guessing.

"I wish thou wouldst not task my skill of divination too much.  Thy face
tells me thou art happy with it, but it does not assure me that I shall
be equally happy.  I divine only on the Kuran, and though thy face is
innocent and without guile, yet it is more difficult to read than the
Kuran.  Tell it me, Selim, I pray thee."

"Then, my mother, I am going with my father to Africa!"

"To Africa, child!  To Africa!  Where is that?  Thou dost not mean the
mainland, surely?"

"Yes, I mean far away into the interior of the mainland," replied Selim,
still looking at his mother smilingly.

"To the interior of Africa!" cried the poor woman in dismay, her face
assuming the hue of sickness.  "Why, what can thy father want in
Africa?--he was never there before.  What can he want there now?"

"He is going to Africa with Khamis bin Abdullah, Sheikhs Mohammed,
Thani, Mussoud, Sultan, Amran, Hamdan, and many others, to a far country
called Rua, to buy ivory and slaves, and come back rich."

"Going to Africa!  To get rich!  Oh, Allah!" cried out Amina, in accents
of unfeigned surprise, mixed with emotion.  "And thou art going with
him--thou, a child?  Art thou going to get rich too?"

"I am to accompany my father and kinsmen, not to get rich, but to see
the world, and learn how to be a man, to shoot lions, and leopards,
zebras, and elephants, with my new English gun."

"Cease thy prating, child; thy tongue runs at a fearful rate.  Thou
shoot lions and leopards!  Thou!  Why thou art but a baby, but lately
weaned!  Thou and thy father must be dreaming!" said Amina sharply, and
with an attempt at a sneer.

It was a brave attempt on the part of a nearly heart-broken woman, who
would fain suppress the cry of anguish that struggled to her lips, but
as she said the last words, one glance at Selim's face showed to her
that such tactics, would never answer.  The eaglet had been taught that
wings were made to fly with.  The boy had been rudely laughed at, and
his latent manliness aroused, by the son of the American consul, who had
sneered at him.  Selim had found that a head was on his shoulders which
teemed with daring thoughts; that he had arms to his shoulders, and legs
to his body, made on purpose, as it were, to execute such thoughts as
the head conceived.  With the culmination of such knowledge fled
unregretfully the pleasant days of the harem, the memories of his romps
with the girls, days upon days of effeminate life.

Achilles was found out by the sight which he obtained of some war
weapons.  Selim had found out that he was a boy by a sneer.  Charming as
was his mother's company, happy as he had been with his feminine
playmates, proud as he had been of his golden tassels and embroidery,
fond as he had been of being loved and embraced as an entertaining young
friend by little girls of his own age--all these experiences became
inane and stupid compared to the overpowering consciousness he felt that
he was a boy, and might in time become a strong man.  A man! perish all
other thoughts and memories, feelings, and reminiscences save those
which tend to lead him to the goal of manhood, which he has set himself
to reach by a journey to Africa, to the land of cannibals and lions,
leopards and elephants, to the land of adventure, undying fable, and
song.

"Mother," said Selim, removing his turban and _fez_, as if his
head-dress compressed the grand thought which filled his brain, "my
childhood is passed.  I have been thoroughly weaned from all things
belonging to a child.  I am now a strong boy, and in five years I shall
be a man.  Allah made the world, and made it to grow.  It has been
growing ever since it was made.  Allah made infants; infants grow if
they live; they become boys--boys become men.  When I was an infant I
had no understanding nor strength.  Thou, my mother, didst point out to
me my nourishment.  I flourished on it, and in time was weaned.  In a
little time my strength availed me to put my own food into my own lips.
I flourished on that food, and I became stronger still.  Later I
understood language, and answered thee with childish love and affection.
I romped in the harem, and was happy.  Then I was permitted to go out
of doors unattended by my female attendant.  I bathed in the sea.  I
learned to swim, and acquired games which boys learn one from another.
I learned to ride on horses; I learned to shoot, and day by day I was
getting stronger in body and limb, and with my strength has begun to
grow my thoughts.  These thoughts are thoughts of manhood, of duty; and
the business of life, which I am beginning to learn, is serious.
Mother, dear mother, my health required, when I was strong enough to
enjoy out-of-door life, that I should run about and leap.  Mother, my
happiness demands that my thoughts should be humoured as my strength
was.  I find I am made of two parts--body and mind.  Neither may be
longer neglected--both must be humoured, or I die.  If my body is not
exercised out in the open air--if I be imprisoned in a harem, I shall
become dwarfed.  I shall not grow.  If my mind is not exercised by
seeing, and talking with many people--if I see no more than my mother
and my mother's slaves--my mind cannot grow.  I shall know nothing, and
I shall become a fool.  I, the son of Amer, the son of Osman, will be
sneered at.  It may not be, dear mother.  I must go away, and learn the
lesson of a man's life."

"But, my dear son," said Amina, entreatingly, for she had been
astonished and amazed at the amount of logic which the boy, to her
surprise, had put forth in his statement.  "Consider, thou art yet
young, and that thou mayst wait awhile yet before journeying to that
horrid land of negro savages.  What canst thou find there to learn?
Seeing lions and leopards, and elephants and ugly crocodiles, will not
ripen thy mind.  Surely thou art cruel to think of leaving me alone
here--both my lord Amer and my son at one time!"

"Nay, my mother, what I shall see in Africa will be new and strange.
The sight of new and strange things is like the lessons which the good
Imam used to give me at school from the Kuran.  Every day I shall see
something new, and every day I shall grow in wisdom and experience; and
my mind will be enriched by each new thing, and in time will become a
store of wisdom, to be applied to my advantage in affairs of life.  Thou
art surprised that I talk so, mother.  I have been talking with wise
white men.  The consuls, who know everything, have been dropping strange
ideas to me every day, not because I asked them, or that they dropped
them for my benefit.  Being permitted to play with their children, I
have been in their presence while they were conducting their business,
and the amount of wisdom the white men know is wonderful.  Great
thoughts--too great for me to understand--dropped from their mouths--
from one to another--just as those pearls which thou dost play with are
passed from thy right hand to thy left."

"It is well, my son.  I have heard thee through.  Thou art already older
by many years than I took thee to be yesterday.  Thou mayst tell my lord
Amer how Amina received thy news.  I will have something more to tell
thee, before thou goest to Africa," and Amina arose to leave the
apartment for another, humbly, and with her head bowed down.

"My mother," cried Selim, springing up, and seizing her hand, which he
conveyed respectfully to his lips, "be not offended.  It is not my
doing, but Allah's, and Allah's will be done!"

"Ay, truly!  Allah's will be done!" said the poor mother, embracing him,
but with more restraint than usual.

We are now compelled to leave each of the Arabs engaged to accompany
Khamis bin Abdullah to Rua in search of ivory and slaves to make his
preparations as he best knows how.  It is not our duty to peer too
closely into the small details of this business of preparation.  It
absorbs all one's time, and we feel sure if we troubled them to give us
too minute an account of the manner in which they get along, some
impatient expressions might escape to our regret.  Therefore we think it
better to leave each Arab alone, to the cunning of his own devices, to
his calculations, and purchases, to his ever-recurring vexations, to the
fatigue and anxiety which belong to the task of fitting out; merely
observing, as we pass by, that each Arab purchases such beads, of such
colours, as he thinks proper, such cloth as he deems suitable for his
market, so much powder and lead as will sufficiently provide his men for
the defence of his goods, should such be ever necessary, so many guns as
he has men, such luxuries in the shape of crackers and potted sweets,
sugar, tea, and coffee, as the chief of the caravan deems it necessary
to take.  "Nothing in excess, but enough of every necessary thing," is
the golden rule adopted by all people about penetrating Central Africa.

The Arab chiefs and their followers, though they generally take a long
time to prepare a caravan, were in this instance, however, much to our
pleasure, punctual to the day named, and at the beginning of the new
moon of the sixth month of the year of the glorious Hegira 128-, or the
year of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ 186-, the ships containing the
expedition and the vast amount of stores requisite for the consumption
of a large and imposing caravan for about three years, set sail in the
morning from the open harbour of Zanzibar, for the port of Bagamoyo, on
the mainland, distant twenty-five miles.

Let us wave our snowy handkerchiefs to the travellers, for we have one
or two young friends who accompany them.  Let us wish them a cheery _bon
voyage_, and a happy issue out of their enterprise, if it so happen that
the Lord of Moslems and Christians looks down upon its purpose with
favourable eye.  Let us at least bear them good will until they have
forfeited our good opinion by acts contrary to Christian charity and the
good will to all men which that most loving God-Man, Jesus, preached
unto us.



CHAPTER TWO.

BIDDING FAREWELL--AMINA'S FAREWELL TO SELIM--SELIM IN TEARS--SIMBA'S
FEATS OF STRENGTH--MOTO'S CHARACTER DESCRIBED--LITTLE NIANI, THE BOY,
CALLED MONKEY--MOTO MEETS ELEPHANTS--MOTO'S DARING ADVENTURE--A NARROW
ESCAPE--THE STORY OF MOTO--KISESA PREPARES TO ATTACK--THE KING'S SON,
KALULU--WHAT PRINCE KALULU SAID TO MOTO--SIMBA PRAISES MOTO.

On the fifteenth day of the sixth month, the members of the last
caravan, under the command of Amer bin Osman, were taking farewell of
their friends, who had arrived at Bagamoyo from Zanzibar that morning
for last words.

It was a most affecting scene, as all such must be when young men are
about to sever themselves from their connections for the first time, and
fathers and husbands are commending to the care of the good God those
whom they are about to leave behind, perhaps for ever.

Who knows how many of these stalwart and stout-hearted people will
return to those from whom they are now almost tearfully withdrawing?
Will the brave and noble Amer son of Osman, who is now bending over his
beautiful wife, in earnest conversation, ever come back?  He appears so
strong and robust in health; two hundred well-appointed servants of his
household are round about him; his Arab companions, with their powerful
retinue, who have gone before him to Simbamwenni, we may be sure, will
be faithful to him.  Yet who can insure his return?  And thus doubt,
fear, and anxiety alternate in his wife Amina's eyes, as she raises them
appealingly, regretfully, towards his own.

"Yes, Amina, please God, I shall come back within two years, with so
much ivory, and so many slaves, as will make me the richest man in
Zanzibar.  Inshallah!  Inshallah!" said Amer, in a sanguine tone.

"Amina, say thy farewell to Selim, the pride of the Beni-Hassan.  He
will some day return to Oman, a rich and powerful chief.  Dost thou not
think he looks a warrior in his marching dress?  But hasten, or we shall
have nothing but women's tears, which perhaps will drown us before we
begin our journey."

As Amer turned away after a still but fervent embrace, Amina turned to
Selim, with a look which revealed the love her maternal heart bore him,
and so steadfastly did she regard him, that it seemed she was fixing a
life-long picture of his features in her memory which time would in vain
attempt to efface.

"Thou, Selim," she said, drawing him nearer to her, "thou joy of my
heart, and jewel of my eyes!  Thou art really about to depart!  Thou to
leave thy mother's heart desolate!  What joy is left for me--my son and
lord both going?  Wilt thou not let thy mother's voice plead, and
prevail with thee, Selim?  Look, Selim, on that dancing sea!  Beyond the
narrow strait lies the Zanjian isle!  Over its fair shores the gentle
winds waft the perfumes of citron and orange!  The sweet scents of the
jasmine flowers, the cinnamon and clove vie with the fragrance of the
orange!  Bare odours and sweet strains of bulbul lull the senses into
perfect felicity!  The sweet air is pregnant with fragrance!  Where
canst thou meet with a land so fair, my Selim?  Wilt thou leave thy
mother, these delights, these joys, for the cruel heat, and thirst, and
jungle-thorn of negro-land?  Oh, Selim!  Oh, Selim!  Wilt thou leave thy
mother, the orange-groves, the palms, the cool fountains, for scorching
days and arid plains?  The road is long--oh, so long--for weeks, months,
and years it lies to the west!  Stay one moment longer, my Selim, and
let thy mother read thee what the Kuran's sacred page, which I've
divined, reveals.  Remember, it is the sure decree of Fate, to which God
has affixed his own heavy seal.  Hear these words, and stay with me:--

  "A day will come, a day of saddest woe,
  A day when Arabs meet the savage foe,
  And Arabs vainly cry for strength and might,
  And vainly strive to save themselves by flight.

  "It is a day of woe, a day of doom,
  A day surcharg'd with black and bitter gloom;
  And sons shall mourn for Arab fathers slain,
  And Arab wives shall shed their tears like rain.

"Wilt thou stay with me now?  No!  Proud boy, shun the death and misery
which wait this venture!  Despise not the warning of Allah!  Why wilt
thou, oh Selim, shake thy head so stubbornly?  Speak."

"Dearest mother, it may not be.  If Fate decrees my death and misery,
then why should I try to escape its sure laws by remaining behind?  If
death awaits my father, Selim's place is by Amer's side, to die as
becomes the son of an Arab chief.  But these are but trivial fears of
thine, my mother.  Why shouldst thou fear for me?  Am I not with my
father, the brave Amer son of Osman?  Have I not my gun and long-sword?
What can the Pagan dogs do against all the great Arabs, and my father's
kinsmen, when Khamis bin Abdullah, and Amer bin Osman lead?  Trust in
Allah, mother.  Believe me, I shall return to thee, tall and strong,
with plenty of ivory and slaves to make thee rich--to hang such jewels
on thy neck as befits a chief's wife.  Hark! the horn of the guide
sounds the signal of departure.  My father is impatient, and I must go
to him.  Embrace me, mother, and bless me ere I go."

Amina, seeing persuasion useless, needed no command for such an
affectionate duty.  A full mother's love rose responsive to the call of
her son, but her son's impatience rendered the embrace, though fervid,
short.

"Allah go with thee, my boy!" cried the mother.

"And with thee also, for ever!" responded Selim.

They were parted at last, one to join his father, who was striding
forward with his caravan, the other to turn to a friend's house, to sob
and weep, and think of the loved ones now fast retiring towards the
west.

For a long time father and son were silent.  Amer strode on quickly,
with an impassive countenance, whence all expression was banished save
firmness, and a lofty air of determination.

Selim, thorough son of a thorough Arab, with his head bent down
mechanically followed his father's footsteps, and allowed the strange
birds to rise, and sing, and fly unheeded about him, the sun to sink
unheeded to the west, and the twilight to approach, without seeming to
be at all conscious that he was marching to that grand, fabulous, awful
heart of Africa, about which he had heard so much, and which he had
craved in his heart of hearts to see.

The silence was unbroken until the caravan had halted on the banks of
the Kingani, then Selim recovered himself, and a copious flood of tears
caused by a feeling of tender melancholy which came over him at the
thought that he had really and actually left the pleasant happy home for
that sable, ominous, forested land that stretched deathly still across
the river.

The father turned as he heard the deep sobs of his boy, and on
approaching him laid his hand kindly on his head, and said:

"What! in tears, my son?  Art thou sorry thou hast left thy home--eh,
Selim?"

"No, father, I am not sorry, but home seemed so beautiful as I thought
of it, compared to that still dark land beyond.  There are nothing but
black-looking forests across the river, even the sky looks black and
desolate, and my heart seems to have caught some of its desolation."

"The forest looks sombrous and dark, my son, because night approaches,"
said Amer, tenderly.  "That black-looking sky which hastens from the
east is but the counterpane earth draws about it before folding its arms
to sleep.  When we shall have crossed the river we will camp, and in the
tent, which thou wilt learn to love as thy home, thou wilt forget thy
present misery; and in the morning, when earth is wide awake, and the
sun comes out as gay as a bride from the east, and the birds have all
left their nests and fill the air with their joyous songs, and the
fleet-footed antelope browses in the open glades, thou wilt wonder that
thou couldst find it in thy heart to weep."

"Oh, father, I shall weep no more.  See, my eyes are already dry;" and
Selim raised a brave face towards his father, which was tenderly kissed.

The caravan was soon across the river, and every man and woman was
engaged in cutting down young trees and branches to form a stockade, a
duty not to be omitted by well-conducted caravans in Africa.

When this was done the people gathered within the camp and prepared
their evening meal.  The tents were all disposed in a circle, with their
doors open towards the centre, where stood Amer bin Osman's tent.  Close
by the master's tent, on either side, were two or three of the most
faithful slaves, who were styled fundis, or overseers, to whom were
given the orders for the conduct of the caravan by the chief.

Over these overseers, for their fidelity and peculiar qualities, were
placed two men, who are intended to figure conspicuously in this
narrative; their names were Simba (Lion) and Moto (Fire).  Where Amer
bin Osman the chief went Simba and Moto followed.  To these two Amer was
as dear as their own hearts, and the boy Selim was their delight; his
slightest wish was law to these faithful creatures, who looked upon him
as though he were something immeasurably superior to them, as though he
belonged to some higher world of which they had no comprehension.

Simba was a giant in form, and a lion, as his name denoted, in strength
and courage.  He was originally from Urundi, a large country bordering
the northeastern part of Lake Tanganika.  He was the son of a chief, and
was captured when a boy in battle when Moeni Khheri's father sided with
the Wasige against Makala, a quarrelsome king living in the northern
districts of Urundi.  Being a chief's son he of course belonged to the
Wahuma, a superior race of bronze-coloured people who formerly migrated
from Ethiopia, and from whom only chiefs are selected in the countries
of Urundi, Ruanda, Uganda, and Karagwah.

Simba was now in the prime of manhood, and he had lived in the household
of Amer bin Osman for twenty years, for Amer, after his arrival at
Zanzibar, within a year of his capture, had purchased him, and seeing
him to be docile and good-tempered, though uncommonly strong, had almost
adopted him as his son.

Some of Simba's feats of strength bordered on the marvellous.  Taught by
the young kinsmen of Amer the use of the long, sharp sword of the Arabs,
and being apt, he had acquired a terrible proficiency with it.  He had
often walked up alongside of a full-grown goat, and had with one well
dealt blow halved the animal from head to tail.  Many of his negro
admirers verily believed he could perform the same feat upon an ass, so
extraordinary was his strength, but he had never attempted it, as the
experiment was too costly for his means.  He had once carried a
three-year-old bullock on his back half way around the plantation of his
master, Amer.  He had often taken one of the large white donkeys of
Muscat by the ears and by a sudden movement of his right foot, had
prostrated the animal on his back; and once, upon an extraordinary
occasion, had actually carried twelve men on his back and shoulders and
chest around his master's house, to the intense wonder of a large crowd
of spectators.  He could toss an ordinary man ten feet high into the
air, and catch him as easily as an ordinary man would catch a small
child.  But manifold were the stories related with awe of the feats of
strength performed by the brave lion-hearted Simba, chief overseer of
Amer bin Osman's caravan.  By measurement he stood six feet and five
inches in his bare feet, and from shoulder to shoulder he measured
thirty-two inches.

Moto, or "fire," could not have been better designated.  His name, which
his master had given him, had been bestowed upon him for his peppery,
irascible temper.  He was from Urori, as almost any one acquainted with
the peculiarities of the various tribes in Central Africa would have
sworn.  A small wiry frame, indicating cat-like activity, strength,
indomitability, capable of enduring great fatigue, characterised the
form of Moto.  He had also been brought to Zanzibar when a child by a
slave-trader, and from a mere caprice had been purchased for twenty
dollars by Amer.  But his master had never regretted the purchase, for
next to Simba, Amer bin Osman preferred Moto.  To serve his master Moto
would have thrown himself into the fire or leaped into the sea.  He was
a great hunter, he could track the soft velvet foot of the leopard upon
a rock, could tell what animal had broken a blade of grass if a single
hair but adhered to it, could stalk an elephant and tickle his belly
with a straw without letting the enormous brute know what deadly foe
intruded on his presence; and a man slightly inclined to exaggeration,
and not at all noted for his veracity, declared by this and by that,
that Moto had at one time dragged himself into a jungle after a lion,
and, finding the lion asleep, had from sheer bravado walked noiselessly
up to him and stepped over his body before he shot him through the head.

If you knew Moto as well as his own best friends knew him, you would
describe him as being as brave as a lion, active as a cat, keen-eyed as
the fish-eagle, hot as pepper, as hardy as an ass, and faithful as a
dog.  If you will add that he was a little vain, and never disposed to
resent any kind friend boasting of his prowess, you will have a perfect
picture of Moto the Mrori.

The first night on the road with some caravans is not very lively; the
people are engaged either in thinking of the joys they have left behind
them, or they are shy, and are sounding one another's qualities before
making advances.  But in the camp of Amer bin Osman there was no regret
at parting from Zanzibar, since the great master and little master were
with them, and every man knew his fellow and mate; thus there was no
disruption of friendships, associations, and congenialities.  Most of
those who were married had their wives with them; those who were not
married had their intimate friends and saw time-endeared faces around
them.  They were all of one household.  It was like unto the migration
of an entire settlement.

One glance within the huts and at the squatting forms informed you that
they were all happy--if not happy, contented.  No eyes like the
coal-black, the pure well of jet undefiled, of the native African, when
the firelight is reflected in their quick sparkles, can so well
represent merriness.  Those people with those sparkling eyes were merry;
they were interesting each other with their trite stories of very trite
lives; but when a peal of laughter louder than usual startled the camp
and rang through the forest, you may be sure it was either at a story of
hearsay or at something that Simba or Moto had been saying.

Such a laugh was heard, and instantly all eyes and mouths were uplifted,
and ears seemed to be quickened, to catch a few words of the story that
had caused an interested group to so loudly vent their delight.

The interested party of laughers were seated around a miniature bonfire,
which Simba and Moto had kindled some thirty feet or so from the chief's
tent.  Selim had lately arrived before it, and Simba had rolled a mighty
log behind his young master and had asked him to be seated, himself
seated on the ground, attentive and alert to please him; and Moto, not
to be outdone in assiduity by Simba, had just begun to draw from the
recesses of his memory, or from the cells of his imagination, one of his
best stories, when a ludicrous incident occurred and Selim had laughed
heartily.  Their young master had laughed, and of course when he laughed
Simba laughed; then seeing Simba laugh Moto laughed; and, as real
genuine laughter is contagious, all hands laughed, and the outer circle,
the entire caravan, smiled sympathetically.

Moto had commenced his story thus: "One day, when I was in the caravan
of Kisesa--(Abdullah bin Nasib--you know Kisesa is a great friend of my
master Amer, and if Kisesa liked to have me accompany him, Master Amer
would never say `No.'  It is in his caravan as fundi I finished my
education as a hunter)--travelling through Ukonongo, I--"

"Have you been to Ukonongo, Moto?" asked Selim.

"Oh, yes, and much farther.  Well, I was saying, I--"

"But, Moto," broke in Selim again, "Ukonongo is the best country for
shooting, is it not?"

"At certain seasons only.  In the dry season, yes.  Then all kinds of
game travel to the neighbourhood of the Cow River, and shooting is
plenty then, but for elephants give me Kawendi.  I was just going to
say, I--"

"But, Moto," broke in a naked youngster called Niani, or the Monkey
[Niani is a Kisawahili term for monkey], a nephew of Moto, "are there
lions in Kawendi? because--"

But he was not permitted to finish, as Moto sprang up furious, with his
kurbash (a hippopotamus-hide whip) in hand.  Niani noticed the movement,
and with the activity of his namesake, took a flying leap over the fire,
and alighted in a huge dish half full of rice that was slowly simmering
over some hot embers.  There was a loud shriek, and clots of hot rice
splashed in all directions, several falling on the nude shoulders of the
group, which started them all to their feet.  Then Selim laughed
heartily at the catastrophe.  Simba followed, then Moto stayed his hand
and laughed, and the laugh was taken by all, and this was the cause of
that which startled the camp and drew our attention.

"That is what some people get for interrupting a good story," said Moto,
sententiously addressing unfortunate Niani, who was rubbing his scalded
feet and moaning piteously in a low tone; but the words were said as
more of a hint to Selim.

"Well, go on, Moto; I will not disturb you another time," said Selim.

"Ah, I did not mean you, dear master," replied Moto.  "You may disturb
me as often as you like."

"Well, well, go on with your story, and let it be a good one," urged
Selim.

"All right, master.  Well, I had just said that I was in the caravan of
Kisesa, travelling through Ukonongo, when that little monkey Niani
interrupted me, and so got--"

"No, no, Moto, it was I that interrupted you; but go on with your story,
and never mind poor Niani; he has got his punishment, and you punish me
too by not telling me the story," asked Selim.

"Yes, yes, Moto, go on!" said the deep-voiced Simba.  "Do you not hear
the young master ask you?  Heh, what is the matter with the man
to-night?"

"Oh, well, if you are all going to interrupt me, the story will last
from here to Rua," said Moto in a careless tone.

"Moto," said Selim, "I will never disturb you any more--there's my hand
on my promise."

Moto's pride and vanity being gratified by this ready promise of Selim,
cleared his throat, and commenced this time in earnest, as follows:

"We were travelling through Ukonongo, and had reached Sultan Mrera's
village, when Kisesa asked me to go to the forest along the river to
look for game, adding that if I brought a Kudu antelope to the camp he
would give me four yards of cotton cloth.

"After a good breakfast of rice and carry, which Kisesa sent me from his
table to make me strong, I started.  It was then about noon, and the sun
was very hot, though once in the forest it would be cool enough.  In a
short time I was by the river, a crooked little stream of delicious and
clear water.  I walked along, looking to the right and left constantly
for hours, when just about two hours before sunset, I heard a hollow
sound, as though the earth was shaking; but I knew, after listening,
that the sound was caused by a herd of elephants walking in file along
the hard-baked road, and that they were approaching the stream to drink.

"In a moment I was down on my face like a dead man.  The grass was about
two feet high, and very thick, so that I was quite safe, if I did not
stir, and I am too old a hunter not to know what to do in the
neighbourhood of elephants.  As the elephants passed by I lifted my head
up cautiously, and counted them.  Two--four--six--eight--ten enormous
beasts, who tossed their trunks aloft, as if they were masters of the
forest, and knew it.  Careless and confident, they passed on, and I
wriggled out until I was some distance away; then I jumped up and leaped
across the stream, and on all fours crept across a deep bend of it; then
lying flat along the ground, I moved forward towards a great tree, a
baobab, that stood between me and them.  If the elephants had all stood
in a row drinking from the river I could never have come up to them
unseen, but one greedily thirsty fellow was standing in the middle of
the stream, almost touching the baobab tree with his side, so that he
completely hid me from the others.

"I thought that Kisesa, though he had not told me to shoot elephants,
would not mind my bringing him two great ivory tusks, which would be
worth at Zanzibar 500 dollars, since he had come to Ukonongo to get
ivory, and that if he gave me four yards of cloth for a Kudu antelope,
that he would give many more yards of cloth for 500 dollars worth of
ivory.

"This thought gave me confidence to proceed, and imperceptibly I was
drawing nearer and nearer to the monster near the baobab.  After a few
minutes, which seemed to me to be hours, I was lifting myself to my
feet, girding my loins tighter, and preparing myself for a run for life.
But just at the moment I ought to have fired, a mischievous idea came
into my head; the hind quarters of the brute were so close to me that I
thought it would be great fun, and a good story to tell afterwards if I
tickled the brute's tail.  Gutting a long straw, I extended the point
towards the tail, and then traced a line across the leg to the belly.
It was delicious to watch the flurry of the short tail and the circles
it described, and to watch the brute half leaning against the tree, and
rubbing it with his ponderous form.  When this play had lasted a short
time, I brought down my gun, and pointing it about three inches or so
behind the left fore leg, on a level with the position of the beast, I
fired.  The elephant sprang forward, and by doing so disclosed to the
astonished eyes of the others my retreating form, which, I assure you,
was bounding over the low bushes and grass tops as if I were an
antelope.

"The elephants got over their surprise in a second, then a wild snort of
rage greeted my ears, and I knew by the crash, of bushes and splash of
water that they were after me.  Never an antelope bounded over the
plains of Ukonongo, when chased by a lion, as I bounded then; never a
timid quagga's fleet feet carried him away from the hunters as my feet
carried me over that ground.  But it seemed to me for a time as if it
were of no use--the awful crashing got nearer and nearer, and as I
turned my head to measure the distance the foremost was from me, I saw
the lord of the herd was but thirty paces from me.  He seemed to tower
up to three times his usual height, and to swell out into proportions
three times as vast as his natural size; his great ears stood straight
out as flat as a board, as if they were wings, and his eyes were like
coals of fire; his trunk was lifted up, as you sometimes see the deadly
forest snake before it strikes his victim; his head was stretched out,
as the head of a giraffe when chased by a beast of prey, and the two
long, mighty, gleaming teeth seemed awful just then.  His eyes caught a
glance of mine as I turned them towards him, and that instant he uttered
another snort of rage, which was as fearful as the war-horn of the
Watuta.  But it gave me greater speed; if I ran before, I now flew; yet
closer and closer the monster came.  I suppose he was about fifteen feet
from me when the tricks of the elephant hunters of Urori came to my
mind.  I had noticed that though the big elephant was the foremost, he
was also the outermost on my right--the other elephants were to my left,
and they seemed to be following the lord of the herd rather than any
particular object.  In an instant after observing this, I shot out
straight to the right from the direction I was first going as hard as my
feet and legs would take me.  The elephants passed on, the rushing sound
of their feet going through the grass was like unto the wild pepo of
Ugogo, accompanied by thunder, when it comes sweeping over the plain,
with a moan and a rush, whirling and tossing bushes, and even small
trees about sometimes, and darkening the air with what it tears from the
earth.

"I had got fifty yards away before the elephants could turn about.  Only
an instant, however, they stopped.  They caught sight of me again, and
with loud, furious snorting again they charged in a mass.  I am a pretty
swift runner as you all know, but the best of us seem to crawl compared
to the speed of an elephant for the first few hundred yards.  The
elephants, especially one or two of the foremost, were gaining on me
rapidly; the stubborn grass whipped my legs severely as I ran, and was a
sore distress to me, but the thick hide of my pursuers was proof against
it.  A little distance off before me, and to the left, was a clump of
brushwood.  I thought if I could gain it, I would be comparatively safe,
as I could find somewhere to hide.  In a few moments I reached it, and
looking sharply about, I discovered, a little distance off, half hidden
by grass and brush, a hole in the ground, which I knew to be that of the
wild boar.  I thought it would be a capital place to hide, provided the
boar was out of his hole, and in a second I was on my face crawling
backwards into it.  I had barely crawled in when I heard the elephants'
thunder overhead, and at the same instant I heard a deep grunt behind
me, and immediately after I was shot out of that hole, like a bullet out
of a gun, and I lay on the ground a few paces from it like a dead man.
I had just consciousness enough to know that I had been grievously
wounded in one of my hams by the furious owner of the underground
excavation in which I found shelter; that the boar had darted off in the
direction the elephants had taken, then I lost all knowledge of
everything for many hours.

"When I recovered it was night.  And soon I heard shots in the distance,
fired at regular intervals, and thinking perhaps that they were my
friends looking for me I fired my gun, which was immediately answered by
another.  By firing thus every few minutes I succeeded in guiding them
to where I lay, for I found myself unable to move.

"When my friends found me, and were acquainted with my condition, they
lifted me on their shoulders and bore me to the camp, where I lay unable
to move for about three weeks.  The marks that savage boar gave me I
have yet, and shall have to my dying day.  I have spoken."

"Well, what became of the elephant you shot?" asked Selim, when Moto had
concluded his graphic and interesting story.

"He was picked up next day, about two hours' distance from the place
where I had shot him.  His trail was easily known by his blood, Kisesa
made quite a sum of money from that elephant, as the tusks were as large
as any that were ever seen."

"How many cloths did Kisesa give you?" asked Selim.

"Only forty."

"_Only_ forty?  That was a good deal, was it not?" asked Selim.

"Forty cloths for what brought him three hundred at Zanzibar!  Do you
call forty cloths a great deal?" asked the offended Moto.

"But you forget, Moto," said Selim, "that you were a slave in the employ
of Kisesa; that the gun you carried was his, that the powder and shot
you used to shoot the elephant with were his, that the clothes you then
wore were given you by him, that the food which gave you strength was
purchased with his money, that the men who carried you from the forest
to the camp were his slaves, that the men who looked after you when you
were sick and wounded were his men, that the man who found the elephant
dead belonged to Kisesa, and that without Kisesa's aid you would have
died in the jungle, perhaps, and never have seen the elephant again.
What do you say now, Moto?" asked Selim.

"You are right, young master, as you are always," said the humiliated
Moto, which remark was echoed and applauded by everybody around the
camp-fire.

"But, now," said the hitherto quiet Simba, "tell us about that battle
Kisesa had with the Warori--your own people--and how you saved the
king's son."

"Ay, do tell us that.  It must be an interesting story," said Selim.  "I
shall sleep all the better for it this first night of my life in
Africa."

"Well, when my friend Simba asks and my young master commands me, Moto
is always ready," said Moto, adding a huge log to the already cheerful
fire-pile.  "It is not such a long time ago but what I can remember
every detail of it.  It may have happened three or four years ago;
Kisesa was then in Unyanyembe.  He was mortally offended with the Arab
chief Sayd bin Salim, the Wali of the Sultan of Zanzibar at Unyanyembe,
and most of the Arabs took sides with Kisesa, as they knew he was a
brave, powerful, and rich chief, who might defy even the Sultan of
Zanzibar if he chose to do so.

"When Sayd bin Salim requested the Arabs to assist him in fighting the
black chief of Kahama in Ugolo, Kisesa refused to go, and most of the
other Arabs did the same, as they said that Kahama was but a small
village and that the son of Salim had soldiers enough paid by the Sultan
of Zanzibar to do that kind of fighting.  Now the son of Salim, though
he knows how to govern Arabs and keep the peace with peaceful merchants,
has neither head nor heart for fighting.  (It takes Kisesa to do that
work.)  So two or three weeks after Sayd bin Salim had gone to the war
we were not at all astonished to see the Wali come back well beaten by
Kahama; and Kisesa and the other Arabs had a good laugh at him.

"When soon after the war with Urori broke out, and Sayd bin Salim was
requested to call every Arab to the war, Sayd bin Salim refused; but
said that if Kisesa desired to go, he, as king's governor of Unyanyembe,
would empower Kisesa to lead the Arabs to war, and make him chief of the
army.  Kisesa accepted at once, and the principal Arabs at once
volunteered to go with him.  Within a very few days Kisesa left
Unyanyembe with nearly a thousand men for Urori, so that Unyanyembe
looked like a deserted place.

"I think it was on the twentieth day--I am not sure--of the march, that
after travelling through Unyangwira and Kokoro we came near Kwikuru, the
capital of Urori.  We slept on our arms that night until about the
eighth hour, when at a given signal we all crept through the bushes for
about an hour, and by the moonlight we saw just ahead of us the boma
(palisade) of the king's village.  I assure you we did not stop long to
look at it, for our horns gave the signal and we all ran for the boma.
Quick as a flash of powder in the musket-pan, as you may say, the men of
Kisesa were at the palisade, and had their guns pointed at the village
through the bare; but not a gun was fired, as Kisesa knew how to make
war.

"Kisesa blew his horn, and a voice from the village shouted out to ask
who we were, and what we wanted.

"Our chief replied, `Come out to fight, for Kisesa is at your gates.'

"`Kisesa!' said the voice, in an astonished tone.  `Kisesa! it cannot be
Kisesa from Unyanyembe!'

"`It is Kisesa, and no other man.  I am Kisesa, and I have come to kill
you.'

"The man said then, `Kisesa has been in a hurry to die to come so soon
to Kwikuru, the capital of the King of Urori.  Does Kisesa usually fight
in such a hurry?  It has been our custom to talk first before we fight.
What does Kisesa mean?' asked the King, for it was he, though we could
not see him, as he took care not to let himself be seen.

"`Thou art a dog, and a son of a dog!' answered Kisesa.  `Hast thou not
been making war upon our merchants, killing them in the forest for the
sake of their ivory?  Hast thou not been mutilating their young sons by
cutting off their right hands?  Hast thou not been beating the prisoners
with sticks until many of them have died under the torture?  Hast thou
not asked for Kisesa, the great Arab warrior, that thou mightest flay
him alive and make clothes of his skin to cover thy nakedness?  Lo!
Kisesa is here at thy gates; come and take his skin.'

"`Kisesa, thou hast done well to come to me before I came for thee.
Kisesa, thou art a good man, but I will flay thee alive nevertheless,
and thou shalt know what it is to come to the gates of Mostana, like a
thief at night.  They told me thou wert brave.  Is it brave to do what
thou hast done?  My young son Kalulu, who is but a child, is more than a
match for thee.  Halt where thou art until daylight, that we may at
least see him who is said to be brave, but is but a night prowler!'

"`Mostana, if that be thy name,' said Kisesa, `I will wait for thee
until the sun appears in the east.  Thou shalt then look on my face and
die.  I have spoken.'

"So we all laid down close against the palisade outside.  Every fifth
man was to stand watch while the others slept.  As soon as the sun
appeared in the east, over the tops of the trees, the horns of Kisesa
were heard, calling us all to be ready; and at the same time the drums
of Mostana were heard.  I had been sleeping soundly, and I now looked in
between the posts of the palisade to see what kind of a place we were
about to attack.  It was a large village, circular, like all in Urori,
but the palisades were strong, and but lately put up.  There were scores
of huts inside, but what struck me as something very uncommon in Urori
was an inner enclosure (like, that in the King's village at Unyanyembe),
which surrounded Mostana's quarters, so that he could from the inside
hold out as long as we could outside if we were not more numerous or
better armed than he.

"We were not long before we were at it like lions, shooting into one
another's faces, or as near them as the defences would permit.  It was
evident that Mostana was getting the worst of the fight, for we were far
more numerous and had better guns, and farther apart from each other,
while Mostana's people were crowded together, and every bullet that went
in through the palisade wounded or killed some one, and the cries of the
women and groans of the wounded were frightful.

"After shooting at each other for an hour Kisesa gave notice to have the
two gates opened, and into these we poured in crowds, and as fast as we
got in we took advantage of the huts that were outside the king's
quarters.  Then, working ourselves gradually, shooting as we went, we
sprang at the other palisade, and putting our guns through, fired into
the crowds.  I assure you the scene was horrible; the people dropped to
the ground as fast as we could count them, so that in a short time the
few that were left began to cry for mercy, shouting `Aman!  Aman!'  The
gates of the inner defences, or the King's quarters, were broken open at
once, and Kisesa's men bounded in, making such noise that might be heard
a day's march from the village.  They fired their guns, they hooted,
they shouted, they sang.  Were they not victors?  I was carried in with
the crowd which poured in towards the King's house.  Old Mostana--he was
not very old either--was fighting to the last, firing his arrows so fast
into the crowd that many of Kisesa's men, even while they were singing
the songs of victory, fell dead, pierced to the marrow with the deadly
arrows which flew unerringly from his how.  At his side was a young lad,
younger by three years than Master Selim is; he was tall, straight, and
slender as one of the light assegais he threw so dexterously and quickly
into the crowds who were pressing onward towards the King.  Kisesa
himself was with us, and on seeing the matchless spirit and bearing of
the boy, he shouted, `Kill Mostana, but save the boy.  Fifty cloths to
him who brings me Kalulu alive.'  I am a Mrori, and I loved that boy for
his bravery the first time I saw him, and I determined to save him, if
possible for Kisesa and at the same time get the fifty cloths.  A shield
belonging to one of Mostana's men lay on the ground; I snatched it up,
and defending my body with it, I cried out to Kalulu in Kirori that I
was his friend and wished to save him.  The boy, surprised for a moment,
desisted, but seeing me advance hurriedly towards him, and fearing that
I only wished to do him harm, he hurled another light spear at me.  So
true was the boy's aim, he hit the centre of the shield and pinned my
hand to it, and at the same moment I saw his father fall across the
threshold of his house.  I heard the boy give one wild shriek, and then
saw him disappear inside; but darting forward, heedless of the pain in
my arm, I arrived at the door of the house, only in time, however, to
see him escape by another door, that led outside of the royal quarters.
I saw him take a hasty look, and, as if the coast was clear and no
danger to be apprehended, shoot off like an arrow, and the head-dress of
fish-eagle feathers he wore streamed behind him straight, so swift were
his feet.  I permitted him to spring to the palisade, but before he
could well clear himself of its tall posts I laid hold of his feet; but
not for long, however.  As the fiery lad clung with one hand, he used
the other in threatening to strike me, and the spears of the Warori are
sometimes dangerous.  When I released him, quicker than the black
leopard of the jungles of Kawendi, or the ever-jumping monkey of Sowa,
he sprang over the posts, and picking himself up, he raced away for
liberty as if for life.  But I am a Mrori too, and I am not to be
outdone by a boy, even though he were sired by Mostana; so snatching the
assegai, which hitherto had pinned my hand to the shield, I tossed the
shield over to the other side, and sprang after it myself.  It did not
take long for me to catch the fugitive; he had just entered the belt of
wood when I caught hold of his arm and bade him, in the Kirori tongue,
not to run away from a friend.  He turned round to me with such a look
in his large eyes--eyes that truly were like unto those of the young
Kalulu, his namesake, which, as it bounds over the low brush or grass
clumps in the plains of Urori and Ubena, seems never to touch the ground
as it leaps lightly and swiftly away from the cruel hunter.  Perhaps it
is because I am a Mrori that I was rather partial to the son of Mostana,
captive of my bow and of my spear, but when I saw those large, soft,
pleading eyes turned up to me, I wept for him who was a king's son
yesterday, and to-day was Moto's slave.

"`You are a Mrori,' said the boy, `and will you make Mostana's son a
slave to those robbers?'

"`My lord, the Arabs are not robbers; they are rich merchants trading
for ivory, who, when angered by wrong done to them, band together to
fight.  Mostana is dead; the Arab chief, Kisesa, wants you for himself.
Will you submit?'

"`You are not a Mrori; no Mrori warrior would talk of submitting to be
the slave of an Arab dog, however great or rich he is.  Mostana has
warned me often how it would all end.  But Kalulu, his son, will never
be a slave.  Listen, my brother.  [All strangers are addressed in
"Urori" as brothers.  All travellers are hailed as brothers.]  I was
born in that village; I first drew breath within that palisaded
enclosure; there I first learned to lisp "baba," "mama;" there I first
learned to distinguish friend from foe, light from darkness, good from
evil; there I first learned how to handle the spear and the bow, how to
throw the war-hatchet and the knob-stick; under those trees I have
sucked at my mother's paps, and when older have listened to the elders
of the village and counsellors of my father relating the traditions of
my great warrior tribe; in those fields now green with corn I have
played with friends of my own age--with Luhambo, Lotaka, Borata Natona,
Kahirigi, and others; in the pleasant stream which is now before us I
have bathed and caught the great fat fish; in this forest I have chased
the honey-bird, and searched for the sweet treasures the wild bees
stored for me; here the antelope and fleet zebra invited me to the
chase; even the very trees seem to know me, and recognise me as
belonging to this portion of earth.  But now Mostana, my father, is
dead, my village will be burnt, my kinsmen are either dead or bound
captives, the fields will be left desolate, and what I have hitherto
known as home will become a wilderness.  Yet for all this, when Cruelty
would even pause before going farther, I am pleading to a Mrori for the
only thing left for me to ask--my liberty!  Mrori, speak; must I ask
twice for that which was never yours to give?  Will you not let me
depart to my uncle, to remember the friendly Mrori who scorned to take
advantage of a boy?'

"`Go in peace, my lord, go in peace: I did but try you.  Moto is your
friend, and if you can remember Moto when you live happily amongst your
uncle's tribe, Moto will ever be grateful.'

"`Is Moto your name?' he said delightedly, taking my hand, while his
eyes danced with joy.  `Then let the Warori of my uncle's tribe ever
remember your name with pleasure.  Katalambula, my uncle, shall remember
your name for future benefit, should we ever meet again.  Kalulu has
spoken.'

"He embraced me as if I were his father, and then snatching his weapons
and the shield which I gave him, he turned away and, light as the
jumping antelope [the springbok], bounded away from sight.

"Come, my friends, the night is far spent, let us retire," said Moto,
when he had ended his really interesting story.

"What, Moto!  I am surprised that you let the fellow go, when you might
have got fifty cloths for him," said Selim.

"And I am not," said Simba, "for I know Moto, and it is for that I love
him as my brother.  Why, he was a king's son!  Should Moto take that
from Kalulu which was not his to take?  Ah, Moto! thou art good as the
yellow metal which all the rich Arabs at Zanzibar love so much, and
which the Banyan women love to hang on their yellow breasts.  Master
Selim, you know not what it is to be a slave; pray Allah that you never
will know," said Simba as he rose and yawned.

"I a slave! you are dreaming, Simba.  An Arab cannot be a slave, but a
black man was born to be an Arab's slave," replied Selim, with some
tartness in his tones.

"Well, well, we will talk of this another time," said Moto quietly, "eh,
Simba, my brother?  Master, the journey is far to-morrow; before the sun
rises, your father has said, we must be on the road to Simbamwenni.  It
is now late.  Good night, young master."

"I shall go to my father's tent to dream of Mostana's son, Kalulu," said
Selim, recovering his temper, saying which, he walked away.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE UNITED ARAB HOST--THE COUNCIL--THE LESSER COUNCIL--WHAT AN ARAB BOY
THINKS OF BEING A SLAVE--WHAT SELIM THINKS OF SLAVERY--SAREASTIO ISA--
LITTLE NIANI IS ILL-TREATED--SELIM, AND HIS FATHER--BEAUTIFUL SCENERY--
THE LAND FLOWING WITH MILK AND HONEY--IS IT RIGHT OR WRONG TO OWN
SLAVES?--THE FEARFUL CROCODILE--NARROW ESCAPE FROM DEATH--THE REWARD OF
SELIM'S COURAGE--SIMBA ON THE ALERT--THE REWARD OF SIMBA'S FIDELITY--THE
DEAD MARAUDER--THE FIERCE WARORI--THE ARAB COUNCIL--IS IT WAR, OR
PEACE?--IS IT WAR?

The next morning the caravan of Amer bin Osman was afoot at an early
hour, all hands feeling in a more excellent mood, if possible, than they
were when they retired to sleep.  They shouted, they sang merrily, and
enjoyed themselves in much the same manner that all caravans do, when
fresh and cheery they start on a trading campaign.

On the tenth day, on coming from under the shadows of the great scarps
of the Uruguru range, the walled town of Simbamwenni lay before them,
and on a green grassy slope, trending to the River Ungerengeri, were the
white tents and the huts of the caravans they were to join.

As is customary in Africa, the new-comers made their presence known to
their friends by repeated discharges of musketry, which brought out the
Arabs and their people by the hundreds.

The greeting which Amer bin Osman received from his friends was warm and
cordial.  The chiefs all embraced him after the manner and custom in
vogue amongst the Arabs, while their followers were not a whit less
expressive to Amer's people.  Selim was received with extraordinary
cordiality by the younger Arabs, some of whom were of his own age, and
after interchanging the long list of greetings customary in Arab
countries, they all adjourned to Khamis bin Abdullah's tent, who had by
acclamation been elected chief of the expedition, where in a short time
dishes of curried chicken and rice, kabobs, and sweets of various kinds,
with nice biscuits, were served as a substantial repast for the hungry
travellers.

Though conversation was animated and varied enough before Amer and his
son Selim had satisfied their hunger, it did not touch upon the object
of the expedition, but simply as to what events had transpired during
the journey from the coast to Simbamwenni; but when the repast was
ended, and the dishes were cleared, Khamis bin Abdullah broached the
subject near and dear to each heart just then--the future journey or
route of the expedition, "The great question, Amer bin Osman, about
which we have been attempting to decide," said Khamis, "is, shall we
take the road to Mbumi, in Usagara, and skirt the Mukondokwa mountains
to reach Uhehe, and strike a straight line to Urundi, thence to Marungu,
south of the Tanganika, for Rua, or shall we follow the old road through
Marenga M'Kali and Ugogo to Unyanyembe, thence to Ujiji, and across the
Lake Tanganika to Rua?  I should like to have thy opinion, for thou art
a man of age and experience, though thou hast never been to this land
before."

"Allah knows," responded Amer bin Osman, "that I know very little of
this country.  If thou dost not wish to decide thyself, as chief, which
is the best road, I should like to hear from thee, or others, about the
differences between the two roads, and the kind of countries which they
traverse."

"Well," said Khamis bin Abdullah, deliberately, "if I were by myself I
should prefer the old road, but there are some here of my friends who
know the country as well as I do, who think we are strong enough to be
able to march along the southern road.

"If we," continued he, "take the old road we shall have the Wagogo to
pay tribute to, or fight, as we like, between here and Rua; but if we
take the southern road, those thieves, the Wahehe, will have to be
looked after closely when going through their country; then we have the
Warori, a more powerful people than the Wagogo, to meet, whom we must
make friends or fight; then beyond Urori we have the Watuta, a tribe
related to the Warori, who speak their language and are more than the
Warori, whom we shall be obliged to pacify or make war against, just as
we feel, and beyond the Watuta is a straight road to the ivory country
of Rua.  I will admit that the southern road is by three or four months
the shortest, but I cannot admit that it is the safest."

"And what do my friends think of the two roads?  What does Sultan bin
Ali say?" asked Amer.

"I say," replied old Sultan, "that it would be far more prudent in us to
take the northern road.  The Wagogo are far more mischievous and
insolent than any I know, but we need not fear them if we are wise, and
do not provoke war."

"Well, if Sultan bin Ali and Khamis bin Abdullah think that the northern
road is the best, I would prefer to be guided by their judgment; but
what do the majority of the chiefs think of it?" asked Amer, directing
his glance to the others who had not yet spoken of this matter to him.

Said Khamis: "There are ten chiefs of us, including thyself; seven of us
are for the southern road, and thou, and I, and Sultan bin Ali are for
taking the northern road."

"Yes," said Sheikh Mohammed, "for this reason.  We are over 600 strong,
all armed with guns.  It is true we shall have to pay tribute to the
Warori and the Watuta, and may experience some trouble from the Wahehe,
who are dogs and sons of dogs; but the tribute, if we pay any, will not
be much, and will be cheaper in the end than the three months we would
lose on the southern road; besides, we save the cloth we would have to
pay the Wagogo, who are insolent besides being extortionate.  Three
months on the road cost us altogether about 900 doti, or fifteen bales
of cloth.  Put the Warori tribute against the Wagogo, and we have
fifteen bales of cloth, out of which we can pay the tribute to the
Watuta.  It is evident we effect a saving, besides gaining three months
time."

"That is a very good way of putting it," said Amer, "but what dost thou
say, Khamis, about the comparative safety of the two roads?  Is there
more danger to be apprehended from the Warori and the Watuta than we, a
trading caravan, would care to meet?"

"That is the view we should take of the matter, and not of the little
cloth we should save," responded Khamis.  "Experience tells me to avoid
the Warori, if possible, but above all the Watuta.  The Warori are brave
and strong, and sometimes very dangerous; but I have always heard the
Watuta were dangerous, that they are a fierce tribe who live by robbing
caravans, and I should not like to undertake to decide for the southern
road without the concurrence of every chief here present."

"Well, thou hast my consent if thou dost require it, and if God pleases
he can guide us in safety through any tribe in Africa.  Far be it from
me to disagree with those who know better than I what roads to take, and
what will best serve our interests," said Amer.

"And if thou dost require mine for thy decision," said old Sultan bin
Ali, "I shall not deny the right of any of the other chiefs to have as
much a voice in the caravan as I have; so now, friend Khamis, thou hast
the liberty to agree or disagree, and hast a right to decide whether
thou wilt lead us through Urori or through Ugogo to the ivory country."

"I have only one voice in the matter, and if ye are all of one consent
that it is better for us to march by the southern road, and still of one
mind that I shall lead ye, I have nothing more to say," responded
Khamis.

"We are, we are," they all replied.

"Very well, the march begins to-morrow," said Khamis bin Abdullah, "at
one hour before sunrise.  We follow the old road as far as Mbumi, when
we shall turn south."

The news was soon communicated through the host of followers, and each
knot and group had their own opinions, which they discussed with, as
much acumen and wisdom as their superiors had evinced.

But not to lose eight of our friends Simba and Moto, let us listen to
what they have to say concerning the unusual line of route about to be
adopted.

It is night.  The camp-fires are blazing by the score; huts are ranged
around the immense circle, which is more than 500 feet in diameter, and
scores of huts dot the centre of the circle, with their doors opening
according as the taste, fancy, or caprice of the builders suggested.
The huts of the Arab chiefs are arranged in a line close to one another,
but still far enough to insure the privacy and exclusion which every
Arab so much loves for the female portion of his household.

Near the tent of Amer bin Osman are seated before the usual fire-pile
the faithful slaves Simba and Moto with the fundis of the other Arabs;
and on carpets of Oman manufacture are placed Selim, the son of Amer,
Khamis, the young son of Khamis bin Abdullah, the leader, Isa, the son
of Sheikh Thani, and Abdullah and Mussoud, brothers, aged fourteen and
twelve respectively, the sons of Sheikh Mohammed.

We hear Selim's voice first, as we pay him this attention for
personating the hero of this veracious romance.

Said he: "Well, Simba;--ah, Isa, you do not know what a treasure Simba
is; he is so great, so wise, so strong!--what do you think of the
southern road? do you think we shall see more fun?"

"My young master, I fear so," answered Simba, while at the same time he
never lifted his head, so apparently intent was he in keeping his
flint-lock musket clean--a favourite occupation with Simba.

"You fear so!" said Isa, in a tone of surprise.  "What, you fear that we
shall see some fun!  Fie, Simba! did you not hear your young master say
you were brave and strong, and why should you fear we should have some
fun?" he asked, in a sneering tone.

Simba, turning his wise and large eyes upon Isa, said: "Ah, Master Isa,
you are a boy, and cannot understand."

"Hear the slave!" shouted Isa, laughing boisterously at Simba's
solemnity.  "Hear the man!" he repeated.  "Isa, son of Mohammed, is a
boy and cannot understand--and cannot understand what--will you tell me,
brave Simba?" he asked.

"You cannot understand, child, that what may be fun to some people will
be sorrow to others; that we may meet with fun of a kind that neither
you nor any of us will much like," said Simba, still rubbing away at the
already excessively clean gun, and looking graver than before.

"Why, what is the matter with you to-night?" asked Selim of Simba.

"The truth is, master, I do not like the course the Arabs have taken.  I
think they have been too hasty in adopting the southern road.  None
knows it better than friend Moto, and if the great masters had asked of
Moto something about the road, my mind would be more easy concerning you
and the great master Amer."

"What do you know of it, Moto?" asked Selim.  "Speak, and tell us all
you know."

"What Simba says is truth," replied Moto.  "The Warori are bad, bad,
bad, and the Watuta are worse--very bad--and I think we shall have very
serious times of it."

"How serious?" asked Selim again.

"I mean that we are very likely to have war with them.  Ever since
Abdullah bin Nasib or Kisesa had that battle with Mostana, the Warori
have been wicked.  They have Arab slaves now.  They formerly used to
kill their prisoners or torture them, but now they treat them in the
same way that the Arabs treat the Warori chiefs--they make slaves of
them."

"Make slaves of Arabs!" shouted young Khamis, a sinewy youth of sixteen,
and brave as the bravest of men.  "You lie, cur dog; you lie, slave!" he
added furiously.

"Ah, Master Khamis," said Moto, deprecatingly, "if they are slaves, it
was not I who made them slaves; but I speak the truth."

"A Bedaween!--a free Bedaween, who owns no master--a slave!  Moto, you
are a liar; it is impossible.  A Bedaween cannot live in slavery."

"But there are slaves with the Warori, and some are Arabs.  I swear it,"
he added solemnly.

"Then for my part," said young Khamis, "I am glad that my father has
taken this road.  The torments of Eblis light on the unbelieving dogs!
An Arab a slave!  Then let every Mrori look to himself should he fall
into my power, for, by Mohammed's holy name, I will torture the reptile
to death."

"Hold, young master," said the deep-voiced Simba, halting a moment in
his work, and raising himself to his fullest height, which, as the
firelight danced on his gigantic form, seemed to add vastness to that
which was vast already.  "Listen to me, Khamis, young son of Khamis bin
Abdullah; the Warori are bad, as you heard Moto say, but the Warori are
men, and I have heard a good Nazarene, one of the white men at Zanzibar,
say that all men are equal.  If the Warori are men, and are lords of
their own soil, and if Arabs trouble them, or will not do them justice,
what great wrong are the Warori guilty of if they fight; and if they
catch Arabs prisoners in war, why should they not treat them as the
Arabs would treat the Warori?  Answer me that."

"Why, Simba," asked the eldest of the sons of Mussoud, "do you know what
the sacred Kuran says?  I remember what the good Imam has told me often:
`_Verily the fruit of the trees of Al Zakkum shall be the food of the
unbelievers, as the dregs of oil shall it boil in the bellies of the
damned, like the boiling of the hottest water.  When ye encounter the
unbelievers strike off their heads until ye have made a great slaughter
among them, and bind them in bonds, and either give them a free
dismission afterwards or exact a ransom, until the war shall have laid
down its arms_.'  And in another place the Kuran says, according to the
holy and learned Imam, `_And as to those who fight in defence of God's
true religion, God will not suffer their works to perish; he will guide
them, and will dispose their heart aright; and he will lead them into
paradise, of which he hath told them_.'"

"There, Simba," said Isa, triumphantly, "what do you think now of slaves
and true believers?  Do you not think it right for us to take and
capture those who waylay us, and make them slaves for their perfidy and
savagery?"

"I think the same as before," answered Simba.  "I do not know the Kuran
so well as Abdullah, it is true, but I know that the same God who gave
you sense and feeling gave the savages of Urori some sense and feeling
as well; but I should like to know what my young master Selim's thoughts
are upon these subjects."

"To tell you the simple truth would be to tell you that I never thought
much of these things," answered Selim, in a mild tone.  "My father has
slaves, and my relations own a great number.  They are all well looked
after, and I have never heard that they were much astonished at their
condition.  I have seen slaves punished and killed; but they had done
wrong, and they deserved their punishment.  Neither my father nor my
relations ever gave me to suppose that by keeping slaves they were
committing wrong, and you surely cannot expect me, who am but a boy and
the son of my father, to say anything against my elders.  Whatever Amer
bin Osman does is right; at least, so I have heard men say, and shall I,
his son, judge him?"

"Bravely spoken," said the impetuous Khamis, "Bravely said, my brother
Selim; but, instead of speaking to Simba as thou hast done, thou
shouldst have taken thy kurbash (whip) to him, and taught the dog to
watch the doorstep of his master, and not be teaching the son of Amer."

"You are over hasty, Khamis," replied Selim, in a deprecating tone.
"Simba is good and true to me and to my father's household.  My father
loves him, and I love him, black though he be, as if he were my brother.
Simba and Moto are worth their weight in the yellow metal which our
women love to adorn their necks with; yet, did it depend on my voice, a
thousand times their weight of gold would not purchase them."

Both Simba and Moto were so affected at this that they both fell on
their knees, and crawled up to their young master to embrace his feet,
thus testifying the great love they bore him; but Selim would not permit
this, and said:

"Nay, my good Simba, and you, Moto, rise.  I think you men, not slaves,
and you need not kiss my feet to show me how much you love me.  You are
my friends, and I shall ever esteem you as such."

"My good young master," said Simba, in a voice broken with emotion, "we
are your servants, and we are proud of it.  Are we not, Moto?"

"Indeed, we are," said Moto.

"What Arab tribe can boast a lad of your years with so much beauty and
heart?  Your eyes, young master, are blacker than the richest, ripest
singwe (a species of wild plume) of Urundi, and as large as those of the
sportive kalulu (young antelope); and when they are covered with your
eyelids, we have often compared them while you were asleep, and Moto and
I watched you, to the lotus which hides its beauty at eve from the fell
touch of night.  And your flesh, though not white like the bloodless
pale children of the white races, is like the warmer colour of ivory,
and beautiful and clear as the polished ivory ornaments of my people in
Urundi: your limbs, clean and shapely, are firm and hard as ivory tusks.
You are like a young palm-tree in beauty and strength.  He is a happy
man who calls you son, and your mother laughs for joy in her sleep when
she dreams of you.  Your slaves are proud to call you master."

"Amen, and amen," responded Moto, while tears descended his cheeks.
"Simba has spoken nothing but the truth; he never utters lies.  Master
Selim knows what Simba and Moto say they mean.  Evil cannot approach him
while we are near, nor can danger lurk unseen.  Rocks shall not wound
his feet, neither shall thorns prick his tender skin.  If the journey is
long Simba is as strong as a camel, and Moto is fleet of foot as the
zebra, and enduring as the wild ass of Unyamwezi.  Moto has spoken."

"Eh, Khamis, and thou, lea, hear and understand," said Selim, smiling.
"Where is the Arab who does not love the Nedjid mare, which partakes of
his food, as the wife of his bosom?  But in Simba and Moto I have two
faithful friends.  I have a camel, a zebra, and an ass, and you tell me
to beat them, Khamis.  Fie, boy!"

"Boy, indeed!  I am older than thou, and taller and stronger.  Thou art
a child, or thou wouldst not believe the fulsome words of these lying
knaves.  I have seen the world more than thou hast, and I assure thee on
my head I never saw the black man yet who could keep his hands from
stealing and his evil tongue from lying.  I--Khamis, the son of Khamis,
the son of Abdullah--know whereof I am speaking."

"What a dear little child he is, to be sure!" laughed Isa.  "Is it
Selim, the son of Amer, whose eyes are like the singwe of Urundi, and
whose limbs are like ivory?  Eh, Khamis, my brother?  Is Selim, the son
of Amer, turned a girl, that his ears court such music?  And if thou art
of the complexion of ivory, what are we, I wonder--I, Isa, son of
Mohammed, and Khamis, son of Khamis?"

While Selim was blushing crimson from shame at the mocking words of Isa,
little Abdullah spoke up, and said, much to everybody's amusement except
Isa's:

"Why, Isa, dost thou mean to say that Selim is not good-looking?  I have
often heard my father, Sheikh Mohammed, say he wished I was as
good-looking as Selim the son of Amer, though he thought I was every bit
as good.  And, lea--now--don't be angry.  I--I don't think thee
good-looking at all.  Thou art almost as black as Simba, and--"

"Liar!" thundered Isa, directing a blow at Abdullah, which was happily
warded by Khamis, who, though ever-ready to lift the whip against stupid
slaves, was averse to see an Arab beaten.  Isa, however, darting behind
Khamis aimed another blow at Abdullah; but Abdullah, probably seeing
that he was very angry, and would strike a serious blow, took to his
heels running round the fire, chased by the infuriate Isa.  As Isa
passed near one side of the fire, Niani, the little negro boy called
Monkey, who had hitherto been very quiet, seeing a chance to assist
Abdullah, who had praised Selim, thrust his foot forward; and Isa, too
much occupied in watching the manoeuvres of Abdullah, struck his shins
against the obstacle, and came heavily to the ground.

A shout of laughter greeted his fall; but the amusement of Selim was
soon changed to real concern as he saw that Isa had quickly recovered
himself, and had sprung upon Niani, and catching hold of him by the
throat and legs, was carrying him to the great log-fire, to warm him, as
he said.

Niani struggled and screamed, but in vain.  Isa's ears were closed
against a little slave's cries, and he would probably have made good his
threat had not Selim, Khamis, and Mussoud, aided by Simba and Moto,
interfered, and cried out, "Enough, enough, son of Mohammed.  Be not
wrathful with a little slave."

As Arabs dislike to see scuffling, or at least always interfere in cases
of this kind, it is not to be wondered at Khamis taking the part of
Niani, or Simba and Moto exerting their manhood to prevent cruelty; but
Niani was not released scot-free; he received several energetic slaps
and kicks, which accelerated his departure to a safer distance.

This incident broke up the meeting.  Simba and Moto withdrew to their
mats on each side of their master Amer's tent.  Khamis, Isa, and Mussoud
retired to their respective parents' tents, and Selim entered the tent
of Amer bin Osman.

Sheikh Amer was seated on his mat in the tent, writing by the light of a
single tallow candle on a large broad sheet of stiff white paper; but as
Selim entered he put his papers by, and bending on his son an earnest
and melancholy look, said:

"My son, light of my soul and joy of my heart, come to me, and do thou
sit by me that I may feel thy cheery presence.  Dost thou know that my
soul feels heavy to-night, as if some great affliction was about to
visit me?"

"And what, my father," replied the boy, bending a loving look on him,
"couldst thou fear?  Art thou not surrounded by kind friends and
servants who love thee as their father?"

"Nay, my son, it is not fear that I feel, but a vague foreshadowing of
evil which none can feel save those who have much to lose.  On whose
head the evil will fall I know not, nor do I know from what direction
the evil may come; but that evil is nigh in some indistinct shape or
another my soul knows, and it is that which has cast this passing cloud
over it.  But let us speak of other subjects.  I have been occupied in
writing letters to Zanzibar to my friends, telling them of the new route
these wayward companions of ours have adopted, and giving directions
about the disposition of my property.  Thou knowest, Selim, my child,
how I have always loved thee and treated thee, for thou art my hope and
joy, and I may not hide it from thee.  Should accident happen to me it
will be well for me to warn thee now that thou hast an uncle from whom
may Allah guard thee.  He is a deep, designing man, though he is my
brother.  Should I die, thy uncle will endeavour to do thee harm, and it
is against him I wish to guard thee."

"But, father Amer, what harm can my uncle do me, and why should he wrong
me, who have never done him wrong in word, or thought, or deed?" asked
Selim, surprised at the tone of his father's voice and this revelation.

"Thou art but a child of tender years and but little aware of the amount
of wickedness in this world.  Thy uncle is an avaricious man, who would
rob thee of thy birthright could he do it, and I believe him to be bad
enough to injure thee in some covert way if it were possible.  My
property amounts to about fifty thousand dollars in slaves and land, and
if I die, this property, by right of thy birth as eldest son, is thine
wholly, and under no condition or restraint.  Wert thou and thy mother
to die it would become the property of my brother Bashid, who is a
cunning and unscrupulous man."

"Thou dost surprise me, my father; but thou art well, and in good hopes
of a long life.  I hope thou wilt live a thousand years; I am happy only
in being thy son," answered Selim.

"I know it, my son; and if ever a dutiful child made the years of his
father seem light, I have that child in thee, but it is well to be
provident for those whom we love.  For the rest, the will of God be
done.  There is another subject I wished to converse with thee upon, and
that is thy marriage.  Dost thou know Leilah?"

"What!  Leilah, the daughter of Khamis bin Abdullah?" asked Selim.

"The same," answered Amer.

"Surely, I know her.  Have we not played together when we were children,
and, now I bethink me, she is the loveliest girl at Zanzibar."

"It is well," said Amer.  "Leilah, the daughter of Khamis bin Abdullah
is wedded to thee, and the settlements are made between friend Khamis
and myself.  Should evil happen to me--which God forefend--on thy return
to Zanzibar, if thou art of age, seek thou Khamis or, in Khamis's
absence, his kinsmen, and claim thou thy wife according unto the custom
of thy tribe.  I have prepared this future for thee that thou mayst not,
like the degenerate Arabs at Zanzibar, seek a wife among strangers to
thy race and tribe, and bring disgrace upon the name of my father Osman.
Thy kinsmen are proud and belong to the pure Arab race, and they would
not think well of my memory if I had neglected to warn thee of thy duty
to me and the tribe of which Osman was so loved.  Bear thou my words in
thy mind, write them upon the tablets of thy heart, and obey.  Dost thou
promise?"

"As God liveth, and as thy soul liveth," responded Selim earnestly, "to
hear is to obey.  I shall cherish as a holy thing thy wish."

"Then do thou retire and rest.  These papers are to be committed to the
care of two of my servants, who will return to Zanzibar to-morrow, when
they will, upon arrival, present them to the Imam.  God shield thee from
evil, and may He avert it always from all of us," said Amer, as he
resumed his work.

"Amen and amen!" replied Selim; and, after embracing his father, he
quietly retired to his carpet to sleep the sleep of the innocent and
young.

At early dawn next morning the horns of the several kirangozis, or
guides, of the respective caravans blew loud and cheerily, calling on
all to prepare for the march.

Before an hour had elapsed, the tents had been struck and folded, and
each carrier, bearing his burden of cloth or beads (which were to be
used for barter for ivory with the tribes in the far interior, or were,
in the meanwhile, to purchase food as the caravan journeyed) or bearing
the beds, and carpets, and rugs, cooking utensils, and despatch-boxes,
was following his leaders as he stepped out briskly for the march.

The Arab chiefs remained behind to bring up the rear, and then, giving
their rifles in charge to their gun-bearers or favourite slaves,
followed on the road their caravans had taken.

The country before them broke out into knolls and tall cone-like hills,
whose slopes were covered with here and there patches of dense jungle,
or nourished young forests whose umbrage formed a most grateful shade
during the heat of day.

Soon they had passed the healthy, breezy hills which are but offshoots
of the Uruguru range, and the land now eloped before them into the low,
flat basin of the Wami river, which during the rainy season becomes one
great swamp.

But the season, at the time our travellers passed over the Makata
Plain--as the basin is called--was soon after the effects of the violent
monsoon had disappeared, in July, when the land presents an unusually
bleached appearance; the grass is crispy, ripe, and extremely dry, the
ground is seamed with ugly rents and gape, and the rivers, Little Makata
and Mbengerenga, are but little better than small rivulets.  The
caravans were therefore enabled to cross the breadth of the Makata Plain
within two days, and arrived at Mbumi in Usagara on the evening of the
second day.

From Mbumi, in the same order as before, avoiding the Mukondokwa Yalley,
the steep passes of Bubeho, and the desolate, forlorn-looking plains of
Ugogo, the lengthy file of men--carriers, soldiers, and slaves--skirted
the eastern end of the Mukondokwa range, and on the third day from
Simbamwenni, arrived in a country which differed materially in aspect
from that which they had just left.  Mountains of a loftier altitude, in
peak upon peak, in tier upon tier, range upon range, met the eye
everywhere.  Green trees covered their slopes in an apparently endless
expanse of vegetation.  The sycamore, the tamarind, the beautiful mimosa
and kolqual vied with each other in height and beauty, while a thousand
other trees, shrubs, plants, and flowers aided to give verdancy and
freshness to the scene.

Down the hard, steep, rocky beds of granite and sandstone, with here and
there basalt and porphyry, flint, and quartz, foamed the sparkling
streams, which, when encountered on an African journey, give zest to the
travel and add something to the pleasures of memory.  A deep gaping
fissure in a high jutting wall of rock, through which bubbled the clear
water in volumes, or a great towering rock, with perpendicular walls, to
which clung, despite the apparent impossibility, ferns, and plants, and
moss, thick and velvety, or a conical hill, which ambitiously hid its
head in clouds, were scenes to be treasured up when the march should
hereafter become monotonous through excessive sameness of feature.

When they were in camp and had rested, our young friends went into
raptures over the bold beauty of mountain scenery, and Belim, and
Abdullah, and Mussoud were constantly heard uttering their exclamations
of admiration.  Selim especially, imbued as he was with the religious
faith of his father, was filled with a loftier feeling than that
youthful glow and exhilaration which his companions felt.  Had he the
power, he would like to have poured out his soul in fervid verse about
the grandeur, the indescribable beauty of Nature in her wildest and most
prolific mood.  But being as yet a boy, in whom the poetic instinct and
feeling is strong, he said to his father, one day, as the scenery was
unusually picturesque:

"Hast thou ever, my father, during these days of travel over these great
mountain-tops, thought that Palestine, the promised land, must be
something like this?  The land flowing with milk and honey.  Why, honey
is already plentiful here--we need but the cows to furnish milk; but if
milk means the richness of earth, the never-dying fertility of the soil,
look but once on this view now before us, and tell me, think you
Palestine can be richer than this?  Why, I feel--I do not exactly know
what--but it is something that if I have never been good or thankful to
Allah for his goodness to men, that I could be good for ever in future.
Do you understand this feeling, father Amer, or is it singular in me?"

"No, it is not singular, my dear son; but go on, tell me what is in thy
mind," replied Sheikh Amer, himself gazing on the revealed might of
Nature.

"I have also a feeling--as if I knew it for the first time--that this
earth is large, very large, that it is immense, without limit or
boundary, and that, consequently, God, who made all this, must be truly
great.  With the mountain air which I now inhale I seem to have imbibed
something purer, more subtle; yet that thing is capable of giving me
more expansion.  Why was it that, before coming to these mountains, I
never thought upon this subject?  Why was it that, before to-day, I had
no one thought of what might happen to-morrow, beyond what might happen
to our caravan, or beyond what I should see on the road?  Yet at this
moment, though my eyes seem to rest upon this view of loveliness, I know
I do not look upon its details or any particular object, but they seem
to drink it all with one look, and more, infinitely more, than is
contained in the area before me.  I seem to have eyes in my mind which
have a keener sight, more extended vision, greater power than the eyes
of my head, which can see so far, and no farther.  Yet to the sight of
the inner eyes, which see not, yet can see a thousand times vaster
scene, a thousand times greater prospect is revealed.  Hills, dales,
mountains, plains, valleys, forests, rivers, lakes, seas, all lovely,
and lovelier than what we see now, are comprehended within the scope of
my hidden and unseen eyes.  What is this new sight or feeling, my
father?  Canst thou tell me?"

"Ah, my child, it is simply the awakening of the hitherto latent mind;
or thought, exercised by but a faint experience, has been touched by
Nature, and begins to dawn," replied Amer.  "God had endowed thee with
the power of thought and of mind when he gave thee life.  It was
impossible that it could remain for ever hidden.  The hour that a child
begins to exercise his mind seeth him advanced a step nearer to manhood.
It will kindle and expand as thou growest in years, and in each day's
march thou wilt find fresh food for it.  It remains with God and thine
own nature to improve it with every breath of air thy lungs inhale.  By
diligently reading the Kuran and studying the precepts of Mohammed--
blessed be his name!--thou wilt so protect that thought pure from evil
as the tiny germ God implanted in thy breast at thy birth."

"But tell me, father, one thing--it is different from that which thou
hast been just telling me," asked Selim.  "Thou knowest Simba and Moto
are thy slaves.  Is it right, or is it not, to own slaves?"

"It is right, certainly, my son.  The Kuran sanctions it, and it has
been a custom from of old with our race to own slaves.  What has
prompted thee to such a question?  Is it another sign of the growth of
thy mind?" his father asked, with a smile.

"I know not," replied Selim, bending his head like one who hesitated to
speak his mind or was unable to comprehend the drift of his own thought.
"But thou knowest Simba and Moto are good; they love thyself and me
exceedingly, and as I know better than others that thou art just, and
lovest justice for its own sake, wouldst thou think it right to retain
thy slaves in bondage if they thought it injustice to them?"

"Ha! where is it possible thou couldst have gained such ideas, child?
But, never mind, since thy thoughts run so wild, I will answer thee,"
replied Amer.  "No, it is not right in me, or any living man, to retain
a slave in his possession, if the slave thinks it injustice, or if his
slavery galls him; neither is it fair that, after I have purchased him
with my money, I should give him his liberty for the mere asking; but
strict justice would demand that I set a price of money on his head, or
a term of labour equivalent to the money I paid for him; and, on the
payment of such money, or on the conclusion of such labour, that he be
for ever freed from bondage.  So says the Kuran, and such is our law,
and such has been my practice, and I would advise thee to do likewise
when the time shall come."

"I thank thee, my father; it is all clear to me now.  But stop! harken
to that sound!  What may that be?  Can it be the hyaena?"

"Yes, the hyaenas are out early this evening.  They are hungry; but,
Selim, my son, haste to tell Simba and Moto to set the tent on that flat
piece of ground near that great tree, and bid them to be sure to turn
the door of the tent to-day towards the east."

"Yes, my father;" and Selim, the fleet-footed youth, agile as a young
leopard, leaped over several bushes, as he ran to do his parent's
bidding.

The camp was situated on a limited terrace or shelf of ground rising
above a body of water which more resembled a long narrow lake than a
river.  Yet it was the river Lofu, or Rufu, as some call it, which in
the dry season, like many an African river, loses its current, and
becomes a series of long narrow pools, which in some places may be
compared to lakes for their length, according to the nature of the
ground wherein these depressions are found.  If the ground is rocky, or
of clayey mud, the water is retained, instead of being absorbed, in
which swarm multitudes of the _silurus_, or bearded mud-fish.  Wherever
mud-fish are abundant, crocodiles, the great fish-eating reptiles of the
African water, are sure to be found; and wherever crocodiles are found
one is almost sure to find the hippopotamus, the behemoth of Scripture;
not because crocodiles and hippopotami have any affinity with each
other, but because the soil, which retains the water during the hot days
of the droughty season, is almost sure to produce in the vicinity of the
pools abundance of rich grass and tall cane, the food of the
hippopotamus.

About two hours before sunset, soon after camping, Selim, accompanied by
Simba and two other men, named Baruti and Mombo, sallied out of the camp
with his faithful rifle on his shoulder to hunt for game.

The party travelled towards the upper end of the narrow lake the caravan
had camped by.  Matete cane, spear, and tiger grass, in profusion, grew
near this end, and beyond lay a thin jungle, the borders of which
touched the water line.  It was to this jungle they directed their
steps, for Simba had judged that it was a promising place for such sport
as Selim desired.

When the party arrived in the jungle they found the place so
delightfully cool, that they could not resist the inclination to rest
awhile and cool themselves after the labour and toil of going through
the long grass.

Simba and Selim sought the deeper shade of a mammoth and far-spreading
tamarind tree, while Baruti sought a place about thirty yards from the
tamarind, and Mombo, fatigued with the long journey over the mountains
that day, reclined under a young mimosa near the water's edge.

The coolness of the retreat, the silence which prevailed, and the
weariness which had come over their tired frames soon induced sleep.

They had not been in this condition long, before the reader, had he or
she been there surveying the scene, might have heard the faintest sound
of a ripple on the water, and have seen a crocodile's head stealthily
rise above the surface, the eyes, cold and fixed, gazing over the
slightly protuberant nose, to the spot where Mombo lay.  A few minutes
the crocodile thus lay still as a heavy sappy log, more than
three-fourths buried in the water, but almost imperceptibly the heavy
body became buoyant, until the lengthy form, with great ridgy scales
marking the line of its spine, lay half uncovered.  Without a movement
of the long powerful tail, and with but the faintest motion of his
heavy, broad, short legs, he propelled himself towards the shore.

A minute he rested there, still as death.  One could not have sworn that
it was an animal, though one might have been sure, provided no one
suggested a cause for doubt.  He then lifted his long head, but with the
same cautious movement which always characterises this stealthy,
cowardly creature of the African deeps, then his enormously long body,
until he resembled a huge log, propped up by four short pins--the legs
appeared so out of proportion.  Anybody at first glance would have seen
that in the great, unwieldy form lay tremendous power.  The trunk of the
largest elephant that was ever born would not equal in size that long
tail, which seemed, on account of its length and weight, slightly bent
towards the ground at the tip.

Having again halted, he moved forward silently, with a slightly waddling
motion; and as he approached the sleeping form of Mombo, his movements
were as slow and cautious as those of a leopard before springing upon
its prey; but the monster made one hurried, convulsive movement forward,
the lower jaw was run under the sleeping man's leg, and the upper jaw
came down with a sound like a well-oiled and sound steel spring, and the
crocodile swung the limp, warm body around, as a man would swing a cat
by the tail.  But this swinging movement proved to be poor Mombo's
salvation, for he was thus swung against a strong young tree, to which
he now clung with the strong tenacity of a man who clings for life,
while he gave vent to the full power of his lungs in cries so alarming
and shrill that they were heard at the camp of the caravans two miles
off.  Selim, Simba, and Baruti realised the scene in an instant; they
saw the great reptile, horrible and hideous as a nightmare, tugging
violently at the leg of the unfortunate man, whose screams pierced their
ears, and whose arms almost cracked as he held on with such a fierce
grip to the strong young sapling, and they saw that had it not been for
its fortunate proximity to him they had never seen Mombo more.

Simba was the first to recover himself, for Selim and Baruti stood as
men transfixed.

"Now, master," said he, "your gun--quick! or he will run away.  Aim at
once; but be cool, or you will kill Mombo.  Aim just at his throat, as
you see his head lifted up.  There, son of Amer, you have slain the
brute!  Ah! he is trying to escape.  Hyah! on, Baruti; your spear, man!
Run! come with me, and catch hold of his tall.  Two of us can hold him,
I think, or delay him at least until he dies.  There--take that, you
beast!" he shouted as he hurled his broad-bladed spear full through his
side, behind the fore leg, into his vitals, which stretched the monster
lifeless after one or two convulsive efforts.

Baruti, encouraged by Simba's powerful voice, which roared through the
wood in accents so cheery, had at first boldly dashed at the crocodile's
tail; but receiving a tremendous thwack on his side from the mighty
tail, which was swung about as though it were a well-handled flail--
which almost fractured every rib in his body--now stood by, looking
fearfully punished and sore.

When the monster had ceased to breathe, Selim and Simba, attracted by
the moans of Mombo, hastened to him to examine his condition.

"Poor fellow!" said Selim.  "See Simba, the leg is stripped to the bone.
What a savage reptile the crocodile is!  Do you think Mombo will live,
Simba?  For after this I should not like to see him die; it would seem
as if my big bullet had done no good after all."

"He will live, Inshallah!  Inshallah!  (Please God!  Please God!)  Mombo
will live to tell the story to his children on the island when he is an
old man and past work.  You know the hakim (doctor) with us is wise and
learned, and, Inshallah!  Mombo, after a few days, will be all right.
Sho!  Mombo die?  No, master; Mombo will live to laugh at this.  But we
must carry him to the camp that the hakim may dress his wounds.  Come,
Baruti, man--cease your cries.  Take your hatchet and cut young straight
trees down while I prepare some rope whereon Mombo may be carried.  You,
young master, may cut a piece of the crocodile's tail to show your
father Amer, who will be proud of what you have done."

They all three set to work.  Baruti cut two young trees, which he
barked.  Simba made use of the bark as rope, and in a short time a
comfortable bed had been made, on which Mombo was carefully lifted, and,
in a few moments, Selim having secured his trophy, the three friends set
out briskly on their return to camp.

Young Selim, who had "bagged" his first game, was highly gratified by
the praise bestowed on him by his father and his father's people, and
the braggart Isa was the only one of his boy-fellows who refused to say
a kind word in commendation of the feat.  Noble young Khamis, on the
other hand, did not stint his appreciation of it, and youthful Abdullah
and Mussoud hung about Selim as though he were some suddenly-discovered
hero.  The chieftain Khamis bin Abdullah, the noble leader of the united
caravans, took from his waist a gold-hafted curved dagger as a token of
his esteem, and Sheikh Mohammed presented him with a crimson silk sash
to put around his waist.  Sultan bin Ali, the patriarch of the
expedition, who was the very type of a venerable Arab chief, gave him
out of his treasure a red fez-cap with a golden tassel, and Sheikh
Mussoud gave him a Muscat turban of a rich cherry pattern, so that
Selim, before night, was arrayed in costly garments.

The slaves among themselves did Selim honour by praising him around the
camp-fires, and Halimah, the black woman-cook of Amer bin Osman, as she
turned her ugali (porridge), declared, by this and by that, that Selim
was the noblest, sweetest lad she had ever seen.

Selim would have slept that night the sleep of those who do praiseworthy
actions, had he not been awakened at midnight by a loud shriek from one
of his father's slaves, whose right cheek was completely ripped off by a
prowling hyaena.  The disturbance in the dead hour of night alarmed some
of the younger slaves, but they were calmed by the wise and experienced
Moto, who said sententiously that "the hyaena is a cowardly brute, who
would run away at the sight of a child in the daytime, and who could
only fight sleeping or dead men."

After these incidents, which occurred at the stagnant pools of the Lofu,
the caravans continued, their march uninterruptedly until they arrived
among the Wahehe, a tribe of predatory people who live south of the
great arid plain country of Ugogo.

The first night, before going to sleep after their arrival in Uhehe, the
kirangozi of Khamis bin Abdullah rose up at the command of his master--
and spoke out in a loud voice to the united caravans:

"Words, words, words!  Listen, ye children of the Arabs, sons of the
great chiefs, Khamis bin Abdullah, Amer bin Osman, Sultan bin Ali, the
Sheikhs Mussoud, Abdullah, Bashid, Hamdan, Thani, and Nasib!  Open your
ears, ye people of Zanzibar!  Ye are among the Wahehe.  Ye are in the
land of thieves, and night-prowlers.  Be wary and alert, my friends;
sleep with one eye open; let not your hands forget your guns.  When ye
meet the prowling Wahehe in your camps at night, shoot and kill all
such.  Do ye hear?"

"We do," was answered by six hundred voices.

"Do ye understand?" he again asked.

"Yes," they all replied.

"It is well; the kirangozi Kingaru, slave of Khamis bin Abdullah, has
spoken."

For two days they travelled through Uhehe without molestation, but on
the evening of the third day Sheikh Amer commanded his tent-pitchers to
set his tent close against the hedge of brush and thorn (which always
surrounds a camp in Africa when it is procurable), for the convenience
of his household, the members of which could thus by a slight gap pass
in and out freely to the pool to get water or to procure wood for the
fire, without being compelled to traverse the length of the camp.

A couple of hours before dawn, when people sleep heaviest, and their
slumbers are supposed to be soundest, Simba, who always slept lightly at
night, because of the responsible cares which a just and faithful
conscience ever imposed on him, was awakened by the crushing of a twig.
He never stirred, but continued his regular breathing as before, and
compelled his ears to do their duty to the utmost.  After a little time
his quickened hearing was rewarded by the sound of a human foot pressing
softly, yet heavily, the ground near him.  The gap, left imprudently
open, which fronted the tent-door of Amer bin Osman, was that to which
his cautious gaze was directed.  By the light of the stars, which shine
in Africa with unusual light, he saw the very faintest resemblance to a
human figure, which held in one hand something darker than its own body,
yet not so long, and in the other a long staff, at one end of which
there was a cold glimmer of faint light, or reflection of light, which
he supposed at once, and rightly, to be a spear.  That human figure was
that of an intruder.  A friend had never stood so long in that gap, or
advanced so stealthily.  A wild beast would have advanced with as much
circumspection and caution--why not a human enemy?  The instincts of
both man and beast are the same in the silence of night, when about to
act hostilely.

Simba still lay seemingly unconscious of duty--unconscious of the danger
which menaced the occupants of his master's tent; but could that human
enemy have seen through the gloomy mist of night those large, watchful
eyes of the recumbent form stretched almost within reach of him, he had
surely hesitated before advancing another step towards that open
tent-door.

All seemed still, and the figure bent down and moved in a crawling
posture towards the open door, wherein lay Selim and his father,
unconscious of the dangerous presence of an armed intruder.  But Simba's
eyes were not idle, though silent.  What thing on earth does its work so
quietly as the eye?  They followed the crawling form unwinkingly, until
it had half entered the open door; then Simba raised his head, finally
his body, upright to its full gigantic height.  The feet of the daring
intruder were within tempting reach of those long muscular arms if he
but stooped, and Simba knew it.  He stood up one short second or so, as
if he summoned threefold strength with the lungful of air he but halted
to inhale; then quickly stooping, he caught hold of the robber's feet,
and giving utterance to a loud triumphant cry, swung him two or three
times around his head, and dashed his head against the great flat stone
on which, a few hours before, the woman-cook, Halimah, had ground her
master's corn, and then tossed him lifeless over the hedge of the camp
as carrion!!

In an instant, as it were, the camp was awake, and fires burned brightly
everywhere.  The cause of the disturbance was soon made known all over
the camp, and curious men came rushing by the score to the scene of the
tragedy, to gaze upon the victim of his own savage lust for plunder or
murder.  Amer bin Osman, when he heard the explanation of Simba, took a
torch, and followed by Selim and others, went to gaze upon the dead man.
One look satisfied him that the man was a Mhehe, who had armed himself
with a long oval-shaped shield, broad-bladed spear, and battle-axe, for
a desperate enterprise.

When Amer raised his head, he seemed to be studying what the intention
of the man might have been, and he retraced his steps backwards to the
tent-door, and looked in, as if to consider what might have been done,
or stolen, had he succeeded in his attempt.  Then, looking at Selim's
pale face, who had also arrived at the same opinion as his father, a
grateful look stole over his features; he said to his son with a smile:

"Well, boy, thou hast to thank Simba for thy safety, for thy head lay
uncomfortably near that door; and hadst thou awakened, thy life had not
been worth much.  What hast thou to say to Simba, Selim?"

The boy turned his large bright eyes upon Simba's face, which glowed
with honest pride and affection, and then they measured the giant limbs,
the tremendous arms, and the broad heaving chest, and to his father's
question propounded another, which rather startled his father:

"Simba is a great strong man, but whom dost thou value more, father--thy
son Selim or thy slave Simba?"

"Why, son of mine, what a question!  Art thou not the child of my loins,
and of my dear Amina? and have I ever failed in my love for thee?"

"Never--no, never, dear father; but Simba has given thy son back again
to thee, else had I been dead.  Has Simba paid thee full valuation for
the purchase-money thou didst pay for him when he was a child?"

"Simba is good; but had I lost thee, I had surely lost all.  Thou hast
said it, my child.  Simba is free, and is no longer a slave of Amer bin
Osman."

"Simba!" cried Selim, "good Simba, do you hear the words of my father?
You are a man, and no longer a slave!"

Simba at first did not seem to comprehend the full meaning of the words
addressed to him, but as the words of the boy whose life he had saved
were repeated to him, a proud smile lit his features, and as he tossed
his head back, while his nostrils dilated, he said:

"A slave!  It is an ugly word; but Simba, of the Wahuma, of Urundi, was
in his own mind never a slave, so the word troubled him.  Simba might
long ago have been free, had he wished it, but he loved his master,
Amer, and Sheikh Amer's son; so he remained their servant, and while
being their servant he never forgot that he was a man.  Simba is
grateful to Amer and his son Selim, and while he remembers that he is
free, Simba will be happy only in remembering also that he is their
servant;" saying which, he bent his knee and kissed the right hand of
father and son.

"Ah, Simba, my friend!" cried Selim, "I shall call thee friend in
future, and thou shalt say `thou' to me, and I `thou' to thee, as my
father and I say to each other; and if thou art grateful, Selim has also
a heart, and can feel."

"Then, boys," said Amer, breaking in upon this interchange of
compliments, "to bed, and sleep your sleep out.  Let a watch be kept,
lest the Wahehe robbers come to avenge the dead dog of a thief, and upon
the first appearance of anything suspicious, sound the alarm instantly."

The night passed without further alarm or disturbance of any kind, and
at the usual hour of the morning the signal horns aroused the camp for
the fatigue of another day's march.

As the caravans were about leaving their camp, a group of Wahehe
strolled up carelessly, similarly armed to the one who had met his fate
so suddenly at the hands of Simba.  As they were advancing towards the
central gate of the camp, their quick eyes caught sight of the dead body
of their comrade, and hastening towards it, they regarded it with wonder
depicted on their faces.  On stooping down to examine the head, they
found it elongated into a hideous, formless shape, and not being able to
contain their surprise, they questioned as to why and how it all came
about.

Said Moto, who had keenly noted these signs, and had approached the
group to answer their expected queries, "Ah, my brothers! some men are
bad, very bad, and fools.  What could have possessed this man to try and
rob a caravan of 600 armed souls, I cannot say, unless it was the evil
spirit.  Do you see that big man with the great battle-axe in his belt,
and a long ivory horn slung to his shoulder?  That big man caught this
thief in the tent of Amer bin Osman: he seized him by the feet, and
whirling him around, he brought his head down flat on that stone."

"Eyah! eyah!" said the astonished Wahehe.  "He must be the evil spirit
himself; but all thieves should die, and if, as you say, this man was
caught at night in the camp, he has earned his death."

"Say you so, my brothers?" said Moto; "then it is well.  But listen to
me; if the wind came to steal in our camp that big man would know it.
He seems never to sleep, never to rest; he could smell a Mhehe at night
afar off."

"Eyah, eyah, ey-eyah!!  He must be the evil spirit."  Saying which they
departed, muttering to themselves and looking very much crestfallen.

The caravans journeyed on for several days after the incidents just
related without meeting anything worthy of note in these pages.  The
western part of Uhehe is very uninteresting; one march follows another
through the same _triste_ scenery.  A long reach of country to the right
and the left, covered with short ripe grass, dotted with a ragged clump
of thorn-bush here and there, or a solitary baobab stem, unbending in
its vast girth and thickness of twigs, alone met the wearied eyes of the
travellers.  The Wahehe, the southern Wagogo, mixed with a stray Wakimbu
family or two, permitted such a large caravan to pass without
molestation, so that the march was getting exceedingly monotonous.  But
when, after crossing an unusually arid plain of some extent, they saw
before them a long line of white rocky bluffs, the people began to
whisper among themselves that "beyond those bluffs lay the lands of the
populous Warori, who are mostly shepherds, and will not, if in the mood
to quarrel, regard our numbers or strength."

It was the tenth week of the departure of the Arabs from Simbamwenni
when the above-mentioned bluffs were crossed, and the pastoral country
of the Warori extended far before them in a succession of wooded
hollows, bare uplands, and jungle-covered plains.

Those who knew Moto, the slave of Amer bin Osman, were startled at the
remarkable physical resemblance he bore to the majority of the shepherds
and villagers, who grouped themselves along the road to wonder at the
wealth of the Arab caravans, and to make their rustic comments upon what
they did not understand.

The Warori, however, did not seem disposed to dispute their advance, but
stood contentedly gazing at the strange sight of some of the whiter
faces among the Arabs.  For instance, Khamis bin Abdullah and his son
Khamis, Amer bin Osman and his son Selim, and the boys Abdullah and
Mussoud.  This paleness of complexion became often a matter of eager
speculation, and as those who, fortunately or unfortunately, possessed
white faces passed by, the straining of eyes and the narrow scrutiny
were amusing to witness, and afforded Selim more especially some
discomfort at first.  The shepherds and villagers furthermore willingly
bartered whatever the Arabs wished for red beads and American domestic.
Milk, butter, and eggs were plentiful, which, to the Arab boys, were
rare treats after the dry heat and desolate aspect of Western Uhehe.
The arms which these shepherds carried were far more formidable than
anything they had hitherto seen in the hands of savages.  Their bows
were longer and heavier, and their arrows longer and more cruelly
barbed, and besides a lengthy broad-bladed spear, which resembled a
broad Roman sword fastened to a staff, and half a dozen lighter spears--
assegais--and a battle-axe, they carried a knife which might be likened
to a broadsword for length and breadth.

On the sixth day after their entrance into Urori, the caravans came
within sight of a large palisaded village called Kwikuru, or the
capital.  It contained about eight hundred huts, strongly protected by a
lofty fence of hard red wood.  This Tillage was protected on one side by
a stream of considerable magnitude.  On the other side of the village
was a grove of fine trees situated from it a distance of about 1000
yards.  Into this grove the Arabs marched to encamp.

Kwikuru, or the capital, was a good distinction awarded to the village,
or town rather, for its size and importance; for, next to Simbamwenni,
it was the most populous place they had found in Africa.  Cattle grazed
by the thousand a little distance off from the grove, attended by
watchful and well-armed herdsmen.  The lowing of the cows, and the
bleating of the sheep and goats, and the braying of a few large donkeys,
were welcome sounds to travellers, to whom such sights in Africa were
rare.  And the long extent of well-tilled ground, in which grew the
Indian corn, the manioc, the _holcus sorghum_, the sugar-cane, and
plantain, with abundance of vegetables and melons, enhanced the pleasure
the Arabs' people naturally felt, unaccustomed as they were, since
leaving Zanzibar, to feast their eyes upon such scenes.

Late in the afternoon, after the Arab chiefs had, with commendable
caution, constructed a dense hedge of bush and branches around their
camp, they called a meeting to discuss the measures they should take to
open friendly communication with the formidable citizens of Kwikuru.

When they were all assembled, the leader Khamis said to them:

"My friends, we are at last in Urori, where I suspect we shall have to
conduct ourselves differently from what we have been accustomed to.  I
mean that I fear that tribute may be exacted by the King, and I have
called you here to advise prudence, and to ask you to use tact in all
your dealings with them.  We may have to pay a heavy tribute, for this
King is evidently powerful and rich, and a mean present of cloth I
expect he will refuse."

"Khamis," said Sultan bin Ali, "thou hast done well to advise us upon
this beforehand.  What amount of cloth dost thou think will suffice this
man's greed?  We may be liberal, for we can afford it, but we have not
one doti (four yards) of cloth too much."

The chief answered, "I do not know as yet what amount will suffice, but
let us begin prudently, for in that course is wisdom.  I suggest that
six doti be made up; two doti (eight yards) of Joho cloth for the King,
two doti of light checks for his wife, one doti of Muscat check with the
red and yellow borders for his eldest son, and one doti of good Kaniki
(blue cotton) for the principal elder."

"That idea seems excellent to me," said Sultan bin Ali, "and Amer, thou
hast a cunning slave called Moto, a Mrori, I believe; let him and
another good man take the cloths to the King with words of friendship
from us, that we may pass through the country in tranquillity and peace
with all men."

This advice meeting the approbation of all the chiefs, Moto, accompanied
by the kirangozi of Khamis bin Abdullah, who was learned in all the
languages of Eastern Central Africa, sallied out of the camp in the
direction of Kwikuru, while the Arabs sat in the tent of their leader,
hospitably entertained with the beet that the larder could furnish.

An hour had barely elapsed before Moto and the kirangozi, or guide,
returned to the camp; and going directly to the principal tent, kneeled
before the door and said to the Arabs:

"Salaam Aleikum!"  (Peace be unto you.)  To which greeting the Arabs
responded with one voice:

"Aleikum Salaam!"  (And unto you be peace.)

"Well, Moto, speak," said Khamis.  "Why, you have brought the present
back!  You have been unsuccessful?"

"These are the King's words, which he commanded me to tell you: `Why
have you come to my country?  Know you not that there is enmity between
the Warori and the children of the Arabs?  Mostana, the great chief whom
the cruel traders slew, was my friend; and can I forget his death with
such a contemptible present as that which you have brought to me?  Go
slaves, and tell your masters that, unless they send me fifty bales of
cloth, and fifty guns, with twenty barrels of gunpowder, they must
return the way they came.'  These, my masters, are the words which
Olimali bade us tell you."

A deep silence followed this declaration of the King of Kwikuru, and the
Arabs instinctively looked at one another in surprise and dismay.

Sheikh Mohammed, the black-browed Arab, resolute and determined as he
always was, first broke the silence with the question, directed to Moto:

"Have you regarded well this village of Olimali?"

"I have, master," said Moto.

"Is it strong?  Speak, for I respect your opinion, Moto."

"It is strong, master, much too strong for us to attack it with our
people.  If the Warori come out of their village they could not take
this camp while our men remained within."

"That is well-spoken, Moto," replied Mohammed; and turning to Sheikh
Khamis, he asked:

"Hast thou decided what to do, son of Abdullah?"

"Mashallah! my friend, can I decide upon so important a subject as
giving away thy property to this greedy infidel?  May his soul perish in
Al Hotamah!  Does he think that cloth, and guns, and powder grow in the
jungles of Africa?  But this is serious, and we must set on our heads
the caps of wisdom and understanding to consider the determination of
Olimali.  Speak, friends, Arabs of Muscat and chiefs of Zanzibar, my
ears are open."

Out spoke Amer bin Osman: "Do you think, Moto, if we offered half he
would accept?"

"No, master, I do not.  I think Olimali desires war and not peace, and
if he thought you would send fifty bales of cloth, he would ask for
fifty more.  I heard the people talk, as I left the King's presence, of
war.  My ears are very sharp."

"War!" shouted Mohammed, "then war he shall have, and I shall have the
pleasure to put light through his body with my good Shiraz sword;" and
Sheikh Mohammed looked as fierce as his threat.

"Peace, Mohammed, my friend," said Sultan bin Ali.  "It is not everyone
who trusteth in his sword flourisheth.  I think there are more ways of
tiding over this evil hour than by war, even if we were doubly strong
with men and guns.  Let us act prudently in the hour of danger."

"Sultan bin Ali is right," said Sheikh Thani.  "Rather let us try all
pacific measures first, and let war be the last resource.  We have
slaves, and women, and little ones in the camp, besides much property.
We must remember this before we act hastily."

"Thani has spoken well, and with understanding; and I propose that we
send forty good cloths and forty ordinary cloths, besides an odd gun or
two, with half a keg of powder to Olimali by Moto and the kirangozi, who
will speak him fairly and with due respect," said the leader, Khamis.

"I do not go again," said Moto.  "What I have seen in the village, and
what my ears have heard are no light things, and I would ask permission
from my master to remain."

"Well, never mind, any man will do who has a smooth tongue and fair
speech," said Khamis.  "Let the kirangozi choose whom he will take, and
let him go with the cloth."

A man was readily found, who, ignorant of the danger, had no reason to
refuse to go upon the errand which the always bold Moto had refused.

But even as the guide and his companion were leaving the camp Moto saw
he had acted wisely, for the cattle were being driven towards the
village with far more expedition than the time of day warranted; but he
held his tongue, not wishing to alarm the camp unnecessarily.

He followed the movements of the kirangozi and his companion with
exceeding interest until they had arrived at the gate, where they were
halted; and after a short pause, he saw the two men returning towards
the camp.

Proceeding to the gate of the camp, he there awaited the arrival of the
kirangozi, and when he was near enough Moto quietly asked of him:

"Is it peace, or war?"

"War!"

He needed to hear no more, for he had been certain of it, and he went
directly to his friend Simba to communicate the news, who received it
with surprise.

"War, Moto?  Then our fears, my friend, have turned out true, and it is
because of the battle which thou wert in with Kisesa against Mostana,
eh?"

"Yes, Simba; and wouldst thou believe it?  I saw two or three fellows
eye me pretty hard, and it was for that I refused to go the second time;
for if they had known to a certainty that I was in that battle thou
wouldst never have seen Moto again, friend Simba."

During the greater part of that night the Arabs sat in council, debating
how to proceed; but not agreeing, they separated for the night, not,
however, without posting sentinels all around the camp under the charge
of Sheikh Thani.



CHAPTER FOUR.

KHAMIS'S ADDRESS TO THE ARABS--PROPOSALS FOR ATTACK ON KWIKURU--SIMBA
SPLITS THE GATE FROM TOP TO BOTTOM--THE WARORI CHIEF SHOT--DEATH OF
KHAMIS BIN ABDULLAH--AMER BIN OSMAN PIERCED BY AN ARROW--SELIM MADE
PRISONER--SELIM BRUTALLY LASHED BY TIFUM--THE THREE ARAB BOYS BROUGHT
BEFORE FERODIA--SELIM REFUSES TO DRINK OR DANCE--ABDULLAH REFUSES TO BE
CALLED A SLAVE--FLIGHT OF SULTAN BIN ALI--DIVISION OF THE SPOILS--THE
MAGIC DRINK: MUTILATION OF THE DEAD--THE CHANT OF THE MAGIC DOCTORS.

The young people who have been fortunate in buying this book may not
have experience of the battle-field, and therefore may not know what the
feelings and thoughts of those who are about to stake their lives
against the lives of others for the victory in the bloody contest are.
The feeling is the same in all men, whether white or black, though some
natures are so constituted that they are enabled to hide feelings which
some say partake largely of fear.  But I deny that such indicate fear,
though, left to themselves, they might create fear.  In the Arab camp,
as report and rumour had been busy at the camp-fires, a feeling of dread
predominated in all minds, but had there been one chief of resolution,
with power unlimited over all, a few words of cheer had done wonders in
improving the tone of their minds.

Khamis bin Abdullah was a brave man; no man might deny that; but his
bravery was undisciplined; it was uncultivated; it was the bravery of a
wild but noble heart.  He had not seen so many battle-fields that he
could afford to smile at the declaration of Olimali; he had not the
experience of war which would have satisfied him that, however large and
numerous the force of Olimali was, he had resources enough in himself to
defeat them all.  Khamis bin Abdullah could die himself, but he could
not bring others to look upon death with calmness and courage.  So that,
despite the high-spirited courage of his race, which he eminently
possessed, the truth must be told without any disparagement to himself;
a feeling of depression, some undefined dread, remained settled in his
breast, though his outer aspect, his mien, or behaviour, did not betray
this.

As it was with Khamis, so was it with the other chiefs.  Amer bin Osman
was as brave as a lion, but he could not depend upon his people as he
could depend upon himself personally, and this thought created the
dread, and doubt, and apprehension of something undefinable, which all
the chiefs at this critical moment felt.

Sheikh Mohammed, Sultan bin Ali, and the rest were as brave as any
living men.  Had there been only one hundred Arabs, a doubtful issue of
the war would never have been entertained; but there were only twelve
Arabs and six hundred black men; and how long would the black men stand
together?

At sunrise, another meeting was called, and the Arab chiefs, with their
sons, hastened to the council.

Khamis, the leader, when all had been seated, said:

"My friends, the last words of Olimali, according to my kirangozi, were
that the Arabs need not try to tempt him to forego his revenge, but that
we must prepare for war.  We can easily prepare for war, for we are
always ready; but we must endeavour to sustain each other by friendly
counsel and cheering words; for in a fatal issue to us of this war we
know what the fate of us true believers will be.  We can hold out in our
camp against four times the number that Olimali may bring against us.
We are weak, however, in this country, because we have no friends to
supply us with food, and it is not a little that will suffice to feed
six hundred souls.  The men had no food yesterday, they have none
to-day; they cannot hold out long in the camp against hunger.  In this
case what do you propose?"

Sultan bin Ali spoke and said, "Our answer has been given to us, and
there is no longer any doubt of what we have to do.  We must fight, but
how fight is the question.  Shall we await here in the camp the coming
of the infidel savages, or shall we sally out of the camp and attack
them in their boma (palisade)?"

Sheikh Mohammed answered, "We cannot remain in the camp to starve and
eat each other; we must go out and get cattle, while a few of us stop
inside here to strengthen the camp with branches.  I would suggest also
that a trench be dug all around the camp, and the earth thrown against
the hedge as a parapet.  Wallahi!  I have seen such things done in
Unyanyembe, and the enemy beaten."

"Mohammed's words are well spoken," said Amer bin Osman.  "I would
advise eleven of us sally out with our men, and one Arab remain with one
hundred men, who will stir themselves to strengthen the defences with
our cloth bales and baggage; and if we have to fall back, we shall find
a strong place ready for us.  We can harry those infidels; though they
may be hidden behind triple rows of palisades, some of our bullets will
reach them.  Thanks to Allah! we have enough ammunition with us."

"Very good indeed," said Sheikh Thani, a wiry, cautious old man, who had
had much experience in Africa; "but supposing we are beaten in our
attack upon the palisades of Kwikuru, we shall not be any better off
than we were before, but worse; our men will get disheartened, and
starvation will stare us in the face.  I propose that five hundred men,
divided into two parties, make for the gates as quickly as possible, and
break open everything with all the speed we can.  It is only in this way
that we can succeed."

"The oldest among ye have spoken," said the leader Khamis, "and ye have
spoken well.  But I have been in Urori before, and know the customs of
the Warori.  If we succeed in taking this village of Kwikuru, we cannot
hope to be permitted to march through this country any more; but as soon
as we take it we must strike along the road to Unyanyembe.  It is
useless for me to tell ye that I advised ye at first not to take the
Urori road.  I shall not quarrel with ye about that now, but will try to
do my best for our general safety.  If we succeed in destroying Olimali
and his people, we must begin our march north to Unyanyembe to-night,
for in two days the fugitives will carry the news from one end of the
country to another."

"Excellently spoken, brave Khamis," said Amer bin Osman.  "Thou hast a
wise head, and art a worthy leader.  Do thou, with thy men and other
chiefs, attack one gate, and I, with my men and other chiefs, will
attack the other gate, and whosoever takes a gate first, let him blow on
his horn once.  I advise now that whatsoever we may have we shall eat,
and that after we break our fast we sally out."

"Praised be Allah for his goodness!  Let us eat; then fight!" all
shouted.

In half an hour breakfast had been despatched, and every chief sallied
out with his men under his respective flag, except Sultan bin Ali, who
was left with one hundred men to prepare the camp for defence in case of
failure.

Simba and Moto had also had their little council together; and as they
marched by the side of Amer bin Osman, various signs might have been
seen by the observer to pass between them, accompanied by many ominous
shakings of the head.

A deep silence prevailed near the village; not a soul was seen, not a
dog was heard to bark; but the sun shone as usual with its summer heat,
and the sky was perfectly cloudless and beautiful in its azure purity.

But little did the approaching Arabs and their followers heed the beauty
of the sky, the brilliancy of the day, or the heat of the sun.

When they had advanced within 300 yards of the village, the force under
Amer bin Osman separated from that of Khamis bin Abdullah, and marched
at a respectful distance from the village towards the southern gate, and
when he had gained his position, at a preconcerted signal both forces
began their firing, advancing rapidly as they fired.

The village stirred not; not a sign of life was visible for some time,
until the Arabs had approached within fifty yards; then clouds of arrows
were seen to issue from the village, and furious yells were heard, which
seemed to rend the sky.  Numbers of the Arab followers fell pierced to
the core by the arrows; but the animated shouts of their chiefs spurred
them on towards the palisade.

In a few moments, after repeated discharges of musketry, the Arabs
gained the outer defence of the village, and, intruding their guns
between the tall posts, were soon firing right in the faces of the
astonished but not dismayed people of Olimali.  But at this juncture, a
long blast on a deep-sounding horn was heard from the interior,
simultaneously with a shorter and shriller sound which proceeded from
the southern gate.  The shriller horn belonged to Amer bin Osman, and
was blown by Moto; but what did the bass horn from the interior of the
village mean?  But there was no time to lose in conjecture.

Amer bin Osman had advanced with resistless impetuosity towards the
southern gate, and the gigantic Simba had, with one blow of his heavy
axe, split the gate from top to bottom, and, giving it a strong push
with his foot, had sent it flying open, through which, accompanied by
his master Amer and Selim, who carried his rifle, he had bounded into
the interior, firing his musket with the utmost rapidity.

Amer's followers, animated by the valour of their master and the immense
strength of Simba, now became as brave as lions, and vied with each
other in noise and bravery.  Not being able to make their way rapidly
enough by the gate, which was thronged by the besiegers, they climbed
over the palisades like monkeys, and little Niani's agility might have
astonished his namesake.  Abdullah, Mussoud, and Isa were with their
parents, Sheikhs Mohammed and Hamdan, and they crept through the gate
much behind Selim and his father Amer, owing to the press of besiegers.

So quickly had Simba gained the gate and destroyed it, that all the
fugitives were not able to enter the inner inclosure which surrounded
the king's quarters, and a body of them, numbering about fifty, under
the leadership of the king's eldest son, now stood with their backs to
the palisades, resolutely confronting Simba and his companions, with
heavy spears in their hands.

Simba, at this time before a foe on whom he could exert the full power
of his arm, became transformed into the embodiment of a black Mars, the
god of war.  He was no longer the humble and obedient servant of Sheikh
Amer and the true friend of Selim.  He was more; he was their
irresistible leader.  In his eyes glowed the ardour of fierce battle;
the terrible savage spirit of the Warundi, hitherto constrained for
faithful, though menial, service, had burst its trammels, and he now
stood, with uplifted musket,--confessed--the bronze Achilles of the war.
His fierce eye caused the doomed fugitives to quail with cowardly
dread; and when aimed at him, the heavy spears of the Warori fell
harmless at his feet.  Giving vent to the hitherto latent passion of the
savage's soul in a loud bellowing cry, he sprang forward, and the
rapidity with which he dealt his blows with his clubbed musket awed even
the warrior soul of his Arab chief.  But not for long did Amer pause to
regard even the prowess of Simba.  Calling to his followers, he raised
his long two-edged sword, and darted at the enemy, plying the weapon
best known to him and his race with a power which elicited as much
admiration as Simba's strength of arm and dexterity of stroke had done.

Rendered desperate by the knowledge of their situation, the remaining
Warori, headed by their chief, made a rush towards their enemies and
used their heavy spears with frantic energy.  In front of the Warori
chief stood Selim, firing and loading his rifle with a coolness and
method which would have won applause from his father's people had the
combatants not been so busily engaged.  He was in the act of re-loading
when the desperate rush of the Warori was made, and their chief stood
with uplifted spear above him; but well was it for him that the watchful
eye of Moto was on him, else had our story been ended here, ere it is
hardly begun.  When it seemed that Selim could not have been saved, and
he stood expectant of the blow which would have ended his young life
there and then, he saw the chief's head fall back with a cruel jagged
wound in the temple, through which the bullet of Moto had sped home.

The Warori no longer resisted when they saw their chief fall, and
attempted to fly, but the force of Arabs was too numerous; they fell
dead to a man.

Khamis bin Abdullah had also been successful.  Cheered by the news which
the horn of Amer conveyed, he soon effected an entrance, and,
accompanied by his followers, he had entered the village, and almost
similar scenes awaited him, though not so sanguinary.

When they had succeeded in forcing the outer inclosure, they had still a
hard struggle before them to conquer the village; but they, no doubt,
would have done so had not a new enemy come upon the field.

Unknown to the Arabs, a few miles west of the village was stationed a
large body of Watuta, whose chief had been sent by Katalambula, brother
of the dead Mostana, to pay his respects to his brother's friends, and
to renew "assurances of his esteem and consideration" for them, as the
old letters used to say.

This body of Watuta was one thousand strong, and as soon as the Arab
caravans hove in sight, Olimali had despatched messengers to Ferodia,
the Watuta chief, telling him of his intentions, and bidding him hasten
to the neighbourhood to watch events, and to be ready for the signal, as
he intended to attack the Arab camp.  But the attack of the Arabs upon
his village had caused him to give the signal earlier than he had at
first anticipated, and the easy entrance of the Arabs into the outer
village had been partly effected through the connivance of this wily
chief, though in the loss of warriors and in the death of his eldest son
he had paid dearly for his treachery.

While the Arabs and their followers now devoted their attention to the
attack upon the inner inclosure, which was vigorously defended, the
major number of the Watuta had risen, in response to the deep-sounding
war-horn of the Warori, from among the corn-fields to the west of the
village and camp of the Arabs, and had hurried to the rescue.

They came upon the outer inclosure just as the Arabs commenced their
attack upon the inner palisade, and the first time the Arabs knew of
their presence was when they were first fired upon before and behind.

The followers of the Arabs, before so valiant, now became
panic-stricken, and they simultaneously made a rush for the gates,
while, the defiant yells of the savages completely drowned their cries;
but the cunning Watuta had closed the gates, or had so barricaded them
that egress was impossible.  They now saw nothing but death staring them
in the face--savages in front, savages behind; both parties defended by
palisades, while they stood exposed between, to be shot to death in
their tracks.  It was useless for the Arab leaders to attempt to
encourage them, for one after another of these brave men fell and died.
Khamis bin Abdullah fell, pierced by a dozen arrows, and his son, the
noble young Khamis--the proud-spirited young Arab--fell also across the
body of his father at the hands of the people whom he so much despised.
Mussoud, and Thani, and Amram died also bravely, and one after another
of their followers fell to rise no more, until those who were left threw
down their guns crying "Aman, aman!"  (Mercy, mercy!) upon seeing which
the Watuta and Warori desisted from further murder, to make slaves of
those who cried for quarter.

The force under Amer bin Osman, Sheikh Mohammed, and Hamdan, and the
other chiefs, fared as badly.  They were engaged in vigorously attacking
the inner defence in front of them, when they heard a loud gurgling
shriek issue from Sheikh Mohammed, who had been pierced in the nape of
the neck from an arrow behind, and on turning to see whence it came,
they were dismayed to find an enemy of another tribe behind them.  Moto,
on seeing them, shouted "The Watuta! the Watuta!  Olimali has betrayed
us into their hands."  Bimba, hearing the words of Moto, desisted from
further attack, and came to Amer bin Osman, counselling him to fly with
him, and handing him a shield to cover his body, which, from the dress
he wore, was a prominent mark.  Moto also held a couple of shields
before Selim, while Abdullah and Mussoud were ordered to do the same.

"Fly!" said the astonished Amer--"fly!  Ah, Simba, my friend, had we
wings, we might fly.  See you not the gate is closed?"

"The gate is closed, I know, great master, but Simba's arm is strong,
and I will force it open."

"No, Simba, I cannot fly to be butchered like a bullock outside.  I
shall meet my fate here.  Ha! do you hear that?  See! the savages are
within.  Khamis bin Abdullah is dead!  Save my boy Selim, for his
mother's sake!  Ho, my son, come to me!  One embrace before we part for
ever; but, my son, remember, I shall meet thee in Paradise!"

The father and son were united in a fervent embrace when Amer received
an arrow in the back from within the inner inclosure, which caused him
to fall, with his son in his arms, to the ground.  The arrow had been
driven by a strong hand, for the point projected in front and slightly
wounded Selim in the chest, the blood of father and son commingling in
one stream.

"Brave Simba and faithful Moto, where are ye?  Save my boy!" cried Amer,
looking up with glazed eyes at the two who bent over him, heart-stricken
with sorrow.  "Save my darling Selim!  Save him for the love I bore you!
Ah, Selim, my son, kiss thy mother for thy fa--Amina!--Sel--Ah!"--and
the great soul of Amer hastened upward to the Judgment Seat.

Simba and Moto, when they saw their master had breathed his last,
stretched his form out evenly, and, placing a cloth reverently over his
face, caught hold of Selim, and pressing the heart-broken boy to the
ground, close by the body of his father, said to him:

"Lie still, young master.  Nay, but you must.  Your father commanded us
to save you, and we will; but you must do what we advise you.  Think of
your mother, of many happy days yet in store for you.  Lie still as
death, and they will take you to Katalambula's village, and there you
will meet us.  Here, Abdullah!  Mussoud!  Isa! lie down here, alongside
of Selim.  What, all the chiefs dead already!  Wallahi! but this is a
sad day for the Arabs at Zanzibar!"

Having given these instructions to the Arab boys, which had been given
in much less time than we have taken to record them, Simba and Moto also
fell to the ground, but retaining their spears and shields in their
hands.

By this time the Watuta were within the village, crowing triumphantly
over their success; but Ferodia, the chief, after giving orders to bind
the captives, hastened away with nearly all his force to attack the
camp, which, under old Sultan bin Ali, held out still against the force
that had been detached to attack it.

While the few remaining Watuta were binding the captives, Simba and Moto
rose to their feet, and, using their spears right and left, soon cleared
a passage to the gate, before the astonished savages could recover their
senses.

Once outside the gate, Simba and Moto exerted their powers to the
utmost, and by their extraordinary speed soon left their pursuers far
behind.

Finding it useless to pursue the runaways, the Watuta began to examine
the wounded, and especially the Arabs, whom they surveyed with
astonishment.  The group formed by Amer bin Osman, Selim his son,
Abdullah, Mussoud, and Isa, attracted them most for their rich dresses.
They began to strip the bodies, but their astonishment was very great
when they perceived Isa sit up and fold his hands, asking for mercy.

Suspecting that others shammed death, they laid hold of Selim, and he
also sat up; then Abdullah and Mussoud, and they also sat up, looking
very sheepish, or like guilty people caught doing a mean action.  Angry
at the cheat, as they imagined, to have been practised upon them, they
snatched the cloth from the face of the dead body of Amer bin Osman; but
there was no mistaking him--he was dead.

Some were for slaying the boys at once; but the majority interposed, and
said in an inquiring tone, "Why slay boys, when you can make slaves of
them?" which shortly met general approbation.

Upon agreeing to this, they began to strip Isa, who shortly found
himself as naked as when he was born; but being extremely dark of
colour, there appeared nothing remarkable about him to attract any
special attention, and he was taken at once to the other captives, where
he wae firmly bound with strips of green bark.

They then laid violent hands on the others, on Selim, Abdullah, and
Mussoud; and despite their struggles and tears, they were soon denuded
of their finery and of their rich embroidered dress.  When they saw the
pale and clean colour of their bodies, the fierce Watuta gathered about
them, and wondered what strange beings these were who were all over
white, while they themselves were all black.  They looked at the wound
in Selim's chest, and on pressing it saw the red blood flow, which only
increased their astonishment; for how could people with white skins have
red blood?  But Selim's proud heart was rebelling against the indignity
of being stared at as a curious specimen of humanity, and he had
endeavoured to hide his blushes with his hands; but when they pulled
them down, and ordered him to show his tongue and teeth, and began to
feel the muscles of his arms and legs, then he could bear no more; and
flinging himself across the dead body of his father, he wept aloud, and
prayed to God that he might die.  Abdullah and Mussoud were as yet too
terrified to do more than cry silently; and they were accordingly led
away and bound without resistance.  They then took hold of Selim to tie
him, but he would not rise; and, angered at what they deemed his
stubbornness, two warriors brought the shafts of their spears full upon
his body, which had well-nigh broken the high courage of the young Arab;
for so great was the pain his pride suffered, and so indescribable were
his emotions, that he lay like one stunned.

While the boy lay fainting in the hot sun amid the dead and the blood,
the chief of the party in charge of the prisoners, casting his eyes
around, saw a whip of hippopotamus-hide in the waist-cloth of one of the
dead fundis, or overseers, of the Arabs.  This pliant and formidable
whip the chief--a man of stern and forbidding aspect, whose name was
Tifum (pronounced Tee-foom),--Tifum Byah, or the "Wicked Tifum," and who
was evidently a traveller--handled like a man who knew its uses, for he
made it fly about his arm in black circles, and made it hiss its menace
in the ears of the sorely-tried Selim.

"Proud Arab boy, arise!  Tifum Byah speaks but once, else you will feel
the pains of this whip, with which your cursed race torture the backs of
your slaves.  Many days lie between here and Ututa, and you will suffer
more than this ere you see our plains.  Arise!  No? then words are light
as air, and seldom go into the ears of the stubborn;" and as he spoke,
he lashed the prostrate youth with all his might, while the shrieks
which the pain elicited at last from him were responded to by the
mocking laughter of the brutal crowd, who pointed at the marks which the
whip made in high glee.

When Tifum fancied he had punished him enough, he ordered the boy to be
assisted up to his feet and bound; and when this was done Tifum lowered
his face to Selim's, and said, "Mark my words, child of the pale race!
You shall be Tifum's slave, to hoe his field and bring him wood and
water.  You shall nurse his children, be a herdsman of his cattle, and I
will break your heart, and make your ears open to his slightest breath.
Do you hear me, white face?"

So strong was the nauseous and hateful repugnance he felt towards this
man that Selim could not repress the expression of the loathing that
filled him, and almost unconsciously he spat in his face, which was
instantly retaliated by Tifum with a tremendous box on the ear, which
prostrated the boy once more across the dead body of Amer, where he lay
like one deprived of life, and not all the brutal lashing which the
almost lifeless form received evoked one groan from him; and it was in
this unconscious state that he was carried to where the other prisoners
stood huddled together like frightened sheep.

Then, directing his attention to the dead bodies of the Arabs, these
were ordered to be denuded of their clothing, and to be laid in a row
together, Sheikhs Khamis, Amer, Abdullah, Mussoud, Thani, Hamdan,
Mohammed, Amram, and young Khamis, and two others of lesser note--an
honourable company truly, even in death!

There seemed to have penetrated into the brain of the unconscious Selim
some idea of what was about to occur; for as soon as the dead had been
gathered together, he raised his head and sat up, with his eyes fixed
upon the dishonoured bodies of his father and his father's friends,
which were laid side by side.  He heeded not the taunts of the Warori
who had collected to menace and insult the prisoners, and feast their
curiosity with a sight of the noble dead; he heeded not the groans of
his boy-companions Isa, Abdullah, and Mussoud, nor the wailing of the
little slave Niani, who had been born on his father's estate, and who
was now crying his eyes out for the loss of his master Amer, and for the
more pitiable condition of his young master Selim; he heeded not the hot
sun which was blistering his back with its fierce heat, nor the scores
of flies which troubled his numerous wounds; he sat heedless of all,
with his great eyes fixed sadly on the remains of his father.

But night was approaching, and Ferodia had not yet returned.  Volleys of
musketry were heard incessantly all the afternoon; but as the sun set
the musketry ceased, and Ferodia returned with all but a few of his
people, when it was reported that the camp still held out, but that in
the morning all the fighting men of Olimali and Ferodia would take the
camp at a rush.  Until then he had left a few of his men to watch it,
lest they might abscond at night and take away the most part of the
great wealth which must be stored within the camp.  The losses of the
Watuta had been excessively heavy, as, when Ferodia darted out with his
victorious men, it was expected that the camp would have surrendered at
once; but it seems that Sultan bin Ali had so well fortified it that it
was almost impregnable, and that the Watuta had been punished severely.

The Warori of the village of Kwikuru had prepared food in a great
quantity for the warriors of Ferodia, who were too much engaged with
satisfying their ravenous hunger to display much interest in prisoners
whom they knew were secure; and when they had finished, they had so
gorged their stomachs with food and pombe, that they were too indolent
to stir.  But when Tifum, who was obsequious enough to Ferodia, though
cruel to his subordinates, had told the latter of the interesting
character of the white slaves, as he called the three Arab boys, and how
he had found them shamming death, he commanded him to bring them before
him and Olimali that they might be amused.

Tifum hastened out obedient to his chief's mandates, and, arriving
before the prisoners, searched for the Arab boys, who had already
forgotten their misery in a deep sleep.  Finding that they were in a too
uninteresting condition to amuse his master, he had several gourds full
of water brought to him, which he threw over them to cause them to cast
off the disposition to sleep.  This being done, he led them to the
presence of his chief.

Ferodia was holding forth to Olimali upon the prospects of the great
riches they should share with each other on the morrow when the young
prisoners were ushered before him.  By the dim light which the torches
gave out, they appeared much more pallid and strange in a land where
white people had never been seen; indeed, one might say they were rather
alarming; and it is no wonder that Ferodia started as the three were
pushed towards him.

But, quickly recovering himself, as he remembered who they were, he
burst out into a laugh, saying, "Ah, I remember, these are the Arab
youths thou didst speak to me of, Tifum.  This pombe, Olimali, is
strong.  I think it has made me light-headed,"--speaking these words
aside to the Mrori chief.

Then attentively fixing his gaze upon the prisoners, and looking them
all over, he said, half to himself, "What strange people these Arabs
are--all white!  Their hides are as white almost as the yolk of eggs but
how came the tallest one, I wonder, to have so many wounds?"

"Tifum," said Ferodia, aloud, "what ails this tallest lad?  These wounds
are not the wounds of arrows."

Tifum, bending his back almost double, said, "My chief, this boy is as
stubborn as an ass.  When I remembered the cruelties the people of this
boy have practised upon those of our colour, my blood boiled within me,
and when I told him to arise and be bound like the other prisoners, he
spat in my face, and I flogged him."

"Pah, pah, Tifum! he but acted as the Watuta boys would have done; but
lay not thine hand on him again.  I take him for my slave.  The boy is
half dead already.  Here," said he, addressing Selim, "drink this,"
handing him a good ladleful of sparkling pombe; "it will put life in thy
dull veins."

Selim shook his head and curled his lips in scorn, and looked at the
half-inebriated chief with contemptuous indifference.

The chief regarded him for a moment in silence, with the cup still
stretched, and then said, "Thou art right, Tifum; no Mtuta boy would
have had the courage to refuse a cup of pombe from a chief, nor regard
his future master with such a look.  He is a fool, and stubborn as an
ass, truly.  But I will tame him, or I will kill him.  How Kalulu, the
nephew of Katalambula, will wonder at him!  Why, he must be of the same
age as Kalulu; but Kalulu is taller and stronger; but I doubt if he has
this lad's high courage, though he is proud as if he were already king
of the Watuta.  Kalulu would act differently from this youth if he were
in his place; he would have taken the pombe and then killed me as soon
as he had the opportunity.  Ah!  Kalulu is a true Mtuta.  But here I am
with the cup still in my hand.  If this boy will not drink it, perhaps
the others will.  Here, you!" addressing himself to Abdullah, "drink,
young one.  No?  And you refuse it, too?  Well, you smallest one," to
Mussoud.  "Not even you?  Strange youths!  Dost thou speak their
language, Tifum?"

"A little, my chief."

"Ask this tallest one why will he not take this cup of pombe from the
hand of Ferodia, chief of the Watuta warriors."

"Boy," said Tifum, addressing Selim, "Ferodia, chief of the Watuta
warriors, demands to know why you will not accept the drink at his
hands."

"Then tell thy master," said Selim, without ever, turning his eyes
towards the man, "that I may not accept anything in kindness from his
hands, since he gives it to me while he believes me to be a slave.  Tell
him I am not his slave, and never shall do his bidding save under
constant compulsion."

When Tifum had communicated this to his chief, Ferodia burst into
another loud laugh; then said:

"This boy is verily proud; but, Tifum, ask him to dance."

"Dance!" said Selim, when the order was communicated to him--"Dance!
when my heart is breaking, when my father lies dead and dishonoured
before yonder gates!  Sooner would I die than obey!"

"Then tell him to sing," shouted Ferodia, laughing.

"Sing!" replied Selim.  "How long, oh Allah! shall I suffer these
tortures?  Sing!  As well might you ask the dead to sing!"

"What, will he do nothing, then?  I will wait until the marts of thy
rough hand have been cured, when I will make marks of my own on that
hide of his," said Ferodia, with a wrathful glance in his eye.  "But
where is that whip of thine, Tifum?"

"Here, my chief, at the door of the house," said he, rising to fetch it.

"Give it me."  And giving Selim a severe stroke with it across his
shoulders, he ordered him to stand back, and Tifum to cut the bonds of
the boys Abdullah and Mussoud.

Then, commanding the youths to be brought before him, he told Tifum to
tell Abdullah to dance and Mussoud to sing.

For awhile Abdullah hung down his head in confusion, not seeming to
understand or to realise that _he_, the son of Mohammed, was actually
required to dance by the slayer of his father; while Mussoud looked from
Abdullah to the chief Ferodia's face in quite a foolish way.

"Ask him, Tifum," said Abdullah, in a trembling voice, "if Ferodia
understands what he requires of me."

"Why need I ask him?  Do I not tell you that he commands you to dance,
and the other slave to sing?"

"Slave!" shouted Abdullah, recovering quickly firmness of tone in his
voice.  "Slave!  Lying dog!  Do you call my brother a slave?  Am I a
slave?"

"What does he say?" thundered Ferodia.

"He says he is not a slave, and calls me a liar.  They are all asses and
sons of asses," replied Tifum.  "Verily, though they own hundreds of
black slaves at Zanzibar, they don't seem to know that the chance of war
has made them slaves."

"Tell him, Tifum, that I say he is a slave, he and his brother; that
they shall be my slaves; that they shall do whatever I bid them, and if
not, that I will punish them until they do.  Ferodia speaks."

"Do you hear and understand, asses and sons of asses?" asked Tifum of
Abdullah and Mussoud.  "Do ye hear, children of the Arabs?  Ferodia the
chief tells you that you shall be his slaves to do his bidding, and if
you do not, he will punish you.  Listen to the chief's words, and obey
him."

"We are Arabs," said Abdullah, proudly tossing, his head back, while his
chest seemed to dilate with the great thought.  "We are Arabs, and
children of the Arabs of Muscat.  A chief of the free Bedaween was my
father Mohammed, and I am his son Abdullah.  The desert wind is not
freer than our never-conquered race, and every child of that race is
free.  We, therefore, cannot be slaves.  Ferodia has lied."

"Tell him, Tifum, that I will beat him until he is bleeding on this
floor--until he confesses himself my slave."

"Ferodia says he will beat you, Abdullah, if that be your name, until
you bleed on this floor."

"Tell him from me he may beat me until I die, but he cannot make me a
slave.  Has he not slain my father, and has he not dishonoured me by
causing me to stand naked before him?  Can he punish me more?  He is a
strong man--you call him a chief; he has in his hand a whip; he says he
will use it.  I am but a child, but he cannot make me a slave.  See, I
go to him nearer, and turn my back to him.  I will not cry, though he
tear my flesh;" and the indomitable young Arab walked up nearer to the
chief, looked at him in the eye for a second, then slowly turned his
bare back to him, and with bended head and folded arms waited for the
blow.

Ferodia, though a chief and a Mtuta warrior, was a true savage; he had
never heard of that rare quality which belongs to races civilised and
semi-civilised, and is called magnanimity, or a generous forbearance to
a conquered foe.  He beheld the defenceless boy who was fully in his
power standing within reach of the lash he held in his hand,--that
delicate youth with the fair and faultless skin, on which an angry blow
had never descended, which a whip had never dishonoured,--and the savage
could not restrain his instincts of cruelty or the delight to torture
and rend which is the instinct of wild men as well as of wild animals.
So, when Tifum explained to him what Abdullah had said, and what he
meant by thus turning his back to him, Ferodia, as though it were an
everyday matter in which no principle was involved, lifted his whip, and
as he saw the tender flesh shrink and redden, and then bleed and gape,
it but kindled the desire to hurt; but a powerful antidote and
corrective,--even subjugator, you may say,--was the resolute passiveness
and determined silence of his victim; and without being aware himself of
what lessened the power of his blows, and weakened his anger, and
finally conquered the desire to torture, his arm was stayed, and still
the boy stood up, now confronting him, with the same steady gaze and
heroic mien, to ask the astonished savage with a curling lip:

"Well, have you made me a slave now?  Am I more a slave than before?"

"Stand aside, fool, else I will do thee a greater harm; and thou, Tifum,
away with them, treat them as slaves; and when we are on the road, give
them loads to carry.  Since they think it such a terrible thing to be
naked, let their nakedness be seen of men and women, and if they suffer
through it, so much the better.  Slaves were made to suffer.  Are my
words nothing?  Shall these baby-faces beard me before my own people?"
So saying, Ferodia threw his whip from him, and drowned his further
reflections in a mighty gourd-bowl full of strong pombe; and as he
sighed his content, all traces of anger vanished; and as he observed his
friend Olimali had long ago measured his length upon the clay floor of
the hut, he laughed heartily; but the fumes of the pombe he had already
drunk were rapidly conquering the conqueror--even Ferodia, chief of the
Watuta.

The first news Ferodia and Olimali received, when they had recovered in
the morning from their drunken stupor, was not calculated to content
them.  This was the flight of Sultan bin Ali and his men by night from
the camp, with but two or three bales of cloth, so that a party flying
for their lives, and so lightly laden, were not easily to be overtaken,
and could not be done before they would reach a country friendly to the
Arabs.  Still, when the two chiefs, after venting a few angry
expletives, came to reflect, to converse, and turn over coolly, calmly,
and deliberately the news, it was found not to be so bad after all--
rather the reverse; until, finally, it was settled that the news was the
best that could be heard of what might concern them, and they felt
accordingly very gratified.

Four hundred bales of cloth and beads, one hundred kegs of powder, a
vast number of bullets, rugs, carpets, counterpanes, feather pillows,
richly embroidered caps, knives, looking-glasses, despatch-boxes, a few
guns, kettles, cups and saucers, sugar, coffee, tea, spices, curry, and
numberless little things which go to make the miscellaneous sum-total of
the plunder of a large and wealthy caravan--in short, the sum of fifty
thousand silver dollars would not have covered the cost price of the
articles found in the Arabs' deserted camp.

In the possession of these articles, what a difference had been made
within twenty-four hours in that small area contained within the compass
of a square half mile, a spot in Africa that might be covered by a pin's
point on an ordinary school-map of the world!  How much noise,
confusion, blowing of gunpowder, did the fact of possession comprehend!
How many lives had been destroyed!  What noble men had died!  How much
misery had been created!  And on such a very small spot in this world,
that no one would ever have heard of it, had I not been elected the
historian of the battle of Kwikuru!  Yet who will dare deny my right and
duty to relate truly and clearly how it all happened--what dashing
bravery Simba showed; how Khamis bin Abdullah and his lion-hearted son
and the noble Amer bin Osman died; how our proud, high-spirited heroes,
the Arab youths, Selim, Abdullah, and Mussoud, endured their sad
misfortunes--to illustrate the high and noble principles involved in all
these things, and to point with bold finger the moral which adorns this
chronicle?  Happy are ye, my young readers, if your eyes fall upon these
few pages; for ye shall be counted as those to whom a new world of human
life has been revealed, where exist passions and joys so akin to our own
that none may be so blind as not to perceive our relationship to them!

Putting by moralising for the present, let us glance at the incidents
which transpired on the news of the desertion of the Arab camp becoming
generally known.

Ferodia and Olimali became exceedingly elated when the rich store of
plunder was described to them.  They rubbed their hands, like two
children rejoicing gleefully over a nice Christmas present; they
laughed, and giggled, and said so many tender silly things to one
another, that the historian of these events finds his patience too
exhausted to relate them.

Trusty men were at once despatched to the camp to superintend the
removal of the riches to Kwikuru, and when they were all conveyed into
the inner inclosure and exhibited to the view of the chiefs, they could
barely realise that they were the actual possessors of all this immense
wealth until they had peered into every box, and felt over and over
again the texture of the gaudy cloths before them.  The palisade was
lined by men, women, and children, who endeavoured to thrust their
over-large heads for such intentions through the narrow spaces between
the poles.  Their cries of admiration were irrepressible.  They hummed,
and hawed, and heyed, and coughed their immeasurable satisfaction.

The division of the spoils was made with religious justice.  Ferodia
retained half of everything, and to Olimali, his friend and ally, was
given the other half.  But their respective halves were so large, that
there was no room for quarrel, and the most ambitious African could
never have dreamed of such abundant store as had now fallen into the
hands of these fortunate chiefs.  When Ferodia, assisted by ten
favourite head men, had reckoned up, after much mental calculation, how
much cloth he had, he could only express it by saying that there were
belonging to him one hundred hundreds of dotis and sixty hundreds of
dotis of cloth, including all kinds; or, as we should say, with our
expressive terms, there were 16,000 doti, or 64,000 yards.

Ferodia caused his warriors to be drawn up in line.  Though a few had
been killed, still there were enough men in the line to warrant the
statement that there were 900 men where originally there had been 1000
of them.  To these warriors the head men delivered six doti each of
mixed cloth, which left in Ferodia's possession 10,600 dotis.  The odd
600 were for himself and his head men and doctors of magic--himself, as
may be supposed, retaining the lion's share.  The remaining 10,000
dotis, and the beads and other things, were for the king Katalambula and
his prospective heir, Prince Kalulu.

The 10,000 dotis of cloth were made into 200 light portable bales
containing fifty dotis each, which weighed about forty pounds.  The
beads were distributed for the like purpose, as well as the fifty
barrels of powder, etc. etc.

The distribution having taken place, and each warrior made perfectly
satisfied with his share, there remained one more duty to perform--a
religious duty--which might not be neglected long, and this was the
religious ceremony of making each warrior magically strong in arm and
limb, by giving him to drink of the consecrated drink.

This ceremony took place the evening of the day after the battle.
First, fires were lighted around a large circle outside the boma, or
outer palisade of Kwikuru, with only one entrance left for the passage
of the sacrificial bodies of the dead Arabs.  The bodies, being all
denuded of their clothing, were laid diametrically across the circle.
Then earthen, tin, and copper pots full of water, with some millet-flour
in each, were placed over the fire, and then small bottle gourds (with
numbers of small pebbles in them), two for each magic doctor, were
prepared and placed near the heads of the bodies.  Everything being thus
ready, the magic doctors took their sharp knives in their hands and
began their work.  To the sound of a low crooning song, or rather chant,
the words of which could not be distinguished, the knives were set to
work on the bodies of their enemies, first in cutting the tips of each
nose, then the lower lip, then the flesh under the chin, then the ears
and the eyebrows, which, when ended, they conveyed to the pots over the
fires.  Continuing their work, the nipples of the breasts were then cut,
the muscles of their arms and legs, and, lastly, the whole of the flesh
covering the abdomen, which they took and placed in the pots over the
fire.  Then the hearts were extracted, and, finally, the fat of the
entrails of each body.  After this mutilation and disfigurement of the
dead, the head of each body was cut off and placed on the end of pointed
poles, to be borne around the camp during the ceremonial song.

Within half an hour the water had boiled sufficiently, and the magic
doctors, taking the wonderful gourds filled with pebbles in their hands,
began to shake them to the tune of a monotonous chant, in the chorus of
which the warriors, bearing the heads aloft on poles, joined, marching
slowly as they sang around the circle.  The words ran thus, as well as
they may be translated:

  Oh, the horrible, fearful battle,
          Where warriors slew and were slain,
  Where dead lay unnumbered, and wounds were made,
  Till the field ran red with blood that was shed
              In the horrible, fearful battle.
      _Chorus_.  With the blood that was shed
              In the horrible, fearful battle.

  Ferodia the chief, Ferodia the strong,
          The lion and leopard in war,
  Tifum Byah, Maro, and Wafanyah,
  Great chiefs of the unconquer'd Watuta,
          In the horrible, fearful battle,
      _Chorus_.  In the horrible, fearful battle.

  They heard the loud note, the war-horn's note,
          Olimali, their friend, was distress'd;
  They rose from the bush, they rose from the ground,
  They rush'd to Kwikuru, and hemm'd them round,
          For a horrible, fearful battle.
      _Chorus_.  For a horrible, fearful battle.

  The Arabs and blacks who came from afar.
          Who came from near the sea,
  To give the Warori and Watuta, King Olimali and Ferodia,
          A horrible, fearful battle.
      _Chorus_.  A horrible, fearful battle.

  Warori were brave, the Watuta were strong,
          'Gainst those who came from afar.
  The Arabs lie dead by hundreds around;
  They will hear never more the war-horn's sound,
          For a horrible, fearful battle.
      _Chorus_.  For a horrible, fearful battle.

  Then, drink, warriors! drink the true magic drink!
          The strength of your enemies slain!
  Drink of the blood, of the fat, and the heart,
  Drink to commemorate before we part,
          The horrible, fearful battle.
      _Chorus_.  Before we part
          The horrible, fearful battle.

  Then, drink, warriors! drink the true magic drink!
          The strength of your enemies slain!
  Be strengthened in heart, in limb, and in arm,
  Be strong, be swift, be wise, and safe from harm
          In each horrible, fearful battle.
      _Chorus_.  And safe from harm
          In each horrible, fearful battle.

When this chant was over, which has been rendered into English as
faithfully as possible, the poles on which the ghastly trophies had been
placed were planted in the ground before each gate of the village.  But
the young Arabs were spared this fearful scene, as they had been sent
ahead with the loads, escorted by a strong guard.  Then, the ceremony
over, the chief Ferodia embraced in a loving manner his friend Olimali,
and departed to the sound of booming horns and drums, and a general
grateful look from the young women of Kwikuru--he and his warriors.

At sunset they camped in a forest, through which the road led towards
the south-west.



CHAPTER FIVE.

SIMBA AND MOTO'S MIDNIGHT HALT IN THE FOREST--MOTO'S PLAN FOR SAVING
SELIM--BIMBA AND MOTO MADE PRISONERS AT KATALAMBULA'S VILLAGE--THEY ARE
BROUGHT BEFORE THE KING--KALULU RECOGNISES MOTO--THE KING GIVES EACH OF
THEM A WIFE--KALULU'S PERSONAL APPEARANCE--THE GREAT AFRICAN GIANTESS--
THE MARRIAGE SONG--CONCLUSION OF THE MARRIAGE FESTIVITIES.

Simba and Moto were men as capable of enduring fatigue as the Watuta
were, as good runners also; so that even had their enemies pursued them
with a greater determination than they showed, the two men might have
laughed securely, as night would soon have shrouded them with its
friendly mantle.

For a long time, however, the two held on their way, raising their eyes
every now and then toward the bright Southern Cross, which shone so
clearly, and pointed their future road so plainly.  They travelled with
their figures half-profile to the Cross, or in a south-westerly
direction.  But at midnight the two halted in the denser portion of the
forest; and there they built two fires and prepared their resting-places
with leaves and tender twigs; and having done so, they breathed a long
sigh of relief, sat down, and gradually their eyes lost the eager,
intelligent look in vacancy.

But after a while Simba said in a deep, low voice, half to himself and
half to Moto: "Wallahi! but this has been a sad day for us.  That large
and costly caravan and the brave men and leaders are gone.  It was but
last night I stood at their tent-door, looking at my noble master Amer
and his friend Khamis, and I was thinking that there never lived finer
and nobler-looking men.  Ah, Arab sheikhs! where are ye now, chiefs of
Zanzibar?"  Then, raising his head, he said, "Answer me, thou black,
blackest night!  Answer me if ye can, oh twinkling stars!  Answer me,
dark and dread silence!  Shall I never see dear master again?  Moto,
where dost thou think Amer is now?"

To which Moto answered: "Amer, the noblest of his tribe, the worthiest
master that ever lived, the man with the kind heart and liberal hand, is
not dead--he sleepeth."

"Sleepeth!  Ah, would it were so! then this great heaviness of sorrow
within me would vanish.  But what meanest thou, Moto?"

"Hast thou forgotten already the words of our noble master, the son of
Osman, how that he said to us often, a man cannot die; the body may
remain on the ground to moulder, and rot, and become dust, but the life
that was in him cannot die?  Hast thou never heard him mention the word
Soul--that unseen, unfelt thing, which is as light as air, yet is the
most important part of a man?  For a long time I laughed at Amer's words
in my secret heart, but when I heard all the Arabs say the same thing,
and the Nazarenes at Zanzibar say it also, I was obliged to believe,
though I could not tell what the soul was like, or who had seen it, or
if anybody had ever seen it.  But now Amer's head lies low on the ground
and a cruel wound has found his kind heart, I shall keep thinking of his
words, and believe in them; and I believe truly that Amer's soul looks
down upon us through this darkness from above."

"I remember me now much the same thing," said Simba, "though my sorrow
of heart had blinded my memory.  Is it not a happy thought, Moto, that
master Amer is not quite, quite dead, and that we shall see him again?"

"Yes, very happy.  Thou knowest, Simba, that he cannot be dead with us
either, for we shall carry him in our memories like a valued treasure,
and will never cease talking of him when we are together."

"Ah! thou hast a good memory, Moto; but who, thinkest thou, is the
happiest--master Amer, up above there, or young master Selim, a
prisoner?"

"Oh, Simba! while I was beginning to think myself happy, thou hast made
my heart black with sorrow, by making me think of what that boy must
suffer.  If it were not for his future good I would never have left him.
Amer is happiest in Paradise, but Selim, his son, living on earth, must
be miserable."

"It is just as I thought also," said Simba.  "Poor child!  Do you not
remember how pretty he looked when he hinted to his father, that perhaps
Simba would like his freedom?  How his eyes, always beautiful, seemed
filled with softness, and love, and gratitude to me?  Ah, Selim, young
master of everything that Simba has, it will go hard with some of these
savage Watuta if they harm thee!"

"They will not harm Selim or the Arab boys; they will keep them as
curiosities, unless some of them have seen Arabs before going about to
buy slaves, in which case I pity them all," said Moto.

"Moto," shouted Simba, raising himself up, "art thou revenging thyself
on me for making thee unhappy with the mention of him?  Speak.  Selim a
slave!  That petted, tender Arab boy a slave!  Answer me, Moto."

"It is as I tell thee; if any of the Watuta understand, as we do, what
the word Arab is, all the Arab boys will be made slaves, and be beaten
like dogs," answered Moto.

"We are not obeying master Amer by running away from the camp of the
Watuta.  He told us to save his son Selim.  I am going back;" and Simba
snatched his spears and gun.

"Fool!" said Moto.  "We cannot save him from the Watuta by going into
their camp.  We can only do it by finishing as we have begun.  We must
go to Katalambula's village and see Kalulu.  He only can save Selim and
ourselves."

"Well, I believe thou art right," said Simba.  "Let us go to sleep, and
at dawn let us be off to see this Kalulu."  Saying which, he lay down
between the fires, but sleep did not visit his eyes for some time
afterwards.

For fifteen days they marched long and far towards the south-west
without any incident worthy of notice.  Now and then they left the
forest occasionally, to follow a road leading to some village and obtain
information as to the whereabouts of the village of Katalambula of those
people whom they might meet, with little danger to themselves.

On the sixteenth day of their night they came to a large plain,
extremely populous and rich.  The dun-coloured tops of huts arose above
the tall corn and millet everywhere.  At midday they came to a deep
river flowing north-west, which the people called Liemba.  On the
opposite side of the river they were also told was Katalambula's
village.

They were rowed across, for which Simba paid the canoe-man with a couple
of arrows, having no other means of paying him.  Then, following the
right bank of the river for a few minutes, by fields of splendid corn,
they came in sight of the village.

It was substantially built; and was constructed in the same manner as
the Kwikuru of Olimali, except that the king's quarters were flat-roofed
tembes, surrounding a square of large dimensions, where the king kept
his cattle and goats, and two or three donkeys, which were preserved
more as curiosities than for any use that were made of them, and where
he himself lived with his numerous family of women; for, strange to say,
Katalambula, with all his wives, had never been able to obtain a son.

The principal gate was, as usual, decorated with the only trophies
savages respect or regard, viz., glistening white skulls of their
enemies.

When Simba and Moto arrived near the gate, the former's gigantic height
of body and breadth of shoulders soon attracted attention, and drew
crowds towards him of curious gazers.

"Health unto you," was his greeting to them.

"And unto you, strangers!" they replied.  "Whence come you?" they then
asked.

"We are travellers," said Moto, "who have heard of King Katalambula, and
have desired much to see Ututa's king."  This was said in good Kirori,
which, excepting a few words, is the same as Kituta.

"Your words are well, strangers.  You are Warori?" a chief, who now made
his presence known, asked them.  "Though your garb is different, and the
punctures on the cheek and forehead are wanting."

"I am a Mrori," answered Moto, "but my companion is not; he is a
stranger from a far land."

"Then do the Warori carry guns nowadays?  And how is it that you wear
such fine clothes?" he asked, regarding them suspiciously.

"We were successful in hunting, and shot an elephant, whose teeth we
sold for cloth and two guns."

"And where did you meet elephants?"

"On the frontier, near Urori."

"And where did you meet the Arabs?"

"In Ututa, two days from Urori."

"Did you ask them where they were going?"

"They were going to Uwemba."

"Perhaps you can tell us where they came from?"

"From Ubena."

"Strangers," said the chief, "you are liars.  No Arabs have been in this
country for a long, long time.  You are our prisoners, and must come
before the King in our company;" and, as he spoke, the men that had
gathered near rushed at them and disarmed them.

In a short time they found themselves within the inner square; and under
a large sycamore in the centre was seated, on a dried mud platform,
raised two feet above the ground, and which ran around the tree like a
circular sofa, covered with kid and goatskins, and over these skins of
wild beasts, an old white-haired man, whom, by the deference paid to
him, the prisoners knew was King Katalambula.

The King had on his head a band of snowy white cloth, and his dress was
a long broad robe of crimson blanket cloth.  He was a kindly-looking old
man, and he was evidently at the time being much amused with something
that a tall young lad of sixteen, or thereabouts, was saying; but as the
group of warriors guarding Simba and Moto entered the square, the old
man looked up curiously, and when they drew nearer he demanded to know
what the matter was.

"My sultan, my lord," said the principal man to whom we were first
introduced at the gate, "these men are suspicious characters.  To every
question I asked them they replied with a he; wherefore we brought them
to you to judge."

"Speak, strangers, the truth.  Who and what are ye?"

The quick eye of Moto had seen the young lad standing by Katalambula
when he entered, and he suspected that he was the object of his search,
the young friend of bygone years.

"Great king," said Moto, "I did lie; but to you I will give the truth.
I am a Mrori, who was taken when a child by the Arabs of Zanzibar.
Years after that time, when I was a man, I accompanied an Arab chief,
called Kisesa, to Unyanyembe; but soon after arriving, he declared war
against the Warori, and--"

"Kisesa!" said the young lad, advancing towards him with the stride of a
young lion.  "War against the Warori!" he added again, with an angry
glitter in his eyes.

"Yes, young chief," said Moto, humbly; "and I accompanied Kisesa to this
war.  After a long march we came before a Tillage near Ututa, governed
by--"

"By whom?" asked the young chief.  "Tell me his name--quick, dog!"

"Mostana," said Moto, deliberately.

"Mostana!" shrieked the boy, and the word was echoed in a tone of
surprise by all.

"Yes, Mostana was his name," said Moto, unheeding the menacing looks or
the angry murmurs which arose from all sides, but hurrying on with his
story.  "We took the village after a short time, though Mostana's men
fought well, and numbers of our people were killed.  Mostana's men were
nearly all killed, and those who were left were made slaves, according
to the custom of the Arabs."

"Yes, that is true," said Katalambula.  "Those cruel people make clean
work of it when they fight, but I--"

"Were they all made prisoners?" asked the boy chief, in a curious tone.

"All, except one, and--"

"And his name was--?"

"Kalulu!" replied Moto, in a clear tone.

Again rose a murmur of astonishment from all sides, but, apparently
heedless that he had said anything very strange, Moto continued:

"Yes, Kalulu, the son of Mostana, was standing by his father's side,
when Kisesa, observing him, said he would give fifty pieces of cloth to
whoever would take him alive.  On hearing that, my soul felt a feeling
of pity for him, as you must remember I was a Mrori; and, though I liked
the Arabs, I could not kill my own people at their bidding, nor did I
like to see such a brave boy as Mostana's son in danger of being made a
slave by Kisesa.  So, on hearing the offer made by Kisesa, I snatched up
a shield and rushed forward to whisper to him to follow me, but the boy
thought probably that I was about to kill him, as he put a spear clean
through my shield and pinned my arm to it."

A loud cry of admiration greeted this, while the boy already advanced
nearer to Moto and regarded him affectionately; but Moto heeded nothing
of this, but continued:

"Seeing me still advance, the boy sprang back just as his father fell
dead by a bullet from some gun behind me.  I hastened after the boy, saw
him look cautiously around, and spring over the palisade; but I was
right behind him; and when he was a little distance off in the forest I
chased him at my best speed, and soon came up to him.  I explained to
him who I was, and why I chased him, and told him I was his friend; upon
which he told me that he was going to his uncle, a great king in Ututa,
and that if ever we met again he would be my friend."

As Moto finished this part of his story, the boy chief sprang forward
and embraced Moto, saying:

"Dost thou not know me?  I am Kalulu!  And thou art my friend Moto!  I
shall keep my promise, and the King must thank thee," said Kalulu, as he
drew Moto forward towards Katalambula.

As they heard these words from Kalulu, the chiefs and elders clapped
their hands, and saluted Moto, while the King took hold of Moto's right
hand and said:

"Kalulu has told me the story which related how the Kirori slave would
not take him when he might have done so; and though I never expected to
see the man, I promised him that if any of my people met him and they
should bring him to me, I should be his friend; that he should have one
of my daughters for wife, and that I would bestow on him anything else
he asked, for Kalulu is as dear to me as though he were my son.  Speak,
Moto, add tell me what I can do for thee."

Then Moto, after a seat had been given to him, repeated briefly the
story which we have already given to the readers, while murmurs of
approbation at the wonderful good fortune of Ferodia rose from every
side; then, when these had subsided, Moto said:

"Oh, Kalulu, if what I have done for thee deserves kindness at thy
hands, and if thou wert sincere when thou didst promise to be my friend,
speak to the great King of the Watuta for me, and let him give my young
master Selim, the Arab slave, as well as the three other slaves their
freedom, and let them depart to their own land, and to the friends who
will mourn for them."

"Kalulu has already given his promise to thee, Moto.  Kalulu is the
friend of thy friends, and the enemy of thy enemies.  Katalambula, the
King, hears my words, and will do this kindness for thee for what thou
hast done for me.  Speak, great King," said Kalulu, advancing to him as
he spoke.

"Ah, Kalulu!" said the King Katalambula, "thou knowest not what thou
askest, but I will do for thee what may be done.  I can intercede with
Ferodia for them, but I may not command him.  Those Arab youths are the
slaves of Ferodia; but if he is willing to exchange for them, I will
give him two female slaves for each of the Arab boy-slaves.  Will that
content thee, Kalulu?"

"I will wait until he comes here.  I will then give thee my answer.  But
I think thou givest way too much to Ferodia in all things; he likes me
not too well, because I stand between him and thy favour.  If I were
king of the Watuta, I should give Ferodia a lesson."

"Tush, boy! be not too hasty with thy tongue.  Ferodia is chief in his
own right of a large tract of country.  Dost thou wish me to take that
from him which he has won by his spear and his bow?" asked Katalambula,
slightly frowning.

"He has not won by himself, with his sword and his spear, the battle
against the Arabs.  Fight hundred of the ten hundred warriors he has
with him are thine, taken from thy country.  Wilt thou that he shall
choose for himself what he shall please to reserve, or wilt thou choose
what he shall have and what thou wilt keep?"

"Boy, boy, Ferodia is the chief warrior of the Watuta; he knows every
art of war.  He has never been beaten in the battle, either by the
Wabena, or the Warungu, or the Wawemba, or any other; and though I have
furnished him with men, he has always given me the greater and the most
valuable share.  Why wilt thou, who art but a boy, tell me these things
concerning Ferodia?  Be patient; I will ask him when he comes for these
slaves for thee.  But had it not been for the good deed this man did for
thee, I should have ordered Ferodia to roast them all alive.  Go thou,
rather, and do thy duty towards these travellers; give them food and
drink; and when they have rested, give each a house.  Then let my
daughter Lamoli be given to Moto for wife; and to this tall man give one
of my female slaves for wife.  Katalambula has spoken."

While the King was speaking he was evidently getting more peevish, for
he was old and soon tired; so Kalulu refrained from taxing his patience
further, and beckoning to Moto and Simba, he walked away with his
guests, leaving the King to be assisted by his chiefs to his quarters.

When young Kalulu arrived at his own house, or rather room--for the
entire square was surrounded but by one house--he again embraced Moto,
and promised to leave no stone unturned until he had secured the freedom
of the Arab boys.  "But," said Kalulu, "it is well for them that you are
my friend, as I do not think I can ever forgive the Arabs for murdering
my father; and the King finds it very hard to do this thing for you,
because in Mostana he lost a brother; and those of our tribe who have
travelled far to hunt and kill elephants always come back with tales of
their cruelty.  I fear if Ferodia insists on their being slaves my uncle
will not resist him; for, but for you, nothing would please him better
than to torture them, and I should have liked it too."

"Oh, Kalulu," said Moto, "you do not know Selim.  He would never have
treated a man badly, neither did his father.  Simba and I were proud to
be slaves of such a man as Amer bin Osman, and we were proud to call
Selim our young master.  Do you know that Selim is just your age, though
you are taller than he is, and you are thinner than he was; though, poor
boy! he will be thin enough when he comes here.  But how you have grown,
Kalulu! yet you cannot be more than sixteen years old!"

"I do not know how old I am," Kalulu said, laughing.  "I wae little when
I saw you, or you would never have caught me.  But I must do what the
King has commanded me to do."  And Kalulu darted out, spear in hand, his
ostrich plumes trailing over his head far behind.

Perhaps here would be a fit place to intercalate a description of the
native youth whose name forms the title-page to this strange historical
romance.

Since ancient Greece displayed the forms of her noblest, finest youth in
the Olympian games, and gave her Phidias and Praxiteles models to
immortalise in marble, all civilised nations have borrowed their ideas
of manly beauty from the statues left to us by Grecian and Roman
sculptors, because civilised nations seldom can furnish us with models
to compete with the super-excellent types designed by Greece.  While
American and English sculptors go to Rome to play with marble and
plaster, and borrow for their patterns of an athlete or perfect human
form, the vulgar, low, and uncouth lazzaroni of Rome, the centre of
Africa teems with finer specimens of manhood than may be found in this
world; such types as would even cause the marble forms of Phidias to
blush, Kalulu was one of the best specimens which the ancient sculptors
would have delighted to imitate in stone.  His face or head may not,
perhaps, have kindled any very great admiration, but the body, arms, and
limbs were unmistakably magnificent in shape.  He had not an ounce of
flesh too much, yet without the tedious training which the modern
athlete has to undergo, and following nothing but the wild instinct of
his adopted tribe, he was a perfect youthful Apollo in form.  The
muscles of his arms stood out like balls, and the muscles of his legs
were as firm as iron.  There was not one of the tribe of his age who
could send a spear so far, or draw the bow with so true and steady aim
as he, or could shoot the arrow farther.  None had such a springy,
elastic movement as he, none was so swift of foot, none followed the
chase with his ardour, none was so daring in the attack; yet with all
that constant exercise, the following of which had given him these
advantages, his form lost nothing of that surpassing grace of movement
and manly beauty for which he was styled by me, just now, a perfect
youthful Apollo.

If I give him such praise for his elegance of form and free graceful
carriage, I may not continue in the same strain in the description of
his face.  Kalulu was a negro, but his colour was not black by any
means, it was a deep brown or bronze.  His lips were thick, and,
according to our ideas, such as would not lend beauty to his face; his
nose was not flat, neither was it as correct in shape as we would wish
it; but, with the exception of lips and nose, one could find no fault
with his features.  His eyes were remarkably large, brilliant,
sparkling, and black as the blackest ink, while the whites of his eyes
were not disfigured by the slightest tinge of unhealthy yellow, nor
seamed with the red veins common to negroes of older growth.  His ears
were small and shapely, and, strange to say, the lobes were not as yet
distorted out of all form with the pieces of wood or gourd-necks, which,
unhappily, with the Watuta, are too common among their ear ornaments.
His ears were simply decorated with two Sungomazzi beads, [these beads
are as large as a pigeon's egg, and are either of coloured porcelain or
coloured glass] one to each ear, each bead suspended by a piece of very
fine brass wire.  His hair, though woolly, hung below his shoulders in a
thousand fine braids, adorned with scores of fine red, yellow, and white
beads.  His ornaments, besides those already mentioned, consisted of
three snow-white ostrich plumes, fastened in a band which ran around his
head, and which, besides holding the plumes, served to hold his hair; a
braided necklace, ivory bands above each elbow, and ivory bracelets, and
broad bead-worked anklets.

While the author has been endeavouring to portray Kalulu, that the
reader may become acquainted with his excellence, the youthful hero had
hastened to bring Lamoli to her husband; and he now appeared on the
threshold of the door with his cousin, who at once pleased Moto as much
as the King expected she would.  We will say this, however, in passing,
that though she was not by any means the loveliest of her sex, she was
neither ugly, toothless, nor old; nor was she young, pretty, or one
calculated to charm our fastidious tastes.  But Moto did not refuse her;
on the contrary, he thought it a high honour to many the daughter of a
king, and became lavish in his praise, with which Lamoli was not at all
displeased.

Having performed this marriage according to the customs of the Watuta,
Kalulu remembered that he had still another marriage on his hand, and at
once asked Simba what kind of a wife he fancied.  Simba was not at all
displeased with the idea of another wife, though he and Moto had each a
wife at Zanzibar, who had borne them children; and he at once replied
that Kalulu might choose for him.  After an absence of only a few
minutes, Kalulu returned with a young woman who might have drawn crowds
in London and New York, as the "Great African Giantess."

As he saw the gigantic couple together, Kalulu clapped his hands in high
glee, and danced about them as if he were about to receive a magnificent
gift, and laughed as he burst into a mock rhapsody.

"Lo, Kalulu has seen strange things! he has seen two trees drawn
together from a great distance! he has seen them walk together
arm-in-arm!!  Behold how the trees, the sycamore and the mtambu, the
great baobab, and the mbiti, how they nod their heads, and are pleased!!
For they rejoice that two great trees are married, and a forest of
young trees will soon sprout up.  As they move, the ground shakes and
the huts reel.  Verily this is a great day; both the ground and the huts
have been guzzling pombe--they are drunk, rejoicing over the marriages
Kalulu, the future King of the Watuta, has performed!

"Lamoli, my sweet cousin, daughter of Katalambula--of Katalambula the
great King--was sorrowing for a husband.  She was thirsting, like a pool
in the middle of the plain in a long summer.  She, the flower of
Katalambula's household, was sick for a husband.  But the day came--ah,
happy day!  A man from afar--from the island in the sea--he came, he saw
me, I knew him.  He was my friend; and in him Katalambula--Katalambula
the great King--found a husband for his daughter--a mate for Lamoli.

"Ah, Lamoli!  Lamoli!  Lamoli! weep no more; but laugh until thy mouth
reaches from ear to ear, and I, Kalulu, thy cousin, can see the joy
welling from thy throat, like living water springing from a rock!
Laugh, Lamoli, sweet Lamoli! so that the unmarried women of all Ututa
may hear and envy thee; so they may rend their bosoms with rage, or
crush themselves to death with the over-weight of their ornaments.
Laugh, Lamoli, sweet Lamoli! until every foot of man and woman moves to
the sound of thy happy laughter!  And thou, tall woman of Ututa! do thou
laugh and sing, until all the tall trees of Ututa will become jealous of
thee! we then may have rain.  And thou, Simba, tall man from afar, well
named the Lion! roar for joy, and thou wilt hear the wild lions of the
forest roar in concert with thee, and each will be roused to fury,
roaring for their loving mates.  But enough; be happy, and raise
warriors for your tribes.  Kalulu is not a singer; he is a young
warrior, who is learning how to throw the spear and shoot with the bow.
The singers are coming with drums to do you honour, for such are the
King's commands."

While Kalulu had been thus employing himself, a company of drummers,
eight in number, two tumblers,--or, as we should call them, two
mountebanks,--and fifty couples of young men and women had formed
themselves in a circle; and as Kalulu ceased speaking, the Magic Doctor,
or Mganga, as the natives called him, raised his voice and sang the
marriage song, while he danced in an ecstatic manner as he sang.  I
should also say, before giving the song, that the smallest drums only
accompanied his voice, while the great drums thundered together when the
chorus was given by the dancers.  The words were, as near as they can be
translated:

  We sing the happy marriage song,
  We sound the drum, and beat the gong
  In honour of Lamoli!
  She is the daughter of a king,
  Yet she spent her days in weeping,
  Being left alone and sorrowing.

  Poor sorrowing Lamoli!
  _Chorus_.
  Oh, Lamoli!
  Poor Lamoli!
  Sorrowing
  Lamoli!

  A day has come, ah, happy day!
  That brought a stranger in the way
          Of sorrowing Lamoli!
  Long ago the stranger did a deed,
  A friendly deed, in time of need,
  Which won for him the lover's meed.
          Sweet Lamoli!
      _Chorus_.  Oh, Lamoli!
          Sweet Lamoli!
          Charming Lamoli!

  This stranger sav'd young Kalulu
  From cruel bonds at Kwikuru.
          The good stranger!
  Kalulu swore to this brave man,
  As long as life-blood in him ran,
  To praise the name to every man
          Of this brave stranger!
      _Chorus_.  Oh, stranger!
          Good stranger!
          Brave stranger!

  This man has come to Tuta Land,
  This man who sav'd with friendly hand
          Our young Kalulu!
  Shall we deny him our faint praise?
  Shall we refuse him wedlock lays?
  Shall we not wish him happiest days?
          Who sav'd Kalulu?
  _Chorus_.  Oh, Kalulu!
          Young Kalulu!
          Brave Kalulu!

  Our great King heard the stranger's name,
  And nearer to him the stranger came,
          To Katalambula!
  He said, "I've known this story long,
  A Mtuta's memory is strong.
  I love the good and hate the wrong,"
          Said Katalambula!
      _Chorus_.  Oh, Katalambula!
          Good Katalambula!
          Great Katalambula!

  Give him house, give him home.  You boy!
  Give him pombe and food.  Give him joy!
          Give him Lamoli!
  Brave man! take the pride of our race;
  Take the dearest girl with the loveliest face.
  Live in the shade of our kingly mace
          With good Lamoli!
      _Chorus_.  Oh, Lamoli!
          Good Lamoli!
          Sweet Lamoli!

  We sing the happy marriage song.
  We sound the drum and beat the gong
          For joy with Lamoli.
  Now a wife, no longer weeping,
  No more to spend her days in mourning,
  She will be for ever laughing,
          Happy Lamoli!
      _Chorus_.  Oh, Lamoli!
          Charming Lamoli!
          Happy Lamoli!

The music accompanying this song was slow and sweet, worthy of the great
occasion on which it was given.  During the chorus, the dancing became
more lively, and each man and woman lifted the voice high, which created
a grand and majestic volume of sound, while the drums were beaten with a
terrific vigour.  The festivities lasted all the day and night, until
sunrise next morning; but during the night they were better attended,
nearly a thousand souls joining in the song and chorus.  Kalulu and many
others were hoarse from over-exertion of voice, when they retired next
morning to rest.

Having brought Simba and Moto to their temporary home and through their
difficulties, let us now withdraw from this scene for a while, and see
how it fares with the Arab boy-slaves and Ferodia's caravan.



CHAPTER SIX.

SUFFERINGS OF SELIM, ABDULLAH, AND MUSSOUD--IN THE SLAVE-GANG--ISA
SEIZED WITH SMALL-POX--ISA LEFT BEHIND TO DIE--SELIM'S PRAYER--SELIM
PROPOSES TO ESCAPE--SELIM'S PREPARATION--SELIM'S ESCAPE--THE ROAR OF THE
KING OF THE FOREST--SELIM SHOOTS A LION--SELIM SHOOTS AN ANTELOPE--HE
SUFFERS FROM HUNGER--HE FALLS FAINTING TO THE GROUND--SELIM'S DESPAIR--
HIS REFLECTIONS--HE GIVES HIMSELF UP TO DIE.

Although the caravan started the day after the departure of Simba and
Moto, it could not of course travel so fast as two fugitives; so that
the journey, which only occupied a few days with our two friends, lasted
nearly a month with Ferodia's caravan.

Ferodia, the chief of the Watuta caravan, had besides four Arab slaves--
three of whom were perfectly white--nearly three hundred black slaves,
who had been captured in the battle of Kwikuru.  If the report was
spread abroad that he possessed so many slaves, as would undoubtedly be
the case, he would soon be visited by traders from Unyanyembe and from
Kilwa, and perhaps, if he waited long enough, from Tette, on the Zambezi
river; so it was for his advantage to travel slowly, not only that the
rumour might have time to spread, but also to give the human cattle
plenty of time to recover from their wounds.

The marches were, therefore, commenced at six o'clock in the morning,
and seldom lasted longer than noon, as the first part of the country
through which he now travelled was extremely populous and rich, and each
chief was friendly to him and his men; but after the tenth day he neared
the debatable ground, consisting of extensive tracts of forest and
jungle, lying between Urori and Ututa, and inhabited by no living being,
except wild beasts.  From the farthest westerly point of this debatable
tract, there were three long marches, or say ninety miles, to
Katalambula's country.

Having explained so much, let us glean what may be interesting to the
general reader of the incidents of this march relating to the slaves.

Besides suffering intensely from the heat, Selim, Abdullah, and Mussoud
suffered excessively from the loads which they were compelled to carry,
and which chafed their tender shoulders frightfully.  For the first
three days they went entirely naked, as it must not be supposed that,
because the Watuta were rich in clothes, they possessed one yard too
much, or that they could have dispensed with a yard for the comfort of
slaves.

Slaves are cattle, are supposed too often to be able to live like
cattle, and are therefore treated like cattle.  So these three hundred
slaves were chained--for chains, it must be confessed, were part of the
plunder which the Watuta had found in the Arab camp--by twenties; an
iron collar ran around the neck of each adult, while the boys, Selim,
Abdullah, Mussoud, Isa, and the negro boys, among whom, it must be
remembered, was our mischievous Niani, or the monkey, and others, were
tied by ropes around the waist, about six feet apart, the tallest first.
Of the adult slaves there were fifteen herds, or gangs of twenties,
each gang being superintended by a sub-chief or a trustworthy warrior,
and there was one gang of boys which were looked after by Tifum Byah.

I have already said that the slaves were cattle.  The word cattle must
be understood by the reader in its most literal sense.  Decency was
therefore out of the question.  If one needed to wash his face in camp,
the whole gang, accompanied by the chief, were obliged to march out for
the convenience of this one.  If from any cause a man required to fall
out of the line, there was a halt and a constant worrying of the
unfortunate wretch until the caravan had been overtaken.  If one needed
a drop of water all had to stop.  In all gangs and crews of slaves there
is always one calling for something or requiring something more than his
fellows; and this to the others is a source of vexation, because the
chief who has charge is soon irritated if such a proceeding is carried
too far, and he is not slow to avail himself of the rod to quicken the
footsteps of the lagging gang.

In the boy's gang, Isa was one of those who continually required to
halt, and all the boys suffered in consequence, especially Selim, whose
file-leader was the lagging and unfortunate lea.

Niani saw through the trick of lea in a very short time, and no doubt he
would have remained silent about it, had he not seen that his young
master Selim suffered through it.  For two or three days of the march
Niani held his peace, but when Selim received a more than usually severe
beating from Tifum Byah, Niani exploded, and told the chief, to his
surprise, that he was whipping the wrong boy, that it was Isa who was
the cause of the stoppage; whereupon Isa received a severe punishment
with the ever-ready kurbash (hippopotamus-hide whip).  While Selim had
been whipped Isa had never expressed any great sympathy with him, but
when he was punished himself his cries and groans were dreadfully long
and loud, and in the camp he was constantly bewailing his hard lot, and
always threatening that supple-minded and tough-bodied little negro
Niani for his expose of him.

On the evening of the fifth day after their arrival at camp, Niani, who
knew how to like and how to hate, said aloud to Selim, as soon as he had
an opportunity, that he would much prefer if Selim took his waist-cloth.
Selim refused it upon the ground that he would have none left for
himself.

"Oh, but, Master Selim," said Niani, "I am but a little nigger; no one
will mind me.  I wanted to give it to you before, but I did not like to
offer my cloth to you, because it is dirty."

"Anything is better than nothing.  I will take it with thanks, since you
say you don't want it; but won't you keep a little of it for yourself?"

"Not an inch," said Niani, resolutely.  "I don't want a cloth anyhow--
never did want it; besides that is the cloth you gave me that night I
tripped Isa, and cruel Isa was going to put me on the fire."

Selim then rose up to put this filthy piece of torn cotton cloth around
his waist; but as he was about to put it on, he saw his friends Abdullah
and Mussoud looking wistfully up; and their colour, as well as his own,
made them look all too nude for a country where all skins were black.
Without saying a word he measured the cloth in three equal pieces, and
tore it into three equal strips, one of which he presented to Abdullah,
another to Mussoud, and the other he reserved for himself.  The two boys
rose up, blushing gratefully, and Abdullah said to Selim:

"Thy heart is as soft as fine gold.  The cloth is not six inches wide,
but I feel more grateful to thee than ever I did when I received fine
daoles (rich gold-worked cloth) at the hand of my father, Mohammed, whom
may God preserve!  A pure heart like thine will not long go unrewarded
at the hand of Allah."

"Thou mightest have given me a piece," said Isa to Selim, in a
complaining tone.

"How can you talk so, Master Isa?" asked Niani.  "Your skin is as black
as mine; sure, you look as though you were clothed already.  You should
be happy in having a black skin, instead of wanting a piece out of
nothing."

"A truce to your insolence, Niani, or I will come and break every bone
in your body," said Isa, angrily.

"You had better not, Isa, because I am a slave of Ferodia, the Mtuta
chief; and if you kill me, Ferodia will kill you," answered Niani.

"Well, then, hold your tongue, and don't torment me.  I am sick of life
already, and sick in mind and body," said Isa.

"Dost thou suffer much, lea?" asked Selim.

"Indeed I do.  My head aches as if it would split, and all down my back
run sharp pains.  They are not the pains which that savage dog Tifum
made, but something else.  I think there is something serious the matter
with me," moaned poor suffering Isa.

"I hope not," said Selim.  "Cheer up, lea, my friend; we have only to
reach Katalambula to have rest.  This march cannot last for ever."

"I shall never reach the country of the accursed Watuta," said Isa.  "My
illness is too serious."

"Why, what can the matter be with thee, my friend?"

"Don't start, Selim, and don't curse me when I tell you that I have the
_jederi_ (the small-pox)."

"The small-pox!  What makes thee think that?"  Selim asked.

"I have seen it often enough, and have seen the men die on the road from
it, and I fear I shall die too," said Isa, mournfully.

The next morning Isa was very much worse, and it was obvious to every
one that the boy had it very badly, but he was not permitted to halt or
to be carried.  Slaves are not carried: there are no means of carrying
sick slaves in Africa, and so he was driven along with the rest; but
about ten o'clock, after four hours' march, as they were approaching a
forest, the sick lad became delirious, and he began to reel like a
drunken man, and after a short time the load fell from his head, and as
Tifum came up raging furiously at this weakness, Isa fell across his
bale with his eyes half protruding from their sockets, and his tongue
hanging out.  But Tifum had no sense of kindness in his heart; so he
began to flog the unfortunate wretch with all the force that an
unnatural cruelty alone could have impelled, until Selim, unable longer
to bear the disgusting sight, hurled the load he carried on his head
full at the head of the savage ruffian, and while he was down he
snatched the whip from his hand, and began to belabour him with all his
might until he was overthrown himself on the ground by the infuriated
Tifum, and belaboured in his turn until Tifum was obliged to desist lest
he might kill him.

Gutting the rope which joined the prostrate bodies of the boys, the one
insensible from violence, the other from a deadly sickness, he called
for a gourdful of water, and pouring it on Selim's head; soon restored
him to consciousness.  Then the refined cruelty of the slave-traders,
and the utter abomination of the inhuman traffic, began to be exhibited.
Trembling with rage and merciless hate, he called for the long, heavy,
wooden yoke, which, furnished with two prongs a little apart from each
other, is used for the most refractory slaves.  When green, this
yoke-tree weighs about thirty pounds, but dry it generally weighs about
twenty pounds.  One of these tree-yokes had been prepared but a few days
before, so that it could not be much reduced in weight from what it
weighed originally.  This was the clumsy, heavy instrument of torture
with which Tifum designed to encumber Selim's body.

After the neck of the half-unconscious lad was placed between the
prongs, the ends of the prongs were drawn together by means of a strong
cord, so that the head remained firmly imprisoned, while the huge
unwieldly tree of the yoke sloped behind him about ten feet off from his
shoulders.

In order to avoid employing a guard to carry the tree, the end was
lifted up and tied to Abdullah's shoulders and arm.

When things had thus been prepared for the continuance of the march
Tifum proceeded to the dying Isa, and seeing it was hopeless to expect
further work from him, as the look of death was already on his face, the
savage fiend bestowed a kick on the body, and swishing his kurbash
warningly, gave the hint to Selim, who was now the file-leader, to
proceed.  In a short time the caravan was out of sight, while the
unfortunate Isa was left in the middle of the road to gasp his last,
unseen, unwept, and unhonoured.

On the twentieth day of the march it was found that little Mussoud was
attacked with the small-pox.  Numbers of the slaves had already perished
from this fell disease; for as fast as they fell from the ranks and
could not rise again, despite repeated applications of the staff of a
spear, or a rod, or a kurbash, they were left to die the miserable death
of deserted sick where they fell, and not one thought was ever directed
to them again.

Thus when Mussoud became sick, the alarm of his brother Abdullah and his
friend Selim was extreme.  They requested permission to share the burden
of his load by having it tied to the yoke-tree with which Selim's neck
was still furnished, but the slight request was refused, and when the
latter's eyes again flashed a dangerous light, Tifum, who saw that he
had a stubborn soul to deal with, replied with another dose of vigorous
lashing on the boy's shoulders until they were one mass of weals and
bruises.

Selim uttered not a word nor moan; he was getting to be past all feeling
of bodily pain, though his heart was keenly alive and sensitive.  While
plodding along in this manner under the burning sun, no sound breaking
the soft shuffling sound of the tramp of naked feet of the slaves,
except a low moan now and then from poor little Mussoud, and Tifum had
retired to vent his spite upon those in the rear, it struck him as a
sudden idea that he was being punished more cruelly than the others
because, despite the fine religious education he had received, he had of
late, since he had been in bondage, forgotten the God of his fathers,
whom Amer had counselled him so often never to forget.  His conscience
was not a whit more hardened; the reason of this neglect was the
delicacy he felt in approaching his God with unwashed hands and feet;
but now he determined to avail himself of the first opportunity of a
halt, and prepare himself for prayer.

After repeated prayers from the sick boy Mussoud to Tifum to give him
one little halt to rest, it was at last granted; more, however, to give
Tifum an opportunity to light his pipe than for the sake of the sick
boy.

No sooner had Tifum turned his back, than Selim bent down and began to
scrape together the dry, white, sandy dust from the road, and to rub his
feet, and hands, and face, and body with it, as if he were washing
himself; then turning his face to the north-east, in the direction of
Mecca, he began his prayer in a whisper:

"Oh, Thou who art the light of heaven and earth, whom all creatures
praise, unto whom all things belongeth, thou bounteous, wise, and
compassionate God! be gracious and merciful to one of the true
believers, who now standeth before Thy footstool.

"Thou art great, Thou art holy, Thou art almighty, Oh God! and unto
those who invoke Thee Thou hast promised, through Thy prophet Mohammed,
blessed be his name! to be attentive and to lend assistance.

"Thou all-knowing and gracious God! avert from me the torments of
Jehenna, which I suffer at the hands of these infidel savages.

"The unbelievers have laid cruel hands upon me, a true believer, and a
son of a true believer.  Lo! they have bound me like unto a sheep about
to be slaughtered; they have laid their whips upon me, the cruel thongs
have cut into my bones, and with their sharp spears have they gashed me.

"Thou Powerful and Self-sufficient God!  Thou hast promised to protect
the fatherless and the orphan, and to be solicitous for him, and to
punish those who oppress him.

"Thou compassionate and loving God! let the orphan's cries take the form
of prayers, and suffer them to ascend unto Thee before Thy footstool,
and do Thou bow down Thine head, and let them penetrate Thine ear.

"Thou one, only, and eternal God! hearken compassionately onto my
prayers, and rescue me from the unbelievers.

"Thou Lord of men, King of men, and God of men! save me from mine
enemies, by the promise Thou hast given unto all true believers through
Thy holy apostle Mohammed, and be Thy heart softened toward the orphan,
and hear his prayers."

When Selim had finished this urgent, sincere appeal to his God, he
prostrated himself to the earth, and then rose refreshed in body and
spirit.

Turning to Abdullah, who had been attending to his brother, he said:

"Abdullah, my friend, I feel refreshed and strong.  I have a bright idea
in my head."

"I have seen you pray, Selim, and have wished that I could pray, too;
but my heart is too bitter for prayer.  I feel as if I could curse all
men, and myself, and die.  Poor Mussoud's days are numbered, I fear: and
if he dies, I do not care what becomes of me."

"But, my dear friend, the Kuran says: `When thou art in distress pray to
thy God and He will hear thee; His ear is open to the oppressed.'"

"I know it, Selim, but I cannot pray now.  I fear I should curse God for
permitting his faithful to be treated as we have been.  Listen to the
moans of my brother, and think of his being left to die all alone in the
road, because, if he cannot march, they will not let me remain with him!
But what is thy bright idea, Selim?"

"My idea is to run away to-night, and go to the depths of this forest.
Far better to die there than lead this life so wretched.  If one of
these people can trust himself in the forest, why may I not do so?  They
have not been able to kill me with all the weight of their cruelties.
The forest were far kinder than these inhuman Watuta."

"And my brother, what of him?"

"We will take him with us; and when we are alone, safe from our
pursuers, we will be able to nurse him.  We will build ourselves a
strong little hut near some nice stream, where we shall be safe and
quiet; and while you are watching your sick brother, I will take my
spear and go out to gather wild fruit and honey.  But, hush!  Here comes
Tifum.  Help Mussoud to his feet, and let him hold up until to-night."

Just then the stern signal to march was given, and the boys turned
industriously and submissively to their bales; and Mussoud feeling
relieved by the rest, the caravan set out at its usual pace.

About noon they halted in the forest, and, knowing that no danger from
men was to be feared in the forest, the Watuta were heedless of the
usual boma or brush fence around the camp.

The boy-gang being tied together, were of course inseparable, and
Abdullah, in his usual place, sat next to Selim, as they munched their
roasted Indian corn or their half-boiled holcus grains.  Mussoud was
accustomed to sit next to Selim, but owing to his illness he was placed
outside the camp, as all the Watuta knew this disease was contagious,
and what danger lay to the whole unvaccinated camp by the dread presence
of the small-pox.

At night they were still together, Selim and Abdullah.  Inside the
circle of the camp were men seated in circles near the fire, discussing
various topics.  Outside the camp, in the deep, deep night was perfect
silence; not a sound broke upon the ear, save now and then the uneasy
growl of the hyena.

"Well, Abdullah," said Selim, "the night has come, and thou must decide
what thou wilt do."

"Dear Selim, I cannot go and leave my brother.  Poor Mussoud will not
live till to-morrow morning.  I am afraid he is very ill to-night.  His
head was so hot, and he did not seem to know me.  If thou goest away I
shall be alone of us all.  Poor Isa is dead already; Mussoud is dying;
and thou wilt be gone; and I shall be alone."

"Well, Abdullah, if thou dost not go, I shall.  I am tired of this life.
I wish to die.  I am not afraid of death, but it shall never be said
that Selim, the son of Amer, died like an ass in the road, to be spurned
by the foot of that dog Tifum, like poor Isa was.  If I am to die, let
me die like an Arab, with none but my God to pity my wretchedness, with
none but the birds of the air around my bed.  Do me this favour,
Abdullah, friend of my heart.  If Mussoud still lives in the morning,
tell him Selim is gone, and give him one kiss for me; and before thou
goest to sleep thou must give me one, for when thou wakest up in the
morning, Selim, the son of Amer, will be gone.  The lashing of this
clumsy yoke around my neck is already loose; it only requires a second
to be free."

"I thank thee, Selim, for this thought of my brother.  I wish thee God's
peace and blessing.  If I live after this hard march, I shall dream and
ever think of thee, and shall sometimes whisper thy name in my prayers,
that the angels may carry it to thy ear, and that some memory of
Abdullah, thy friend, may be preserved in thy heart.  Thou art a true
Arab, son of Amer, a true friend; thy soul is a jewel, brighter and
purer than the diamond.  On the road to thy home look up at night to
those seven stars which thou seest together, and say to thyself,
`Abdullah thinks of me.  Poor Abdullah!'  May the holy Mohammed take
thee to thy mother, and when thou art welcomed back to thy friends,
think of my mother, and bear to her the kindly remembrance of her son.
Selim, dear friend, I am about to compel myself to sleep, that I may be
ready for my morrow's work.  See!  I kiss thee with the kiss of lasting
friendship, and, since thou goest, be strong with Abdullah's faith that
Allah will save thee!"

They then both lay down, and, after a few uneasy tossings, Abdullah fell
asleep, while Selim also lay down to plan out his march.  Suddenly he
remembered the parting words of Simba and Moto, and wondered to himself
how he had not thought of them before, as they would have enabled him to
bear up with a little more patience and fortitude the trials he had
undergone.  But they came not too late; he felt that with such friends
as those he was not alone in the world, and he resolved on leaving the
camp to strike south, then wait a day in the woods, and afterwards
strike off through the forest until he came near to a village in Ututa,
and then lie in wait for some one who would direct him to Katalambula.
A cruel thought came across his mind once, to stab Tifum with his own
spear, but he instantly rejected it as unworthy of an Arab and the son
of Amer bin Osman.

The hours passed by, but not wearily, as Selim's thoughts had been busy.
All slept soundly, and the fires also seemed to have fallen into
drowsiness, for nothing but dull red embers marked the places where the
fires stood.

He muttered a short prayer to God for courage and strength, and the
lashings of the cruel yoke fell apart, and he drew his head through,
free.  Free! not yet.

He stood up silently, walked straight to a tree deliberately but
noiselessly, chose a couple of spears, a gun, a powder horn, and a
cartouche box, and began to withdraw as stealthily as he had advanced.

It seemed an age to him, the time before he began to congratulate
himself that he was safe; for so precious were the articles in his
possession, and so rich seemed the prospect of freedom.

A few long strides brought him from tree to tree, and the more he
counted of these trees the more certain was he of safety.  Tree after
tree was passed, their tall thick columns--taller and thicker by night--
formed a denser rampart between him and his enemies, an impenetrable
protection against pursuit.

Finally, he was free!  Free he felt, freely he walked, freely he
thought, and the new idea, as it settled in his mind, seemed to fill him
to strangling, it had such power of expansion; the lungs were more
inflated, the stride became firmer, the head assumed a prouder air, and
the back of him straightened rigid!

He was impelled forward, fatigue seemed to fly from him, an eager
urgency of movement seemed to have come upon him; he was walking against
time for freedom!

An endless number of dark solemn trees were passed, countless numbers of
acres in front, behind, and around him, of this tree-covered upland, and
still it remained night.  To darkness there seemed no end, nor did he
want it to have end; he wished it would ever remain night and his
enemies ever sleep.

But though the night was long, and friendlily sheltered him with its
kind mantle of impenetrability, through which a fugitive was not
visible, it had an end, for all things have an end; but Selim and the
Watuta camp were far apart!

Daylight--a dull grey mantle seemingly, which night had put on for a
fickle change--appeared, but greyer and greyer it came through the
foliage above; it then came pale, and then a steely blue.  A streak of
silver light shot athwart his path; the foliage was a bright green, and
the leaves moved responsively, gently sighing to the morning wind!

How cool, how fresh it was!  How newly-born seemed the world, while the
hum of busy insect life told him there were other creatures, after their
rest, rejoicing in the new light of day!

It became full day, for the sun, a round globe of living fire, or like a
fiery balloon, surged upward light and airily.  But oh! with what
different feelings he gazed upon it now.  Yesterday it was hateful with
its dry heat and blister, and its thirst-begetting warmth; to-day it was
like a huge lamp hoisted up to the sky to light the dim and lengthy
aisles of the forest.  There was no heat nor thirst in its appearance,
nothing but strengthful vigour and cheery light!

At noon, Selim came to a quiet pool in the forest; the lotus flowers
rose like yellow cups above its surface, while the leaves lay languidly
flat.  All around the rim the pool was garnished with these water
flowers of Africa; and, so decked, it looked like a great shallow dish
adorned with a pictured border!  How delicious did the water taste!  How
cool and tranquil the spot!  What deep silence pervaded the forest at
noon!  How soothing to the fugitive soul!

A little distance off he espied a large baobab, which had a hole in its
body.  Walking to it and looking in, he saw the hole led to a large
hollow in the tree, as large as a small chamber.  He crept in, for it
was empty, and there he laid down to rest, and finally he slept.  He had
escaped, and was safe!

It was night when he awoke; he must have slept eight or ten hours; there
were no means of knowing how many.  It was evidently a hard task to wake
up, for after the first movement indicating life, he lay still, and
tried to compel the sodden brain to recover its duty, and the eyes to
aid it by piercing that thick darkness of the natural chamber in which
he found himself.  Bit by bit, the senses resumed the old order of
things.  Mind stirred up, and gave its master to know that he had run
away from a most cruel slavery.  Ah! yes! and, the keyword touched, all
became clear.

"The Watuta!--that torturing yoke-tree, and the sleepless nights it
caused me! my galled shoulders, my wealed back, my racking head! that
monster Tifum! that fierce man-animal whom pity never touched! that
pariah dog-face, repulsive in its animal malignity! those thick lips
which uttered such horrible blasphemy! that always-ready whip!  Who can
forget him?  May the foul mother who bore him, and her fouler son,
perish like one of those whose fate will be Al Hotamah!

"All is clear to my mind now.  I am free!  Arise, my soul, for further
freedom; the dark night is kinder than day.  The wilderness will take
more pity on me than man.  Shake thyself, son of Amer, thy mother is
patiently waiting for thee; thy kinsmen at Zanzibar still look for thee.
Courage, my heart, there is nothing to fear."

He rose to his feet and looked out.  "Is that a beast, or is it my timid
fancy which creates such a shape?  Hush, that was a step! a slow,
stealthy step of padded feet; no man alone in the wilds would walk on
all fours.  Hush, but a moment.  Ah! what is it?"

For just then an unearthly laugh--terrible in its satiric wildness of
tone--rang through the forest.  It was startling for a moment, because
it was unexpected, and fearful, because it seemed to challenge all the
denizens of the wilds.  "What beast can it be?

"Ah!  I remember now.  Moto has told me of it.  It is only a hyaena, and
the hungry fellow has scented a prey.  Not yet, my friend, can I be
thine.  Selim is safe from thy jaws.  He must see Zanzibar first, before
any of thy species can eat him.  Oh God!--"

The satiric laugh of the hyaena was succeeded now by a roar which echoed
through the forest, and another and another succeeded it, which almost
deafened the lad with its volume and power.  No animal but the dread
king of the forest could have emitted such sounds, and there is nothing
more startling than the first sudden bellowing outburst of his lungs--it
is so deep, so protracted; but, as if he expends the concentrated power
of his lungs in the first roar, the others which succeed it come out in
short, gasping, rasping sounds, which seem to chase one another as they
peal through the forest in quick succession.  Though the first sudden
outburst is startling, even appalling, when unexpected, a certain
feeling of admiration quickly succeeds the first fear, at the volume and
the force of it, and at the echoes which it wakes up.

"It is a lion!" said Selim to himself when he had regained his
bewildered senses; "the king of beasts.  I have often desired to see
thee and to hear thee, but I may not venture too near thee, as I fear
thy claws and thy cavernous mouth.  Halt where thou art until dawn, my
friend, and I will look at thee well, but just now I will remain here.
Ah, that is right; thou comest nearer, but I have a gun, and there is a
bullet in it, O lion, so thou hadst better keep a respectful distance.
The window through which I look at thee is too small for thee to enter;
besides, king of beasts, I need no companion like thee in this small
chamber with me.  How my bones would crack under thy strong jaws, and
what a delicious morsel thou wouldst deem me.  The _hulwah_ of Muscat [a
species, of sweets made in Muscat, Arabia] were as nothing to it; the
honey of thy native wilds were bitter compared with my flesh, and bones,
and warm blood.  Nay, I beseech thee keep thy distance, O lion.  If thou
art hungry catch that laughing devil of a hyaena; but me, poor me, thou
wilt surely not harm me!"

But the lion had advanced nearer to the tree; he had also scented a
prey, and while he knew that the prey was contained within the tree, he
was doubtful whether he could obtain the wherewithal to satisfy his
hunger, and this was why he advanced roaring.

Arriving at the foot of the tree he halted, and stood looking up at the
tempting morsel.  As if he heard and understood the low-spoken words
which the Arab youth addressed to him, he uttered another terrific roar.
This caused Selim to draw in instinctively and seize his gun, but at
the same instant the lion's form came bounding in at the hole through
which Selim had entered, where he clung tenaciously with his claws, and
endeavoured to drag himself in.  Then Selim, with his heart in his mouth
at the dreadful presence, put the muzzle of the gun against the lion's
head and fired, and the monster fell dead outside.

Selim, finding it dangerous to leave his friendly shelter, resolved to
remain where he was until morning, and after he had listened, a long
time at the aperture of the tree, and became satisfied that the lion was
dead, he laid down again on the floor of his natural chamber, and,
happily for one in his situation, fell asleep once more.

About two hours after dawn he awoke, and immediately going to the
window, he looked down, and when he saw the dead lion stretched stiff at
the foot of the tree, he said to himself:

"He would have it; he would not listen to me.  Like Tifum he revelled in
his strength, and was conscious of his might, and, like him, he wished
to rend and tear me, but I have a gun, and I would that Tifum came after
me, so that I could give him the same answer I gave this lion."

As he spoke, he placed his spears outside, then his: gun, then went out
himself, and, taking his weapons up, he stood by the body of the lion.

The following thoughts, though unexpressed, ran through his mind:

"Behold! how strong this lion was early last night--how proud his pace
as he roamed through the silent forest looking for his prey!  All the
animals ran from before him, and left him lone in his proud strength.
As if they knew his power, the echoes submissively sent his voice
pealing through the long colonnades of the forest, like the heralds
trumpeting the approach of a king.  His eyes pierced the darkness and
searched the night, his nostrils scented prey and blood, and he came and
stood before me, the relentless tyrant of the wilderness!  His great,
flaming eyes glowed red with rage, his nostrils dilated wide as he
thought of his hunger and the prospective feast; he pawed the ground and
whirled his tail in fury, and tossing his mane back impatiently, he
sprang at me and met his death.

"Now, how weak!  An unarmed infant might play with his mane and pull at
his great teeth.  There lies no more danger in him; and as he is, so may
all my enemies be!  Farewell, thou lion!  I would have preferred thou
were not so unclean.  My hunger is now sharp, and woe befall the hoofed
animal I meet, but thee I may not eat."

Then Selim, shouldering his gun and spears, having observed the sun, and
found out the direction he intended to go, strode on, looking keenly to
the right and left for any game that might promise him relief from the
gnawing pangs of hunger he began to feel.  He had been now thirty-six
hours without food, for he had disdained to steal the rations of his
comrades, as he might have done, knowing from experience that the slave
who lost his rations or consumed them before the next distribution of
food was very apt to suffer, as none of his fellows, having nothing too
much for himself, could find charity enough in his own destitution to
share with him.

Thirty-six hours is a long period for a growing boy to be without food,
and Selim began to feel it.  There were none of those wild fruit-trees,
so common in Ukonongo, and Kawendi, and Usowa, the mbembu, the singwe
(the wild wood-peach and plum); no wild grape nor nux vomica fruit, as
in the south-eastern forests of Urori.  The long, extensive plain south
of the Cow River seems to have made two zones, different from each
other, of Southern Unyamwezi and South-western Urori.  The trees in this
forest were more adapted for building purposes; but had Selim understood
the ways of wild life in the forest, had he been anything but the
tenderly-nurtured and pampered youth from Zanzibar, even here he might
have found plenty of eatable roots.  There was no lack of these about
him; the roots of those long, slender, primate-leafed plants, on which
he trod, he would have found to be as nutritious as the yams of
Zanzibar.  But the boy was innocent of this knowledge, and so he kept
on, seldom looking on the ground, except when he began to feel
disheartened.

As it was approaching sunset, however, he espied a small antelope
crouching behind the bushes about fifty yards from him.  Lifting his
gun, with a prayer for success, he fired, and the animal, after making
two or three convulsive leaps, fell wounded on its side.  Hurrying up,
he caught it as it was about to rise to its feet, and using one of his
spears as a knife, looked towards the north-east, in the direction of
Mecca, and uttering his fervent "Bismillah"--(in the name of God!) the
pious youth cut its throat.

Then, proceeding with the work of preparing the meat, he cut off the
head, skinned the animal, and extracted the inward parts, which he left
for the hyaenas, while the eatable portions he conveyed to the fork of a
great tree, where he intended to rest that night.

Hastily collecting some dry leaves, twigs, and sticks, he conveyed these
also to the fork of the tree, and with the aid of some powder, he
succeeded, after much patient work, in making a fire, over which he
placed whole pieces of the antelope to roast, or rather to warm, for his
ravenous hunger would not permit him to wait for the roast.

Had Selim understood the art of travelling, he would, of course, have
cut the meat into thin strips, and have dried them slowly over the fire,
and by this means have furnished himself with sufficient food for two or
three days.  But not knowing the art, he had placed all the pieces over
the fire at once, believing, doubtless, like many other hungry people,
that he could eat them all at one meal.  Before, however, he had eaten
half of one leg, he felt gorged; and feeling tired, put out the fire,
raked all the ashes away, and when the fire-place had cooled somewhat,
he laid himself down, with his legs coiled, and went to sleep.

In the morning, before starting on his journey again, he ate the other
half of the leg, out of which he had formed his supper, and tying the
other three legs together, he descended the tree and resumed his march.

During that day he was more bent upon walking than upon anything else;
consequently he made a good day's march.  At night, when he began to eat
his supper, perched, like the night before, in the fork of a great tree,
he perceived the meat was tainted, but as he had no other means of
gratifying his hunger, he suppressed the rising nausea, and contentedly
ate the ill-smelling meat.

In the morning the meat swarmed with maggots, and he tossed it from him
with disgust, and, without breakfast, resumed his journey.  During the
morning he travelled, at noon he rested; and for a couple of hours in
the afternoon he contrived to hold on, until, faint with hunger, he was
compelled to halt and go to sleep supperless also.

Another day dawned, and Selim, descending from his perch, resolutely
determined upon prosecuting his journey.  The forest was unusually
silent and deserted; not an animal crossed his path; a few kites alone
hovered above.  Hour after hour he dragged his weakened legs along till
the sun was sinking over the western horizon.  He had seen no water on
this day, and thirst sharply and severely attacked his frame.

And still another day dawned.  Hunger and thirst had made great inroads
on his strength, and had begun to sap his resolution.  If he had but
known that a few hours ahead of him lay the corn-fields of the Watuta
villages, or if he had but known that only a mile north of the line he
traversed lay the road over which Ferodia's caravan had travelled two
days before!  But enveloped round about by the great forest, to which
there seemed to be no end, he knew nothing,--tiny mite that he was,
alongside of one of those straight-stemmed and towering trees,--beyond
the thin line of vision which his low stature permitted him.  Could he
only have seen one foot above those trees, he had been safe, and could
have directed his steps whither he desired.  But he could barely see the
sky, so dense was the foliage and so closely did each tree's branches
embrace the other.  How hard it is to strive to attain the end of the
interminable!  What a seeming waste of strength is it to ever work and
work to span the infinite!  How disheartening it is to one to feel that
he can never live to see the end of the endless!  Interminable,
infinite, and endless seemed this forest to the wearied, hungry, and
thirsty Selim.  He strained his eyes ever in his front, hoping that
every low swell of the ground would enable him to see something
encouraging; he looked in all directions for anything bearing the
semblance of a living creature, of beast, or fowl; he looked upwards,
striving to gain a glimpse of the serene face of heaven, which, in his
present state of mind and body, would have afforded him momentary
relief.  Had he been more experienced in African travelling he would
have known how to procure water; he would have known that in any one of
those hollows a few hours' excavation with a pointed stick would have
procured him water, and that if there were not roots to satisfy a
craving stomach, then the land would be poor indeed.  Knowing nothing,
however, of these things, he wasted the precious hours in resting, and
then plunging nervously on his way, until his body was obliged to
confess its weakness and his starved legs refused to go.  When much time
was thus wasted, again he would rise to again fall; and, finally, he
fell fainting to the ground.  Poor boy! he was paying dearly for the
desire of his father to increase his riches by the bartering of cloth
and flimsy beads for human creatures!

After a fainting fit, which lasted some minutes, he sat up, but was too
weak to remain long even in that condition, and he fell back; and while
thus prostrate, with his eyes upward, thought was busy with the
pleasures he had been obliged to leave, and the more his body suffered
the more his thoughts loved to revel in the luxurious scenes he had
known.  Groaning from sheer agony of body, he cried aloud:

"Ah, for one sight of the foaming wave of the Zangian Sea, which curled
at morn into graceful wreaths like liquid flowers as the monsoon gently
kissed it!  One glance, if nothing more, of the snowy strand whereon I
have sported often with my playmates, little Suleiman, and lea, and
Abdullah before we plunged gaily into the foam and spray with which each
moment the sea drenched the margin of the island.  How oft, as nude I
lay stretched on the warm sandy shore, the great sun descending towards
the continent, have I watched the great ships idly rocking on that sea
which in its deep dissolving bosom of blue depths reflected as a mirror
the spotless azure of the sky!  Happy days!  Memory recalls so much that
a thousand years would never obliterate.  My dear father's happy
household gathered under the shade of the towering mangoes, whose rich
fruit, golden, and purple, and brown, hung so temptingly over my head;
the evening zephyr wind gently brushing by the light leaves as it
rustled through from one tree to another with its welcome whispers,
bending, as it flew, the tops of the kingly cocoa and the fragrant
cinnamon, wafting the rich green bough of the orange, whose precious
fruit was as a balm to my soul.  Now could I but feel one in my fevered
hand!  What ample wealth does not my mind bring before my sickened eyes!
The amber-coloured stalk of the sugar-cane and its luscious juice; dark
green leaves of orange and mangoe; great cocoa-nuts, with their
nutritious milk; the brilliant pomegranate, with its sweet soothing
odour and thirst-assuaging pippins; the soft, rich guava, with its
health-giving meat; the lime, with its yellow, golden fruit, at the mere
sight of which fever and thirst are forgotten; and melons, whose deep
green skins cover such crisp, sweet treasures.  Ah! there is no place on
earth to me like the beautiful island of Zanzibar.  It is blessed by the
beneficent God with Eden's wealth.  Streams laugh with gladness and
murmur with joy.  Fresh, healthy winds blow over it, laden with the
fragrance of earth's dearest and best treasures.  God has blessed it
with abundance, and has caused its warm bosom to heave with triumph.
Lo! its gardens pass by me one after another; happy homes stand in their
midst; the pride of my race sit happy under the shade of their orange
trees, surrounded by their dependents, whose faces seem kindled with the
quiet rapture which fills them.  Trees and flowers, houses and gardens,
men and women, hills and valleys, the sea and streams,--all of
Zanzibar,--come nearer to the unhappy and forsaken son of great Amer bin
Osman.

"Come nearer, nearer still, to your kinsman Selim, Let me embrace ye
before my destiny is accomplished!

"No! no!  Ah, ye are unkind!  Gaze in pity upon my abject condition!
Look down upon me, ye that are elated with pleasure.  Mark my
surroundings!  This great, silent wilderness of forest, to which there
is no end; it stretches from sunset to sunrise, from sea to sea; it
excludes light and air; it smothers the earth with its limitless length
and breadth.  Through its thick, heavy drapery of leafage--I may not
breathe, neither be warmed, by ever a single sun-ray.

"Hark to the storm of wind sweeping over the tops of the giant trees!
How it expends its might in attempting to open even a slight gap, that
one of the true believers might see a glimpse of heaven before he dies!
But it may not be.  Nature took ages to build this rampart and construct
this impregnable palisade, and the baffled tempest retreats, and leaves
me hopeless and despairing.

"The air is pregnant with deadly vapours; gigantic trees, fallen from
extreme age, lie prone on the ground, infested by myriads upon myriads
of creeping things; withered branches strew the ground thickly, and
their leaves, long since dead, lie damp and sappy, reeking with every
insect abomination.  From afar, like the indistinct and distant sound of
thunder, is borne to my ears, after traversing aisles upon aisles, the
hungry lions' roar, suggestive of what may happen if relief comes not
early to the lonely Arab boy; and my quickened hearing catches strains
of a still fiercer meaning, the voice of the leopard calling to his
mate, mingled with the growls of the hyaena.

"Ah, cruel chance, that my fresh young life should be thus beset with
dangers which menace it.  What sin has my infancy committed that my
youth must be punished so severely?  What wrong have these boy-hands
performed, that their owner merits death?  What guile has ever my
childhood's heart conceived for which my youth must pay the penalty?
What crime has ever my brain meditated, that I must be reft of my life
at so early an age?  None,--none.  I but ever acted as I knew how; not
wantonly, not recklessly, but just as instinct and nature, untutored,
impelled me to.

"I would my father had never felt the power of manhood, or met my
mother.  I would my mother's womb, with its embryo, had withered up;
then had I not been born to encounter such evil days.  From the evil day
Khamis bin Abdullah kindled in my father's breast knowledge of his
comparative poverty I date the birth of my misfortune; from that time
hard and evil days innumerable have I seen; mischance has succeeded
mischance, danger succeeded danger, one suffering has produced another.

"I saw my parent die as became the chief of his tribe.  The friendly
shields, which endeavoured to shelter him from harm, averted not the
death which sought his lion heart; his companions in arms fell thickly
around him in heaps upon heaps of unnumbered dead; while I stood alone,
first to wonder at the strange phase of nature--death, then to mourn for
the great loss that had befallen me, then to suffer torture like that to
those who visit Eblis, and, finally, to wish that I had never seen the
light which animates the earth, or had died upon that fatal field of
battle.  I, the son of great Amer, was made a slave by those hideous
Watuta, who are but monstrous apes, was stripped of my clothing to have
my modest youth shocked by the unbelievers' rude gaze.  When, blushing
at their impertinence, I resented the rough behaviour, they bound and
scourged me, and they laughed and mocked me as the tortured flesh gave
way and hung in gory tatters, and the red blood dyed my limbs crimson.
Probed and pricked by their spears, they drove me to the journey amongst
a herd of other slaves, while the relentless sun streamed its rays upon
my naked and defenceless body, and I thought that all the agony of the
damned was not to be compared to that which I suffered.  Ah, the
suffering that followed!  The long, long days of marching, which seemed
to be interminable, the protracted pains from thirst, the weary, leaden
limbs that refused to be moved at my command, the long, long,
immeasurable road, the poor victims that fell never to rise again, whom,
nevertheless, I envied for their eternal relief from misery and poignant
pain.  Their stolid faces upturned to heaven, blank and unmeaning; the
unwinking eyes, that must have once reflected domestic joys, gaped wide,
but were dim and glazed, and nothing more on earth would ever cause them
to cover that horrible, steady gaze on emptiness and vacancy; the greedy
vulture might peck at them, the kites might satiate themselves on their
entrails, the hyaena might gorge himself on their flesh, yet those once
sensitive eyes would never wink their discontent.  This is death!  It is
real death.  It is the death which threatened me until, rendered
desperate by the keen terrors which filled me one night, I deserted that
ever-moving caravan, to find myself after a time in this strait, and the
terror of death has followed me hither.  Every thought, and moan, and
cry speaks of it.  For ever present is the fearful sight of death; it is
in this stagnant, oppressive air which I breathe; and the tomb which God
has raised above my head--in these lofty columns, bearing far up their
leafy roof--I see.

"Fit tomb for an Arab chief's son.  A sultan of the Arab tribes might
envy me mine.  But where are the mourners?  There should be my kindred
weeping hot tears over Selim's early death.  My mother, with her maids,
should be present to wash my limbs ere shrouding them with snowy shash
[fine bleached domestic, or cotton cloth].  There should be my
playfellows to chant a dirge over my early departure from this life; and
the holy Imam to repeat the prayers for the dead.  There should be my
kinsmen to dig my grave, and women to weep.  But I am alone, to die
without bidding farewell to my friends,--to die without taking with me
to that other world that last enduring look of love from all who
esteemed me, which must ever thrill the souls of those who leave
sympathising friends behind.  Then come and welcome, cruel, cruel Death;
wreak thy will on me; my limbs are already chained to that earth of
which they are a portion; thou hast hedged me around with thy terrors
and affrighted my soul long enough; thou hast advanced and receded, as
though it were child's play; I have alternately felt strong and faint,
felt brave and weak.  I may not balk thee longer!

"Farewell, happy island, with thy purling streams, thy orange-groves,
thou home of my happy childhood, home of my kindred!

"Farewell, thou solemn earth; ay, bend thine head with shame for the
frown with which thou hast regarded thy innocent child!

"Farewell, thou monster Death!  Thou tyrant!  I am conquered; and I--I
must--yield.  I come, father, dear fa-ther!"



CHAPTER SEVEN.

FERODIA'S TRIUMPHAL APPROACH--HIS RECEPTION BY KATALAMBULA--THE KING
PRAISES FERODIA--ABDULLAH IS GIVEN TO KALULU--ABDULLAH MEETS WITH SIMBA
AND MOTO--KALULU'S PLAN OF SEARCH FOR SELIM--A GUN FOUND--SELIM FOUND--
THE SENSELESS FORM OF SELIM CARRIED TO THE VILLAGE--SELIM RECOVERS--
KALULU FRATERNISES WITH SELIM--KALULU'S FRIENDSHIP FOR SELIM.

On the twenty-ninth day after the battle of Kwikuru, Ferodia, the chief
of the Watuta, made his triumphant entrance to Katalambula's village.
Messengers had arrived the night before at the King's house to announce
the approach of the victorious chief; and when next morning, near noon,
a great cloud of dust was perceived on the left bank of the river, then
the women, posted on every advantageous point for a good view, began the
glad lu-lu-lu-ing, and the welcome tones, when heard by the Watuta, were
answered by them with a shout which might have been heard at the great
lake into which the Liemba ran.

Long before Ferodia had emerged from the leafy corn-fields on the left
bank of the river, the vicinity of the great gate of Katalambula's
village was thronged by a multitude of men, women, and children gathered
from the rich plain around, who were the brothers, cousins, nephews,
wives, sisters, and children of the warriors whose return was now so
enthusiastically, nay, frantically, welcomed.  Two thousand voices
sounded the happy "lu-lu-lu;" four thousand hands were clapped together;
four thousand legs, brown and black, and black and brown, danced,
leaped, moved, and wriggled as the emotions of their owners moved them.

And Ferodia was all this time slowly approaching, while the drums, with
tremendous thunderous volume of tone, ushered him into the presence of
the assembled multitudes.  Note him well as he approaches.  What
civilised monarch ever acted the triumph he felt so well as Ferodia?
What civilised king ever possessed that gait?  What actor could have
imitated Ferodia?  Mark his steps, his lion strides, with his legs
encumbered with one hundred rings of fine wire.  Watch how negligently
he lays his arms, heavy with broad ivory wristlets, on the shoulders of
the supple-bodied youngsters, who are jealous of this high honour
conferred on them.  Note the toss of his head with its wealth of braids!
It is the majesty of triumph impersonified.  Happy men would those
actors be who could but imitate that regal air!

The procession is in the following order, as it appears before the gate
and the multitude.  Two hundred warriors in front of Ferodia, file after
file, each head adorned with feathers in huge, dancing, waving tufts,
each man solemnly marching through the gate into the quadrangular square
surrounded by the King's quarters to occupy one side of the square in
line.  Then Ferodia himself, supported by two stalwart young warriors,
one on each side.  Then two hundred warriors, each warrior's face
surrounded by the black, stiff hairs of the zebra's mane, stripped
entire with the hide from the zebra's neck, which gives each warrior a
fierce appearance, much fiercer than the black bearskin caps give to
English hussars.  Then the adult captives in gangs of twenty, bearing
the plunder Ferodia had taken from the Arabs.  Then the boy captives, at
the head of whom was Abdullah, whose white face and body obtained
universal notice.  Then five hundred warriors bringing up the rear, each
head decorated according to the caprice of its owner, with feathers, and
red, white, and blue cloth.

The nine hundred warriors were formed around the square, while the
captives, after depositing their loads near the great tree in the centre
of the square--the cloth bales by themselves, the beads in a separate
pile, the boxes by themselves, the kettles, pots, pans, and
miscellaneous goods by themselves, the powder barrels and bullets by
themselves, and the guns by themselves--formed a circle around the tree.

Katalambula was seated on his mud bench or sofa, which was garnished on
this occasion with over a score of lion and leopard skins.  In his hand
was a short rod, to the end of which was neatly fixed a giraffe's tail,
with which he negligently whisked the flies from his face.

The multitude which we first saw outside the gate had climbed upon the
roofs of the square tembes, and looked down now intent upon the
warriors, the slaves, the plunder, and the king, seated with Kalulu and
the grey-headed elders and councillors of the tribe under the tree.

Ferodia stood with spear in hand alone in the centre of the inner circle
formed by the ring of slaves, and close to the great heaps of spoil he
had taken from the camp of the Arab traders.  His attitude was
unmistakeably grand, and spoke the proud chieftain.  A broad robe of
crimson blanket cloth, which trailed to the ground, was tied in a knot
over his left shoulder, leaving his right shoulder free.  There was a
dead silence; not a word was heard from the warriors or from the
multitudes.  Then the mild voice of Katalambula was heard, saying:

"Ferodia, we have expected thee.  We have heard of thy great success;
how thyself and the Watuta warriors have triumphed over the Arab
traders.  Speak, our ears are open."

Then Ferodia replied: "O King, and ye elders of our tribe!  I was sent
by Katalambula to bear presents to his friends, the Warori chiefs; and,
as I had concluded, I was thinking of returning to Ututa, when Olimali
sent word to my camp that the Arabs--the traders from the sea--had come
to his country with an immense store of cloth and beads.  He said they
were of those who had slain Mostana thy brother, O Katalambula."

"Eyah!  Eyah!" greeted the speaker from the king and his elders, in
which Kalulu joined.

Lifting his voice higher, and adopting a more energetic strain, while
his spear was used to describe gestures, Ferodia continued:

"When I heard the words of Olimali, the King of the Warori, I became as
a hungry lion, even as a roaring lion before his prey.  I said aloud,
`Lo, Malungu (the Sky-spirit, or God) has put the Arabs into my hands,
even the slayers of Mostana, thy brother.  I will arise and avenge
Katalambula and Mostana's son on them.  I will make strong drink from
their bodies, and give their entrails to the fowls of the air, and their
heads I will raise before Olimali's gate to the terror of all other
Arabs who come, and murder, and steal, and make slaves, from near the
sea.'"

"Eyah--eyah!" shouted the multitude.

"When the morning came, the Watuta warriors were in the bush and in the
corn.  They heard the horn of Olimali, they heard the noise of the
Arabs' guns, they heard the shouting and the battle, and, at my signal,
the Watuta warriors rose as one man.  They came with the swiftness of
arrows, like the flash of a bright spear.  We saw the foe in the village
of Olimali, we hemmed them round, we closed the gates, and we began to
slay.  Before our arrows and spears the foe fell in numbers, in heaps,
until those that were left cried aloud for mercy, and fell on their
knees.  Then we made slaves of hundreds of men and boys, and bound them
captives for Katalambula.  We took guns, and powder, and bullets; we
gathered a heap of wealth, of fine cloth and beads.  Of the cloth, and
beads, the guns, and powder, and lead, I have given half to Olimali, the
King of the Warori.  Then each Mtuta warrior received his due, six
cloths to each man; the Watuta chiefs received their due, and Ferodia
took a share.  Fifty slaves died on the road to Ututa, two Arab slaves
died, and one white Arab ran away to die in the forest.  We have two
hundred and fifty men-slaves, and seventeen boy-slaves left, one of whom
is the son of an Arab chief.  The cloth, and the beads, and the other
plunder from the Arabs lie before you in these heaps.  O King, and ye
elders of the tribe, I have spoken."

"Eyah! eyah!" burst out in applausive accents amid clapping of hands and
lu-lu-ing from all the people.

Then Katalambula spoke and said, "O Ferodia, great chief and warrior!
thou art like a right arm to me; thou art a very lion in war.  Who is
stronger than thou in the battle?  The Wabena, the Wasowa, the
Wakonongo, and even the Wajiji, have felt thy spear.  Verily thou hast
spread the name of the Watuta and the renown of Katalambula to the ends
of the earth.

"Let the people hear, and let the elders open their ears.  What king has
a warrior like Ferodia?  He goeth forth with empty hands, but returneth
full.  He goeth from the village poor, and returneth rich.  His warriors
are beggars when they depart from us, but they return with Merikani, and
Kaniki, fine Sohari, and Joho cloth, and their nakedness is hidden under
heaps of finery.  Who is like unto Ferodia?  Were not our maidens in
tears when he and his warriors left us?  Lo, and behold, they are now
laughing, and their hearts dance for joy.  Were not our children hungry
when he departed?  Lo, and behold, they cry no more, for their bellies
are full.  Katalambula--even I--was poor, whereas who is to be compared
to me now in wealth?  Verily thou art great and good, Ferodia, and
Katalambula is pleased with thee.  I have spoken."

Then Katalambula got up and examined the slaves, while Ferodia walked by
his side and commented on such as exhibited extraordinary qualities; and
in going around the circle, the King came to the boy-gang, and when he
came to Abdullah he could barely contain himself for delight and
gratified curiosity.

"Verily," said he, "the Arabs are strange people, and this is one of
that race.  Strange people; all white!"

Katalambula put out his finger to touch the pale skin of Abdullah, and
he instantly drew it back as if the skin had bitten him, laughing at
himself for his timidity.  But, encouraged by Ferodia, he placed his
hand on his shoulders, and marvelled at their softness; and then toyed
with the boy's hair, remarking that it felt like goat's hair.  Then the
boy was obliged to open his mouth while Katalambula peered down his
throat, as if he were in search of some hidden treasure, or as if he
expected something would jump out, since the white boy was such a
wonderful creature.

"But what are you going to do with him?" asked Katalambula.

"It is for the King to command," said Ferodia, in an insinuating tone.

"Well, I will give him to Kalulu; but I thought there were three of
them; or were there four?"

"Only three white," said Ferodia; "one died on the road, a little
fellow, and the tallest ran away, about five days from here."

"Why did he run away?" asked the King.

"Because he was a fool, and the son of a fool," responded Ferodia.  "I
never saw such a stubborn ass; his mouth was full of words, but his back
had no work in it; therefore he preferred to die in the woods, as he
cannot live.  Yet had he spirit enough for two warriors, and he would
have made a fine slave by-and-bye."

"Who art thou speaking of, Ferodia?" asked young Kalulu.

"Now, hold thy tongue, boy, and do not thou interfere with the affairs
of men; but rather see how good Ferodia, thy uncle, is to thee; he has
given thee that white slave for a playmate.  Take him, cut loose his
bonds, and teach him to be a warrior."

"Nay, let Ferodia answer me," persisted Kalulu, "and I will then see
about the white slave.  Who is he that has run away?"

"If thou must know," said Ferodia, looking on Kalulu kindly, "'twas a
young Arab slave, about thy age, who ran away.  He was the son of a
chief, and I half suspect he was driven to run away by Tifum's
unkindness."

"Tifum Byah!" cried Kalulu; "no wonder he ran, Ferodia; Tifum has not a
gentle hand; but I will see thee again, uncle.  I must look after my
white slave now, and teach him to eat first."

And Kalulu, leaving the King and Ferodia to pursue their examinations
into their property, turned to Abdullah with a curious look, and then,
taking his spear, he proceeded to cut the rope around his waist; then,
beckoning to the astonished Arab boy, he walked away towards his own
quarters, followed by him.

When he had Abdullah in his own apartment, all to himself, he again
turned to take a look at him, and silently surveyed him from head to
foot.  Then, walking up to him, he stood with his back to Abdullah's,
and, putting his hand over his head, he seemed desirous of knowing
whether he was taller than him; and having satisfied himself, he turned
round to him again, and, smiling, said to him in Kituta--the language of
Ututa:

"Son of an Arab, canst thou speak Kituta?  No? is that what thou meanest
by shaking thy head?  Canst thou speak Kirori?  No, again?  Kibena,
perhaps?  No?  Canst thou speak Kinyamwezi?  No?  Then what language
dost thou talk?  But, never mind, thy head must think of thy belly now;
I will go fetch thee some food.  Sit down on this bullock-hide until I
return."  And Kalulu vanished, having pointed to the hide on which he
desired Abdullah to seat himself.

[_Ki_ placed before Tuta means, the language of Tuta; _U_, the country
of Tuta; _Wa_, people of Tuta; _M_, a man of Tuta.  This rule is the
same with other African names.]

Presently he returned with a female slave bearing some roast kabobs
(small pieces of meat), rice, honey pombe, or native beer, and a thick
porridge; and pointing to the food and to his mouth, he intimated to him
his desire that he should fall to and eat; which Abdullah, casting a
grateful look on him, was not slow to understand and to avail himself
of.

After watching the Arab boy eat for some moments, he left the hut again,
but soon returned with two men, whose faces immediately attracted
Abdullah's attention and made him cease eating from surprise.  When he
opened his mouth to speak, he ejaculated--

"Simba!  Moto! how came you here?"

"Abdullah! poor boy!"

The two men having spoken, Abdullah sprang to his feet, and, throwing
his arms first around Simba's neck, then around Moto's, he embraced and
kissed them both, and shed floods of tears from joy, while Kalulu,
looking at them all, smiled with fraternal pleasure.

"I am not alone, then, as I thought; I have still some friends left,"
sobbed Abdullah.  "I thought all had left me."

"Nay, weep not, Abdullah," said Bimba.  "Allah is good.  Tell me, son of
Mohammed, where are Selim, and Mussoud, and Isa?"

"Ah!  Simba; evil days have been our fate ever since we came to Urori.
Isa died of the small-pox soon after starting for Ututa; then, some days
afterwards, Mussoud, my dear little brother, fell ill of the same
disease and died; and Selim--"

"Yes, tell us where he is!" said Moto, eagerly.

"The same night that Mussoud was dying, Selim asked me to go with him to
the forest; he said he could not live longer, while Tifum was beating
him all the time; and to see the men and boys die on the road, and left
to be eaten by beasts of prey, sickened his soul.  I could not go while
the fate of my little brother was uncertain, but I gave Selim my
prayers, and after I had fallen asleep he must have gone, for he was not
by my side when I awoke, and his yoke-tree was empty.  I think he took
with him a gun and some spears, for the Watuta who lost those things
made a great noise about their loss."

"Bun away!" said Simba and Moto, looking at one another blankly.  "Selim
gone! but, Abdullah, did he tell you which way he was going after he
would leave you?"

"He said he intended to try to get to Zanzibar, but while I was dropping
to sleep, or whether I dreamed it or not I can't say, I thought I heard
him mutter something about you, and Moto, and Katalambula."

"Ay, that's it, more likely," said Moto.  "He remembered our warning.
The boy, if he is not here now, must be in that forest still.  Did he
say, Abdullah, whether he would go north or south first?"

"Oh, south, because the camp was on the southern side of the road, and
our part of the camp was the most southerly; so it was easy for him to
slip away unperceived."

"And how many days from here, Abdullah, is the spot from whence Selim
disappeared?"

"We came here in six or seven days--I forget the exact number," answered
the boy.

All this time, Kalulu looked from one to the other; and seeing the looks
of anxiety and uneasiness on the faces of his friends, he asked Moto
what the matter was, upon which Moto explained that his young master was
missing--he for whose sake he had sought out himself and Katalambula.

Then he asked what Moto purposed doing, and was answered that he did not
know, but would consult with Simba; upon which Kalulu promised that,
whatever they did, he would assist them.

Simba and Moto, sometimes assisted by Abdullah, consulted together for a
few minutes, at the end of which Moto informed Kalulu that they had
decided that it was their duty to hunt up their young master, who was by
this, perhaps, perishing from hunger, or was captured again by some
other tribe of the Watuta.

Young Kalulu had expected this would have been the answer; for, being
sharp-witted, and knowing how great was their affection for their young
master, he could have divined nothing else.  And he replied that, if his
assistance was wanting, he was ready with his influence to promote
anything necessary for the restoration of Selim to his friends.  "For,"
said he, "since I have seen what the Arabs are face to face, I begin to
like them.  At least, I think I shall like this one and Selim; besides,
my uncle has already given me this one for a slave, and he will give me
the other one, if I can catch him.  But, Moto, they both shall be thine
when thou wilt demand them from my hands."

When this was translated into Kisawabili, the language of Simba, by
Moto, Simba said to Moto:

"Tell the young chief that if he can get fifty men from Katalambula, on
the pretence that he has heard there are elephants in the forests, we
can start at once, and by spreading out through the woods, either find
him ourselves there, or hear some news of him, or rescue him from those
who have already got him."

After expressing his approval of the scheme, Moto conveyed it by
translation to Kalulu, who replied immediately that he would set about
it at once; and while saying it, he left the hut.

In half an hour he returned, and informed Simba and Moto that the men
were outside the gate waiting for them, though it was unusual to start
on a hunting expedition without the ceremony of the magic doctors.
"However," he added, "I have explained that it shall be done at the
village nearest the forest, where we shall arrive to-morrow at noon if
we travel well.  So come on, Moto; I want to do something too, or
Ferodia will be on everybody's tongue, and Kalulu's name will never be
heard; besides, I want to see this young master of thine, and see if he
is as good as you say he is."

While he had been talking, Simba and Moto had snatched up their guns and
declared themselves ready, and Kalulu, after giving orders to have
Abdullah sleep in his hut, and to be well fed and looked after,
accompanied by Simba and Moto, hastily left the hut.

Kalulu was very proud as he showed his friends his warriors, and was
sure that with such people the lost Arab boy would be found.  Then,
putting himself at their head, with his friends next to him, he rapidly
led the way along which Ferodia had arrived from Urori.

As it was noon when they started, they could continue their march until
late at night, which they did; and a couple of hours before dawn next
morning found them _en route_ again.

At noon, as Kalulu had said, they saw the forest darkening the western
horizon ahead; but between them and the forest was a village, whose
corn-fields were then reached, situated about a mile south of the road,
from which Simba supposed it would be best to spread out, and keep a
sharp eye for anything that promised to furnish a clue of him for whom
they were about to search.

They soon came to the village, and when the inhabitants recognised
Katalambula's adopted son, they manifested great delight, and
immediately set about furnishing him and his men with the best they had,
consisting of bananas, and porridge, beans, and rice, and pombe.

The chief of the village was very assiduous to please Kalulu, and sat
down close to him, imparting local news; and, as he began to impart it,
he remembered an incident which had occurred that morning, which was,
that one of his men, searching for wild honey, a couple of hours off in
the forest, had found a gun.

"A gun!" said Moto.

"A gun!" echoed Kalulu.

"Yes, a gun; and the medicine was in it--the medicine powder and
bullet--for when the man who found it was playing with it, boom! it
went, almost killing him with fright."

"Yes, yes, that's very funny; very funny," said Moto, trying to curb his
impatience; "but did your man find nothing else near it?"

"Nothing else, my brother.  What do you mean?  Was not the finding of a
gun strange enough in a forest which, for aught I know, never saw one
before?  Can many more miracles happen to us like this?"

"But, my brother," urged Moto, with anger in his tones, "how could the
gun have come there if some one had not left it?"

"The Mienzi Mungu (Good Spirit) placed it there for me.  It was not many
days ago since my father, the chief, died; and when I had put him in the
ground deep, and covered him with earth, I collected all his property in
a heap, and thanked the Mienzi Mungu, who had been so kind to me, and
prayed to him to make me rich and strong.  The good Mienzi Mungu has
heard my prayers, and has sent this gun, with its strong medicine, from
the skies, for me."

"Chief, be silent," said Kalulu, holding up his hand; "the heir of
Katalambula commands thee.  Knowest thou the spot where thy man found
this wonderful gun?"

"My lord, thy slave is silent when Kalulu speaks.  I know not the place,
but my man must know."

The man was called, and when he was asked if he had searched the
vicinity for further treasures, he replied that he had not, as he had
hurried away with what he had found to his chief.  He was then told to
prepare himself to accompany Kalulu and his men to the spot where he had
found the marvellous treasure.

Within two hours they had arrived, and stood under a tree in a dense
part of the noble forest.  The trees grew around thickly, with many
towering columns, supporting a mass of leafage, impenetrable to glare of
sun or the white light of day.

On the man pointing the exact spot to Kalulu, Moto, and Simba, the
warriors of Katalambula were formed in line, and one half was ordered to
march northward, each distant from his fellow fifty paces, and the other
half was ordered to step out, with their faces to the south, in like
manner.  The men having thus been posted in skirmishing order, were then
ordered to front towards the east and march forward, observing closely
everything strange they might see.

The men had not advanced far--not more than two hundred yards--when one
of them gave a shout, which instantly attracted the attention of all.
He was seen pointing with excited motions at some object lying on the
ground.  Simba uttered a roar of joy, when, bounding upward to catch one
glimpse of the object, he perceived it to be the pale-coloured and
apparently inanimate body of his young master.  Moto, also, labouring
under no less joyful excitement, shot forward with the speed of an
arrow, and Kalulu's light and graceful form was seen cleaving the air as
he sped with nimble feet towards Simba.  The men soon shared in the
excitement, and came running up to know the cause; and, among the first,
was seen the peasant who had found the gun in this same forest, little
dreaming that its owner lay so near.

But the joy of the leaders was soon turned to sorrow.  The giant Simba
stood nerveless and speechless at the head of the body, Kalulu looked on
with deep sympathy on his face, at the side, while Moto threw himself on
his knees with clasped hands, at the feet, keen anguish written in every
line of his face.  The positions of the others, as they came up one by
one to obtain a view of the prostrate form of the boy, indicated sorrow,
mixed with curious awe; but that of the man through whose aid the body
had been discovered was the most remarkable.

When he had approached the curious object which attracted such attention
and elicited such shouts, he stood stock still, as if he had been
suddenly petrified; but seeing that the pale object bore the semblance
of a man, and that it remained motionless, he advanced slowly on tiptoe,
while his face underwent remarkable changes as his emotions moved him.

"What is it?" he asked of the nearest man to him.  "Is that the Mienzi
Mungu who left the gun?"

"No," answered the man, shortly, "this is not the Mienzi Mungu, thou
fool; 'tis but an Arab boy, who has died from hunger," he added,
proudly, and with the compassionate tone of one who pitied such woeful
ignorance.

"An Arab boy!" he uttered.  "What is that?"

"He is one of the white people who live in the middle of the sea," the
warrior answered.

"Well, what makes him so white?  Is his skin like the shell of an egg?
Is he hard or soft to the touch?" he asked again, with a strange
curiosity.

"Art thou afraid of a dead boy?  Go to the body and feel it, fool."

The peasant smiled foolishly as he was thus rebuked; but presently he
was seen to crawl towards the body and timidly put his hand on the boy's
chest to feel it; but he suddenly removed it with a cry.

"He is not dead!  His skin is soft, and I felt it move!"

Moto and Kalulu sprang and knelt down by the boy's side, and a joyful
sparkle was seen in Simba's eyes as he also bent down and placed one
hand within that of the motionless boy, and the other on the chest.
Moto felt the head, to see if there was internal warmth in it, and
Kalulu seemed desirous of knowing the truth by reading it in the eyes of
Simba and Moto with his own.

"He lives! my young master Selim lives!  Allah be praised!" cried Simba
fervently.

"But he will not live long if we don't carry him away to put something
into him," said Moto, anxiously and hurriedly.  "Dost thou see Simba,
how thin he is? he is nothing but skin and bone--and look here, Simba!
Wallahi! what sheitan (bad man, fiend) has done this?  See the bruises
on his shoulders, and--turn him over on his side--there!--look at his
back, Simba!"

"Moto," answered that great and tender-hearted giant, "Tell me, what
could have done this?  Is it a man?  A man?--no!  No man could have
wounded and striped that back so, because Selim--poor innocent Selim!--
could have done nothing to deserve it.  This is the work of a pure
mshensi (savage), and I will tear out that man's heart, so help me
Allah!  But let us bear him quickly but gently to the village--and,
Moto, ask Kalulu to send the man back running to tell the people to have
some very thin ugali (porridge) boiled in goat's milk ready by the time
we reach there."

The order was given by Kalulu immediately, and Moto, laying hold of his
shoulder-cloth, which he had thrown away from him at the first burst of
excitement, began to spread it out on the ground.  Simba aided Moto then
to lift the wasted form of their young master on the cloth, groaning
from sheer sorrow and grief at the thought of what he must have
suffered, and murmuring to himself, "Selim will tell me if he lives, and
if he dies, little Abdullah will tell me, and then, you sheitan, you
mshensi dog!  I will treat you in the same way as you treated Selim--
sure, sure."

When the senseless form of Selim had been placed on the cloth, Simba and
Moto took hold of each corner of it at the head while two other men were
ordered by Kalulu to take hold of each corner at the feet, and in this
manner they proceeded on their return to the village.

When the party arrived at the village, they found the inhabitants loudly
and excitedly discussing the strange events that had occurred, and the
report which Kalulu's messenger, the peasant, had made concerning the
discovery of a white boy, nearly dead from hunger, in the forest.  The
report that a white boy had been found created an unprecedented surprise
and excitement; no stranger news could have been given in a village
where white people had never been heard of or dreamed of before; the
wildest imagination could not have produced any shape or human figure so
wonderful.  A boy all white! white skin--as white as the yolk of an egg!
They might have imagined black men with horns, or black men with two
heads, six arms, and as many legs as a centipede, or any other
monstrosity; but a white boy, with skin so soft and smooth that the
slightest pressure with the finger produced an impression on it,--this
was wonderful and excelled all tradition.  No wonder, then, that when
the party which bore the white boy was seen advancing, the people made a
general rush to see the curiosity.

But Kalulu, warned by Moto, had thought of this; and his warriors had
been so skilfully arranged that the excited people found themselves
balked; and Moto, Simba, and the other two men bore their burden into an
empty hut which the village chief, at Kalulu's command, showed them.

The ugali, or porridge, which had been prepared, was then taken by
Simba, and while Moto gently forced the mouth of the boy open, Simba,
with a small wooden paddle, which he had soon scooped out into a shallow
spoon, began to drop some of the nourishing gruel into the open month.
The effect was almost instantaneous, although to the anxious Simba it
appeared a long time; the open lips closed and a slight movement of the
throat was observed.  Again the lips opened, and the watchful Simba
poured a few more drops of the warm and grateful restorative, and soon,
as fast as he poured, the thirsty mouth received it, with other
agreeable effects which the friends were quick to perceive.  Kalulu, who
knelt at Selim's head, pointed Simba to the minute beads of perspiration
which had formed on the previously dry forehead, and Moto, placing his
hand on the chest, gladdened the ears of all with the news that the
heart throbbed quicker and stronger.

Presently, Selim heaved a sigh, and the eyelids, hitherto closed,
opened, revealing the lustrous orbs which give light and the sense of
seeing to the body.

"Ay, what eyes! so large and beautiful!" ejaculated Kalulu, with wonder.

"Hush-sh," said Simba, warningly, as he bent his ears to the lips which
now were whispering words which brought the tears to Simba's eyes.

  "And sons shall mourn for Arab fathers slain,
  And Arab wives shall shed their tears like rain."

"Poor boy!" said Simba; "he repeats the words his mother said before son
and mother parted."  And then in a louder tone he said, "Selim, young
master, dost thou know me?"

The head turned round, and the eyes of his young master rested on him
full, with the light of intelligence in them.

"Ah, Simba!  Is it thou?" asked Selim, in a faint but glad voice.

"Yes, I--thy slave Simba.  Praised be Allah for his goodness! my master
knows his slave."

"Where am I?"  Selim then asked.  "I have had such a fearful dream.  I
thought I was dying from thirst and hunger.  But this is not that awful
forest I saw.  I am in a house, and Simba is at my side.  How is this,
Simba?"

"Dost thou not know Moto, master?" asked Moto, who had risen to his
feet.

"And thou too, Moto, here?  Then I am happy.  I am not alone, as I
dreamed I was."

"No, master, thou art not alone; but take some more of this," said
Simba, as he industriously stirred the porridge.  "It is good for thee,
and thou wilt be quite strong by-and-bye."

And Selim obediently opened his mouth and permitted himself to be fed
without demur, though his eyes worked and looked about to aid his mind
in resolving the remarkable change of circumstances which had taken
place since he fell down in the forest from fatigue, hunger, and thirst.

When the gruel was exhausted and he had eaten his fill, Selim found his
strength much recovered, his mind firmer, and he asked Simba to tell him
how this change had come about.  Simba related briefly all the facts
already known to us, to Selim's infinite surprise and joy; and Selim, in
answer to a question from Simba, related what occurred to him, from the
time Simba and Moto disappeared at Ewikuru to the time he laid down as
he thought to die, Kalulu came round now, and kneeled in front of Selim,
and Simba introduced him as the adopted son of the King, who had been so
good to Moto, and as the young chief through whose aid they had been
enabled to discover him.

Selim lifted his hand, and grasped Kalulu's fervently, and asked Moto to
tell him how grateful he felt to him for his kindness, which was no
sooner done than Kalulu said:

"Let the son of the Arab chief eat, and rest, and get strong.  Let
neither hunger nor thirst approach him.  Kalulu is his brother.  With
Kalulu my white Arab brother may tread the forest glades in safety; for
the forest is kind to Kalulu; the trees nod their tall heads to him as a
friend, the birds make music for him, and the honey-bird finds sweet
treasures for him.  The forest is fall of beauty and richness, and
Kalulu's heart is glad when he can roam through it alone.  Neither the
lion nor the leopard harm him, and the wild boar starts in fear when
Kalulu is near him.  Get well, my brother, get strong, and fear harm no
more."

To which Selim answered, while grateful tears filled his eyes:

"The voice of Kalulu sounds in my ears as the living waters of a
fountain in the ears of a thirsty man.  My soul responds to his kind
words as the closed petals of the lotus to the warm light of day.  Fear
and distrust fly from me as the gloom of night and early mist before the
sunshine.  When the heart is tranquil and sadness does not disturb the
mind, a man sees joy in all things; even the sombre forest is reft of
its terrors, and becomes beautiful, the ground is found to be clothed
with sweet grass and pretty flowers.  The waving grain and tasselled
corn does not bend more easily to the breeze than a man's heart does to
his emotions; the dark past will be forgotten by me, and with Kalulu as
a brother I shall find beauty in all things, music in birds, pleasure in
the fields, joy in sunshine and night."

Kalulu replied: "Thy voice, my white brother, makes Kalulu glad.  His
heart grows under its pleasant sounds, and is moved like the foliage by
the soughing breezes.  I will teach thee what the Sky-spirit has taught
the children of the Watuta, and thou shalt teach me what the Sky-spirit
has taught the pale-faced children of the Arabs.  Thou shalt show me
what the great sea is like whose waters are salt, and to what it is like
when the angry pepo (storm) blows on it; and I will show thee the brown
Liemba, where, among the thick matete brake, hides the long-nosed mamba
(crocodile), and where the hippopotamus loves to bathe his great body.
I will show thee the pretty islands, silent as the night in their
loneliness, which are guarded by scores of crocodiles, for me to roam
when I like.  I will teach thee how to hunt the swift antelope and the
leaping springbok; how to pierce the thick hide of the pharo
(rhinoceros); how to laugh at the fierce bellow of the wild buffalo; and
how a Mtuta boy meets the lion.  Eat and get strong.  But tell me, my
brother, how comes thy back so scarred and wealed?"

"Kalulu, my brother, thy words have made me strong already.  Heed not my
bruised body; thy words are a medicine for it.  The music of thy voice
has healed my sores.  I feel them no more."

"Nay, but tell me the name of the man who made them.  Was it Ferodia?"

"No.  Ferodia has not struck me; it was the man they call Tifum Byah."

"Tifum Byah! the cruel dog; but never mind, I will stripe his back for
him."

"Nay, please trouble him not, for my sake, Kalulu; the dark days are
over."

"Well, we shall see," said Kalulu.  "But now we will leave thee to sleep
and rest.  We shall stay two days here, when thou wilt be strong enough
to be carried before Katalambula.  I marvel at the friendship I bear
thee; but Moto was good to me, and when he told me thou wert his master,
I loved thee then.  Now I love thee for thyself.  The Watuta know how to
love and hate, how to like and dislike."

Then, turning to his warriors, who had crowded into the hut, Kalulu
said, "Come, let us leave Moto and Simba with the pale-faced boy; they
will watch him."



CHAPTER EIGHT.

CEREMONY OF BROTHERHOOD--CEREMONY OF BLOOD-DRINKING--SELIM BROUGHT INTO
FERODIA'S PRESENCE--SIMBA TO THE RESCUE--THE WARNING TO KALULU--KALULU
SPEAKS FOR SELIM--WHERE IS PARADISE?--SELIM AND ABDULLAH ARE CLOTHED--
DOWN THE LIEMBRA--THE HIPPOPOTAMUS--OVERBOARD--FIGHTING THE CROCODILE--
HOW KALULU FOUGHT THE CROCODILE--SECURING THE RIVER-HORSE.

On the third day after his discovery in the forest by his friends Simba,
Moto, and young Kalulu, Selim was sufficiently strong to begin his
journey to the village of Katalambula.  Had Kalulu not assured him of
his friendship, and that he would be a brother to him, it is doubtful
that Selim would have looked upon the idea of meeting Ferodia and his
obsequious servant Tifum Byah--to whose tyranny he owed so much misery--
again with pleasure.  But it was agreed between Kalulu and Selim that
the ceremony of brotherhood, of which he had heard much before, should
take place the evening before they arrived at Katalambula's village.

The party travelled by easy stages, and on the fifth day of the journey,
the day set apart for the ceremony of brotherhood, they found themselves
close to the Liemba stream, at a village called Kisari, distant but
eight miles from the capital of Katalambula.

Here the author may remark, for the benefit of the younger readers, that
a close brotherhood among men or boys, unrelated by blood, birth, or
marriage, is in no way singular.  I need but mention David and Jonathan,
Achilles and Patroclus, Damon and Pythias, as examples among men; and
what boy of any nation, in any public school, has not some friend who is
as dear to him as a born brother?  It arises from a similarity of
dispositions generally, from the desire to relieve ourselves from little
anxieties, and to have some one in whom we have thorough confidence.
There were two things singular about this ceremony of brotherhood about,
to be enacted between Selim and Kalulu.  First, was the ceremony of
blood-drinking connected with it; and, secondly, was the fact that a
Moslem boy--a true believer--was about to become a brother with a Pagan
boy--an unbeliever--and to drink his blood.  For it is expressly
prohibited by the Kuran that blood shall be drunk by the true believer;
next, it is expressly prohibited that a true believer shall make any
such close friendship with an infidel.  But it may be argued for poor
Selim that he was yet but a young boy; that he was driven by necessity
to this as the best method of assuring his freedom and safety from
recapture, and this the Kuran, whose laws are not cruel, permits when
there is necessity; and it might be said that Selim was, perhaps, not
aware of the Kuran's prohibition in this small matter; otherwise, I
doubt that a boy so generally pious would have erred against the law of
the Prophet consciously.

On Kalulu's side, nothing could be said against the ceremony.  It was a
common custom with his tribe, when any of them met anybody they liked
better than another, to go through the ceremony.  Sometimes the chiefs
did it with neighbouring chiefs, to strengthen their alliance from
motives of policy, for the same reason that European monarchs contract--
or rather did, for it has lost long ago its former significance--
advantageous alliances among themselves for their sons and daughters.
Kalulu wished the ceremony to proceed, because he had a strong liking
for Selim, born of gratitude to Moto; because Selim was of his own age;
because he had pleasant ways with him, and friendship having grown out
of the accidental circumstances under which they met, he desired to
assure himself, with the ardour of a boy, that real friendship existed
between them.  Once his brother by this ceremony, no one of his tribe
could injure Selim; and Ferodia and Tifum Byah might storm and fret in
vain, for the ceremony of brotherhood with Kalulu could not be
disregarded.  We shall see, however, what came of it.

At sunset, Kalulu was asked to seat himself side by side with Selim on
the ground, which he did, taking hold of Selim's right hand, each with
his profile half turned to the other.  Simba was the master of the
ceremonies on this occasion, who held a knife with all the solemnity of
one who was about to offer a sacrifice to some horrid deity who
delighted in the blood of youths.  Moto stood by as a supernumerary, and
to interpret the words of Simba for Kalulu.  The people of Kisari had
also come to witness the ceremony.

Simba advanced as the sun was setting, knife in hand, while the two boys
retained each other's right hands, and said to Kalulu:

"Art thou willing to be a brother to Selim, to be more than a friend to
him, to share what thou hast with him, to defend him against all enemies
to the best of thy power, and to stand by him until death?"

Kalulu answered, "I am."

"With what wilt thou seal thy word?"

"With the blood of my right arm."

"And what wilt thou give him as a sign?"

"I will give him a sheep."

"Art thou willing further to drink his blood, that his blood may pass
unto thee, that the bond of eternal brotherhood may be made strong and
sure?"

"I am."

Then turning to Selim, Simba asked:

"Art thou, Selim, willing to accept Kalulu as a brother, to be more than
a friend to him, to share what thou hast with him, to defend him to the
utmost of thy power against all enemies, and to stand by him to the
death?"

Selim answered, "I am."

"With what wilt thou seal thy promise?"

"With the blood of my right arm."

"And what wilt thou give him as a sign?"

"I will give him my gun."

"Art thou willing, further, to drink his blood, that his blood may pass
unto thee, that the bond of eternal brotherhood may be made strong and
euro?"

"I am."

"Then let it be done!"  Simba said; and with that he made a small
incision in the arm of each, and as the blood began to flow, he shouted,
"Drink!" and immediately the youths seized each other's right arms, and
left their right hands free, and putting their lips to the wounds,
sucked a small quantity and swallowed it, and the ceremony was concluded
by a fraternal embrace.  During the exchange of presents which followed,
men, women, and children shouted and clapped their hands; and the
youngest of them, in the exuberance of their childish hearts, kicked up
their heels and danced, as they do upon most great occasions in Africa.

The next morning, a little before noon, the party arrived at the
capital.  Selim's arrival caused a great sensation; but Kalulu
immediately took him and his two friends, Simba and Moto, into his own
hut, where Selim, to his great joy, met Abdullah, who was quite
recovered from the severe punishment he had received and the fatigues he
had undergone.  The meeting between the two Arab boys was very
affecting, as they could understand each other's feelings and interpret
them faithfully one to the other.

After a short time, Simba and Moto left the two boys to themselves and
retired to their own hut, while Kalulu, after seeing Selim attended to
and supplied with food, started for the King's house to acquaint the
King with the events which we have just detailed.

It was not long after the two Arab boys were left alone that a rustling
of many feet was heard at the door, not noisy, but hurried, and somewhat
alarming; and immediately there stood before the astonished boys the
form and malevolent face of Tifum Byah, his former tyrant, accompanied
by other warriors, armed with spears and knob-sticks.

"Oh, ho! hee, hee!" shouted Tifum, with a wicked leer on his face.
"This is my runaway slave.  Ha, ha! thou art caught like a sneaking
jackal in a trap.  Come, my pale-faced slave, you must follow me;" and
he advanced and laid a rough hand upon his shoulder.

"Why with you?" asked Selim.

"Come, no words.  Ferodia, the chief, calls."

"But I am now Kalulu's brother," said Selim, attempting to release
himself from his grasp, "and I am no longer a slave."

"You the brother of Kalulu!  Since when came you to be the brother of
Kalulu, you son of an ass?"

"Since yesterday; and if you do not let me go, Kalulu will punish you
for entering his hut."

"We'll see about that.  Warriors, bear him to Ferodia!" said Tifum,
turning to his companions.

And Selim was borne away, despite his remonstrances, to Ferodia's
presence, who happened to be seated under the tree in the middle of the
square.

"Here is the runaway," said Tifum, laying a heavy hand on Selim's
shoulder, to Ferodia.

"Ha! pale-faced dog!" shouted Ferodia, angrily.  "What made you run
away?  Did you think to better yourself by doing so?  Speak."

"I am not a dog!" retorted Selim in a passion; for he was getting
desperate at the prospect of another lease of such cruel bondage as he
had experienced.  "I am not a dog, but you are a dog."

"Eyah, eyah! hear him!  A slave insults Ferodia the chief!" cried the
obsequious Tifum.  "Fool, do you know what you say?"

"Silence, pariah!" thundered Selim, more passionately.  "I defy you!--I
spit on you!  You are dirt.  Do your worst, great chief--the Arab boy
will not bend to you!"

As the boy uttered these words, showing more spirit, and such anger, and
bitter contempt as none of the Watutu ever had witnessed before, both
Ferodia and Tifum were struck speechless for a moment; but Ferodia broke
the silence at last with fiery accents, saying:

"Tifum, dost thou hear me?  Lay that stubborn ass down on his face and
cut his back for me with thy whip.  Beat, beat, and spare not."

But Selim waited to hear no more.  Ferodia had but begun his cruel order
when the latent Bedouin spirit of resistance electrified him.  His arm
felt surcharged with the impulse to strike, and his hand, weighted with
hate, was shot full in the face of Tifum, who reeled as if he had been
struck with a knob-stick.  Then with a light bound he sprang from the
circle, sending a mocking laugh into Ferodia's ears as he flew towards
the King's house, which had been pointed out to him on his first
arrival, shouting "Kalulu!  Simba, to me!  To me, Simba!  Kalulu!"

He had reached the threshold of the King's house when he felt an arm on
his shoulder.  He turned around; it was Tifum!  Rage had given the man a
quickened sense and speed to his feet, even superior to the fear which
hurried the feet of Selim away.  The strong hand crushed the weakened
frame of the youth to the ground for the execution of the cruel sentence
of Ferodia, and his brain was fast whirling with the terror which
possessed him, when he heard a shout--a roar of rage--behind him, and at
the same time the force with which he was being compelled to the ground
relaxed.  Simba was seen bearing down upon the party with irresistible
power.  He saw for an instant how the gigantic form of his friend and
protector dilated, as he had seen it in the battle of Kwikuru; he saw
the powerful muscular arms, with their wealth of sinew and muscle, and
the eyes glowing with the ferocity of a beast of prey: only an instant,
for Simba was before Tifum, face to face with the monster who had
striped the son of Amer, and there was no time to think before he saw
Tifum's body in the air, nor time to utter the thought of pardon which
he wished to say, before he saw the man dashed with the force of a
cannon ball against the body of warriors who had hurried up to lend
assistance to Tifum--laying half a dozen of them prostrate on the
ground.

Ferodia had seen the giant form of Simba hurrying to the rescue of the
white slave, and comprehending at a glance that something would happen,
he snatched his spear and started after him.  But he had never imagined
that such a thing as he saw could have been done by living man; and the
wonder of it all paralysed his arm, which tingled but a moment before to
send his spear through the man's body.  While Ferodia thus stood, lost
in wonder at such human power, three new-comers had appeared on the
scene--Moto, who had hurried after Ferodia, and stood behind him,
seemingly careless and unconcerned; Kalulu and Katalambula, the King,
who appeared on the threshold, the former of whom had dragged Selim
behind him.

Katalambula, though old and on the verge of infirmity, could demean
himself royally enough upon occasions; and this was one of them
evidently; for he advanced and stood before Simba and Ferodia, spear in
hand, with a bearing seldom witnessed.

"What means this, Ferodia?" he asked in a cool, quiet tone.

"It means, O King, that I sent Tifum to catch that runaway slave who
deserted me in the great forest; that the slave ran towards thy house,
and Tifum ran after him, only to meet with this man, who caught up Tifum
as if he had been a piece of wood, and sent him flying against those
warriors of mine, who are now picking themselves up."

"Indeed!  Who art thou?  Oh, I remember, thou art the friend of the
stranger who saved Kalulu in Urori!  Thou art very strong."

Then turning toward the group which had been prostrated, he asked if any
of them had been hurt.  One replied that he felt a pain in the chest,
another that he could not breathe; one felt his head swim, another a
pain in the abdomen; one felt a lump in his throat, another replied that
he had a sore back; while Tifum declared he felt bruised all over, and
all looked at Simba with terror.

Ferodia now advanced, and made as if he would lay a hand on Selim; but
Kalulu interposed his slight form with a drawn bow and fixed arrow in
his hand, and a dangerous glitter in his eyes.

"Keep away, Ferodia; or, by the grave of Mostana my father, I will send
this arrow through thy body."

"What ails thee, boy?  Is not one white slave enough for thee, that thou
wouldst deprive me of the other?  I made him captive with my bow and
spear at Olimali's village.  Stand aside."

"Go away, I tell thee!  This `slave' of thine is now my brother.  The
blood ceremony has been made.  Who injures him injures me; and I am
Kalulu, adopted son of Katalambula."

"Well, if he is thy brother, keep him; but give me the other white slave
in his place," replied Ferodia.

"Thou hast given him to my father.  My father has given him to me.  I am
too poor in white slaves to be able to give thee any.  I have but one
slave, for the other is my brother."

"Katalambula," said Ferodia, "this is injustice.  White slaves are not
caught every day.  I must have one of them."

"We may not disregard the laws of brotherhood, Ferodia," said the King,
mildly.  "When Kalulu made the white boy his brother he made him a
Mtuta, and all the Watuta are free men.  Thou gavest me the other, and I
gave him to Kalulu.  It is not our custom to return gifts, thou knowest,
Ferodia.  But take thou three Wabena men at my hand instead, and be
friends with Kalulu."

"No, no, no!" said Ferodia, in a burst of anger.  "Thou art unjust,
Katalambula, to one who fought for thee with such success, and brought
thee so much wealth.  I depart at once; and thou," said he warningly to
Kalulu, "do thou beware of me; eagle's wings have been clipped ere now,
and young lions tamed.  Ferodia is king over his own tribe."

"Ferodia," said Kalulu with a sneer, "I fear thee not.  I know thee for
a bad man; and were it not for my father thou shouldst not leave this
village, for I should garnish the gate with thy skull."

"Peace, boy!" cried Katalambula, "and do not make bad worse with thy
saucy tongue.  And thou, Ferodia, heed him not; remember, he is but a
young boy.  But it is thou who art unjust, not I.  Hast thou not
received a fourth of all thou didst bring me?  Hast thou forgotten the
slaves, the cloth, the powder, and guns I gave thee?  Whose were the
warriors with whom the battle was won at Kwikuru?  Who sent thee there
but I?  Go home if thou must, and peace be with thee."

Ferodia left the party, but not before he had again menaced Kalulu,
which menace that young chief returned with interest.  Within an hour he
had departed from the village with his warriors, slaves, and property,
breathing revenge and hatred, fuming and storming at the slaves, and
sarcastically bitter to the bruised and discomfited Tifum Byah.

Katalambula was angry also with Kalulu; but the latter, though forward
enough when Ferodia, of whom he was intensely jealous, was concerned,
knew the ways of the old man well; and, unmindful of his frowns, he went
up and embraced him, and accompanied him towards his house.

"Oh, my uncle, and father!" cried Kalulu, "why dost thou not say a kind
word to my white brother?  Is he not a handsome brother?  Look at his
eyes; they are like the young kalulu when it looks at the hunter in
fear.  Speak to him, ah, do.  Think of that horrid Tifum Byah beating
him!  I am so sorry I did not drive an arrow through him.  He is a
wicked man, verily, and is properly named Byah.  He would cut my head
off readily if Ferodia commanded him."

"And thou art the new brother of my boy Kalulu, art thou, pale-faced
boy?" asked Katalambula, stopping in front of Selim.

"Kalulu has been very good to me," said Selim, looking up gratefully
towards that youth.  "He has been pleased to call me his brother."

"Yes," said Katalambula.  "Kalulu is a good boy--a good boy--he loves
the old King, too.  I believe he has a kind heart for those he loves,
but he is hot, hot as fire, when anybody crosses him.  Take care he does
not kill and eat you," he added, smiling, and passing on towards his
house.

"But, father," said Kalulu in a whisper, "thou seest he is naked, except
that rag.  He is the son of an Arab chief, and is not accustomed to our
ways.  Thou art rich in cloth.  Canst thou not give him something to
cover his nakedness?"

"What need he cover his nakedness, boy?  He looks fair and clean enough
without anything.  He is not a girl.  I am sure if I had a white skin I
would rather be naked to show it," chuckled the old man, looking at
Selim.

"But, father, he has told me himself that he feels ashamed of being
without cloth.  His people never go out unless they are covered from
head to foot.  It is against their custom, and there is a book written
by the Sky-spirit, which tells them not to be without clothes."

"Well, well, do as thou wilt.  Give him four doti (sixteen yards), and
let him cover himself from head to foot if he wants to, though I think
it all folly, all nonsense."

"Thou art good, very good, father," cried the delighted Kalulu, leaping
about the old man.

"Ah, yes, I know I am good," replied Katalambula, "especially when I let
thee have thy own way.  There, go now.  I am sleepy and tired."

Kalulu left the old man, and, proceeding to the store-room, extracted
the four doti he was permitted to take; one of blue cotton, one of
white, one coloured barsati, and one fine sohari, which he rolled into a
bundle, and covered with a goatskin, and conveyed to his hut, where he
found Simba, Moto, Abdullah, and Selim.

When he had seated himself, he asked Selim:

"What book is that thou wert talking of to me yesterday?"

"It is the Kuran," replied Selim, "written by a holy man, sent by the
Sky-spirit to tell men how to conduct themselves on earth, so they may
enter the good place called Paradise."

"What is the Sky-spirit like?"

"No man, since that great man, has seen him; he is a spirit, and cannot
be seen," replied Selim.

"Why do the pale-faces obey a thing that cannot be seen?"

"Because the holy man, Mohammed, who wrote his words down, has given us
all we want to know.  The holy man saw him, and wrote his words
faithfully down."

"Is Mommed alive now?" asked Kalulu.

"Oh no!  He has been dead ever so long, many, many years.  So many as
one hundred sultans of Ututa have lived and died since Mohammed--not
Mommed--died," answered Selim.

"Where is this Paradise to which the good men go?  I am good.  Shall I
go to Paradise?" asked Kalulu, with a smile.

"Paradise is away, up, far, far above the clouds.  No man is permitted
to go there except he is a true believer, who believes in God, Mohammed,
and the Kuran."

"And where shall I go when I die?"

"If thou diest without believing, thou shalt go to the place which is
reserved for such as were ignorant, and were not taught the true word.
It is far from Paradise."

"Hum! it is not as good as Paradise, then?" asked Kalulu.  "No."

"The Sky-spirit is wicked," said Kalulu.  "He sends a holy man called
Mommed to tell good words to the white peoples, and prepares a nice
place for them.  For it is easy to believe, when people are taught what
to believe.  But the black peoples, they see no holy man.  Nobody comes
to tell them anything; but because they are ignorant they are sent to a
bad place.  Bah! the Sky-spirit is very wicked; he is unjust; I don't
want to see him, because I shall not die; I won't die."

Selim had here a fine chance to deliver a sermon, and make a proselyte,
but he was too young to take advantage of the opportunity; besides, he
did not want to make his new brother angry or more rebellious than sheer
ignorance made him already.

"But, Selim, tell me; why do thy people wear clothes?  Why do you not go
about without clothes, as we do?"

"Because it is wrong; it is not decent.  The good book says `Thou shalt
restrain thine eyes, and do no immodest action.'  It is immodest to
expose the person.  Beasts are clothed with fur and hair, fowls with
feathers; men cover themselves with clothes.  Is man so poor that when
he sees all things clothed--the rocks with earth, the earth with trees,
the trees with foliage, the beasts of the forest with hair and fur, the
birds with feathers, the fish with scales, that he himself who owns all
these things shall have nothing?"

"Well, Selim, thou shall; not be immodest any more while thou art with
me.  I have brought thee and Abdullah cloth.  Am I not good now, and
shall I not go to Paradise?"

"Thou shalt have all things, Kalulu, when thou wilt become a true
believer," answered Selim, clapping his hands with joy and gratitude at
Kalulu's delicate kindness.  "What dost thou say, Simba? and thou, Moto?
Abdullah?  We shall be sons of Arabs, and true believers now, eh?"

"I shall be so proud of these clothes, I will not know myself," said
Abdullah, as he folded around his body a brand new shukkah (two yards)
with the skill of one who knew the art of wearing shukkahs.  Another
shukkah was thrown over his shoulders, while a piece of snowy cloth, a
foot wide and a yard long, was folded around his head, and he stood up
to be admired, his pleased and sparkling black eyes mutely inviting his
friends to express their pleasure at the transformation.

"Why, Abdullah!" exclaimed Simba.  "Wallahi! but thou lookest better in
the negro costume of Zanzibar than thou didst in the braided gold jacket
and embroidered shirt of Sheikh Mohammed's son; and thou too, Selim.  I
think I see my young master once more himself.  Fine sohari and fine
barsati in Ututa!  Who would believe it?"

"Ay," said Moto, "my young master and Abdullah, having covered
themselves, will forget their misery and vexation, and grow fat and
happy.  After this I shall always look out for young chiefs in danger,
to help them, hoping they will all turn out to be as good as Kalulu has
been."

"Now that we are all so happy and good, I propose to my new brother
Selim and my white slave Abdullah, who is now no more a slave than I am,
that we take a canoe to-morrow, and go down the Liemba to spear
hippopotamus and crocodiles; for you must see the Watuta at home in
their sports, and we must, by-and-bye, go to the great forest several
days south of where thou wert found, Selim, to have a grand elephant
hunt.  What do ye say, Selim--Abdullah?"

"I shall be delighted," answered Selim.

"And I too," responded Abdullah.

"Then it is settled; eh, Simba and Moto?"

"Yes," those faithfuls replied.

At dawn, the time prescribed, the party set out for the river, two
warriors accompanying them, bearing the paddles for the canoe.  Simba
and Moto carried their guns, Kalulu carried the one given him by Selim
at the brotherhood ceremony, besides his spear, while Selim and Abdullah
carried guns which Kalulu had procured them from the King's store-room,
with the King's permission.

Arriving at the river, the party found a large number of idlers there
already, who had collected to see their young chief and his white
slaves, as Selim and Abdullah were called, set off.  Some of them
wondered that Kalulu should so soon take his slaves away on a pleasure
excursion, but they said nothing, the majority of them thinking that he
took them with him as gun-bearers.  Several of the Watuta offered to
accompany Kalulu in his canoe, but he waived them off peremptorily,
saying he had enough with him.

Soon after Kalulu had taken his seat in the stern with Selim and
Abdullah, Simba, Moto, and the two warriors, taking each a paddle, shot
the canoe into mid-river; then with dexterous strokes they pointed her
head down stream, to the music of a boatman's song.  Each man
industriously plied his paddle, and Katalambula's village receded from
view.

This mode of journeying the two Arab boys, having nothing to do but to
sit down and enjoy the scenery, thought much preferable to the continual
march of the caravan; and the contrast was certainly great to that
bitter experience they had endured on the journey from Kwikuru in Urori
to Katalambula with the heavy-handed and callous-souled Tifum.  They
looked on with delight at the brown river and the tiny billows of brown
foam which the stout canoe made with her broad bow; at the dense sedge
and brake of cane which lined the river's banks, wherein, now and then,
was heard a heavy splash, as the drowsy crocodile, alarmed by the
approaching crew, leaped into his liquid home; at the great tall trees
which now and then were passed, out of which the canoes of the Watuta
are made; at the enormous sycamore, with its vast globe of branch and
leaf, affording grateful shade to beast and bird; at the brown cones,
the habitations of men, encircled by their strong palisades; at the
grain-fields, which shimmered and waved gaily before the tepid southern
wind; and at lengthy, straight, far-reaching vistas of river and wooded
banks which were revealed to them as they glided down the Liemba.

"Happy hour!" thought Selim.  "Would it might last ever, or at least
until I reached my own home and mother at Zanzibar!"

"Hail, joyous day!" thought Abdullah.  "Give joy to all men, as I have
joy.  Be still joyous, to-morrow and the day after, until mine eyes
shall once more rest on the blue wares of the Indian Sea."

The two boys looked into each other's eyes; the look was interpreted
aright by each, and tears crept into the corners of their eyes, and
rolled down their faces in still drops--still as the joy which caused
them.

About two hours before noon the canoe touched an island; and,
disembarking, the party proceeded to select a nice place to rest for an
hour, and to refresh themselves with the lunch, consisting of dried
meat, smoked fish, and, a potful of cold porridge they had brought with
them.

Just as the hour had transpired, a hoarse, deep bellow woe heard close
by, which caused the entire party to start to their feet and glide to
the edge of the island, whence they saw a herd of hippopotami quietly
enjoying the cool deep waters near a place where the river began a sharp
curve at the other end of the island.

"Good!" cried Kalulu; "one--three--fire hippopotami!  Now for sport.  My
white brother, canst thou swim?" he asked Selim.

"Yes; why?"

"Because, if thou cannot, 'twere better that thou shouldst stay here.
Can Abdullah swim?"

"Very well," replied Abdullah for himself.

"Then come on to the canoe at once.  But stop; ye both had better doff
your shoulder-cloths, and roll the lower clothe far up the hip; ye may
have to swim, for a hippopotamus sometimes charges on the canoe, or
kicks it viciously, and then down ye go to the bottom.  If it should
happen this time, dive down to the bottom of the river at once, and make
off under the water towards the island.  The hippopotamus is very apt to
cut a man in two if he catches him.  The animals are now coming up the
river; we will wait for them, and when they have gone above us a little
way we can sally out from our hiding-place, and give it to them.  Do ye
understand?"

"Perfectly," both answered; while Simba and Moto, rolling their cloths
tight around their hips and loins, nodded their approval of what Kalulu
had said.

Having done what the sage young chief had advised, Selim and Abdullah
accompanied _him_ to the canoe; Simba and Moto took their paddles in
their hands, while the two warriors, who were famous for their
harpooning, prepared the instrument which they intended to drive into
the first animal nearest to them.

This instrument was similar in shape to the harpoons which whalers use
for destroying the whales, except that it was not half as neat or sharp.
It had a long, heavy staff, and had once been used to pound corn into
flour by some woman, as was evident by its close grain and polish,
showing that it was hard and heavy, and had been of frequent use.  To
its pointed end was a broad, heavy, and barbed spear, well sharpened and
polished, around the handle of which was fastened the end of a long
rope, of native manufacture, made of the bark of the baobab tree.

While the harpooneers were quietly preparing themselves, Kalulu pointed
the two Arab boys through a thin edge of cane which hid the boat from
the approaching animals, as they came up slowly and unsuspectingly
abreast of the place where they lay.

What magnificent beasts they were!  What splendid and powerful necks
they had!  The best prize-bull ever fattened on English grass might have
been ashamed of his breadth of neck had such as these been exhibited
side by side with him.  Unaware of the danger that lay in wait for them,
they came up to breathe quickly and boldly, and by so doing exposed
nearly all their heads and necks.  On the backs of their powerful necks
the colour was that of a bright reddish yellow, which also tinged their
heads over the eyes and the ears, and broad patches of this colour were
also seen on the cheeks.  In appearance the head bore a striking
similarity to the head of a large and powerful horse; especially did the
bold and prominent eyes, the short pointed ears, and noble curve of neck
aid the comparison; but at the nose it was more like that of an ox.

The name of this enormous and apparently unwieldy animal, by which he is
known to us, is hippopotamus, from the Greek words--hippos, a horse;
potamos, a river.  Had the Greek travellers been better acquainted with
the appearance of this animal they might have called it river-cow, or
river-hog.  It is only when his head is half-submerged that we can
correctly designate him as a river-horse.  Once we see his nose and
mouth, we are apt to call him a river-cow; but when he is once well out
of the water, and we see his heavy body and short legs, we would say
immediately that he was more like an over-fat hog than either cow or
horse.  The hippopotamus has four equal toes on each foot, inclosed in
hoofs.

The unwary beasts rose and sank not many feet from the canoe for the
last time while they were abreast of the canoe; and, at the word given
by Kalulu, Simba and Moto dipped their paddles, and sent the boat into
the stream bow forward, the harpooneer entrusted with the duty of
striking standing rigid with uplifted weapon, ready for the blow.

A minute thus he stood, and all eyes were fixed expectant, when at the
bow rose the monstrous head and neck of a bull hippopotamus, and at the
same moment the harpoon was shot straight and deep into his neck, while
the bright blood gushed upward in streams.  The stricken animal sounded
immediately, while the water was lashed into foam by his struggles, and
soon the canoe was moving up the river at terrific speed, while the
water rose in high, brown waves at the bow.  Presently the speed
slackened, and the canoe began to float down the stream.

"Pull back! pull back!" shouted the harpooneer, and at the same time he
tossed the buoyant gourd, to which he had fastened the end of the rope
hitherto attached to the boat by a round turn around a cleat, into the
water.  Responsive to the cry, Simba and Moto dashed their paddles into
the water; but they were too late, for they felt the boat lifted up
bodily out of the water, and the crew, losing their equilibrium,
staggered on one side, which completely turned the canoe over, and
precipitated them into the water.

The three boys, Kalulu, Selim, and Abdullah, instinctively, as they felt
the canoe lifted out of the water, rose to their feet with their guns in
their hands, and when it was assumed beyond doubt that it would turn
over, sprang into the water in different directions, and dived to the
bottom, dragging themselves toward their island beneath, by clutching
the tenacious mud.  For some time the wounded hippopotamus remained
master of the field, and no enemy appearing in sight, he sank, uttering
a horrible bellow as he disappeared out of sight.

Immediately after, Selim appeared above the surface, more than twenty
yards from the scene of the disaster, and swimming vigorously towards
the island, which he soon gained in safety.  Then appeared Abdullah,
about ten yards from the bank; Kalulu close to the shore, with Simba,
and Moto, and the two warriors close to him.  In a second they stood on
the shore, Kalulu minus his gun, but having his sharp spear in his hand;
the two warriors had also retained their spears, while Simba and Moto
had their guns in their hands, and their long broad knives in their
waists.

As soon as they had regained the shore, and stood on dry land, the party
began to cheer the youthful straggler, Abdullah, and to encourage him to
greater exertions.  He was within five yards of the bank, and Simba and
Moto were already stretching their guns to him to grasp, when suddenly
Abdullah's smiling face assumed a look of terror, and a wild, thrilling
shriek was uttered by him, which was silenced instantly by the brown
waters closing over his head; and the calm, placid river flowed on, and
no swimmer was seen disturbing its surface.

For the shortest possible instant, all hands seemed turned into stone;
not a sound nor a breath was heard, until Kalulu was heard uttering the
terrible and awful word, "mamba!"--crocodile.

Simba and Moto then breathed, and confused murmurs were heard from all.
"Save him!" cried Selim; "oh, save poor Abdullah!"

There was no need to utter the prayer; for young Kalulu had divested
himself of his wet loin-cloth, had broken the staff of the spear he held
short off, close to the sharp head, and with the latter grasped firmly
in his hand, had plunged head-foremost, unconscious, as it were, of the
imminent danger of the hazardous undertaking, into the water, where
Abdullah was last seen.

Kalulu's feet had but disappeared beneath the water, when Simba and
Moto, dropping their guns, divested themselves of their loin-cloths,
and, grasping their long heavy knives, sprang in likewise, and the
river, disturbed for but a short second, flowed on as before, with its
silent, still flow.

It seemed an age to Selim, who stood on the bank with clasped hands, and
cowering form, a prey to the keenest anxiety for the fate of all his
friends, who had disappeared beneath the treacherous face of the river.

Yet thirty seconds could not have passed before the deep, brown water
was again disturbed, this time in a violent manner, while it began to be
slightly discoloured with, blood, and the crocodile's tail shot suddenly
above the surface, lashing the water into foam, and immediately after,
Abdullah's head; then Kalulu, Simba, and Moto simultaneously appeared
above, making for the shore with all haste.  As they reached the shore,
Kalulu was seen supporting, with his hand beneath the hip, the body of
Abdullah, who seemed to have lost consciousness.  The ready hands of the
two warriors dragged the almost lifeless body, as it reached the bank,
and laid it carefully a few feet from the river, on the ground, while
Kalulu, wringing his long braids clear of water, and drawing the
draggled ostrich feathers from his head, uttered a ringing peal of
laughter, and then said in a triumphant tone to Selim:

"We were too much for the mamba, Selim.  He did not get my slave
Abdullah this time!"

"Ah, thou art so brave, so good, Kalulu!" while grateful tears ran down
his cheeks, as he sprang forward to embrace the young hero.  "I shall
never, never forget thee!  I would not miss thy friendship for the
world!  Thou hast twice saved me--once from death, and another time from
the hands of the cruel Tifum.  Thou hast still more increased my love
for thee, my brave brother, by rescuing Abdullah from the jaws of that
horrid mamba.  How shall I thank thee, my Kalulu?  How shall I praise
thee?  Thou art swifter than an eagle, braver than a lion, comelier than
any of the sons of men!  Thine eyes are more tender than a gazelle's to
thy friends, fiercer than the greedy leopard's, when it scents the blood
of its prey, to thy enemies.  Thou art tall as a palm-tree, straight as
the hardened shaft of a spear, grace breathes in every movement of thy
limbs.  Thou hast saved the life of my playmate--even the life of
Abdullah, the Arab boy.  The dark grey waters had closed over his young
head, his voice had been silenced in the deep, when thou, O Kalulu,
didst leap in--a true hero!--to do battle with the scaly monster in
behalf of Abdullah, my friend, and playmate of my happy childhood.  I
saw the waters hiss and foam, as the monster battled with thee for his
prey.  The victory was given to thee; Allah made thine arm strong, thine
heart brave; for Abdullah, my friend, was brought back from death to
life, from the dark waters to the sunlight, from the grave to the light
of day.  O Kalulu! if a fatherless boy is beloved by Allah, my prayer
shall go up to God night and day for thee; if a true believer may
intercede with Heaven, then wilt thou be blessed, and the soul of
Abdullah's dead father shall cry for thee before the holy footstool of
Allah!"

"Ah, Selim!" replied Kalulu, embracing him in return, "has Kalulu, the
son of Mostana, pleased thee? then is Kalulu rewarded.  Kalulu is thy
brother, and his heart is soft towards Selim, and to the Arab boy, for
thy sake.  Thou art good--there is no guile in thee.  Kalulu is also
good, but he has seen wicked men; and when a wicked man draws nigh to
him, Kalulu's heart is black, and bitter, and his spear comes quickly to
his hand.  His eyes search out the good; they found the good in thee,
and Kalulu's heart went to thee as thou didst lie like an antelope
stricken to death in the forest.  I shall love all Arabs for thy sake
for ever.  There shall be bad blood no more between us.  For as good as
thou art am I good, and as I am good, so art thou.  Where I shall he,
there shalt thou be, and where thou wilt be, there shall I be, until
thou canst return in safety to thine own land.  And when thou goest, do
thou but remember thy brother Kalulu, and but whisper his name, then our
Sky-spirit shall send the wind to bear thy whisper to me.  Come, let us
see how poor Abdullah fares."

Proceeding to the spot where the still unconscious form of Abdullah lay,
they found that the crocodile had snatched the young swimmer by the
right leg, just below the knee, where his cruel sharp teeth had pierced
to the bone, leaving ugly marks behind him.

"How didst thou find the crocodile, Kalulu?"

"Oh, I sprang to the place where I saw thy friend sink, and by good luck
I came upon the crocodile's back.  The crocodile having dragged the boy
down, let go of his leg, and laid on top of him.  When the crocodile
felt me on his back, he turned round savagely, but without leaving his
prey.  I had no time to stop talking with him, or to ask him to give me
Abdullah back, because I knew he wouldn't; and besides, I didn't go to
ask him, for it is very close down there, and there is no air.  So I
felt for his foreleg, and while I stabbed him behind, I felt my two
friends, Moto and Simba, who perhaps thought that I was the crocodile,
though my hide is not quite so rough as the hide of him.  When the
fellow felt the keen point of my spear in his heart, he rolled off
Abdullah, and began to kick and lash with his tail in a dreadful way,
and losing my spear, I caught hold of Abdullah by the leg, and came up.
That's how it was."

"And what didst thou, too, Simba?" asked Selim, turning to his friend.

"When I went down, I caught hold of Moto's hand, and diving, I touched
Kalulu, but I knew at once that he was not the crocodile, for his skin
is as soft as a child's; the next minute I got hold of the crocodile's
leg, though he was kicking and laying about him furiously, and I let go
Moto's hand, who got hold of another leg.  I buried my knife in the
crocodile's belly several times, and he swam away, leaving his inside
dragging after him, while I came up to find Kalulu, Abdullah, and Moto
right close to me.  I think the crocodile has got more than he thought
he would get, and that he will leave Abdullah alone in future."

"Do you think Abdullah will come to soon?"

"Oh yes," replied Simba; "he has swallowed a little too much water, or
he has fainted from the pain.  See now, Master Selim, he breathes!
There, his eyes are open!"

Abdullah had only fainted, as Simba said, and this was the reason why
the crocodile had so soon released his hold of his leg, and had lain on
him.  When he opened his eyes, Abdullah gave a long sigh, and asked
where he was, to which a cheery answer was returned; and presently he
talked, and discussed the event calmly, but not before he had
endeavoured to kiss the feet of his saviour, which Kalulu had too much
manliness to accept; but he knelt down by him and embraced him, while
Abdullah availed himself of the opportunity, and kissed his forehead.

Abdullah having in a measure recovered, the two warriors were sent to
hunt after the canoe, which fortunately was found, stayed in its
progress by the reeds, at a point of the island projecting into the
current; and, to their great joy, close to the canoe was the gourd to
which was fastened the harpoon rope.  Giving vent to a loud halloo,
Simba, Moto, and Kalulu rushed towards them, and by their united aid
they dragged the body of the dead hippopotamus to shallow water, and
setting vigorously to work, they soon loaded their canoe with the
luscious flesh, it being a food highly prized by the tribes of Central
Africa.

By the time this work was despatched, it was night, and the hunters,
lifting the wounded Abdullah into the canoe, and having a clear course
up the river towards home, they started on their return journey, feeling
as proud as men who have been successful in a dangerous exploit only can
feel.  They sang over and over again exciting hunting and boat songs
with vociferous chorus, until midnight, when the fishermen's fires, near
Katalambula's village, gladdened their eyes and made them rejoice as
home-returned wanderers generally do.



CHAPTER NINE.

SELIM--HAPPY DAYS--THE LOVER'S SONG--THE MAGIC DOCTOR SOLTALI--KALULU
PROPOSES TO HUNT ELEPHANTS--PREPARATIONS FOR A DANCE--THE HUNTING-SONG--
THE ELEPHANT HUNTERS SET OUT--THE SCENES ON THE MARCH--THE HUNTERS'
DAMP--TEN ELEPHANTS!--KALULU ADDRESSES THE KING ELEPHANT--THE KING
ELEPHANT DIES--SELIM'S CONDUCT IN THE FIELD--KALULU IS ASTONISHED AT
SELIM'S PROWESS.

Selim was now happy; and next to being able to reach his own Zanjian
Isle, and revisit the scenes of his childhood, and romp, as of yore,
with the playmates of his youth, and enjoy walks through the
orange-groves with young Abdullah, he could not have chosen for himself
a more tranquil life than that which he now enjoyed with his friend and
new brother, Kalulu.

For the bright Liemba River was beautiful, though brown; its crisp
little wavelets, where they washed over stone and pebble in the
shallower parts, had music for him, though he never forgot that horrible
scene near the island, when the smiling face of Abdullah changed into
one of horror and sank down into the depths, with his shriek echoing
through the woods.

The banks of the Liemba became for him a frequent resort, for Kalulu had
made it generally known to all that he was his brother, and no Mtuta
under the King Katalambula might molest him.  Hence, he wandered where
he pleased, finding charms in the wild woods, and in the depths of
waving grain, in the peaceful, still life that reigned around, in the
music of the birds, and even in the harsh cries of paroquets.

The Selim, the brother of Kalulu, was not the Selim of Zanzibar, but was
the product of him, refined and pure from the fiery crucible of the
unusual hardships he had endured.  It was the same boy, but not the same
heart.  He, whom we knew at Zanzibar, the gay, light-hearted, sunny
youth, playing with the females in the harem and his playmates on the
beach, but ever listening in wonder to the great, wise words and sayings
of white men, was changed for the dreamy boy with the poet's heart, who
chose solitudes, forests, and the depths of tall corn-stalks to indulge
in reverie, which we are too apt to ascribe to melancholy.  Perhaps it
was melancholy, a tender, soft melancholy, engendered by many
reminiscences of a mournful nature, crowding together in the mind of a
boy who had suffered much, but who had seen but few years.  There was
the death of a loving father and loving kinsmen, the tragic fate of Isa
and Mussoud, the most narrow escape he had himself from death, and poor
Abdullah's narrow escape from a horrible fate.  These were not the best
kind of subjects to dwell in the mind of a boy of Selim's years; but
what aided to soften all these, and did much to lighten his burden, was
his present position, the tender friendship of Kalulu, the company of
the gentle Abdullah, the calm tranquillity of the life he was now
enjoying, and the consciousness--which his perfect trust in the goodness
of God created--that there was a God above, who was both good and great,
and who would bring him in his own good time out of all trouble.

For many days Abdullah suffered from the wounds which the crocodile's
sharp teeth had made in his leg.  High fever set in, during which time
he was attended by Simba, and Moto, Kalulu, and Selim.

All sport was at an end for Selim and Kalulu while their friend Abdullah
was thus suffering.  Nothing of enjoyment was thought of, nothing could
be thought of but their poor young patient, whose constitution was
battling vigorously against the fever which threatened often to
terminate his life.

And what a time poor Abdullah had!  Instead of the soft, silken
counterpane and feathered bolsters, and the fragrance of lime and orange
of his own comfortable home at Zanzibar, here were a mud-hut, low roof
of straw and mud, a goatskin for his bed, a low door of cane-stalks,
through which the white sunlight streamed hot and glaring, voices of a
thousand rats for music, and the bad smells caused by the indecent
habits of savages, for the perfume of ripe orange and cinnamon.  All
these aggravated the fever and created hideous dreams at night.  For
food he had a thin gruel, which Simba made for him to the best of his
ability; for drink, the muddy water of the Liemba or some pombe-beer.
Despite these, however, his constitution triumphed; the fever left him,
and the wounded leg, carefully bathed each morning by Simba, began to
heal.

When convalescent, Abdullah would leave his hut at evening, pale and
thin as a ghost, leaning on the arm of his true friends, Kalulu and
Selim, to enjoy the mild air, and to listen to the songs of the Watuta,
and the sonorous music of the drums.  The sight of the pale and thin
Arab boy touched the heart of many a maternal bosom, and many were the
expressions of condolence which he received from them.  He often heard
these dark-faced women utter expressions which he had never thought at
Zanzibar could ever be uttered by black women; and he was rapidly
beginning to learn that women are the same all over the world, whether
they are white or black, and that human love and kindness belong as much
to the black as to the white, and are as often practised.  And the
outcast, despised negro race were rising daily in his estimation.
Neither was Selim indifferent to the tones of sympathy he heard from
them; not only did Kalulu win his friendship more and more each day, but
the whole negro race was being admitted into his brotherhood.

These were really happy days.  Abdullah was improving each day, and
Selim was fast becoming as joyous a companion as Kalulu could desire.
Inspired by the invigorating sound of the drums, and the lively chorus,
he was compelled to leave the side of Abdullah and join in the dance.  A
favourite song of the Watuta was the boatmen's song, which seemed
interminable; but the chorus was so pretty, and had such a sweet,
pathetic melody, that Selim joined with pleasure in it for its pathos.

The first and second verses ran somewhat in this strain:--

  Down the brown Liemba,
  The home of fierce Mamba [crocodiles],
          We are gliding.
  With sudden stroke and song
  The boat is sent along,
          Swiftly gliding.

  We fear no fierce mamba
  In the deep Liemba
      While we are gliding;
  Nor bush nor thickest brake,
  Nor foe that would us take--
      Swiftly gliding.

The fifth, seventh, and eighth verses are descriptive of the scenery on
the Liemba:--

  By waving fields of grain.
  With song and loud refrain,
      We are gliding;
  While women hoe the corn
  Till eve from dewy morn--
      Swiftly gliding.

  Lo!  Isle of Ihata,
  Blest Isle of Liemba,
      By which we are gliding.
  The isle was long ago
  Blest by great Moshono--
      Softly gliding.

  Near that tree on yon plain
  Died Moshono in pain--
      We are gliding--
  Burnt by dread Warungu,
  Who fear no Malungu--
      Softly gliding.

The ninth verse is somewhat superstitious:--

  Sole on that lofty rock
  Lives Moshono's sacred cock.
      We are gliding.
  Now, boatmen, here cease to row,
  Bad luck, to hear no crow!--
      Softly gliding.

As I have said, the boat song is almost interminable; it describes every
view on that beautiful river, each tradition that surrounds the hills,
and memorable sites of battles fought and victories won; for it is thus
that our history was kept before writing was known to us.

Another song, which was a favourite with the young men and maidens of
Katalambula's village, describes what love-making is known to the
Watuta.  For this reason only is it valuable, as illustrative of the
mode of marriage.  The following verses are sufficient as an example:--

  Canst thou love me as I love thee?
  Wilt thou not come and live with me?
  My father talked with thine to-day,
  Thy father did not tell him "Nay."

  Said he, "Bring me two score of sheep;
  Bring me pombe in pots thus deep;
  Bring me ten goats of the best class,
  Thy son may take my pretty lass."

  I've built my hut of sedgy cane,
  The well-thatched roof keeps out the rain,
  The floor is spread with river sand,
  The latch waits lifting by thy hand.

  Thy husband calls, do not delay:
  Come to his house ere end of day;
  Put now thy hand in mine and come,
  Come to Kiranga's heart and home.

Selim and Abdullah heard numbers of these during the period of the
latter's convalescence, and were constantly amused by them.  To sit
under the great tree in the centre of the square, to hear the music of
the drums, to hear the songs sung, and to see the people dance, was like
going to a theatrical entertainment with us.  Kalulu often sat with
them, but not for long; the exhilarating influence of the music produced
such an effect on his feet and legs, that while listening to it he found
himself unable to restrain them.

As Abdullah got better and became able to move about during the day,
Kalulu used to take him and Selim to the great Maganga, or magic doctor,
to enjoy the conversation of the wise man of the tribe.

This doctor must have been at least eighty years old, for he remembered
Katalambula as a child, and knew Mostana, Kalulu's father, and
remembered the "great, great" King Loralamba, father of Katalambula and
Mostana.  This was very old history to Kalulu, who could not conceive
the number of years that had elapsed since Loralamba's death, though the
time could only have been between forty and fifty years.  The doctor,
whose name was Soltali, knew any amount of things that no other man
knew.  He remembered the time when the Northern Watuta, who now live
north of the Malagarazi River, separated from the Southern Watuta, over
whom Katalambula was chief ruler, for some pique that the younger
brother had against Loralamba.  He remembered many wars that had taken
place between the Watuta and Wabena, and remembered well the incident of
which the boatmen sang as they travelled down the Liemba, viz., the
burning of Moshono, a great doctor, who lived on the island of Ihata.
The Warungu came in great numbers, and were conquering wherever they
went, until they came opposite Ihata.  Then their cattle died, and their
warriors died of a horrible disease which Moshono punished them with.
Finally, however, they got across the river and landed on the island;
the village was taken, and Moshono was carried to the plain opposite the
island, and burnt alive near a great tree.  But it seemed as if the
Sky-spirit heard the words of Moshono, and stirred up the Watuta--all;
every man who could bear a sword and spear--against the Warungu, and a
few days after, the Watuta, under Loralamba, rushed on their camp at
night, and there was an exceeding great slaughter.  Only a few Warungu
escaped, and since then they had settled quietly in their own country,
south of the Lake Liemba, many days' march from Katalambula's.

Soltali was rich in this history, which, alas! is never destined to see
the light; a history that were a man disposed to write it for the mere
love of giving it to the world, and instructing it in the past life of
this obscure corner of the world, might enlighten the learned of all
countries in much that concerns the great races of Central Africa.

Soltali's hut was a veritable museum; but it bore a striking resemblance
to the rich men's houses in England and America in this respect.  What
ducal castle or baronial hall is there, in England, but has its
collection of deer, antelope, and buffalo horns; its stuffed lions; its
tigers, etc. etc.?  What rich man's house is there in America which has
not some trophy of its master's hunting prowess?  Soltali had his
trophies, though, owing to his pitiable ignorance of taste, book
knowledge, etc, etc, his trophies were not arranged as a Schwartzenberg
of Austria or a Duke of Sutherland arrange theirs.  There were horns
upon horns of antelope, kudu, hartebeest, black buck, springbok,
gemsbok, gnu, buffalo, and rhinoceros, and tusks upon tusks of polished
ivory.  But the great store of curiosities that he set the greatest
value upon consisted of tails of elephants, horns of giraffes, eyelids
of zebras, tusks of boars, paws of lions, nose-hairs and whiskers of
leopards, claws of eagles, beaks of bustards and kites, wings of
ostriches, scales of fish, dried eyes of ibis; all wrapped up in pieces
of goatskin, each separate the one from the other.  He had a great
number of little gourds, filled with the calcined heads of the various
animals he had ever killed, and smaller gourds, like phials, filled with
the burnt brains of men whom he had killed in war.  There were so many
brains of Warungu, Wabena, Wasowa, Wakawendi, Wawemba, Warori,
Wanyamwezi, Wamwite, Wakanyara, Wakokoro, and a number of other smaller
tribes; for in his prime, when he fought side by side with Loralamba,
the "great, great" King, Soltali's spear was heavy, sharp, and sure.

Poor, ancient Soltali! who shall sing thy praises?  Who shall tell the
wide, wide world all the deeds done by thy mighty hands?  Where is the
Homer who shall arise and sing of thy prowess?  Homer, and Virgil, and
Tasso, De Ercilla, and Camoens are dead, and we have none left capable
of conveying thy name to future generations.  But be content, old man;
this page, at least, of this little book will tell a few of the growing
generation of true-hearted American and British youths, that such a man
did once live as thee, oh, Soltali! and, perhaps, in an obscure corner
of the British Museum, thyself and wondrous museum of monstrosities
shall, embodied as it were in this page, rest a few years until they
become a heap of dead, unintelligible dust!

At the end of about two months, Abdullah was so far recovered as to be
able to go about alone, without the aid of any of his friends; but he
had an unconquerable antipathy to the banks of the Liemba.  The brown
waters of this river, in which he was so very near being engulphed,
inspired him with a nauseous aversion, having something of the effect of
tartar emetic on his stomach, and he never dared, as Selim often did, to
wander along its banks alone.  When he became tired of the village he
walked to the fields, or the gardens, where the pot-herbs, the lentils,
the pig-nuts, and the beans grew.  Neither forest nor solitude charmed
Abdullah; the company of the nursing women, or the workers in the field,
was far preferable.

One day, Kalulu proposed to Selim, and Simba, and Moto, that they should
get up a party to make a grand elephant hunt, and, as an apology, said
to Selim:

"I should have asked thee long ago, were it not that I knew thou wouldst
not come; but Abdullah is so much better that he travels about the
village as if he had never been bitten by a crocodile."

"To hunt elephants I will surely come with thee.  I have got my gun,
which I saved from the Liemba, and I should like to try a shot at an
elephant.  Moto is a great hunter, and he shall teach me how to tickle
the tail and hams of one; thou hast never heard him tell the story.  Oh,
it is such an incredible one! but he never tells a lie to me."

"Does Moto say he tickled the tail of an elephant? if it is true, he has
done more than old Soltali himself.  Soltali has done some wonderful
things with elephants too, but he never did anything like this.
However, we shall see how he acts before a real wild elephant.  We shall
watch him--eh, Selim?"

"Oh, I shall have my eyes on him, depend on it; but when shall we go,
Kalulu?"

"At daybreak to-morrow.  To-night Soltali must sing the elephant
hunting-song of the hunters, and must give each of the hunters a charm,
since he is too old to accompany us.  I shall take fifty men with me, so
that we can make a strong party.  If Ferodia catches us in the woods he
would make short work of us, and my head would not remain long on my
shoulders if he caught me; for then he knows he would be king."

"Why, thou art not going near his country, surely! because I would
rather stop here, if thou art.  I want to see no more of Ferodia," said
Selim in alarm.

"Be at ease, my brother.  I go not near him with the best fifty men that
the Watuta can count.  I go in a different direction, south-east; he
lives south-west, south of the Liemba Lake."

"All right; but really thou didst frighten me.  My back fairly tingles
at the thought of Tifum, and Tifum is with Ferodia."

"Yet, my brother, thou didst hit him a blow in the face, and Moto--
cunning man--said he saw it, and said it was well done."

"I wish the blow had gone through his head, then my mind would be at
ease, for that man is my bane--my Afrit.  [Afrit is a bad spirit with
the Moslems.]  Even when I am at Zanzibar I shall think of that man."

"There, enough, my brother; I will put one of my barbed arrows through
his throat the first time I see him, for thy sake.  Go and prepare thy
gun, and bullets, and medicine powder, and to-night thou must attend to
the song of the doctor, or thou shalt have bad luck with us in the
hunt."  And Kalulu turned away with light hounding steps, which soon
carried him away from his Arab brother.

At night--probably at the hour of nine with us, the moon being up--a
long, low, rumbling roll of the largest goma brought the destined
hunters, together with Kalulu, Selim, Simba, and Moto, running and
chasing each other towards the drum stand.  There were ten drums, and a
boy for each, ascending in height from the smallest to the biggest drum;
so that the boy who beat the smallest drum must have been about ten
years old, and the boy who beat the largest drum was a sturdy youth of
twenty, or thereabouts.

Pots full of pombe and plantain-wine were ranged a little distance off,
from which the dancers and the singers could regale themselves when they
felt disposed.  For the eve of a hunting party's march is considered a
great event, second only to the return of a successful party with plenty
of ivory.

The hunters formed a select circle round the drummers and the pombe
pots; a larger circle, made by about three hundred people--men, women,
boys, and girls--surrounded the hunters.

Each hunter had on a capricious head-dress.  One tall fellow was very
conspicuous by wearing a pair of buffalo horns; another had a rhinoceros
horn on the top of his head; another had his head draped with a piece of
zebra skin, which gave him quite a remarkable appearance by moonlight;
one had a zebra crest, which made him appear as if he wore a Greek
helmet; another had a goatskin over his head.  Kalulu wore three
magnificent snowy ostrich plumes on his head.  Selim wore a turban.
Simba and Moto also wore turbans.  One fellow, next to Moto, wore an
enormous black earthen pot on his head; another had a broad, wooden
dish; but it would be wearying to enumerate all the strange things they
wore.

The drummer boys struck up an interlude, which was a verse from the
boatmen's song--the chorus,

  We are gliding,
  Softly gliding,

seemingly giving them immeasurable enjoyment as they lingered over the
word "gliding."  While they were busy with feet and lungs, moving about
in a circle, a sudden silence prevailed;--the great Soltali, the
greatest elephant hunter and doctor of magic of the age, arrived upon
the scene.

A loud murmur of approbation greeted the extraordinary old man.  The
most remarkable of all head-dresses was on the head of Soltali, for he
had the skin of an elephant's trunk, the base of the trunk fitting his
head, as if it had grown there, while the trunk, filled with grass, was
stiff enough to stand perfectly erect, though perhaps it was stiff
enough without.  The weight of this must have been considerable; but the
ridiculous vanity of men causes them to do strange things sometimes, and
this act could have been nothing else than absurdest vanity.  Hanging
around the old man's neck was a string of giraffe tails, whose hairs
were blacker than ink.  On his arms he wore wristlets and armlets of
pure white ivory.  In each hand he carried a gourd half full of pebbles,
which he rattled every now and then with a horrible noise.

He first, after he entered the inner circle, walked around three times,
staring at each man, rattling his gourds alternately, as he passed
round; then walking to the centre, while the bass drum began to hum and
murmur its deep sounds, he began to move his body to the right and left,
each hunter sighing deeply in sympathy with the now fast rising murmur
of all the drums in concert.  Loud and louder beat the drums, until the
noise was deafening, and the voices of the singers became a demoniac
din; then lower and lower descended the voices and the drum-sounds,
until nothing was heard but the pacific and low murmur of the bass drum
and the low sighs of the dancers.

Then Soltali opened his mouth and sang, in the heroic vein, of his
doings in the elephant hunt in the far southern lands, the streamy land
of the Wa-marungu, in the hot swampy lands of the Wawemba, and on the
broad plains of Ututa; of his mishaps and fortunes, his narrow,
hair-breadth escapes, and his wonderful adventures, out of which the
author of the present history might make his fame and fortune were he
gifted with the power to translate into some kind of verse what Soltali
said.

Though demurring somewhat at the necessity of translating at all what
the old man said, the author feels compelled to give the gist of the
charge he gave the hunters concerning their conduct when they should
meet an elephant.  He spoke authoritatively and well, and it is a pity
that a better translator is not at my side to assist me in the
translation of some of the Kituta polysyllables.

  "Let the warrior Watuta, and the hunters bold
  Heed and mark well the words of the Mganga old;
  Let them behold these charms, these trophies of my might
  Each of them reminds me of many a hard fight.
  Should ye meet the elephant alone in a plain,
  Seek not too hastily to give him the death pain.
  Singly let none attack him--'tis an unequal fight;
  For the elephant is strong, the embodiment of might;
  But surround him coolly, and carefully all,
  Be ready to obey your leader's slightest call;
  Then charge on him, all shouting, and charge with your spears;
  Let the stoutest and best of you aim behind his ears.
  Watch well the unfortunate on whom he turns round!
  He must run this and that way, and oft change his ground;
  Ye others must tease him, and invite him your way,
  Hamstring him, and spear him, and do what ye may.
  Beware of his front! range on his sides and his rear,
  Go all together, and let each man heave a sure spear.
  Fast as he veers round, hasten at right angles away
  To 'scape the elephant's first charge is no child's play,
  For his stride is so long he swallows the ground:
  One stride of his is as long as a hunter's bound.
  After a while he will get tired--heed well what I say,
  He is never so dangerous as when standing at bay;
  For the hunter too often thinks he is dead game,
  And advances too near him, too eager for fame;
  But be ye guided by me, and stand off afar,
  And your good hunt so well done, ye will not mar.
  Let the elephant bleed, let him fall to the ground,
  Let him gladden your ears with his fall's heavy sound!
  Then think of the Mganga, the words he has said;
  Be sure that his services to you are well paid!
  Then will ye succeed in your hunt on the plain,
  Succeed without loss, and succeed without pain!"

The author may not attempt further translations from the speech, or song
rather, of this old Mganga or magic doctor, the Kituta polysyllables
having tasked his powers to the utmost; but from his knowledge of
hunting in Africa, he feels bound to admit that the old man had a sound
head on his shoulders; and the band of hunters having heard his lengthy
chant to the end, declared that they felt eternally grateful to him.  On
the conclusion of his chant, he delivered to each hunter a small portion
of whitish powder, which we, who have been in his museum, feel confident
consisted of burnt brain, mixed with wood ashes.  But this charm,
consecrated by the magic doctor, could not fail to render each hunter
highly successful in his enterprise.

The pombe, or beer, next attracts the attention of the singers, and each
singer incontinently sets to the agreeable task of guzzling, where the
author leaves them until the morrow--the Kituta polysyllables and the
pombe having fairly upset him for the time.

In the morning, at daybreak, without any of the formalities of muster or
calling the roll, Kalulu, Selim, Simba, and Moto, left the village by
the principal gate, followed by about fifty strong active young
warriors, not one of whom could have been over thirty years old.  The
horn of the leading hunter sounded merrily as he blew his ringing blasts
of adieux, while the party dived into the depths of the gigantic
corn-stalks, and their friends at the village listened long and
attentively, until the horn could be no longer heard.

Kalulu had a couple of broad-bladed spears, and half-a-dozen assegais,
much lighter than spears, with long flexible shafts, besides a bow and a
quiver pack-full of arrows, which was slung over his shoulders.

Selim, radiantly happy, walked next to Kalulu, as the path was so narrow
that but one could walk at a time on the smooth, hard road, and carried
his own gun--the "gun from London," which Kalulu had found among the
plunder, with its own special ammunition.  It was probably a fine "Joe
Manton" as the barrels were of fine steel, short, of large bore, and a
heavy price had been paid for it by Amer bin Osman through his Bombay
agent.  It was one of those fortunate accidents that occur sometimes.
Olimali might have had the gun, had not Ferodia, seeing its great beauty
and superiority, specially reserved it for a present to Katalambula; and
the king not caring, or not having any use, for it, had placed it among
his treasures in his store-room; and Selim, accompanying Kalulu to the
store-room, as a privileged brother, to pick out a gun, suddenly saw the
beautiful little masterpiece of the English gunmaker, which his father
had presented him with, and with which he had shot the greedy crocodile
on the Lofu, while his sharp teeth were lacerating his slave Mombo's
leg.  Could anything have been more fortunate?  "Impossible!" thought
Selim, as he had hastened to secure it, with the ammunition and the
percussion caps.  "Impossible!" thought he now, as he strode on after
Kalulu, laughing and chatting gaily, and sometimes turning round to
Simba and Moto with a gay remark, which permitted them to see his
bright, happy face and sparkling eyes.

Simba had his own bright-barrelled gun, which he had as yet never parted
with, besides a ponderous spear, which might have made Goliath of Gath
faint with the carrying of it.

Behind Simba strode nimble-footed Moto, who also had his own gun,
besides a couple of long keen-pointed spears.

Behind Moto strode the Watuta hunters, one after another, some of them
armed with shields, besides their handfuls of spears and quivers fall of
arrows.

Merriness is what distinguishes the conduct of all hunting parties,
whether white or black, while on the way to the chase or the hunt.
Pleasures unlimited are anticipated, and happy sport is expected, and
this anticipation and expectation are what produce so many good jokes,
and wit, and fun, and raillery, or, as the English call it, "chaff,"
when the hunting-field has not yet been reached and all feel bright and
fresh.  The hours that precede the chase or the hunt form the
flower-time which men's minds love to remember and dwell upon for the
unalloyed happiness which it furnished.

It is needless to describe in detail the ground the party traversed.
Once out of the corn-fields, the pastoral plains spread before them,
where young Watuta boys were seen indulging in the excitement of a mimic
battle or hunt while they tended their fathers' flocks.  Here and there
were little tracts of cultivation where women were at work hoeing the
corn; and as they passed some isolated village, near the gate, under the
trees, sat the nursing mothers, lullabying their babes to sleep, or the
snowy crisp-haired elders sat on short three-legged stools retailing to
each other the experiences of their lives, dwelling with fondness on
some particular episode of their generally uneventful lives; while
chubby, abdominous little children listened in wonder at what they
heard, as chubby, abdominous little boys of white men's lands do when a
particularly interesting tale is told.

Beyond the plains and corn-fields, the cultivated tracts and villages,
heaved into view the dark-blue line of forest--that forest which Selim
knew, where he suffered, where he fainted, and laid unconscious.
Finally, the party entered it, and they were involved in its twilight
gloom.

A week's, marching through the forest brought the party to the elephant
hunting-grounds of the Watutu.  The broad tracks, pounded and pressed,
trodden compact and smooth as an asphalte pavement by the elephants'
broad, heavy feet, indicated too clearly that this was a common resort
for the ponderous beasts.

Lengthy sinuous hollows, overgrown with thicket and shrub, tufted grass,
and tall cane, spoke of clear but stagnant water being plentiful here,
their ridges, clad with dense brush, ran in serpentine directions, and
separated these swampy hollows from each other.  Overhead were the leafy
crowns of gigantic columnar trees, forming as they met close together a
thorough shade for the locality, under which, undisturbed by any enemy,
the elephant might cool himself during the fervid noon.

Pressing further on out of this swampy region, they came, about sunset,
to a thin jungle, where here and there rose a giant baobab, the monarch
of all woods.  Choosing one of these great trees, whose foliage was
denser than ordinary, the party proceeded to cut down the smaller trees
and brush, to form a brush fence around their camp, for the centre of
which they chose this great baobab.  They built the fence solid, secure,
and high, as an efficient protection against wild beasts and nomadic
freebooters.  They then erected their huts--placing four short pronged
poles in the ground, one at each corner of a square of six feet; then
two taller poles dividing the square into halves; over these two taller
poles and the two shorter poles on each side they laid transverse poles,
which rested in the forks; and over these again they laid laterally
light sticks, sloping down each side, which they covered over with long
grass, and in a short time they had a perfect miniature house.  There
were other kinds of houses or huts being constructed; but the following
illustration will best describe the architectural knowledge of the
Watutu.

After constructing their huts, some roamed into the woods to hunt for
wild fruit, others to look for flat stones to grind their corn upon,
others to procure sticks to make their fires with, others to get water;
while others, again, scoured and prepared their pots to boil their
porridge in.  There were about fifteen huts in the encampment, some huts
having as many as five for a mess, others only three, while others had
but two.  It is a noteworthy fact in African camps that, where the mess
is large, the more important of the party are together; or that the most
popular are those who prefer each other's society to that of any of the
rest; though in each large mess one may be sure that one of the members
has been admitted only for the sake of utilising his services; and his
folly and ignorance, or cowardice and unworthiness, are forgiven and
borne with, so long as he is industrious and not idle.

Thus in Kalulu's mess were Selim, Simba, Moto, and an ignorant and timid
fellow, who was only too glad to be near the great, and who
industriously strove to please them for the sake of the patronage which
he received for his labour.  Kalulu, of course, as chief, could command
the services of all if he chose to do so, but none would have worked as
well as the timid fellow who voluntarily offered to cook for him.

After the suppers were cooked and eaten, and their limbs were somewhat
rested, and earth had drawn its sable mantle, chequered with the
diamonds of heaven, over its head, and the dark foliage of the baobab
began to be peopled with formless shapes and shadows, and the fires
burned bright, and cast their tongued flames with splutter, and hissing,
and crackling, the dispositions of each began to be exhibited.  They
squatted around a blazing pile, listening to an exciting tale of
adventure, or a funny story, which makes men's sides almost explode with
laughter.  What can be more enjoyable?  Nothing.  People, for the time,
forget everything but the interesting present.  Not one in such a
position can be left to himself; for his little world is before him, and
he must be drawn into its vortex of pleasantry and enjoyment, and forget
what he selfishly thinks belongs to himself.

The desire of slumber came on by-and-bye, and each man crept into his
hut, and on his own little pile of straw or leaves, drowned in kindly,
healthy sleep, forgot not only himself, but his neighbours, his friends,
and his tribe.

At dawn, five of the likeliest fellows were sent by Kalulu to
reconnoitre the vicinity and the open, swampy ground near which they had
camped, and where they had obtained their water for cooking the night
before.

They had not been gone fifteen minutes before one of them returned, who,
with a warning finger, imposed silence, and whispered the words "Kumi
tembo"--ten elephants!

You might have seen then how quickly the looks of indifference were
changed into one of exciting interest, how eyes danced gladly, and
sparkled at the joyful news; how Kalulu's hunter-soul kindled into
raptures, and how Moto and Simba looked significantly at one another,
and how Selim even felt a throb and a warm glow stealing over him.

Moto advanced to Kalulu, and reminded him of the advice given by Soltali
to hunt one at a time, and said that while he and his warriors should
single out one, it would be better that those armed with guns, viz., he
and Simba, and Selim, should engage another, and so kill two.  Kalulu at
once acceded to the proposal.

The hunters, as soon as they got outside of the boma or camp, deployed
in a long line, while Selim, Moto, and Simba stole quietly and quickly
away on their own venture, in a direction considerably to the left of
the Watuta hunters.  All the natives had denuded themselves entirely;
Selim and his two friends had but girded their cloths about their loins.

The natives thus deployed, and ready at a signal, moved forward
silently, and soon they were joined by the four remaining scouts, who,
ensconced behind the bushes, had continued to watch the elephants, who
were seen slaking their thirst at a pool, and playfully tossing the
water over their backs.

As the hunters emerged from this jungle into the cleared space near the
pool, the elephants turned short round to look at the strange intruders,
who were thus boldly appearing in their presence.

The hunters stopped also with one accord to survey the ponderous animals
they had come to kill.  What a sight this was!  Ten such noble beasts,
clothed with bluish-grey hides, with uplifted trunks, and great ears
standing out straight in array before those fifty naked pigmies, who,
had they not their sharp spears and their barbed arrows, would no more
have dared to approach these magnificent creatures than they would have
climbed up to the highest tree and jumped off, expecting to be able to
fly.

They stood thus a minute opposed to each other; then Kalulu advanced to
the front in the absence of the magic doctor, as the chief hunter, and
with uplifted spear in hand, chanted the death-song of the elephant he
chose should be killed.  This was a picture also worthy of a great
artist--the warriors in the foreground, the slight and nude form of the
young chief in the centre, with his ostrich plumes waving above his
head, as his body oscillated from side to side while he sang; and
fronting him, about thirty feet off, a monster elephant, with his herd
behind him, all looking astonished at the scene.

The words ran after this fashion:--

  "Thou monarch of beasts, thou king of the woods,
  Thou dangerous beast in thy angry moods,
  Thou elephant strong, thou form of great might,
  Behold Kalulu before thee for fight!
  I've come from the green groves of Liemba,
  From the country of old Loralamba,
  With magic from Soltali Mganga [Magic Doctor],
  The surest and best of his Uganga [Magic Medicine].
  Then look at that sun, look at the pool
  In which thou didst revel, and think so cool;
  Look on that forest, and look on this grass.
  The sweetest and best of this wide morass;
  No more shalt thou see the sun or the pool,
  No more shalt thou revel in waters cool,
  No more shalt thou walk in the forest's shade,
  No more shalt thou delight in forest glade,
  No more shalt thou daintily feed on the grass
  Of the plain, or jungle, or this morass!
  Soltali the Mganga cannot lie:
  Young Kalulu is here! prepare to die!"

As he finished his song his head was violently thrown back, the right
arm was drawn to its length, and the bright spear-head, flashing once,
twice, white sun-glints, was buried deep in the elephant's chest.  A
loud shout greeted the brave effort; and at the instant the elephant
felt the keen sharp iron in him, he uttered a loud trumpet-note of rage,
and charged, clearing at one bound several strides of a man.

"Be off, Kalulu, thou brave prince of the Watuta!  Hie away young hero!
Stay not to count thy steps, thou dusky chief!  Spring out, my boy; run
as thou didst never run before!  Impel thy haunches on--lift thy feet
clear from the ground; out with thy chest--set thy head far back!  Let
thy lungs inhale free the rushing air!  Beware of a stumble, else the
tale is ended!  Ha! well done--at right angles now!  So; see the
elephant charges the empty air, and runs headlong after vacancy!  Now,
warriors, is our time, with a whoop, and the shrill cry of the Watuta!"

Such were the words that could be distinguished from the noise and
tumult produced by the charge.  Twenty spears had been launched into the
elephant's body to distract his attention, and had it not been for
Soltali's good advice to "turn at right angles away," the elephant would
soon have overtaken the daring young chief; but, by his dexterous and
easy movement to the right, the monster had charged on far ahead before
he became aware that his enemy had escaped him.

When he turned round he found the hunters like a cloud about him; he
found himself isolated from his herd; the other elephants having charged
in another direction in fury and fright to meet an enemy in another
guise, and with different weapons.  While the elephant seemed to take
this all at a glance, a loud report was heard, which sounded like a
volley of fire-arms; but he, unheeding the sound, charged again, with
irresistible power, at his nearest foe, only to be foiled once more by
the ever-evading, ever-shifting figures of his remorseless enemies.
Again and again he charged, only to receive new wounds, an additional
shower of spears and barbed arrows, which tormented him cruelly; until,
fatigued with the unusual speed, faint from loss of blood, he stood
stock still, confronting his enemies, defiant and still dreadful, though
the spears and arrows in his body might have been counted by hundreds.
Heedful of the prudent counsel of old Soltali, the Watuta drew back, but
still surrounding him, awaiting his fall.  They had not to wait long,
before they saw his body oscillate from side to side, and the left knee
bend, as if he were getting weak; then he staggered forward, rose up
again, and finally rolled on his side--dead, crushing the spears in his
side like straws in his fall.

Leaving the Watuta to indulge in their self-glorification, let us
proceed to see how the other three, Selim, Simba, and Moto, fared.

Moto, as the three left the Watuta, drew alongside of Selim, and
whispered some words in his ears, how to conduct himself, to reserve his
fire, and to fire at the last elephant which would pass him, aiming
behind his ears, which, of course, would be standing straight out,
giving him an ample opportunity and a good target to fire at.  Selim,
faithfully promising, was placed behind a tree at the furthest end of
the cleared ground in the neighbourhood of the pool.  Simba chose one a
few yards off, further still to the left, and Moto another tree twenty
yards to the left of Simba; and in this position they waited the
denouement.

Selim could see the swaying form and nodding plumes of Kalulu, could
hear the death-song, and with his finger on the two triggers of his gun,
which was heavily loaded specially for this purpose, stood behind his
tree waiting.  Soon he saw Kalulu launch his spear, saw the charge and
flight, heard the deafening noise, and while his heart palpitated fast,
and his pulses throbbed, and his ears tingled, came the affrighted
animals of the herd, charging in fear and fury by him.  Obediently he
waited, according to orders, until the last elephant was passing his
position, then, stilling the heart's palpitation and the wildly beating
pulse, full of trust and confidence in the powers of his English gun, he
deliberately aimed behind the elephant's ears, and fired both barrels at
once.  The concussion knocked him down; but, while falling, he saw his
elephant stumble and fall on his head in a motionless heap, stone dead.

Picking himself hastily up, and snatching his gun, he stayed a moment to
take in how matters stood; and finding the elephants in full flight, two
limping laggards behind, and Simba and Moto following, he began to load
his gun again with equally heavy charges as those he had in it
previously; and having placed the caps carefully on, and taking a glance
of pride at the game he had "bagged," he ran after Simba and Moto.  His
two friends he found firing, running, and loading as fast as they could;
not a very hard task when the animals were so badly wounded.  His nimble
feet soon carried him nearer them, and after dodging and running as he
had been directed to, as he was pursued by one or the other of the
elephants, he had the satisfaction at last of seeing both stand still.
Retreating a little distance from view, he took a circuit round, and
then returned, taking advantage of every tree, and by great caution
succeeded in coming behind a large tree at the distance of twelve paces
from one of them.  Lifting his gun, already cocked, to his shoulders, he
took aim again behind the ears, and fired the two barrels once more,
which was met with the same fatal result, for the elephant, after
beating the air with his forelegs for a short time, swayed pitifully,
and fell over, dead.

But Selim had no time to make these observations, for the other elephant
turned short round and charged at the tree.  Selim stood his ground
until the tree had almost been reached, when, dropping the gun on the
ground, he started off for another tree, the elephant in hot pursuit
after him.  To the right, to the left, forwards and backwards, from tree
to tree, Selim ran, until the elephant, to his astonishment, suddenly
stopped, the hind-legs doubled under him, the forelegs bent, and his
head came to the ground heavily, and in this kneeling position the poor
elephant breathed his last.

Selim had his gun brought to him by Simba, who lavished praises, almost
fulsome, on his bravery and accuracy of shooting, in which Moto, who now
came up, joined with heart and spirit.  Simba, while he embraced his
young master, would have it that Selim was the best elephant hunter
known; there never was such an Arab boy before, who shot two elephants
dead one after another.  "And thou must consider, Moto," said he,
apologetically, "Selim is but sixteen; if he shoots two elephants, one
after another, when he is sixteen, what will he do when he is a grown
man?"

"True," answered Moto, "when he is double his age he will shoot four one
after another.  Selim is a great hunter truly.  I wonder what the Watuta
have done.  Whisht! hear their cries!  Their elephant is dead.  We must
go to see them.  Or do thou stop with Selim to watch these whilst I go
to tell them what our young master has done.  Say, Simba, how much money
would the ivory of these three elephants bring at Zanzibar, dost thou
think?"

"I know not.  How many frasilah dost thou think there are in the three?"
asked Simba.

"Somewhere about twelve, I should say?  Twelve frasilah of ivory at 50
dollars the frasilah (35 pounds) would make how much?" asked Moto.

"I don't know--plenty, I suppose," said Simba; "but Selim knows."

"Twelve fifties will make 600--six hundred dollars," answered Selim.

"Six hundred dollars!  What a pity we cannot carry it to Zanzibar!" said
Moto.  "I shall be back directly."

Moto bounded away lightly towards the pool, and in a short time in the
middle of the plain beyond he saw the Watuta in a group cutting and
slashing at the dead elephant, with noise and excitement enough to
frighten every elephant for miles around.

When he approached, the Watuta gathered about him, and Kalulu pointed
exultantly at the dead beast into which he had driven the first spear,
and Kalulu then asked what luck they had had.

Moto answered: "Selim has killed two, and I have killed one."

"Selim killed two!" echoed Kalulu, with surprise.  "What! little Selim
my brother?"

"The same," answered Moto.

"Eyah, eyah!" murmured the group, while Kalulu seemed lost in
astonishment, and could not utter a word more.

"Selim stands waiting to shew them to his brother, Kalulu," said Moto.

"Oh, I shall come.  Why Selim is a hero, a lion, an elephant!  Is he
not, Moto?"

"He is a brave young Arab, and the son of an Arab chief," answered Moto.

When the young chief started off, all but a few Watuta, who remained to
extract the tusks, followed him to see the wonderful three dead
elephants.

In the same position in which he had first fallen lay Selim's first
prize, with his tusks half buried in the ground.  Kalulu gazed at the
wide wound in his head, put his fist into it until it was buried up to
the wrist, and then turned to Moto with wondering eyes, and said:

"Kalulu has seen dead men in his father's village, pierced to the heart
with the leaden balls which the rifles of Kisesa threw, but what gun is
this that makes such big holes in the elephant's head?"

Then Moto told him that Selim had fired the two barrels of the gun at
once, at such a short distance from the elephant, that the two big
bullets went into the head as one, and that this was the reason there
was such a big hole, which quite satisfied the young chief.

Leaving ten men to extract the tusks, Kalulu proceeded to where Selim
and Simba stood, close to the former's second prize; and here, again,
Kalulu saw the wide rent and savage wound in the same spot as that found
in the first elephant.

Kalulu sprang on Selim's neck, and embraced him warmly, while the Watuta
gazed at Selim as on one they had never seen before, with surprise and
unlimited admiration.

By evening the tusks had all been extracted from the elephants, and
great portions of the meat were carried to camp, especially the feet,
the hearts, and livers, and ribs, where, before blazing fire-piles, the
meat was set to roasting, while the adventures of the day were rehearsed
over and over, with new additions each time, until midnight of that
eventful day came and sealed all eyes in deep slumber.

They moved further south, and in less than two weeks the party had
killed twenty elephants, which so loaded them with ivory, that they were
obliged to return towards home, unable to carry more.



CHAPTER TEN.

THE BURIAL SONG--KALULU BECOMES KING--LONG LIVE KING KALULU--KALULU'S
ORATION--SELIM ASKS PERMISSION TO DEPART--THE DISSATISFIED MINORITY--
FERODIA'S AMBITION--TIFUM THE WICKED, AND HIS ADVICE--FERODIA VISITS
KALULU--THE TREACHEROUS GUESTS.

After a march of two weeks without a single incident, they arrived at
Katalambula's village, to hear the sad news that the King had died the
day before, and that everybody was mourning for him.

This was a great shock for Kalulu, for the King had loved him dearly,
and the young chief bore him great affection in return.

When at first the news was conveyed to him, he seemed to be suddenly
stricken dumb, his face assumed a livid hue, and he trembled all over.
Then, giving vent to his sorrows in a long, sad cry of sorrow, he
hastened to the King's house, where the doctors were found attending the
corpse, and at once threw himself on the body, uttering the most doleful
lamentations, crying, "Awake, thou King! thou chief of the Watuta,
awake!  Behold me, thy son, Kalulu, returned from the chase!  Open thine
ears, O Katalambula!  Listen to the voice of thy son!  Open thy eyes, O
Katalambula! stretch out thine hand, and feel the form of him thou didst
so love!  Speak, Katalambula!  Say, whither hast thou gone, that thy
voice may no longer be heard, nor thy ears may longer hear Kalulu's
Voice?  Kalulu, the child of thy brother Mostana, calls unto thee!  Come
out with me, O Katalambula!  Come out under the tree! come and tell
Kalulu of thy prowess when thou wert young!  Ah!  Katalambula, I shall
die if thou wilt not wake up!" and thus he kept calling on the dead,
until he found his cries and tears were of no avail.  He rose then, and
went to his hut, and closed the door, and on his rugged bed, his tears
flowed silently and swiftly, until it seemed as if his soul would melt
in tears.

When near sunset, the grave being ready, under a hut erected over it at
the corner of the square, and the ceremony of burial was about to begin,
Kalulu came out of his hut to do honour to the body of Katalambula.  All
the Wa-mganga [Wa-mganga--plural of mganga--magic doctors] from the
neighbouring villages were gathered together; all the elders, the
councillors, and principal men of the tribe were assembled, until the
great square of the capital was crowded with warriors, women, and
children.  In order that the ceremony might be allowed to proceed in due
form, they had arranged themselves around a large circle, having the
great tree for its centre.  In this circle were assembled the doctors of
magio and the chief mourners, and near them were the fattest, finest
bulls that could be procured, black in colour and without a single
blemish, which were to be killed over Katalambula's grave; near by,
also, were enormous earthenware pots of pombe (beer) and plaintain wine,
which were to be poured over the grave as a libation to his manes.

The drummers were in their places, the wa-mganga (doctors) were ready,
painted and striped with white chalk all over, with the gourds,
half-filled with pebbles, in their hands; and the chant began.

The author, in order to do something like justice to the pathetic
death-song of the King, finds himself compelled to give as literal a
translation as possible.  The tune was most mournful, the chorus most
pathetic, being drawn out into a long, sweet-toned wail; and the voices
of the women and children, mingling with the deeper voices of the
warriors, were effectively impressive:

  The son of Loralamba,
  The conqueror of Uwemba,
  The Sultan of Liemba,
      Is dead!

  The brother of Mostana,
  The wisest Manyapara,
  The King of the Watuta,
      Is dead!
  _Chorus_.  Is dead!
      Oh, he is dead!

  He who fought Wa-marungu,
  The great lord of Kwikuru,
  The wise son of Malungu,
      Is dead!

      He who slew Tamaniro,
  Chief of the Wukhokoro,
  By the river Amhenuro,
      Is dead!
  _Chorus_.  Is dead!
      Oh, he is dead!

  Who triumph'd o'er Kansala,
  Near the Mount Araboella,
  In the land of Kinyala,
      Is dead!
  _Chorus_.  Is dead!
      Oh, he is dead!

  The uncle of Kalulu,
  The sire of Koranilu
  And pretty Imamulu,
      Is dead!
  He who married Lamoli,
  The daughter of Soltali,
  By the woman Zimbili,
      Is dead!
  _Chorus_.  Is dead!
      Oh, he is dead!

  The lord of Mohilizi,
  And the land from Bonzi
  To the River Zambezi,
  Is dead!
  The bravest, wisest Mwenni,
  Of the tribe of Meroeni,
  The dauntless Simbamwenni,
      Is dead!
  _Chorus_.  Is dead!
      Oh, he is dead!

  He was fear'd by Wagala,
  By the fierce Wazavila,
  Was great Katalambula,
      Who is dead!
  But the mighty Mtuta,
  Bravest of the Watuta,
  The Sultan of Ututa,
      Is dead!
  _Chorus_.  He is dead!
      Oh, he is dead!

  Ah! the King we did adore,
  We shall see his face no more,
  And our hearts are sad and sore,
      For he is dead!
  Kindest, best, and wisest King,
  On thy head the dust we fling,
  And in sorrow do we sing.
      Our lord is dead!
  _Chorus_.  Our lord is dead!
      Alas! our lord is dead!

  O King! why didst thou thus die?
  Deep in the grave thou must lie,
  While we will for ever cry,
      Our chief is dead!
  O'er him pour libative wine,
  O'er him slay the fattest kine,
  O'er him make the magic sign,
      For our King is dead!
  _Chorus_.  For our King is dead!
      Alas! our King is dead!

When the chant was ended, the body was laid on a long, broad piece of
stiff bark, and four wa-mganga (doctors) carried it to the grave, where
it was laid on the right side, with the King's shield, spears, bow, and
quiver of arrows.  A pot, full of millet-flour, mixed with water was
placed, closely covered, by the head, and the stiff piece of bark, which
served to convey the body to the grave, was placed over the body; then
the plaintain wine was poured over this, the black bulls were brought up
and slaughtered, the blood pouring into the grave; then the earth was
scraped in and stamped close and hard; and, finally, ten potfuls of
pombe were poured over the grave, and the ceremony was over.

Then the elders, the councillors, and the doctors gathered together
under the great tree, and began to discuss the question who should be
King.  A large number proposed that Ferodia should be sent for, as he
was a relative of the King; but the majority, though small, were for
Kalulu, who, not only was nephew of Katalambula, but adopted son, and
the choice of the old King.  Besides, Kalulu was a brave lad, and would
in time be a greater warrior than Ferodia, perhaps greater than
Katalambula, and the equal of Loralamba.  His youth was full of promise,
and he had already won everybody's regard for his amiability and good
heart, said they.  Whereupon the discussion grew fierce; those for
Ferodia threatened to leave Katalambula's tribe and go over to him, and
would return with spear and sword to cut Kalulu's head off.  Finally,
when all this was at its greatest height, and wordy dissension came near
ending in bloodshed, Soltali rose, and, by his eloquence, succeeded in
calming the turbulent and winning over to Kalulu's side several of the