[102] See p. 174.

Other women wear blue cotton jackets, in the fronts and back of which
are many artistic embroidered designs. Their hemp cloth skirts, like
those of the Bagobo, are made tube-like and are held at the waist by
means of belts. They are very careless about the hang of these garments
and one side may be above the calf of the leg while the other drags on
the ground (Plate LXVII). No head coverings are worn, but quite
elaborate combs (Fig. 48) are thrust into the knots of hair at the back
of the head. Wooden ear plugs (Fig. 49) ornamented with incised silver
plates and with bead and silver pendants fit into openings in the lobes
of the ears. Like the men they wear necklaces of beads, sweet smelling
herbs, and seeds. Many of the latter are considered to have medicinal
value and are eaten to cure pains in the stomach. One or more silver
disks are worn on the chest or over the breasts, while anklets, such as
are used by the women of the other tribes, are frequently seen. Both
sexes are fond of bracelets of brass, shell, or vines, as well as of
finger rings of tortoise shell and silver (Plate LXXI).

FIG. 48. WOMAN'S COMB.

FIG. 49. FAR PLUGS WITH BELL PENDANTS.

None of the garments contain pockets, and in order to make up for this
deficiency the men carry bags (Plate LXX) suspended on their backs by
means of bands which pass over the shoulders. In these they carry their
betel-nut outfits, tobacco, and the like. Small covered waterproof
baskets (Plate LXVIII) serve the same purpose for the women and are
carried at the back or at the side.

HISTORY.

Probably no wild tribe in Mindanao has received so much mention in
histories, reports, and books of travel as have the Mandaya, but these
references have been, in the main, so vague and often so misleading that
they are of little value for our purposes. Quite in contrast with this
mass of material are the excellent reports of the late Governor Bolton,
and Mr. Melbourne A. Maxey,[103] who for a number of years has been
closely associated with the members of the tribe residing in the
vicinity of Cateel. In the preparation of this paper frequent use has
been made of the notes gathered by these two gentlemen.

[103] Published in the Mindanao Herald.

When the first white men visited the tribe they found that the
neighboring Moro were making frequent raids on their villages and were
carrying away women and children whom they sold to the Bagobo and other
tribes of the Gulf.[104] At the same time it was learned that they, in
turn, were slave holders and were eager to purchase captives from the
Mohammedan raiders. The great distances traveled by the Moro in their
raids make it possible that slaves from distant islands may thus have
been introduced into the tribe. Later we shall see that it was difficult
for a slave or a descendant of a slave to become a freeman, yet it was
by no means impossible, and it is likely that a considerable part of the
tribe are descendants of people brought to the district through purchase
and capture. Another possible source of outside blood is suggested by
well verified stories of castaways on the east coast of Mindanao and
adjacent islands.[105] While working with the Mandaya in the region of
Mayo bay the writer was frequently told that three times, in the memory
of the present inhabitants, strange boats filled with strange people had
been driven to their coasts by storms. The informants insisted that
these newcomers were not put to death but that such of them as survived
were taken into the tribe. These stories are given strong substantiation
by the fact that only a few months prior to my visit a boat load of
people from the Carolines was driven to the shores of Mayo bay and that
their boat, as well as one survivor, was then at the village of Mali.
(Plate LXXII). I am indebted to Mr. Henry Hubbel for the following
explicit account of these castaways: "One native banca of castaways
arrived at Lucatan, N. E. corner of Mayo Bay, Mindanao, on January 2nd,
1909. The banca left the Island of Uluthi for the Island of Yap, two
days' journey, on December 10th, 1908. They were blown out of their
course and never sighted land until January 2nd, twenty-two days after
setting sail. There were nine persons aboard, six men, two boys, and one
woman, all natives of Yap except one man who was a Visayan from Capiz,
Panay, P. I., who settled on the Island of Yap in 1889. These people
were nineteen days without food or water except what water could be
caught during rain storms. The Visayan, Victor Valenamo, died soon after
his arrival, as a result of starvation. The natives recovered at once
and all traces of their starvation disappeared within two weeks. The men
were powerfully built, nearly six feet high. Their bodies were all
covered with tattoo work. The woman was decorated even more than the
men. Fever soon took hold of these castaways and in a year's time all
died except one small boy who seems to have become acclimated and will
become identified with the natives in Mati. I took care of these people
until they died.

[104] BLAIR and ROBERTSON. The Philippine Islands, Vol. XLIII, p. 203.

[105] FOREMAN. The Philippine Islands, pp. 257-9. JAGOR. Travels in the
Philippines, Ch. XX.

"The clothing worn by the men and woman was nothing but the 'lavalava,'
a scarf of sea-grass fiber about 18 inches wide and five feet long. This
was worn around the loins.

"The banca, which was of very curious construction, was taken to
Zamboanga last year by General Pershing, to be placed in Moro Province
Museum."

After the advent of the Spaniards into their territory a considerable
number of this people were converted to the Christian faith and were
induced to settle in villages. There they met and intermarried with
Visayan and other emigrants who had followed the Spaniards to the South.
During the time of the Spanish rule these settlements were partially
destroyed by Moro raiders, and following the Spanish-American war these
attacks became so frequent that many of the inhabitants deserted their
homes and returning to their mountain kinsmen again took up the old
life. The effect of this return is especially noticeable in the vicinity
of Caraga where as late as 1885 there were 596 Mandaya converts.

Several attempts were also made to colonize the Mandaya near the mouths
of the Tagum and Hijo rivers, but the restlessness of the natives or the
hostility of the Moro was always sufficient to cause the early break up
of the new settlements.

The last great influence on this tribe has come through American
planters who have prevailed upon the more venturesome members to come
down to the coast plantations and there adopt the life of the
Christianized natives. Many of these adventurers have returned to their
mountain homes, carrying with them new ideas and artifacts and, in some
cases, wives from other tribes. With all these influences at work there
has been considerable modification of the life in many districts,
particularly along the Pacific coast. This description will attempt to
give the old life of the tribe as it still exists in the more isolated
districts, or as it was related by older people of the coast
settlements.

MYTHOLOGY AND RELIGION.

In order to enter into a full understanding of the social, economic, and
aesthetic life we must have some knowledge of the mythology and
religious beliefs, for these pervade every activity.

Several stories accounting for natural phenomena and the origin of the
tribe were heard. One of these relates that the sun and moon were
married and lived happily together until many children had been born to
them. At last they quarreled and the moon ran away from her husband who
has since been pursuing her through the heavens. After the separation of
their parents the children died, and the moon gathering up their bodies
cut them into small pieces and threw them into space. Those fragments
which fell into water became fish, those which fell on land were
converted into snakes and animals, while "those which fell upward"
remained in the sky as stars.

A somewhat different version of this tale agrees that the quarrel and
subsequent chase occurred, but denies that the children died and were
cut up. It states that it is true that the offspring were animals, but
they were so from the time of their birth. One of these children is a
giant crab named _tambanokaua_ who lives in the sea. When he moves about
he causes the tides and high waves; when he opens his eyes lightning
appears. For some unknown reason this animal frequently seeks to devour
his mother, the moon, and when he nearly succeeds an eclipse occurs. At
such a time the people shout, beat on gongs, and in other ways try to
frighten the monster so that he can not accomplish his purpose.[106] The
phases of the moon are caused by her putting on or taking off her
garments. When the moon is full she is thought to be entirely naked.

[106] The writer found almost identical beliefs and practices among the
Batak and Tagbanua of Palawan.

According to this tale the stars had quite a different origin than that
just related, "In the beginning of things there was only one great star,
who was like a man in appearance. He sought to usurp the place of of the
sun and the result was a conflict in which the latter was victorious. He
cut his rival into small bits and scattered him over the whole sky as a
woman sows rice."

The earth was once entirely flat but was pressed up into mountains by a
mythical woman, Agusanan. It has always rested on the back of a great
eel whose movements cause earthquakes. Sometimes crabs or other small
animals annoy him until, in his rage, he attempts to reach them, then
the earth is shaken so violently that whole mountains are thrown into
the sea.

A great lake exists in the sky and it is the spray from its waves which
fall to the earth as rain. When angered the spirits sometimes break the
banks of this lake and allow torrents of water to fall on the earth
below.

According to Mr. Maxey, the Mandaya of Cateel believe that many
generations ago a great flood occurred which caused the death of all the
inhabitants of the world except one pregnant woman. She prayed that her
child might be a boy. Her prayer was answered and she gave birth to a
son whose name was Uacatan. He, when he had grown up, took his mother
for his wife and from this union have sprung all the Mandaya.

Quite a different account is current among the people of Mayo. From them
we learn that formerly the _limokon_,[107] although a bird, could talk
like a man. At one time it laid two eggs, one at the mouth and one at
the source of the Mayo river. These hatched and from the one at the
headwaters of the river came a woman named Mag,[108] while a man named
BEgenday[109] emerged from the one near the sea. For many years the man
dwelt alone on the bank of the river, but one day, being lonely and
dissatisfied with his location, he started to cross the stream. While he
was in deep water a long hair was swept against his legs and held him so
tightly that he narrowly escaped drowning. When he succeeded in reaching
the shore he examined the hair and at once determined to find its owner.
After wandering many days he met the woman and induced her to be his
wife. From this union came all the Mandaya.

[107] See p. 63 note.

[108] Also known as Manway.

[109] Also known as Samay.

A variant of this tale says that both eggs were laid up stream and that
one hatched a woman, the other a snake. The snake went down the current
until it arrived at the place where the sea and the river meet. There it
blew up and a man emerged from its carcass. The balance of the tale is
as just related. This close relationship of the _limokon_ to the Mandaya
is given as the reason why its calls are given such heed. A traveler on
the trail hearing the cooing of this bird at once doubles his fist and
points it in the direction from whence the sound came. If this causes
the hand to point to the right side it is a sign that success will
attend the journey.[110] If, however, it points to the left, in front,
or in back, the Mandaya knows that the omen bird is warning him of
danger or failure, and he delays or gives up his mission. The writer was
once watching some Mandaya as they were clearing a piece of land,
preparatory to the planting. They had labored about two hours when the
call of the _limokon_ was heard to the left of the owner. Without
hesitation the men gathered up their tools and left the plot, explaining
that it was useless for them to plant there for the _limokon_ had warned
them that rats would eat any crop they might try to grow in that spot.

[110] Maxey states exactly the opposite, for the Mandaya of Cateel, _i.
e._, the right side is bad, the left good.

The people do not make offerings to this bird, neither do they regard it
as a spirit, but rather as a messenger from the spirit world. The old
men were certain that anyone who molested one of these birds would die.

Another bird known as _wak-wak_ "which looks like a crow but is larger
and only calls at night" foretells ill-fortune. Sneezing is also a bad
omen, particularly if it occurs at the beginning of an undertaking.
Certain words, accompanied by small offerings, may be sufficient to
overcome the dangers foretold by these warnings. It is also possible to
thwart the designs of ill-disposed spirits or human enemies by wearing a
sash or charm which contains bits of fungus growth, peculiarly shaped
stones, or the root of a plant called _gam_. These charms not only ward
off ill-fortune and sickness, but give positive aid in battle and keep
the dogs on the trail of the game.[111]

[111] The use of these magic sashes, known as _anting-anting_, is
widespread throughout the southern Philippines both with the pagan and
Mohammedan tribes.

There is in each community one or more persons, generally women, who are
known as _ballyan_. These priestesses, or mediums, are versed in all the
ceremonies and dances which the ancestors have found effectual in
overcoming evil influences, and in retaining the favor of the spirits.
They, better than all others, understand the omens, and often through
them the higher beings make known their desires. So far as could be
learned the _ballyan_ is not at any time possessed, but when in a trance
sees and converses with the most powerful spirits as well as with the
shades of the departed. This power to communicate with supernatural
beings and to control the forces of nature, is not voluntarily sought by
the future _ballyan_, but comes to the candidate either through one
already occupying such a position or by her being unexpectedly seized
with a fainting or trembling fit, in which condition she finds that she
is able to communicate with the inhabitants of the spirit world. Having
been thus chosen she at once becomes the pupil of some experienced
_ballyan_ from whom she learns all the secrets of the profession and the
details of ceremonies to be made.

At the time of planting or reaping, at a birth or death, when a great
celebration is held, or when the spirits are to be invoked for the cure
of the sick, one or more of these women take charge of the ceremonies
and for the time being are the religious heads of the community. At such
a time the _ballyan_ wears a blood-red waist,[112] but on other
occasions her dress is the same as that of the other women, and her life
does not differ from their's in any respect.

[112] PEDRO ROSELL, writing in 1885, says that the _ballyan_ then
dressed entirely in red. BLAIR and ROBERTSON, Vol. XLIII, p. 217.

When about to converse with the spirits the _ballyan_ places an offering
before her and begins to chant and wail. A distant stare comes into her
eyes, her body begins to twitch convulsively until she is shivering and
trembling as if seized with the ague. In this condition she receives the
messages of the spirits and under their direction conducts the ceremony.

Rosell gives the following description of the possession of a
_ballyan_.[113] Nothing of this nature was seen by the writer.

[113] BLAIR and ROBERTSON, Vol. XLIII, p. 218.

"They erect a sort of small altar on which they place the _manaugs_ or
images of the said gods which are made of the special wood of the
_bayog_ tree, which they destine exclusively for this use. When the
unfortunate hog which is to serve as a sacrifice is placed above the
said altar, the chief _bailana_ approaches with _balarao_ or dagger in
hand which she brandishes and drives into the poor animal, which will
surely be grunting in spite of the gods and the religious solemnity, as
it is fearful of what is going to happen to it; and leaves the victim
weltering in its blood. Then immediately all the _bailanas_ drink of the
blood in order to attract the prophetic spirit to themselves and to give
their auguries or the supposed inspirations of their gods. Scarcely have
they drunk the blood, when they become as though possessed by an
infernal spirit which agitates them and makes them tremble as does the
body of a person with the ague or like one who shivers with the cold."

SPIRITS.

The following spirits are known to the _ballyan_ of the Mayo district:

I. DIWATA. A good spirit who is besought for aid against the
machinations of evil beings. The people of Mayo claim that they do not
now, nor have they at any time made images of their gods, but in the
vicinity of Cateel Maxey has seen wooden images called _manaog_, which
were said to represent Diwata on earth. According to his account "the
_ballyan_ dances for three consecutive nights before the _manaog_,
invoking his aid and also holding conversation with the spirits. This is
invariably done while the others are asleep." He further states that
with the aid of Diwata the _ballyan_ is able to foretell the future by
the reading of palms. "If she should fail to read the future the first
time, she dances for one night before the _manaog_ and the following day
is able to read it clearly, the Diwata having revealed the hidden
meaning to her during the night conference."[114]

[114] In the Mayo district palmistry is practiced by several old people
who make no claim of having the aid of the spirits. Bagani Paglambayon
read the palms of the writer and one of his assistants, but all his
predictions were of an exceedingly general nature and on the safe side.

Spanish writers make frequent mention of these idols,[115] and in his
reports[116] Governor Bolton describes the image of a crocodile seen by
him in the Mandaya country "which was carved of wood and painted black,
was five feet long, and life-like. The people said it was the likeness
of their god." Lieutenant J. R. Youngblood, when near the headwaters of
the Agusan River, saw in front of a chief's house "a rude wooden image
of a man which seemed to be treated with some religious awe and
respect." Mr. Robert F. Black, a missionary residing in Davao, writes
that "the Mandaya have in their homes wooden dolls which may be idols."

[115] BLAIR and ROBERTSON, Vol. XII, 269, XLIII, p. 217, etc.

[116] Filed in the office of the Governor of Davao.

From this testimony it appears that in a part of the Mandaya territory
the spirit Diwata, at least, is represented by images.

2. Asuang. This name is applied to a class of malevolent spirits who
inhabit certain trees, cliffs and streams. They delight to trouble or
injure the living, and sickness is usually caused by them. For this
reason, when a person falls ill, a _ballyan_ offers a live chicken to
these spirits bidding them "to take and kill this chicken in place of
this man, so that he need not die." If the patient recovers it is
understood that the _asuang_ have agreed to the exchange and the bird is
released in the jungle.

There are many spirits who are known as _asuang_ but the five most
powerful are here given according to their rank, (a) Tagbanua, (b)
Tagamaling, (c) Sigbinan, (d) Lumaman, (e) Bigwa. The first two are of
equal importance and are only a little less powerful than Diwata. They
sometimes inhabit caves but generally reside in the _bud-bud_ (baliti)
trees. The ground beneath these trees is generally free from undergrowth
and thus it is known that "a spirit who keeps his yard clean resides
there." In clearing ground for a new field it sometimes becomes
necessary to cut down one of these trees, but before it is disturbed an
offering of betel-nut, food, and a white chicken is carried to the plot.
The throat of the fowl is cut and its blood is allowed to fall in the
roots of the tree. Meanwhile one of the older men calls the attention of
the spirits to the offerings and begs that they be accepted in payment
for the dwelling which they are about to destroy. This food is never
eaten, as is customary with offerings made to other spirits. After a
lapse of two or three days it is thought that the occupant of the tree
has had time to move and the plot is cleared.

In former times it was the custom for a victorious war party to place
the corpses of their dead, together with their weapons, at the roots of
a _baliti_ tree. The reason for this custom seems now to be lost.

3. Busau. Among the Mandaya at the north end of Davao Gulf this spirit
is also known as Tuglinsau, Tagbusau, or Mandangum. He looks after the
welfare of the _bagani_, or warriors, and is in many respects similar to
Mandarangan of the Bagobo.[117] He is described as a gigantic man who
always shows his teeth and is otherwise of ferocious aspect. A warrior
seeing him is at once filled with a desire to kill. By making occasional
offerings of pigs and rice it is usually possible to keep him from doing
injury to a settlement, but at times these gifts fail of their purpose
and many people are slain by those who serve him.

[117] p. 106.

4. OMAYAN, OR KALALOA NANG OMAY, is the spirit of the rice. He resides
in the rice fields, and there offerings are made to him before the time
of planting and reaping.

5. MUNTIANAK is the spirit of a child whose mother died while pregnant,
and who for this reason was born in the ground. It wanders through the
forest frightening people but seldom assailing them.[118]

[118] The belief in a similar spirit known as Mantianak is widespread
throughout the southern Philippines.

6. Magbabaya. Some informants stated that this is the name given to the
first man and woman, who emerged from the _limokon_ eggs. They are now
true spirits who exercise considerable influence over worldly affairs.
Other informants, including two _ballyan_ denied any knowledge of such
spirits, while still others said _magbabaya_ is a single spirit who was
made known to them at the time of the _Tungud_ movement.[119] Among the
Bukidnon who inhabit the central portion of the island the _magbabaya_
are the most powerful of all spirits.

[119] p. 179.

7. Kalaloa. Each person has one spirit which is known by this name. If
this _kalaloa_ leaves the body it decays, but the spirit goes to
Dagkotanan--"a good place, probably in the sky." Such a spirit can return
to its former haunts for a time and may aid or injure the living, but it
never returns to dwell in any other form.

In addition to those just mentioned Governor Bolton gives the following
list of spirits known to the Mandaya of the Tagum river valley. None of
these were accepted by the people of Mayo district. According to rank
they are Mangkokiman, Mongungyahn, Mibucha Andepit, Mibuohn, and Ebu--who
made all people from the hairs of his head.

For the neighboring Mangwanga he gives, Likedanum as the creator and
chief spirit, Dagpudanum and Macguliput as gods of agriculture, and
Manamoan--a female spirit who works the soil and presides over
childbirth. All of these are unknown to the Mandaya of the Pacific
coast.

While in the Salug river valley Governor Bolton witnessed a most
interesting ceremony which, so far as the writer is aware, is quite
unknown to the balance of the tribe. His quotation follows: "One
religious dance contained a sleight of hand performance, considered by
the people as a miracle, but the chiefs were evidently initiated. A man
dressed himself as a woman, and with the gongs and drums beaten rapidly
he danced, whirling round and round upon a mat until weak and dizzy, so
that he had to lean on a post. For a time he appeared to be in a trance.
After resting a few minutes he stalked majestically around the edge of
the mat, exaggerating the lifting and placing of his feet and putting on
an arrogant manner. After walking a minute or two he picked up a red
handkerchief, doubled it in his hand so that the middle of the kerchief
projected in a bunch above his thumb and forefinger; then he thrust this
into the flame of an _almaciga_ torch. The music started anew and he
resumed his frantic dance until the flame reached his hand when he
slapped it out with his left hand, and stopped dancing; then catching
the kerchief by two corners he shook it out showing it untouched by
fire. The daughter of Bankiaoan next went into a trance lying down and
singing the message of Tagbusau and other gods to the assemblage. The
singing was done in a small inclosed room, the singer slipping in and
out without my seeing her."

The letters of Pedro Rosell written at Caraga in 1885 contain many
references to the duties of the _ballyan_. In one account he records the
following song which he says is sung by the priestesses when they invoke
their gods Mansilatan and Badla.[120]

[120] BLAIR and ROBERTSON, Vol. XLIII, pp. 217-21, and Vol. XII, p. 270.

"Miminsad, miminsad si Mansilatan

Opod si Badla nga magadayao nang dumia

Bailan, managunsayao,

Bailan, managunliguit."

This means:

"Mansilatan has come down, has come down.

Later (will come) Badla, who will preserve the earth.

Bailanas, dance; bailanas, turn ye round about."

This Rosell takes as "a confirmation of the most transcendental
questions of our true religion," for in Mansilatan he finds the
principal god and father of Balda, "who descended from the heavens where
he dwells, in order to create the world. Afterwards his only son Badla
came down also to preserve and protect the world--that is men and
things--against the power and trickery of the evil spirits Pudaugnon and
Malimbung." The writer made persistent inquiry among the Mandaya to the
south of Caraga, but could not find a trace of a belief in any one of
the four spirits named; neither are these spirits mentioned in the notes
of Governor Bolton, nor in the excellent description of the people about
Cateel, furnished by such a careful observer as Mr. Maxey. It seems that
this account, together with the song and its translation, must have been
gathered from other than Mandayan sources. Long before 1885 the town of
Caraga had become one of the strongholds of the church on the east coast
of Mindanao, and Christianized settlers from all the southern islands
had come to the vicinity.[121] It is probable that Rosell's information
was secured from Christianized or Moro emigrants, and the first spirits
named refer to Badhala--Bathala, or Batala--"the all powerful," and Dian
Mansalanta--"the patron of lovers and generation."[122]

[121] They are often referred to as _Caragas_ in the early writings.

[122] Further information regarding these spirits will be found in the
Relations of Loarca, 1582 (BLAIR and ROBERTSON, Vol. V, p. 171), and the
Relation of Juan de Plasencia, 1589 (_ibid_, Vol. VII, pp. 189-96, Vol.
XII, p. 265). It is worthy of note that the Bagobo spirit Toglat, who is
one of the pair responsible for marriages and births, is sometimes
addressed as Maniladan.

THE TUNGUD MOVEMENT

In 1908 a religious movement known as _tungud_ started among the
Manobo[123] at the source of the Rio Libaganon. Soon it had spread over
practically the whole southeastern portion of Mindanao, and finally
reached the Mandaya of the Pacific Coast. According to Mr. J. M. Garvan,
of the Philippine Bureau of Science, the movement was instigated by a
Manobo named Mapakla. This man was taken ill, probably with cholera, and
was left for dead by his kinsmen. Three days later he appeared among the
terrified people and explained, that a powerful spirit named Magbabaya
had entered his body and cured him. He further stated that the world was
about to be destroyed and that only those persons who gave heed to his
instructions would survive. These instructions bade all to cease
planting and to kill their animals for, he said, "if they survive to the
end they will eat you." A religious house or shrine was to be built in
every settlement, and was to be looked after by divinely appointed
ministers. Those persons who were at first inclined to be skeptical as
to the truth of the message, were soon convinced by seeing the Magbabaya
enter the bodies of the ministers, causing them to perform new, frantic
dances, interrupted only by trembling fits during which their eyes
protruded and gave them the semblance of dead men.

[123] Not the Kulaman.

By the time the _tungud_ had reached the Mayo district it had lost most
of its striking features, but was still powerful enough to cause many of
the Mandaya to kill their animals and hold religious dances. The coast
Moro, who at that time were restless, took advantage of the movement to
further a plan to drive American planters and Christianized natives from
the district. The leading Mandaya were invited to the house of the Moro
_pandita_[124] "to see the spirit Diwata." During several nights the son
of the _pandita_ impersonated the spirit and appeared in the darkened
room. Over his chest and forehead he had stretched thin gauze and
beneath this had placed many fire-flies, which to the imaginative people
made him appear superhuman. His entrance into the room was attended by a
vigorous shaking of the house, caused by a younger brother stationed
below. A weird dance followed and then the spirit advised the people to
rise and wipe out the whole Christianized population. The Mandaya had
become so impressed by the nightly appearance of Diwata that it is more
than probable they would have joined the Moro in their project had not
an American planter at Mayo learned of the plot. He imprisoned the
leaders, thus ending a scheme which, if successful, would have given new
attributes to at least one of the spirits.

[124] The religious head of the settlement.

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION

The before-mentioned _ballyan_ direct the religious observances of the
tribe. Their mysterious powers give them great influence among their
fellows but, nevertheless, they are subservient to the local ruler.

The tribe is divided into many small groups, each of which is governed
by a _bagani_. To reach this coveted position a man must have
distinguished himself as a warrior and have killed at least ten persons
with his own hand.[125] The victims need not be killed in warfare and
may be of any sex or age so long as they come from a hostile village.
When the required number of lives has been taken, the aspirant appeals
to the neighboring _bagani_ for the right to be numbered in their select
company. They will assemble to partake of a feast prepared by the
candidate and then solemnly discuss the merits of his case. The petition
may be disregarded entirely, or it may be decided that the exploits
related are sufficient only to allow the warrior to be known as a half
_bagani_. In this case he may wear trousers of red cloth, but if he is
granted the full title he is permitted to don a blood-red suit and to
wear a turban of the same hue. This distinction is eagerly sought by the
more vigorous men of the tribe and, as a result, many lives are taken
each year.

[125] At Mayo it was said that it is necessary to kill only six, but the
two _bagani_ living there had each killed more than twice that number.
Among the Mansaka the number required is often as high as thirty.

A short time ago a candidate entered the district of Bungalung on the
east coast of Davao and killed thirty-two persons. In that same section
are now living five _bagani_ who have gained this title by similar
exploits.[126] Whole communities become involved in feuds as a result of
these individual raids, for it is the duty of a murdered man's family to
seek revenge for his death. It is not necessary that they kill the
offender, as any member of his family or settlement will suffice. In
some districts the unmarried relatives of a murdered person are not
allowed to wed until the death is avenged.

[126] These are Maclingtong at Pandisan; Pankard at Tagauanan;
Kasicknan, Lewanan, and Malangit, in the mountains between Taguanan and
Piso.

Instances are known where the old men have conferred the title of
_bagani_ upon the son of some deceased warrior. In such a case the
recipient of the honor starts at once to fulfil the requirements of
election, for otherwise he brings disgrace to himself and family. In his
own settlement the oldest of the _bagani_ becomes supreme ruler, and if
powerful enough he may extend his influence to a considerable distance.
In a few cases on the East coast the holders of the title have so
instilled fear of themselves into the neighboring districts that they
have been able to levy blackmail, even on the Christianized natives. War
parties are led by these wearers of the red garments, and they also
enforce the laws handed down from their forefathers.

The day a warrior is elevated to this order he is in a large measure cut
away from his fellows. He no longer associates with them as equals but
eats his meals alone, unless it happens that other _bagani_ are present.

Below the _bagani_ in rank come the warriors, a class which includes
practically all the able-bodied free men; and still below them are the
slaves. Slavery was an ancient institution with this people when the
Spaniards first visited their country, and it has continued to flourish
up to the present, in all districts a little removed from the influence
of the white man. The great majority of slaves are secured by capture,
but until recent years the Moro of the coast have carried on a lucrative
slave trade with this tribe. Girls and women become members of their
master's household, but their children are treated as slaves. Captive
boys and men aid their masters in the chase and in the fields, and in
most cases it would be hard indeed for a stranger to pick servant from
master. Sometimes the people of a neighboring village ransom one of
their fellows and in such a case the freed slave may return to his old
home or he may become a free member of the community in which he has
been serving.

DWELLINGS

The insecurity of life resulting from the conditions described has
caused the people to build their homes high in the branches of trees,
often so situated on the edge of cliffs that they can be approached only
from one direction (Plates LXXIII-LXXIV).

Two sorts of dwellings are commonly seen. Of these, the rudest rest on
the limbs of trees, and conform in size and shape to the nature of the
supporting branches. Some few houses of this kind have horizontal sides
and sloping roofs, but more frequently a roof which slopes directly from
a central ridge pole to the edges of the platform does away with the
necessity of side walls.

The second and more common type of house is shown in Plate LXXIV. Here
the top of the tree has been cut off some fifteen or twenty feet above
the ground leaving a stump to serve as a part of the foundation. Many
smaller poles help support the floor and then extend upward to form the
wall and roof stays. The upper flooring of beaten bark rests on
cross-beams which have been lashed to the uprights. Above it are
occasional horizontal poles, forming a skeleton to which the walls of
_nipa_ palm are fastened. In some houses two or three of the foundation
poles extend above the floor to such a height that they are used as the
supports for the ridge pole. In others true king posts rest on the
beams, which in turn are supported by the corner poles. From the ridge a
number of smaller rods extend to or project out over the side walls, and
on them rests the roofing of _nipa_ palm. A space of several inches
often intervenes between the roof and the side walls. The whole
structure is so firmly lashed together with rattan that it is capable of
withstanding severe storms, despite the fact that it gives and creaks
with every wind. During violent storms the house is further secured by
anchoring it with rattan lines to nearby trees.

Entrance to the dwelling is gained by means of bamboo or rattan ladders.
These are drawn up at night, and with all means of access thus removed
the inhabitants need have little fear of a surprise attack. If enemies
do attempt to dislodge them the defenders have the advantage of their
elevated position in the use of their weapons.

Generally, each house contains only one room which varies in size
according to the number of inhabitants. Frequently two or three families
are found living in one house, for it is the custom for the suitors, and
often for the husbands of the married daughters, to live with the girls'
people.

Near the door, or in one comer of the room, is a small box of earth in
which several stones are imbedded. This constitutes the hearth, about
which is found a miscellany of pots, jars, and other kitchen vessels.
The smoke finds its way out through a small opening at each end of the
roof, or through the narrow space under the eaves. There is no
recognized arrangement of the room. Utensils[127] are scattered
promiscuously about and when the inhabitants are ready to sleep they
occupy such parts of the floor as are free or can be most easily
cleared.

[127] These consist of baskets, rice mortars, and winnowers, weaving
outfits, bark dye vats, as well as traps and weapons, nearly all of
which are so similar to those already described for the Bagobo that they
do not call for special notice here.

The people of a community build their houses within a short distance of
one another, yet seldom so close together as to form a village. However,
village life is not entirely unknown, for in the vicinity of Cateel
Governor Bolton found six houses, partially surrounded by palisades,
perched on the top of a conical hill.

Lieutenant Youngblood gives the following description of the people and
dwellings seen by him near the upper waters of the Agusan river:

"The people seemed to be living in an atmosphere of fear as far as
intercourse with the world outside their crater-like valley was
concerned. They believed it was death to look upon the sea, of which
they had heard disjointed tales, but which none of them had ever seen.
They feared the coast people with a mortal fear, justified perhaps by
the experiences of occasional meetings in times gone by. They fear each
other to a certain extent, especially men who live further north of the
headwaters of the Agusan. This ever-present state of fear gives coloring
to their whole life. They take to the brush at the least unwonted sound.
They make their clearings on the steep mountainsides and in these build
two or three of their houses in strategic positions. In the very
construction of their dwellings the idea of security in case of attack
is predominant.

"The houses in this section are generally built in clearings on the
sawn-off trunk of some giant tree and placed from the ground some forty
or fifty feet. Numerous posts help support the structure, entrance to
which is gained by a notched pole firmly set in the ground and held in
place by tightly wound bejuca. Oftentimes this stair pole is bowed
outwards slightly, which gives it a peculiar appearance and requires a
considerable amount of skill in climbing. The front and only door to
these houses consists of a section of the floor composed of hewn plank,
hinged at one end. One end of this is raised by a bejuca rope during the
day, while at night it is let down forming a solid floor throughout the
house.

"The roof is of shingles made from mountain cane; the floor and sides of
hand-hewn logs and planks; the roof is at no place more than seven feet
from the floor and is blackened on the inside from smoke. The largest
house visited in this locality was that of Chief Leuanan, and this was
some twenty feet square. These houses consist of one room and are
inhabited by two or more families."

AGRICULTURE

About the settlements are the fields in which rice, corn, camotes,
sugar-cane, and a small amount of tobacco, cotton and hemp are raised.
However, the crops are usually so small that even with the addition of
game and forest products there is, each year, a period closely bordering
on starvation. New clearings are frequently made near to the old, for
the primitive tools[128] with which the people work are ill-fitted to
combat the incursion into the open land of the rank cogon grass. Only
the exhaustion of suitable timber land for a new clearing, the
prevalence of an epidemic, or the near approach of a powerful enemy will
cause the people to move their homes from one district to another.

[128] These consist of a mall axe, working knife, and planting stick.

We have already referred to the important part the _limokon_ plays in
the selection and clearing of a new plot of ground,[129] and to the
offerings made to the spirits when it becomes necessary to cut down
certain trees.[130] The crops, aside from the rice, are planted and
harvested without further reference to the spirit world, but the
cultivation and care of this cereal can only be carried on according to
certain fixed conditions.

[129] See pages 173 and 177.

[130] Near Cateel the wishes of the spirits are learned by means of
cords. A number of strings are tied together in the center and the knot
is buried. The loose ends are then joined and if it happens that the two
ends of a cord have been tied together it is taken as a sign that the
spirits give their consent to the proposed clearing.

About November first, when a group of seven stars called _poyo poyo_
appears in the west, it is a signal for all who expect to clear new land
to begin their labors. By December first this constellation rises
straight above and it is then time to plant. This is further confirmed
by the appearance of a star known as _sabak_. If any have delayed their
planting until the middle of December they are given a last warning when
the stars forming _Bayatik_[131] appear.

[131] This is the same as _balatik_, page 62.

As soon as the land has been cleared a pole is placed in the center of
the field and is surrounded by a fence. This is known as _tagbinian_ and
seems to be erected in honor of the spirit Omayan, although by some it
is insisted that it is intended for his residence. The seed rice is
deposited inside the enclosure[132] and the men begin to prepare the
soil about it. This they do by thrusting sharpened sticks into the
ground, thus making holes an inch or two in depth. Taking rice from the
_tagbinian_ the women follow, dropping seeds into the holes.

[132] Maxey relates that at planting and harvest tune the Mandaya of
Cateel carry offerings to the _baliti_ trees and there offer it to
Diwata, in supplication or thanks for an abundant crop.

When the harvest time is near at hand the men repair the old granaries
or build new and then, when all is ready for the crop, an old man or
woman goes alone, in the middle of the night, to the fields and there
cuts a few stalks of the rice. Should this be neglected the crop is sure
to be small and will vanish quickly. This grain is not used as an
offering, nor are any gifts made to the spirits until the crop has been
harvested and the people are ready to eat of the new rice. At that time
a little of the recently harvested grain is placed on a dish, together
with other food and betel-nut, and is carried to the granary, where it
is presented to the spirit "in order that the granary may always be
full." When the grain is needed for use it is removed from the straw by
pounding it with wooden pestles, it is then placed in a wooden mortar
and is again pounded until the husks are loosened. This accomplished,
the grain is freed from chaff by tossing it in a winnower. If a greater
amount has been cleared than is needed it is stored in gourds or
water-proof baskets (Fig. 50). A month or two after the harvest a great
celebration is held, the principal features of which are a feast and
dance but no offerings are then made to the spirits.

FIG. 50. GOURD RICE HOLDER.

The small crop of sugar-cane is made into an alcoholic drink, which is
sometimes indulged in at meal time but is generally reserved for festive
occasions. The juice is boiled with a plant called _palba_, similar to
ginger, and is stored away in bamboo tubes until it has reached a
suitable stage of fermentation. Another drink is made by boiling
strained honey with the _palba_ and allowing it to ferment.

HUNTING AND FISHING

A considerable portion of the food supply is secured by hunting and
fishing. Small birds are captured by placing a sticky substance on bare
limbs of fruit-bearing trees, or by fastening gummed sticks in places
frequented by birds. When a victim alights on this it is held securely
until captured by the hunter. Fig. 51 shows another method of securing
such small game. A cord with a noose at one end is attached to a bent
limb. In the center of this cord is tied a short stick which acts as a
trigger. This trigger is placed with the top end pressing against an
arched twig _a_, while the other end draws _b_ against the sides of the
arch. Other sticks rest on _b_ and on them is a covering of leaves on
which is placed bait and the open noose. The weight of a bird or small
animal on the cross-piece is sufficient to release the trigger and then
the bent limb draws the noose taut.

FIG. 51. BIRD SNARE.

The series of slip nooses attached to a central cord which surrounds a
tame decoy is also found in use here, and boys frequently secure birds
by means of blow-guns. The latter do not differ from those already
described on p. 73, but with this tribe they are regarded only as a
boy's plaything.

Deer and pig are sometimes hunted by large parties with the aid of dogs.
In such cases an attempt is made to drive the animals past concealed
hunters, or to dispatch them with spears when brought to bay by the
dogs. The more successful method, however, is by means of traps several
types of which were seen by the writer. The first and most common is a
dead fall consisting of a heavy log so arranged in the runway of the
game that a passing animal will cause it to fall. Next in favor with the
hunters is the _bayatik_. One end of a sapling is tied horizontally to a
tree and is then bent back like a spring. It is held in place by means
of a trigger which is released when an animal disturbs a vine stretched
across the runway. Against the free end of the spring a long bamboo
spear or arrow is placed in such a manner that it is thrown with great
force against the animal which has released the trigger. This trap is
frequently used in warfare to protect the retreat of a war party, or to
surprise an enemy.

Sharpened bamboo sticks, two or three feet long, planted at points where
animals are accustomed to jump or run down steep inclines, are
wonderfully efficient in securing game. Sticks and leaves cover pits in
which sharpened poles are planted and into these unsuspecting animals or
members of a hostile party often fall. All these last named devices are
exceedingly dangerous and it is unadvisable for a traveler in the jungle
to try to penetrate a strange region unless accompanied by a native who
knows the position of the traps and pits.

Fish are secured by means of bamboo traps through which a part of the
water of a stream is diverted. These traps do not differ in any respect
from those shown in Fig. 19. Along the coast metal fishhooks and dip and
throw nets are in common use, but these are at present largely obtained
from the Moro. The easiest and hence the most popular method of securing
fish is to mash together the poisonous roots of the _tobli_ tree and the
fruit of the _oliskEb_. The pulp is then sunk into still pools of water
and in a short time, the stupified[sic] fish begin to float to the
surface, where they are quickly seized by the fishermen.

WARFARE

Mention has already been made of the use of pits and traps in warfare.
In addition to these it is customary for a returning war party to
conceal in the trail many _saoñag_, small stiletto-shaped bamboo sticks,
which pierce the feet of those in pursuit. A night camp is effectively
protected in the same manner against barefooted enemies.

The arms used are spears, fighting knives with wide bellied blades,
daggers, narrow shields with which weapons are defected (Fig. 52), and
in some sections bows and arrows. The fighting knives and daggers
(Plates LXXV-LXXVI) deserve more than casual notice. The heavy bellied
blades of the knives are highly tempered, and not infrequently are bored
through and inlaid with silver, in which instances they are known as
_binuta_,--blind (Plate LXXVa). The sheaths, with their sharply upturned
ends, are made of light wood on which are carved decorations, attached
or inlaid bands of silver, or stained designs. The handles of the
weapons are also decorated with incised silver bands.

FIG. 52. WOODEN SHIELDS.

Much as the fighting knives are prized, the dagger, _bayadau_ or
_badau_, is in even greater favor. It is worn on the front left-hand
part of the body in ready reach of the right hand, and is never removed
unless the owner is in the company of trusted relatives. A light thread,
easily broken, holds the dagger in its sheath and the slightest
disturbance is enough to cause the owner to draw his weapon.

The older warriors claim that it formerly was their custom to protect
themselves with strips of hemp cloth, _limbotung_, which they wound many
times around their bodies in order to ward off knife thrusts, but this
method of protection seems to have fallen into disuse.[133]

[133] This type of protective armor is still used by the Bukidnon of
Central Mindanao.

Individual warriors lie in ambush for their foes, but when a great raid
is planned the party is under the command of a _bagani_. These attacks
are arranged to take place during the full moon and the warriors usually
assault a settlement which they think can be taken by surprise, and
hence unprepared. It is very seldom that these people fight in the open,
and invaders do not attempt a combat unless they feel sure of the
outcome. If they find a house well protected they may attempt to fire it
by attaching a torch to an arrow and shooting it into the grass roof,
the occupants being slaughtered as they rush out. If one of the enemy
puts up an especially good fight his body is opened and the warriors eat
a portion of his heart and liver, thinking thus to gain in valor.

Mr. Maxey mentions the use of poisoned weapons in the neighborhood of
Cateel, but the Mandaya of the south seem to be entirely ignorant of
this custom, Maxey's account of the preparation of the poison is as
follows:

"The poison is, according to the writer's informant, prepared as
follows: A long bamboo is cut and carried to a tree called
_camandag_.[134] The bamboo must be long enough to reach to the limit of
the shadow cast by the tree to the trunk of the same, as the tree is so
poisonous that it even affects those who stand beneath it. The bamboo
has a sharp point which is stuck into the tree and receives the milk
which exudes from the cut. After several days the bamboo is removed and
the contents emptied into another bamboo which serves for a sheath or
quiver for the arrows, these being placed in it point down. The
slightest scratch will cause death. A peculiar thing about the tree from
which the poison is extracted, is that the person extracting must not
only not get under the tree, but must approach it from the windward, as
the effects of even the odor are unpleasant and dangerous."

[134] _Croton tiglium L_.

INDUSTRIES

In the description of the tribe up to this point we have touched upon
those pursuits which engross the greater part of the time. In addition
to these, it falls to the lot of the women to manufacture and decorate
all the clothing worn by members of the tribe. Some cotton is grown and
is used in the manufacture of jackets, but the bulk of the garments are
of hemp. In the description of the Decorative Art we shall deal with the
decoration of the hemp cloth skirts worn by the women. Here it is only
necessary for us to observe that this cloth is produced and colored by
exactly the same process as is employed by the Bagobo women.[135]

[135] See p. 79.

A very little brass casting is done by the Mandaya of one district, but
it is evidently a crude copy of Moro work. By far the greater part of
the brass betel boxes, and ornaments of that metal, as well as spear
heads, are purchased from the coast Mohammedans.

Iron working is an ancient art with this people and the beauty and
temper of their knives and daggers is not excelled by the output of any
other Philippine tribe. In the manufacture of these weapons they employ
the same methods as their neighbors to the south and west.

No wild tribe in the archipelago has made so much use of silver in the
production of ornaments as has the Mandaya. Thin silver plates are
rolled into small tubes and are attached to the woman's ear plugs (Fig.
49), finger rings of the same metal are produced in great numbers, but
the finest work appears in the large silver ornaments worn on the
breasts by both sexes (Fig. 53). Silver coins are beaten into thin
disks, in the center of which a hole is cut. About this opening appear
beautiful intricate designs, some engraved, others stamped with metal
dies.

FIG. 53. SILVER BREAST ORNAMENTS.

All work in metal is limited to a few skilled men, but many lesser
industries, such as shaping tortoise shell rings and shell bracelets,
carving of spoons, and making baskets, are carried on by other members
of the tribe during their leisure hours.

BIRTH

In each district there are one or two mid wives, known as _managamon_.
They are women past middle life who are versed in the medicines and
rites which should be employed at the time of birth. They are not
considered as _ballyan_, yet they talk to the spirits upon certain
occasions.

When a pregnant woman is about to be delivered the midwife crushes the
bark of the _dap-dap_ tree and makes a medicine called _tagaumo_, which
she gives to the patient. It is claimed that this causes the muscles to
relax so that they allow an easy delivery. The umbilical cord is cut
with a bamboo knife and as soon as the child has been bathed it is given
to the mother. The afterbirth is placed in a specially prepared basket
and is either hung against the side of the house or in a nearby tree.
For a few days the midwife assists about the house and then, if all is
well with the child, she takes her payment of rice, chicken, and fish,
and returns to her home. Should the child be ailing she will return, and
having placed rice and betel-nut on banana leaves she carries these to
the top of the house and there offers them to the _asuang_,[136]
meanwhile asking those spirits to accept the offering and to cease
troubling the child. No ceremony takes place at the time of naming or at
the age of puberty, but at the latter period the teeth are filed and
blackened so that the young person may be more beautiful and, therefore,
able to contract a suitable marriage.