{97}

VI

THE COMMUNION OF THE SPIRIT




{98}

"In his intimate union with his Son, the Holy Spirit is the unique
organ by which God wills to communicate to man his own life, the
supernatural life, the divine life--that is to say, his holiness, his
power, his love, his felicity.  To this end the Son works outwardly,
the Holy Spirit inwardly."--_Pastor G. F. Tophel_.






{99}

VI

THE COMMUNION OF THE SPIRIT

The familiar benediction which invokes upon us the "communion of the
Holy Ghost" has probably a deeper meaning in it than has generally been
recognized.  The word "communion"--_choinônia_--signifies the having in
common.  It is used of the fellowship of believers one with another,
and also of their mutual fellowship with God.  The Holy Spirit dwelling
in us is the agent through whom this community of life and love is
effected and maintained.  "And truly our fellowship," says John, "is
with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ" (1 John 1: 3).  But this
having in common with the first two persons of the Godhead were only
possible through the communion of the Holy Ghost, the third person.  In
his promise of the Comforter, Jesus said: "He shall take of mine and
show it unto you."  As the Son while on earth communicated to men the
spiritual riches of the invisible Father, so the Spirit now
communicates to us the hidden things of the invisible Son; and if we
were required to describe in a word the present office-work of the Holy
Ghost, we should say that it is to make true _in_ us that which is
already true _for_ us in {100} our glorified Lord.  All light and life
and warmth are stored up for us in the sun; but these can only reach us
through the atmosphere which stands between us and that sun as the
medium of communication; even so in Christ are "hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge," and by the Holy Spirit these are
made over to us.  It will be our endeavor in this chapter to count up
our hid treasures in Christ, and to consider the Spirit in his various
offices of communication.

1.  _The Spirit of Life: Our Regeneration_.  Not until our Lord took
his place at God's right hand did he assume his full prerogative as
life-giver to us.  He was here in the flesh for our death; he took on
him our nature that he might in himself crucify our Adam-life and put
it away.  But when he rose from the dead and sat down on his Father's
throne, he became the life-giver to all his mystical body, which is the
church.  To talk of being saved by the earthly life of Jesus is to know
Christ only "after the flesh."  True, the apostle says that "being
reconciled" by Christ's death, "much more being reconciled we shall be
saved by his life."  But he here refers plainly to his glorified life.
And Jesus, looking forward to the time when he should have risen from
the dead, says: "Because I live, ye shall live also."  Christ on the
throne is really the heart of the church, and every regeneration is a
pulse-beat of that heart in souls begotten from above {101} through the
Holy Spirit.  The new birth therefore is not a change of nature as it
is sometimes defined; it is rather the communication of the Divine
nature, and the Holy Spirit is now the Mediator through whom this life
is transmitted.  If we take our Lord's words to Nicodemus: "Except a
man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God," and press the
"again" _anôthen_ back to its deepest significance, it becomes very
instructive.  "Born _from above_," say some.  And very true to fact is
this saying.  Regeneration is not our natural life carried up to its
highest point of attainment, but the Divine life brought down to its
lowest point of condescension, even to the heart of fallen man.  John,
in speaking of Jesus as the life-giver, calls him "_he that cometh from
above_" (3: 31); and Jesus, in speaking to the degenerate sons of
Abraham, says: "Ye are _from beneath_, I am _from above_" (John 8: 23).
It has been the constant dream and delusion of men that they could rise
to heaven by the development and improvement of their natural life.
Jesus by one stroke of revelation destroys this hope, telling his
hearer that unless he has been begotten of God who is above as truly as
he has been begotten of his father on earth, he cannot see the kingdom
of God.

Others make these words of our Lord signify "born _from the
beginning_."  There must be a resumption of life _de novo_, a return to
the original {102} source and fountain of being.  To find this it is
not enough that we go back to the creation-beginning revealed in
Genesis; we must return to the precreation-beginning revealed in John,
the book of re-genesis.  In the opening of Genesis we find Adam,
created holy, now fallen through temptation, his face averted from God
and leading the whole human race after him into sin and death.  In the
opening of the Gospel of John we find the Son of God in holy fellowship
with the Father.  "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
toward God", _pros ton theon_--not merely proceeding from God, but
tending toward God by eternal communion.  Conversion restores man to
this lost attitude: "Ye turned to God, _pros ton theon_, from idols to
serve the living and true God" (1 Thess. 1: 9).  Regeneration restores
man to his forfeited life, the unfallen life of the Son of God, the
life which has never wavered from steadfast fellowship with the Father.
"I give unto them eternal life," says Jesus.  Is eternal life without
end?  Yes; and just as truly without beginning.  It is uncreated being
in distinction from all-created being; it is the I-am life of God in
contrast to the I-become life of all human souls.  By spiritual birth
we acquire a divine heredity as truly as by natural birth we acquire a
human heredity.

In the condensed antithesis with which our Lord concludes his demand
for the new birth, we have both the philosophy and the justification of
his {103} doctrine: "That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the Spirit is spirit.  Marvel not that I say unto you,
Ye must be born anew" (John 3: 7, R. V.).  By no process of evolution,
however prolonged, can the natural man be developed into the spiritual
man; by no process of degeneration can the spiritual man deteriorate
into the natural man.  These two are from a totally different stock and
origin; the one is from beneath, the other is from above.  There is but
one way through which the relation of sonship can be established, and
that is by begetting.  That God has created all men does not constitute
them his sons in the evangelical sense of that word.  The sonship on
which the New Testament dwells so constantly is based absolutely and
solely on the experience of the new birth, while the doctrine of
universal sonship rests either upon a daring denial or a daring
assumption--the denial of the universal fall of man through sin, or the
assumption of the universal regeneration of man through the Spirit.  In
either case the teaching belongs to "another gospel," the recompense of
whose preaching is not a beatitude but an anathema.[1]

The contrast between the two lives and the way {104} in which the
partnership--the _choinônia_--with the new is effected, is told in that
deep saying of Peter: "Whereby he hath granted us his precious and
exceeding great promises; that through these ye may become
partakers--_choinônia_--of the divine nature, having escaped from the
corruption which is in the world by lust" (2 Pet. 1: 4, R. V.).  Here
are the two streams of life contrasted:

1.  The corruption in the world through lust.

2.  The Divine nature which is in the world through the incarnation.

Here is the Adam-life into which we are brought by natural birth; and
over against it the Christ-life into which we are brought by spiritual
birth.  From the one we escape, of the other we partake.  The source
and issue of the one are briefly summarized: "Lust when it hath
conceived bringeth forth sin, and sin when it is finished bringeth
forth death."  The Jordan is a fitting symbol of our natural life,
rising in a lofty elevation and from pure springs, but plunging
steadily down till it pours itself into that Dead Sea from which there
is no outlet: To be taken out of this stream and to be brought into the
life which flows from the heart of God is man's only hope of salvation.
And the method of effecting this transition is plainly stated, "through
these," or by means of the precious and exceeding great promises.  As
in grafting, the old and degenerate stock must first be cut off and
then the new inserted, so {105} in regeneration we are separated from
the flesh and incorporated by the Spirit.  And what the scion is in
grafting, the word or promise of God is in regeneration.  It is the
medium through which the Holy Spirit is conveyed, the germ cell in
which the Divine life is enfolded.  Hence the emphasis which is put in
Scripture upon the appropriation of divine truth.  We are told that "of
his own will begat he us _with the word of truth_" (James 1: 18).
"Having been begotten again, not of corruptible seed but of
incorruptible, _through the word of God_, which liveth and abideth" (1
Peter 1: 23, R. V.).

Very deep and significant, therefore, is the saying of Jesus in respect
to the regenerating power of his words, in the sixth chapter of the
Gospel of John; He emphasizes the contrariety between the two natures,
the human and the divine, saying: "It is the Spirit that quickeneth,
the flesh profiteth nothing."  And then he adds: "The words which I
have spoken unto you are spirit and life."  As God in creation breathed
into man the breath of life and he became a living soul, so the Lord
Jesus by the word of his mouth, which is the breath of life, recreates
man and makes him alive unto God.  And not life only, but likeness as
well, is thus imparted.  "So God created man in his own image; in the
image of God created he him," is the simple story of the origin of an
innocent race.  Then follows the temptation and the fall, and then the
story of the {106} descent of a ruined humanity: "And Adam begot a son
in his own likeness, after his image."

And yet how wide the gulf between these two origins.  The notion is
persistent and incurable in the human heart, that whatever variation
there may have been from the original type, education and training can
reshape the likeness of Adam to the likeness of God.  "As the twig is
bent the tree is inclined," says the popular proverb.  True; but though
a crooked sapling may be developed into the upright oak, no bending or
manipulation can ever so change the species of the tree as to enable
men to gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles.  Here again the
dualism of Jesus Christ's teaching is distinctly recognized.  "A good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit."  And what is the remedy for a corrupt tree?  The
cutting off of the old and the bringing in of a new scion and stock.
The life of God can alone beget the likeness of God; the divine type is
wrapped up in the same germ which holds the Divine nature.  Therefore
in regeneration we are said to have "put on the new man who is renewed
in knowledge _after the image of him that created him_" (Col. 3: 10),
and "which _after God_ hath been created in . . . true holiness" (Eph.
4: 24).

In a word, the lost image of God is not restamped upon us, but renewed
within us.  Christ our life was "begotten of the Holy Ghost," and he
became {107} the fount and origin of life henceforth for all his
church.  This communication of the divine life from Christ to the soul
through the Holy Spirit is a hidden transaction, but so great in its
significance and issues that one has well called it "the greatest of
all miracles."  As in the origin of our natural life we are made in
secret and curiously wrought, much more in our spiritual.  But the
issue has to do with the farthest eternity.  "As when the Lord was born
the world still went on its old way, little conscious that one had come
who should one day change and rule all things, so when the new man is
framed within, the old life for a while goes on much as before; the
daily calling, and the earthly cares, and too often old lusts and
habits also, still engross us; a worldly eye sees little new, while yet
the life which shall live forever has been quickened within and a new
man been formed who shall inherit all."[2]

2.  _The Spirit of Holiness: Our Sanctification_.  "According to the
Spirit of holiness" Christ "was declared to be the Son of God in power
by the resurrection from the dead" (Rom. 1: 4).  How striking the
antithesis between our Lord's two natures, as revealed in this passage,
Son of David as to the flesh, Son of God as to the Spirit.  And "as he
is so are we in this world."  We who are regenerate have two natures,
the one derived from Adam, the other {108} derived from Christ, and our
sanctification consists in the double process of mortification and
vivification, the deadening and subduing of the old and the quickening
and developing of the new.  In other words, what was wrought in Christ
who was "put to death in the flesh but quickened in the spirit" is
rewrought in us through the constant operation of the Holy Ghost, and
thus the cross and the resurrection extend their sway over the entire
life of the Christian.  Consider these two experiences.

Mortification is not asceticism.  It is not a self-inflicted
compunction, but a Christ-inflicted crucifixion.  Our Lord was done
with the cross when on Calvary he cried: "It is finished."  But where
he ended each disciple must begin: "If any man will come after me let
him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.  For whosoever
will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for
my sake shall find it" (Matt. 16: 24, 25).  These words, so constantly
repeated in one form or another by our Lord, make it clear that the
death-principle must be realized within us in order that the
life-principle may have final and triumphant sway.  It is to this truth
which every disciple is solemnly committed in his baptism: "Know ye not
that so many of us as were baptized into Christ were baptized into his
death?  Therefore we were buried with him by baptism into death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by {109} the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life" (Rom. 6: 3, 4).
Baptism is the monogram of the Christian; by it every believer is
sealed and certified as a participant in the death and life of Christ;
and the Holy Spirit has been given to be the Executor of the contract
thus made at the symbolic grave of Christ.

In considering the great fact of the believer's death in Christ to sin
and the law, we must not confound what the Scriptures clearly
distinguish.  There are three deaths in which we have part:

1.  _Death in sin, our natural condition_.

2.  _Death for sin, our judicial condition_.

3.  _Death to sin, our sanctified condition_.

1.  _Death in sin_.  "And you . . . who were dead in trespasses and
sins," "And you being dead in your sins" (Eph. 2: 1; Col. 2: 13).  This
is the condition in which we are by nature, as participants in the fall
and ruin into which the transgression of our first parents has plunged
the race.  It is a condition in which we are under moral insensibility
to the claims of God's holiness and love; and under the sentence of
eternal punishment from the law which we have broken.  In this state of
death in sin Christ found the whole world when he came to be our
Saviour.

2.  _Death for sin_.  "Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead
to the law by the body of Christ" (Rom. 7: 4).  This is the condition
into {110} which Christ brought us by his sacrifice upon the cross.  He
endured the sentence of a violated law on our behalf, and therefore we
are counted as having endured it in him.  What he did for us is
reckoned as having been done by us: "Because we thus judge, that one
died for all, therefore all died" (2 Cor. 5: 14, R. V.).  Being one
with Christ through faith, we are identified with him on the cross: "I
have been crucified with Christ" (Gal. 2: 20, R. V.).  This condition
of death for sin having been effected for us by our Saviour, we are
held legally or judicially free from the penalty of a violated law, if
by our personal faith we will consent to the transaction.

3.  _Death to sin_.  "Even so reckon ye also yourselves to be dead unto
sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus" (Rom. 6: 11, R. V.).  This is
the condition of making true in ourselves what is already true for us
in Christ, of rendering practical what is now judicial; in other words,
of being dead to the power of sin in ourselves, as we are already dead
to the penalty of sin through Jesus Christ.  As it is written in the
Epistle to the Colossians: "For ye died," judicially in Christ,
"mortify"--make dead practically--"therefore your members which are
upon the earth" (Col. 3: 2, 5, R. V.).  It is this condition which the
Holy Spirit is constantly effecting in us if we will have it so.  "If
ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body {111} ye shall
live" (Rom. 8: 13).  This is not self-deadening, as the Revised Version
seems to suggest by its decapitalizing of the word "Spirit."  Self is
not powerful enough to conquer self, the human spirit to get the
victory over the human flesh.  That were like a drowning man with his
right hand laying hold on his left hand, only that both may sink
beneath the waves.  "Old Adam is too strong for young Melancthon," said
the Reformer.  It is the Spirit of God overcoming our fleshly nature by
his indwelling life, on whom is our sole dependence.  Our principal
care therefore must be to "walk in the Spirit" and "be filled with the
Spirit," and all the rest will come spontaneously and inevitably.  As
the ascending sap in the tree crowds off the dead leaves which in spite
of storm and frost cling to the branches all winter long, so does the
Holy Ghost within us, when allowed full sway, subdue and expel the
remnants of our sinful nature.

One cannot fail to see that asceticism is an absolute inversion of the
Divine order, since it seeks life through death instead of finding
death through life.  No degree of mortification can ever bring us to
sanctification.  We are to "put off the old man with his deeds."  But
how?  By "putting on the new man who is renewed in knowledge after the
image of him that created him."  "For the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death" (Rom. 8:
2), {112} writes Paul.  It is a pointed statement of the case which one
makes in describing the transition from the old to the new in his own
experience, from the former life of perpetual defeat to the present
life of victory through Christ.  "Once it was a constant breaking off,
now it is a daily bringing in," he says.  That is, the former striving
was directed to being rid of the inveterate habits and evil tendencies
of the old nature--its selfishness, its pride, its lust, and its
vanity.  Now the effort is to bring in the Spirit, to drink in his
divine presence, to breathe, as a holy atmosphere, his supernatural
life.  The indwelling of the Spirit can alone effect the exclusion of
sin.  This will appear if we consider what has been called "the
expulsive power of a new affection."  "Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world," says the Scripture.  But all experience
proves that loving not is only possible through loving, the worldly
affection being overcome by the heavenly.

And we find this method clearly exhibited in the word.  "The love of
the Spirit" (Rom. 15: 30) is given us for overcoming the world.  The
divine life is the source of the divine love.  Therefore "the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto
us."  Because we are by nature so wholly without heavenly affection,
God, through the indwelling Spirit, gives us his own love with which to
love himself.  Herein {113} is the highest credential of discipleship:
"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another" (John 13: 35).  As Christ manifested to the world the
love of the Father, so are we to manifest the love of Christ--a
manifestation, however, which is only possible because of our
possessorship of a common life.  As one has truly said concerning our
Saviour's command to his disciples to love one another: "It is a
command which would be utterly idle and futile were it not that he, the
ever-loving One, is willing to put his own love within me.  The command
is really no more than to be a branch of the true vine.  I am to cease
from my own living and loving, and yield myself to the expression of
Christ's love."

And what is true of the love of Christ is true of the likeness of
Christ.  How is the likeness acquired?  Through contemplation and
imitation?  So some have taught.  And it is true, if only the
indwelling Spirit is behind all, beneath all, and effectually operative
in all.  As it is written: "But we all with unveiled face, reflecting
as a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image
from glory to glory, even as from the Lord, the Spirit" (2 Cor. 3: 18,
R. V.).  It is only the Spirit of the Lord dwelling within us that can
fashion us to the image of the Lord set before us.  Who is sufficient
by external imitation of Christ to become {114} conformed to the
likeness of Christ?  Imagine one without genius and devoid of the
artist's training sitting down before Raphael's famous picture of the
Transfiguration and attempting to reproduce it.  How crude and
mechanical and lifeless his work would be!  But if such a thing were
possible that the spirit of Raphael should enter into the man and
obtain the mastery of his mind and eye and hand, it would be entirely
possible that he should paint this masterpiece; for it would simply be
Raphael reproducing Raphael.  And this in a mystery is what is true of
the disciple filled with the Holy Ghost.  Christ, who is "the image of
the invisible God," is set before him as his divine pattern, and Christ
by the Spirit dwells within him as a divine life, and Christ is able to
image forth Christ from the interior life to the outward example.

Of course likeness to Christ is but another name for holiness, and
when, at the resurrection, we awake satisfied with his likeness (Ps.
17: 15), we shall be perfected in holiness.  This is simply saying that
sanctification is progressive and not, like conversion, instantaneous.
And yet we must admit the force of what a devout and thoughtful writer
says as to the danger of regarding it as _only_ a gradual growth.  If a
Christian looks upon himself as "a tree planted by the rivers of water
that bringeth forth his fruit in his season," he judges rightly.  But
to conclude therefore that his growth will be as {115} irresistible as
that of the tree, coming as a matter of course simply because he has by
regeneration been planted in Christ, is a grave mistake.  The disciple
is required to be consciously and intelligently active in his own
growth, as a tree is not, "to give all diligence to make his calling
and election sure."  And when we say "active" we do not mean
self-active merely, for "which of you by being anxious can add one
cubit unto his stature?" asks Jesus (Matt. 6: 27, R. V.).  But we must
surrender ourselves to the divine action by living in the Spirit and
praying in the Spirit and walking in the Spirit, all of which
conditions are as essential to our development in holiness, as the rain
and the sunshine are to the growth of the oak.  It is possible that
through a neglect and grieving of the Spirit a Christian may be of
smaller stature in his age than he was in his spiritual infancy, his
progress being a retrogression rather than an advance.  Therefore in
saying that sanctification is progressive let us beware of concluding
that it is inevitable.

Moreover, as candid inquirers, we must ask what of truth and of error
there may be in the doctrine of "instantaneous sanctification," which
many devout persons teach and profess to have proved.  If the
conception is that of a state of sinless perfection into which the
believer has been suddenly lifted and of deliverance from a sinful
nature which has been suddenly eradicated, we must {116} consider this
doctrine as dangerously untrue.  But we do consider it possible that
one may experience a great crisis in his spiritual life, in which there
is such a total self-surrender to God and such an infilling of the Holy
Spirit, that he is freed from the bondage of sinful appetites and
habits, and enabled to have constant victory over self, instead of
suffering constant defeat.  In saying this, what more do we affirm than
is taught in that scripture: "Walk in the Spirit and ye shall not
fulfill the lust of the flesh" (Gal. 5: 16).

Divine truth as revealed in Scripture seems often to lie between two
extremes.  It is emphatically so in regard to this question.  What a
paradox it is that side by side in the Epistle of John we should have
the strongest affirmation of the Christian's sinfulness: "If we say
that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us";
and the strongest affirmation of his sinlessness: "Whosoever is born of
God doth not commit sin, for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot
sin because he is born of God" (1 John 1: 8; 3: 9).  Now heresy means a
dividing or choosing, and almost all of the gravest errors have arisen
from adopting some extreme statement of Scripture to the rejection of
the other extreme.  If we regard the doctrine of sinless perfection as
a heresy, we regard contentment with sinful imperfection as a greater
heresy.  And we gravely fear that many Christians make the {117}
apostle's words, "If we say we have no sin we deceive ourselves," the
unconscious justification for a low standard of Christian living.  It
were almost better for one to overstate the possibilities of
sanctification in his eager grasp after holiness, than to understate
them in his complacent satisfaction with a traditional unholiness.
Certainly it is not an edifying spectacle to see a Christian worldling
throwing stones at a Christian perfectionist.

What then would be a true statement of the doctrine which we are
considering, one which would embrace both extremes of statement as they
appear in the Epistle of John?  _Sinful in self, sinless in Christ_--is
our answer: "In him is no sin; whosoever abideth in him sinneth not" (1
John 3: 5, 6).  If through the communication of the Holy Spirit the
life of Christ is constantly imparted to us, that life will prevail
within us.  That life is absolutely sinless, as incapable of defilement
as the sunbeam which has its fount and origin in the sun.  In
proportion to the closeness of our abiding in him will be the
completeness of our deliverance from sinning.  And we doubt not that
there are Christians who have yielded themselves to God in such
absolute surrender, and who through the upholding power of the Spirit
have been so kept in that condition of surrender, that sin has not had
dominion over them.  If in them the war between the flesh and the
spirit has not been forever ended, there has {118} been present victory
in which troublesome sins have ceased from their assaults, and "the
peace of God" has ruled in the heart.

But sinning is one thing and a sinful nature is another; and we see no
evidence in Scripture that the latter is ever eradicated completely
while we are in the body.  If we could see ourselves with God's eye, we
should doubtless discover sinfulness lying beneath our most joyful
moments of unsinning conduct, and the stain of our old and fallen
nature so discoloring our whitest actions as to convince us that we are
not yet faultless in his presence.  Only let us gladly emphasize this
fact, that as we inherit from Adam a nature incapable of sinlessness,
we inherit from Christ a nature incapable of sinfulness.  Therefore, it
is written: "Whosoever is born of God cannot sin, for his seed
remaineth in him."  It is not the nature of the new nature to sin; it
is not the law of "the law of the Spirit of life" to transgress.  For
the new-born man to do evil is to transgress the law of his nature as
before it was to obey it.  In a word, before our regeneration we lived
in sin and loved it; since our regeneration we may lapse into sin but
we loathe it.

3.  _The Spirit of Glory: Our Transfiguration_.  "The Spirit of glory
and of God resteth upon you," writes Peter (1 Peter 4: 14).  Let us
recall this apostle's habit of dividing the stages of redemption into
these two, "the sufferings of Christ and the {119} glory that should
follow," in which he seems to conceive of our Lord's mystical body, the
church, as passing through and reproducing the twofold experience of
its Head, in humiliation and in subsequent exaltation.  Even in the
time of her humiliation she has the Spirit of glory abiding on her, as
the cloud of glory rested down upon the tabernacle in the wilderness
during all the pilgrimage of the children of Israel.  And is not
Peter's saying the same as Paul's, in his picture of the suffering
creation: "But ourselves also, which have the first-fruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the
adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body" (Rom. 8: 23).  Not yet
have we reached the consummation of our hope, at the "appearing of the
glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ" (Titus 2: 13, R. V.);
but the Spirit, through whose inworking power this great change is to
be wrought, already dwells in us, giving us by his present quickening
the pledge and earnest of our final glory.  And so we read in another
Scripture: "But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken
your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you" (Rom. 8: 11).
It is not our dead bodies which are here spoken of as the objects of
the Spirit's quickening, but our mortal bodies--bodies liable to death
and doomed to death if the Lord {120} tarry, but not yet having
experienced death.  Hence the quickening referred to has to do rather
with the vivifying of the living saints than the resurrection of the
dead saints.

Of course the consummation of this vivifying is at the Lord's coming,
when those who have died shall be raised, and those who are alive shall
be transfigured; but because of the Spirit of life dwelling in us, who
shall say that the process has not even now begun?  To explain: "Behold
I shew you a mystery," says Paul; "we shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump" (1 Cor. 15: 51, 52).  That is, as at Christ's coming the dead
saints will be raised, so the living saints will be translated without
seeing death.  A change will come to them, so far as we can understand,
like that which came to Jesus at his resurrection--the body glorified,
all of mortal and earthly belonging to it by nature eliminated in an
instant, and the Holy Ghost so completely transforming and
immortalizing it that it shall become perfectly fashioned to the
likeness of Christ's glorified body.  But having the Spirit dwelling in
us we have, even now, the first-fruits of this transformation in the
daily renewing of our inward man, in the helping and healing and
strengthening which sometimes comes to our bodies through the hidden
life of the Holy Ghost.  Sanctification is progressive, waiting to be
{121} consummated in the future; so is glorification in some sense
progressive, since by the presence of the Spirit we already have the
earnest of the glory that is to be.  As Edward Irving beautifully
states it, condensing his language: "As sickness is sin apparent in the
body, the presentiment of death, the forerunner of corruption, and as
disease of every kind is mortality begun, so the quickening of our
mortal bodies by the inward inspiration of the Spirit is the
resurrection forestalled, redemption anticipated, glory begun in our
humiliation."

When is sanctification completed?  At death, is the answer which we
find given in some creeds and manuals of theology.  This may be true;
but we say it not, because the Scripture saith it not.  So far as we
can infer from the word of God the date of our sanctification or
perfection in holiness is definitely fixed at the appearing of the Lord
"a second time without sin unto salvation."  Our sanctification, now
going on, is glory begun in us; our glorification then ushered in will
be glory completed in us.  The Spirit of glory now working in us brings
forward and already works within us the beginning of the perfect life.
Because we have been made "partakers of the Holy Ghost" we have thereby
"tasted the powers of the age to come" (Heb. 6: 4, 5, R. V.), that age
of complete deliverance from sin and sickness and death.  But at most
we have only tasted as yet; we have not {122} drunk fully into the
fountain of immortal life.  It is at Christ's advent that this blessed
consummation is fixed: "To the end he may establish your hearts
unblamable in holiness before our God and Father _at the coming of our
Lord Jesus with all his saints_" (1 Thess. 3: 13, R. V.).  Not simply
blameless but faultless, seems to be the condition here foretold, since
it is unblamable in the sphere and element of holiness.

And with this agrees another text in the same epistle: "And the God of
peace himself sanctify you wholly; and may your spirit and soul and
body be preserved entire without blame _at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ_" (1 Thess. 5: 23, R. V.).  The time appointed for the
consummation of this blameless wholeness is at the Saviour's advent in
glory.  And how suggestive the order maintained in naming the threefold
man: "Your spirit, soul, and body."  Our sanctification moves from
within outward.  It begins with the spirit, which is the holy of
holies; the Spirit of God acting first on the spirit of man in renewing
grace, then upon the soul, till at last it reaches the outer court of
the body, at the resurrection and translation.  When the body is
glorified, then only will sanctification be consummated, for then only
will the whole man, spirit, soul, and body, have come under the
Spirit's perfecting power.

We may see the difference between progressive {123} sanctification and
perfected sanctification, or glorification, by comparing familiar
texts.  One already has been quoted in this chapter: "We all, beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord" (2 Cor. 3: 18).
Here are degrees of progress "from glory to glory," and it is a
progress in the glorified life--gradual conformity to the Lord of
glory, through successive stages of glory, effected by the Spirit of
glory.  The word-painting of the passage inevitably associates it in
our thought with the great transfiguration experience of our Lord, when
by a kind of rapture he was for a little while taken out of "this
present evil age" (Gal. 1: 4), and translated into "the age to come,"
and made to taste of its powers as "he appeared in glory" (Heb. 6: 5,
R. V.).  So says the apostle: "Be not fashioned _according to this
age_, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds" (Rom. 12: 2,
R. V.).  That is, by his inward transformation the Holy Spirit is to be
daily repeating in us the Lord's glorification, separating us from the
present age of sin and death and assimilating us to the age to come,
with its resurrection triumph and its perfected restoration to God,
when we shall be presented "faultless before the presence of his glory
with exceeding joy" (Jude 24).  This is our step-by-step advancement
into a predestined inheritance; and it must for the present be {124}
step by step.  "Of his fullness have all we received," but we can
appropriate that fullness only "grace by grace" (John 1: 16).  Of his
righteousness we have all been made partakers, but we only advance in
its possession "from faith to faith" (Rom. 1: 17).  Even in passing
through the valley of Baca we can make it a place of springs, going
"from strength to strength" as we appear "before God in Zion" (Ps. 84:
6).  Thus our growth in grace is our glory begun; but the progress is
like the artist's slow and patient perfecting of his picture.  Turn now
to another statement: "We know that if he shall be manifested we shall
be like him, for we shall see him even as he is" (1 John 3: 2, R. V.).
Whatever difficulty may arise from another translation of this passage,
one thought seems to be taught in the entire connection, viz., that the
unveiled manifestation of God will bring the full perfection of his
saints.  Thus Alford sums up the meaning of the passage.  As the
believer, having by a knowledge of God been regenerated, "becomes more
and more like God, having his seed in him, so the full and perfect
accomplishment of this knowledge in the actual fruition of God himself
must of necessity bring with it entire likeness to God."  In a word, it
seems to us that the sanctification taking place at the manifestation
of our incarnate Lord will be as the instantaneous photograph compared
with the Spirit's slow and patient limning of the {125} image of Christ
in our present state.  "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," "we
shall be changed" (1 Cor. 15: 52).  Then the glorified body and the
glorified spirit, long divorced by sin, will be remarried.  So long as
this twain are separated by death, or are at war in our present earthy
life, our perfection in holiness were impossible.

It is because the resurrection and translation of the saints are
instantaneous that we affirm sanctification to be instantaneous at the
coming of the Lord.  The Scripture is always harmonious with itself,
however widely separated the writers of its books by time or distance.
David struck the same joyful note with John, though the learned may
insist that he did not know of the resurrection.  "As for me, I shall
behold thy face in righteousness"--the seeing him as he is and being
made fit to see him.  "I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy
likeness"--the conformity to the Divine image at the instant sound of
the resurrection trump.  (Ps. 17: 15.) Perhaps we may conjecture
wherein will consist the perfection of the resurrection state.  We may
find it in that one saying: "It is raised a spiritual body" (1 Cor. 15:
44).  _Now_, how often the body dominates the spirit, making it do what
it would not; but _then_, the spirit will dominate the body, making it
do as it will.  In a house divided against itself there can be neither
perfection nor peace.  Such is the condition in our present state {126}
of humiliation.  And not the body alone, but the immaterial within us
may be at war with the divine.  What does the Apostle Jude mean in his
description of certain who separated themselves, saying that they are
"sensual, having not the Spirit" (Jude 19).  The soul, the middle
factor in the man, if we may say so, instead of being in alliance with
our higher nature, the spirit, takes sides with the lower, the flesh,
so that instead of being spiritual we become "earthly, sensual,
devilish" (James 3: 15).  The whole man must be presented blameless at
the coming of the Lord before we can enter upon a state of blessed
perfection.  Our spirit must not only rule our soul and our body, but
both these must be subject to the Holy Spirit of God.  Dimly and
imperfectly do we thus image to ourselves the perfection of our
"spiritual body."  Now the body bears the spirit, a slow chariot, whose
wheels are often disabled, and whose swiftest motion is but labored and
tardy.  Then the spirit will bear the body, carrying it as on wings of
thought whithersoever it will.  The Holy Ghost, by his divine inworking
will, has completed in us the Divine likeness, and perfected over us
the Divine dominion.  The human body will now be in sovereign
subjection to the human spirit, and the human spirit to the divine
Spirit, and God will be all and in all.



[1] Milton probably gives the true genesis of this doctrine in these
words, which he puts into the mouth of Satan:

  "The son of God I also am or was;
  And if I was, I am; relation stands;
  All men are sons of God."

[2] Andrew Jukes, "The New Man," p. 53.




{127}

VII

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE SPIRIT




{128}

"The Holy Ghost from the day of Pentecost has occupied an entirely new
position.  The whole administration of the affairs of the Church of
Christ has since that day devolved upon him. . .  That day was the
installation of the Holy Spirit as the Administrator of the Church in
all things, which office he is to exercise according to circumstances
at his discretion.  It is as vested with such authority that he gives
his name to this dispensation. . .  There is but one other great event
to which the Scripture directs us to look, and that is the second
coming of the Lord.  Till then we live in the Pentecostal age and under
the rule of the Holy Ghost."--_James Elder Cumming, D. D._




{129}

VII

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE SPIRIT

The Holy Spirit, as coming down to fill the place of the ascended
Redeemer, has rightly been called "The Vicar of Jesus Christ."  To him
the entire administration of the church has been committed until the
Lord shall return in glory.  His oversight extends to the slightest
detail in the ordering of God's house, holding all in subjection to the
will of the Head, and directing all in harmony with the divine plan.
How clearly this comes out in that passage in the twelfth chapter of
First Corinthians.  As in striking a series of concentric circles there
is always one fixed center holding each circumference in defined
relation to itself, so here we see all the "diversities of
administrations" determined by the one Administrator, the Holy Ghost.
"Varieties of gifts, but _the same Spirit_"; "diversities of working,
but _the same God_"; different words "according to _the same Spirit_";
"gifts of faith _in the same Spirit_"; "gifts of healing _in the one
Spirit_"; miracles, prophecies, tongues, interpretations, "but all
these worketh the _one and the same Spirit_, dividing to each one
severally as he will."  Whether the authority of this one ruling {130}
sovereign Holy Ghost be recognized or ignored determines whether the
church shall be an anarchy or a unity, a synagogue of lawless ones or
the temple of the living God.

Would one desire to find the clue to the great apostasy whose dark
eclipse now covers two-thirds of nominal Christendom, here it is--the
rule and authority of the Holy Spirit ignored in the church; the
servants of the house assuming mastery and encroaching more and more on
the prerogatives of the Head, till at last one man sets himself up as
the administrator of the church, and daringly usurps the name of "The
Vicar of Christ."  When the Spirit of the Lord, speaking by Paul, would
picture the mystery of lawlessness and the culmination of apostasy, he
gives us a description which none should misunderstand: "So that he, as
God, sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God" (2
Thess. 2: 4).  What is the temple of God?  The church without a
question: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" (1 Cor. 3: 16).  Whose prerogative is
it to sit there?  The Holy Ghost's, its ruler and administrator, and
his alone.

When Christ, our Paraclete with the Father, entered upon his ministry
on high, we are told more than a score of times that he "sat down at
the right hand of God."  Henceforth heaven is his official seat, until
he returns in power and great glory.  {131} When he sent down another
Paraclete to abide with us for the age, he took his seat in the church,
the temple of God, there to rule and to administer till the Lord
returns.  There is but one "Holy See" upon earth: that is, the seat of
the Holy One in the church, which only the Spirit of God can occupy
without the most daring blasphemy.  It becomes all true believers to
look well to that picture of one "sitting in the temple of God," and to
read the lesson which it teaches.  We may have no temptation toward the
papacy, which thrusts a man into the seat of the Holy Ghost,[1] or
toward clerisy which obtrudes an order of ecclesiastics--archbishops,
cardinals, and archdeacons into that sacred place; but let us remember
that a democracy may be guilty of the same sin as a hierarchy, in
settling solemn issues by a "show of hands," instead of prayerfully
waiting for the guidance of the Holy Spirit, in substituting the voice
of a {132} majority for the voice of the Spirit.  Of course, in
speaking thus we concede that the Holy Spirit makes known his will in
the voice of believers, as also in the voice of Scripture.  Only there
must be such prayerful sanctifying of the one and such prayerful search
of the other, that in reaching decisions in the church there may be the
same declaration as in the first Christian council: "It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost and to us" (Acts 15: 28).

In some very profound teaching in 2 Cor. 3 we seem to have a hint as to
how we hear the voice of the Lord in guiding the affairs of the church.
There, the administration (_diachonia_) of the Spirit is distinctly
spoken of in contrast with the administration of the law.  Its
deliverances are written "not with ink, not in tables of stone, but in
the tables that are the hearts of flesh, with the Spirit of the living
God" (R. V.).  There must be a sensitive heart wherein this handwriting
may be inscribed; an unhindering will through which he may act.  "Where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty," it is written in the same
passage; liberty for God to speak and act as he will through us, which
begets loyalty; not liberty for us to act as we will, which begets
lawlessness.

To us there is something exceedingly suggestive in the teaching of the
Lord's post-ascension gospel, the Revelation, on this point.  The
epistles to the {133} seven churches we hold, with many of the best
commentators, to be a prophetic setting forth of the successive stages
of the church's history--its declines and its recoveries, its failures
and its repentances, from ascension to advent.  And because the bride
of Christ is perpetually betrayed into listening to false teachers and
surrendering to the guidance of evil counsellors, the Lord is
constantly admonishing her to heed the voice of her true Teacher and
Guide, the Holy Ghost.  How forcibly this admonition is introduced into
the great Apocalyptic drama!  As in the opening of the successive
seals, representing the judgments of God upon apostate Christendom, the
cry is repeated, "Come"!  "Come"!  "Come"!  "Come"!  (Rev. 6)--as
though the church under chastisement would repeatedly relearn the
advent prayer which her Lord put into her mouth in the beginning: "Even
so, come, Lord Jesus," so at each stage of the church's backsliding a
voice is heard from heaven saying: "He that hath an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit saith unto the churches."  It is the admonition "of him
that hath the seven spirits of God," seven times addressed to his
church throughout her earthly history, calling her to return from her
false guides and misleading teachers, and to listen to the voice of her
true Counsellor.

From this general statement of the administration of the Holy Spirit
let us now descend to the {134} particular acts and offices in which
this authority is exercised.

1.  _The Holy Spirit in the ministry and government of the church_.  In
speaking to the elders of Ephesus Paul says: "Take heed unto
yourselves, and to all the flock in the which the Holy Ghost hath made
you bishops, to feed the church of God" (Acts 20: 28, R. V.).  Clearly
in the beginning bishops or pastors were given by the Spirit of God,
not by the suffrages of the people.  The office and its incumbent were
alike by direct divine appointment.  We find this distinctly set forth
in the Epistle to the Ephesians: "When he ascended on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. . .  And he gave some to be
apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors
and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, unto the work of
ministering, unto the building up of the body of Christ" (Eph. 4: 8-12,
R. V.).  The ascent of the Lord and the descent of the Spirit are here
exhibited in their necessary relation.  In the one event Christ took
his seat in heaven as "Head over all things to his church"; in the
other the Holy Ghost came down to begin the work of "building up the
body of Christ."  Of course it is the Head who directs the construction
of the body, as being "fitly framed together it groweth into a holy
temple in the Lord"; and it is the Holy Ghost who superintends this
construction since "we are {135} builded together for an habitation of
God in the Spirit."  Therefore all the offices through which this work
is to be carried on were appointed by Christ and instituted through the
Spirit whom he sent down.  Suppose now that men invent offices which
are not named in the inspired list, and set up in the church an order
of popes and cardinals, archbishops and archdeacons?  Is it not a
presumption, the worst fruit of which is not alone that it introduces
confusion into the body of Christ, but that it begets insubordination
to the rule of the Holy Ghost?  But suppose, on the other hand, that we
sacredly maintain those offices of the ministry which have been
established for permanent continuance in the church, and yet take it
upon us to fill these according to our own preference and will; is this
any less an affront to the Spirit?

Doubtless the mistakes of God's servants, as given in Scripture are as
truly designed for our instruction and admonition as their obedient
examples.  We think we do not err in finding such a recorded warning in
the opening chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.  A vacancy had
occurred in the apostolate.  Standing up in the upper room, amidst the
hundred and twenty, Peter boldly affirmed that this vacancy must be
filled, and of the men who had companied with them during the Lord's
earthly ministry, "one must be ordained to be a witness with us of his
resurrection."  But the {136} disciples had hitherto had no voice in
choosing apostles.  The Lord had done this of his own sovereign will:
"Have I not chosen you twelve?"  Now he had gone away into heaven, and
his Administrator had not yet arrived to enter upon his office-work.
Surely if the divine order was to be, that having "ascended on high" he
was "to give some apostles," it were better to await the coming of the
Paraclete with his gifts.  Not only so, but we are persuaded that, with
Christ departed and the Holy Spirit not yet come, a valid election of
an apostle were impossible.  But in spite of this, a nomination was
made; prayer was offered in which the Lord was asked to indicate which
of the candidates he had chosen; and then a vote having been taken,
Matthias was declared elected.  Is there any indication that this
choice was ever ratified by the Lord?  On the contrary, Matthias passes
into obscurity from this time, his name never again being mentioned.
Some two years subsequent, the Lord calls Saul of Tarsus; he is sealed
with his Spirit, and certified by such evident credentials of the
Divine appointment that he boldly signs himself "Paul, an apostle, _not
of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father_" (Gal.
1: 1).

We believe that the apostolic office has passed away, the qualification
therefor, that of having been a witness of the Lord's resurrection,
being now impossible.  But the office of pastor, elder, bishop, or
{137} teacher of the flock still remains.  And the divine plan is that
this office should be filled, just as in the beginning, by the
appointment of the Holy Ghost.  Nor can we doubt that if there is a
prayerful waiting upon him for guidance, and a sanctified submission to
his will when it is made known, he will now choose pastors and set them
over their appointed flocks just as manifestly as he did in the
beginning.  Very beautiful is the picture in Revelation of the
glorified Lord, moving among the candlesticks.  There are "seven golden
candlesticks" now, not one only as in the Jewish temple.  The Church of
God is manifold, not a unit.[2]  He who "walketh in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks" "holdeth the seven stars in his right hand."
These stars are "the angels of the seven churches"--their ministers or
bishops as generally understood.  The Lord holds them in his right
hand.  Does he not require us to ask of him alone for their bestowal?
Yes.  "Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send
forth laborers into his harvest" (Luke 10: 2).  There is no intimation
in Scripture that we are to apply anywhere but to him for the ministry
of his church.  Does he not give {138} such ministry, and he alone?
Yes.  "When he ascended on high . . . he gave some . . . pastors and
teachers."  And now, speaking to the church in Ephesus, the elders of
which, chosen by the Holy Ghost, Paul had so affectionately exhorted,
he is seen in the attitude of Chief-shepherd and Bishop--giving pastors
with his own hand; placing them with his own right hand, and warning
the church that though they have tried and rejected false apostles,
they have nevertheless left their "first love."  Significant word!  On
this love our Lord conditioned the indwelling of the Father and of the
Son through the Holy Spirit (John 14: 23).  Losing this the peril
becomes imminent that the candlestick may be removed out of its place;
and so the warning is solemnly announced: "He that hath an ear, let him
hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches."  Without the Spirit the
candlestick can shed forth no light, and loses its place of testimony.

Dead churches, whose witness has been silenced, whose place has been
vacated, even though the lifeless form remains, have we not seen such?
And what is the safeguard against them, if not that found in the
apostle's warning: "Quench not the Spirit?"  The voice of the Lord must
be heard in his church, and to the Holy Ghost alone has been committed
the prerogative of communicating that voice.  Is there any likelihood
that that voice will be heard when the king or prime minister of a
civil {139} government holds the sole function of appointing the
bishops, as in the case of State churches?  Is there any certainty of
it when an archbishop or bishop puts pastors over flocks by the action
of his single will?  We may congratulate ourselves that we are neither
in a State church nor under an episcopal bishop; but there are methods
of ignoring or repressing the voice of the Holy Ghost, which though
simpler and far less apparent than those just indicated, are no less
violent.  The humble and godly membership of the little church may turn
to some pastor, after much prayer and waiting on God for the Spirit's
guidance, and the signs of the divine choice may be clearly manifest;
when some pulpit committee, or some conclave of "leading brethren,"
vetoes their action on the ground, perchance, that the candidate is not
popular and will not draw.  Alas! for the little flock so lorded over
that the voice of the Holy Ghost cannot be heard.

And majorities are no more to be depended upon than minorities, if
there is in both cases a neglect of patient and prolonged waiting upon
the Lord to know his will.  Of what value is a "show of hands" unless
his are stretched out "who holdeth the seven stars in his right hand?"
Of what use is a _viva voce_ choice, except the living voice of Christ
be heard speaking by his Spirit?  One may object that we are holding up
an ideal which is impossible to be realized.  It is a difficult ideal
we admit, as {140} the highest attainments are always difficult; but it
is not an impossible one.  It is easier to recite our prayers from a
book than to read them from the tables of a prepared heart, where the
finger of the Spirit has silently written them; but the more difficult
way is the more acceptable way to him who seeks for worshipers who
"worship in Spirit and in truth."  It is easier to get "the sense of
the meeting" in choosing a pastor than to learn "the mind of the
Spirit" by patient tarrying and humble surrender to God; but the more
laborious way will certainly prove the more profitable way.  The
failure to take this way is, we are persuaded, the cause of more decay
and spiritual death in the churches than we have yet imagined.  From
the watch-tower where we write we can look out on half a score of
churches on which "Ichabod" has been evidently written, and the glory
of which has long since departed.  They were founded in prayer and
consecration, "to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his
Son from heaven."  Why has their light been extinguished, though the
lampstand which once bore it still remains, adorned and beautified with
all that the highest art and architecture can suggest?  Their history
is known to him who walks among the golden candlesticks.  What violence
may have been done, by headstrong self-will, to him who is called "the
Spirit of counsel and might"?  What rejection of the truth which he,
"the Spirit {141} of truth," has appointed for the faith of God's
church till at last the word has been spoken: "Ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye."  Is it only Jewish
worshipers to whom these words apply?  Is it only a Jewish temple of
which this sentence is true: "Behold your house is left unto you
desolate"?  The Spirit will not be entirely withdrawn from the body of
Christ indeed, but there is the Church, and there are churches.  A man
may yet live and breathe when cell after cell has been closed by
congestion till at last he only inhales and exhales with a little
portion of one lung.  Let him that readeth understand.

The Spirit is the breath of God in the body of his church.  While that
divine body survives and must, multitudes of churches have so shut out
the Spirit from rule and authority and supremacy in the midst of them
that the ascended Lord can only say to them: "Thou hast a name to live
and art dead."  In a word, so vital and indispensable is the ministry
of the Spirit, that without it nothing else will avail.  Some trust in
creeds, and some in ordinances; some suppose that the church's security
lies in a sound theology, and others locate it in a primitive
simplicity of government and worship; but it lies in none of these,
desirable as they are.  The body may be as to its organs perfect and
entire, wanting nothing; but simply because the Spirit has been {142}
withdrawn from it, it has passed from a church into a corpse.  As one
has powerfully stated it: "When the Holy Spirit withdraws, . . . he
sometimes allows the forms which he has created to remain.  The oil is
exhausted, but the lamp is still there; prayer is offered and the Bible
read; church-going is not given up, and to a certain degree the service
is enjoyed; in a word religious habits are preserved, and like the
corpses found at Pompeii, which were in a perfect state of preservation
and in the very position in which death had surprised them, but which
were reduced to ashes by contact with the air, so the blast of trial,
of temptation, or of final judgment will destroy these spiritual
corpses."[3]

2.  _The Holy Spirit in the Worship and Service of the Church_.  Is
there anything, from highest to lowest, which we are called to do in
connection with the worship of God's house, of which the Holy Spirit is
not the appointed agent?  Believers are the instruments indeed through
which he acts; but they have no function apart from his inspiration and
guidance, any more than the organ-pipe has without the wind, which
breathing through it causes it to resound.  To make this clear, we may
consider the several parts of the service of the church as we are
accustomed to participate in it, and observe their relation to the
divine Administrator.

{143}

(1) Preaching is by general consent an important factor of the work of
the ministry, both for the pastor and for the evangelist.  In what
consists its inspiration and authority?  We "have preached the gospel
unto you _with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven_" (1 Peter 1: 12),
is Peter's simple story of the apostolic method.  And the words direct
our thought to the Spirit not as instrumental but as inspiring.  "_In
the Holy Ghost_," the words mean literally.  The true preacher does not
simply use the Spirit; he is used by the Spirit.  He speaks as one
moving in the element and atmosphere of the Holy Ghost, and mastered by
his divine power.

In this fact the sermon differs immeasurably from the speech, and the
preacher from the orator.  How distinctly Paul emphasizes this contrast
in his letter to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 2: 4).  The sole substance of
his preaching he declares to be "Jesus Christ and him crucified," and
the sole inspiration of his preaching, the Holy Ghost: "And my speech
was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the Spirit and power."  What did good Philip Henry mean by his resolve
"to preach Christ crucified in a crucified style"?  More perhaps than
he thought or knew.  "He shall testify of me," is Jesus' saying
concerning the promised Paraclete.  The Comforter bears witness to the
Crucified.  No other theme in the pulpit can be sure of commanding his
co-operation.  {144} Philosophy, poetry, art, literature, sociology,
ethics, and history are attractive subjects to many minds, and they who
handle such themes in the pulpit may set them forth with alluring words
of human genius; but there is no certainty that the Holy Ghost will
accompany their presentation with his divine attestation.  The
preaching of the Cross, in chastened simplicity of speech, has the
demonstration of the Spirit pledged to it, as no secular, or moral, or
even formal religious discourse has.  And when Paul writes to the
Thessalonians: "Our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also _in
power and in the Holy Ghost_, and in much assurance" (1 Thess. 1: 5),
we need only to be reminded that "our gospel" meant but one thing to
Paul, the setting forth of Jesus Christ crucified in the midst of the
people, and we have found the secret of evangelical power.  Ought it
not therefore to be the supreme question with the preacher, what themes
can assuredly command the witness of the Holy Spirit, rather than what
topics will enlist the attention of the people?  Let us set the popular
preacher and the apostolic preacher side by side, and consider whose
reward we would choose, universal admiration or "God also bearing
witness, both with signs and wonders and with divers miracles, and
_gifts of the Holy Ghost_, according to his will" (Heb. 2: 4)--the
sermon greeted with applause and the clapping of hands, or "_the word
received with joy of {145} the Holy Ghost_" (1 Thess. 1:
6)?--admiration of the preacher possessing all who listen to the
discourse, or "_the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word_"
(Acts 10: 44)?  Language cannot express the vital moment of the
question which we are here discussing.  Our generation is rapidly
losing its grip upon the supernatural; and as a consequence the pulpit
is rapidly dropping to the level of the platform.  And this decline is
due, we believe, more than anything else, to an ignoring of the Holy
Spirit as the supreme inspirer of preaching.  We wish to see a great
orator in the pulpit, forgetting that the least expounder of the word,
when filled with the Holy Ghost, is greater than he.  We want the
gospel, forsooth; but in the strenuous demand that it be set forth
according to the "spirit of the age" we ignore the supremacy of the
"Spirit of God."  And the method of discourse soon tells upon the
matter.  We cannot very long have the truth in the pulpit after we have
lost "the Spirit of truth" therefrom.  "When one possesses not the
whole of life," says Vinet, "he possesses not the whole of truth."

In all that we have said we do not ignore the human element in
preaching, nor undervalue good learning and sanctified mental training,
as a furnishing for this high office.  We only emphasize the extreme
peril of making that supreme which God has made subordinate.  As it is
genius which raises the great {146} painter or poet far above the
common man, so it is the Holy Spirit which lifts the preacher far above
the man of genius.  A gifted artist spoke wisely when one, thinking
only of the implements of his profession, asked, "With what do you mix
your paints?"  "With brains, sir," he replied.  The preacher who
brought three thousand to believe on a crucified Christ, under a single
sermon, anticipated the question of those who, with an eye upon the
mere human accessories of his sermon, might ask after the secret of his
power; and he unfolds that secret in a single terse sentence: "With the
Holy Ghost sent down from heaven."

(2) Prayer is a most vital element in the worship of God's church.
"Lord, teach us how to pray, as John also taught his disciples."  Jesus
complied literally with this request of his followers.  As John, under
the law, could only give rules and rudiments, not yet having come to
the dispensation of grace and of the Spirit, so did Jesus give a form
of prayer, a lesson in the "technique of worship."  But only when he
reaches the eve of his passion, when he announces the coming of the
Comforter, does he lead his disciples into the heart and mystery of the
great theme, teaching them to pray as John _could not_ have taught his
disciples.  "Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name," said Jesus, in
his paschal discourse.  But now that he was about to enter into his
mediatorial office at God's right {147} hand, and to send forth the
Comforter into the midst of his disciples, this joyful privilege was to
be accorded to him: "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father _in my name_ he
will give it you"[4] (1 John 16: 23).  The words are equivalent to "_in
me_."  The thought is not surely that of using the name of Jesus as a
password or as a talisman, but of entering into his person and
appropriating his will; so that when we pray, it shall be as though
Jesus himself stood in God's presence and made intercession.  Nor is it
"as though"--it is the literal fact.  We become identified with Christ
through the Spirit, now sent down, and his will is wrought within us by
the Holy Ghost, so that to ask what we desire of him is to ask what he
desires for us.  We are inwilled by his will, because inspired by his
Spirit, who lives and breathes within us.  Therefore we may know that
we are always heard, since we are in him who can boldly say to the
Father: "I know that thou always hearest me."  It is Christ's
mediatorship with the Father, and the Holy Ghost's mediatorship with
us, that gives us this high privilege of praying in the name of Jesus,
as it is written: "For through him we both have access _in one Spirit_
unto the Father."

When therefore, under the fuller development of {148} doctrine as found
in the epistles, we read of "praying always with all prayer and
supplication _in the Spirit_" (Eph. 6: 18), and of "praying in the Holy
Ghost" (Jude 20), it is simply an admonition to use our privilege of
asking in the name of Jesus.  For to be in the Spirit is to be in
Christ, united to his person, identified with his will, invested with
his righteousness, so that we are as he is before the Father.

In that fullest exposition of the doctrine of the Spirit, given in the
eighth of Romans, we see clearly that the ministry of the Comforter
consists in his effectuating in us that which Christ is accomplishing
for us on the throne.  Especially is this true of prayer.  In the
Epistle to the Hebrews we read: "Wherefore also he is able to save to
the uttermost them that draw near to God through him, _seeing he ever
liveth to make intercession for them_" (Heb. 7: 25, R. V.).  In the
Epistle to the Romans we read: "And in like manner the Spirit also
helpeth our infirmity; for we know not how to pray as we ought, but
_the Spirit himself maketh intercession for us_ with groanings which
cannot be uttered; and he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the
mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints
according to the will of God" (Rom. 8: 26, 27, R. V.).  These passages,
read together, clearly show the Spirit doing the same thing _in_ us
which Christ in heaven {149} is doing _for_ us.  And, moreover, they
reveal to us the method of the glorified Christ in helping those who
know not what to pray for as they ought, teaching them, not by an
outward form, but by an inward guidance.  Indeed, the prayer inspired
by the Holy Spirit is often so deep that it cannot be expressed in
formal words, but reaches the ear of the Father only in unspeakable
yearnings, in unuttered groanings.  The keynote of all true
intercession is the will of God.  In the disciples' prayer, as taught
them by the Master, this note is distinctly sounded: "Thy will be done
on earth as in heaven."  In the Saviour's garden-prayer it is heard
again, as with strong crying and tears the Son of God exclaims: "Not my
will but thine be done"; and in the revelation of the doctrine of
prayer through an inspired apostle we read: "If we ask anything
according to his will he heareth us."  It is the Spirit's deepest work
in the believer to attune his mind to this exalted key, as he "maketh
intercession for the saints _according to the will of God_."  There is
a promise which all disciples love to quote for their assurance in
prayer: "If two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything that
they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
heaven" (Matt. 18: 19).  The word translated "agree" is a very
suggestive one.  It is, _sympsônêsôsin_, from which our word "symphony"
comes.  If two shall _accord_ {150} or _symphonize_ in what they ask,
they have the promise of being heard.  But, as in tuning an organ all
the notes must be keyed to the standard pitch, else harmony were
impossible, so in prayer.  It is not enough that two disciples agree
with each other; they must both accord with a Third--the righteous and
holy Lord--before in the scriptural sense they can agree in
intercession.  There may be agreement which is in most sinful conflict
with the divine will: "How is it that ye have agreed together
[_synepsônêthê_, the same word] to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?" asks
Peter (Acts 5: 9).  Here is mutual accord, but guilty discord with the
Holy Ghost.  On the contrary it is the Spirit's ministry to attune our
wills to the Divine; thus only can there be praying in the Holy Ghost.

We cannot therefore emphasize too strongly the administration of the
Spirit in directing the worship of God's house.  The use of liturgical
forms is a relapse into legalism, a consent to be taught to pray as
"John taught his disciples."  True, there may be extemporaneous forms
as well as written forms, praying by rote as well as praying by the
book.  Against both habits we simply interpose the higher teaching of
the Spirit, as belonging especially to this dispensation, in which the
Father seeketh worshipers who "worship in Spirit and in truth."  To
pray rightly is the highest of all attainments.  And it is so because
the secret lies {151} between these two opposites; a spirit supremely
active while supremely passive, a heart prevailing with God because
prevailed over by God.  "O Lord," says a high saint, "my spirit was
like a harp this morning, making melody before thee, since thou didst
first tune the instrument by the Holy Spirit, and then didst choose the
psalm of praise to be played thereon."  Most solemn and suggestive
words these have always seemed: "The Father seeketh such to worship
him."  Amid all the repetition of forms and the chanting of liturgies,
how earnestly the Most High searches after the spiritual worshiper,
with a heart inwardly retired before God, with a spirit so sensitive to
the hidden motions of the Holy Ghost that when the lips speak they
shall utter the effectual inwrought prayer that availeth much!

If any shall interpose the objection that what we are saying is too
high to be practical, it may be well to confirm our position by the
witness of experience.  We are not speaking of pulpit prayers
especially, in what we have said.  The universal priesthood of
believers, which the Scriptures so plainly teach, constitutes the
ground for common intercession, for "the praying one for another" which
is the distinctive feature of the Spirit's dispensation  The prayer
meeting, therefore, in which the whole body of believers participate,
probably comes nearer the pattern of primitive Christian {152} worship
than any other service which we hold.  To apply our principle here,
then, what method is found most satisfactory?  Shall the service be
arranged beforehand, this one selected to pray, and that one to exhort;
and during the progress of the worship, shall such a one be called up
to lead the devotions, and such a one to follow?  In a word, shall the
service be mapped out in advance and manipulated according to the
dictates of propriety and fitness as it goes on?  One, after many years
of experience, can bear emphatic testimony to the value of another
way--that of magnifying the office of the Holy Spirit as the conductor
of the service, and of so withholding the pressure of human hands in
the assembly that the Spirit shall have the utmost freedom to move this
one to pray and that one to witness, this one to sing and that one "to
say amen at our giving of thanks," according to his own sovereign will.
Here we speak not theoretically but experimentally.  The fervor and
spirituality and sweet naturalness of the latter method has been
demonstrated beyond a peradventure, and that too, after an extended
trial of both ways, the first in ignorance of a better way, with
constant labor and worry and fret, and the last with inexpressible ease
and comfort and spiritual refreshment.  Honor the Holy Ghost as Master
of assemblies; study much the secret of surrender to him; cultivate a
quick ear for hearing his inward voice and a ready tongue {153} for
speaking his audible witness; be submissive to keep silence when he
forbids as well as to speak when he commands, and we shall learn how
much better is God's way of conducting the worship of his house than
man's way.[5]

(3) The service of song in the house of the Lord is another element of
worship whose relation to the Spirit needs to be strongly emphasized.
Spiritual singing has a divinely appointed place in the church of
Christ.  Church music, in the ordinary sense of that phrase, has no
such place, but is a human invention which custom has, with many,
unhappily elevated into an ordinance.  We often quote the exhortation
of the apostle: "Be filled with the Spirit," without marking the
practical service with which this fullness stands immediately
connected: "Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord" (Eph. 5:
19).  As immediately as prayer is connected with the Holy Ghost in this
same epistle: "Praying at all seasons _in the Spirit_"; and our
edification in the church: "Builded {154} together _in the Spirit_"
(Eph. 2: 22, R. V.); and our spiritual energizing: "Strengthened with
power _through his Spirit_" (Eph. 3: 16, R.  V.); and our approach to
God, "Access _in one Spirit_ unto the Father" (2: 18, R. V.), so
intimately is the worship of praise here connected with the Holy Ghost
and made dependent on his power.  Therefore it would seem too obvious
to need arguing, that an unregenerate person is disqualified from
ministering in the service of song in God's house.  Scripturally this
seems incontestable; and as to the teaching of experience, we should
hardly know how to name any custom which has brought a sorer blight
upon the life of the church, or a heavier repression upon its spiritual
energy, than the habit, now so general, of introducing unsanctified,
unconverted, and even notoriously worldly persons into the choirs of
the churches.

Now the teaching of the text just cited is decisive, not only against
such performers in choirs, but against the choirs themselves, if by the
latter term is meant certain ones employed to dispense music for the
delectation of the congregation.  For observe how distinctly the mutual
and inter-congregational character of Christian singing is here pointed
out: "Speaking _to one another_ in psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs."  The one feature of the worship of the church, which
distinguishes it radically and totally from that of the {155} temple,
is that it is mutual.  Under the law there were priests and Levites to
minister and people to be ministered to; under the gospel there is a
universal spiritual priesthood, in which all minister and all are
ministered to.  Every act of service belonging to the Christian church
is so described.  There must be prayer, and the exhortation is, "Pray
_one for another_" (James 5: 16).  There must be confession, and the
injunction is: "Confess your sins _one to another_" (James 5: 16, R.
V.).  There must be exhortation, and the command is: "Exhort one
another" (Heb. 3: 13).  There must be love, and we are enjoined to
"love _one another_" (1 Peter 1: 22).  There must be burden-bearing,
and the exhortation is: "Bear ye _one another's_ burdens" (Gal. 6: 2).
There must be comforting, and the command is: "Wherefore comfort _one
another_" (1 Thess. 4: 18).  So with the worship of song.  Its
reciprocal character is emphasized, not only in the passage just
quoted, but also in the Epistle to the Colossians: "Teaching and
admonishing _one another_ in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs"
(Col. 3: 16).  This is according to the clearly defined method of the
Spirit in this dispensation.  He establishes our fellowship with the
Head of the church, and through him with one another.  All blessing in
the body is mutual, and the worship which is ordained to maintain and
increase that blessing is likewise mutual.

{156}

As now the Spirit is the inspirer and director of the worship of God's
church, he must have those who have been renewed and are indwelt by
himself as the instruments through whom he acts; and by a teaching of
Scripture too clear to be misunderstood all others are disqualified.
How distinctly is this shown even in the types and symbols of the old
dispensation.  The holy anointing enjoined in Exodus for Aaron and his
sons, is confessedly a type of the unction of the Holy Ghost.  And mark
the rigid and sacred limitations in its use: "And thou shalt anoint
Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them that they may minister unto me
in the priest's office.  And thou shalt speak unto the children of
Israel, saying: This shall be a holy anointing oil unto me throughout
your generation.  Upon man's flesh it shall not be poured; neither
shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it; it is
holy, and shall be holy unto you; whosoever compoundeth any like it, or
whoso putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his
people" (Exod. 30: 30-33).

Now, of these minute directions and prescribed transactions we may say
confidently that "they happened unto them for ensamples and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world [ages] are
come" (1 Cor. 10: 11).  The three rigid prohibitions here named touch
just the errors which are most characteristic of the present {157}
generation.  "_Upon man's flesh it shall not be poured_"; honoring the
natural man, and exalting human nature into that place which belongs
only to the regenerate.  This is the error of those who believe in the
universal sonship of the race, and call the carnal man divine.
"_Whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger._"  This is the sin of
those who thrust into the ministry and service of the church persons
who have never by the new birth through the Spirit been brought into
the family of God, into the household of faith.  "_Whosoever
compoundeth any like it._"  This is the artificial imitation of the
Spirit's offices and ministration.  Let the Christian reader pause and
ponder well this last prohibition.  In the story of the primitive
church sample sins are given for our warning, as well as specimen
graces for our emulation.  One such sin, so subtle, so dangerous, and
so constantly recurring in Christian history, having taken the name of
its first author and being called "simony," has been handed down from
generation to generation.  "Because thou hast thought that the gift of
God can be purchased with money" is the solemn indictment against one
who had purposed to buy the power of the Holy Ghost.  Many desire the
gifts of the Spirit who little care for the Spirit himself.  Divine
music is greatly coveted.  Why not, with our thousands of gold, buy
this spiritual luxury?  Bring the singing men and singing women from
the {158} opera and from the concert hall; bid them compound a potion
of sanctuary music, which shall entrance all ears and draw to the
church those who could not be drawn thither by the plain attractions of
the Cross.  But what is the exhortation of Scripture?  "By him
therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name" (Heb. 13: 15).
This kind of sacrifice costs--earnest prayer, deep communion, and the
fullness of the Spirit; but no sum of gold, however large, is adequate
for its purchase, nor can any musician's art, however ingenious,
imitate it.  Is there no approach to the sin of simony in those
churches which spend thousands yearly in artistic music?  And is not
this attempted purchase of the Holy Ghost closely linked with the other
sin of robbing God, considering how this lavish expenditure on
artificial worship is almost always accompanied with meagre giving for
the carrying out of the Great Commission?  Our conclusion is, that the
service of song has been committed to the church, and to the church
alone, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit.  Some of her number may
be appointed to lead this service, if they themselves are under the
leadership of the Spirit.  But the church cannot commit this divine
ministry to unsanctified hireling minstrels, without affront to the
Spirit of God and serious peril to her own communion with God.

{159}

If again any object that we are setting up an exaggerated and
impossible ideal, let the voice of experience be heard in evidence.
Let pastors be called to testify of the added blessing and fervor which
have come to their sanctuaries when this ideal has been approximately
realized.  Let history repeat its story of song driven in times of
apostasy into some narrow stall of the church, and into the hands of a
few trained monopolists of worship; and then, in eras of revival, of
the bursting of the barriers and the people of God seizing once more
their defrauded heritage and breaking forth, a great multitude, into
"hallelujahs of the heart."  The annals of the Lollards, and of the
Lutherans, and of the Wesleyans, and of the Salvationists bear
harmonious witness on this point, and are deeply instructive.

3.  _The Holy Spirit in the Missions of the Church_.  In the Gospels
which contain the story of Christ's earthly life we have the record of
the giving of the Great Commission: "Go ye into all the world and
preach the gospel to every creature."  In the Acts, which contains the
story of the life of the Spirit, we have the promise of the coming of
the Executor of that Commission: "But ye shall receive power when the
Holy Ghost is come upon you; and ye shall be my witnesses, both in
Jerusalem and in Judea and Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the
earth" (Acts 1: 8, R. V.).  Nowhere is the hand {160} of the Spirit
more distinctly seen than in the origination and superintendence of
missions.  The field is the world, the sower is the disciple, and the
seed is the word.  The world can only be made accessible through the
Spirit--"When he is come he will convict the world of sin"; the sower
is energized only through the Spirit--"Ye shall receive the power of
the Holy Ghost coming upon you"; and the seed is only made productive
through the quickening of the Spirit--"He that soweth unto the Spirit
shall of the Spirit reap eternal life" (Gal. 6: 8, R. V.).  In the
simple story of the primitive mission, as recorded in the thirteenth of
Acts, we see how every step in the enterprise was originated and
directed by the presiding Spirit.  We observe this:

(1) In the selection of missionaries: "_The Holy Ghost_ said, Separate
me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them" (13: 2).

(2) In their thrusting forth into the field: "So they, being sent forth
by the _Holy Ghost_, departed unto Seleucia" (13: 4).

(3) In empowering them to speak: "Then Saul, who also is called Paul,
filled with the _Holy Ghost_, said" (13: 9).

(4) In sustaining them in persecution: "And the disciples were filled
with joy and with the _Holy Ghost_" (13: 52).

(5) In setting the Divine seal upon their {161} ministry among the
Gentiles: "And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving
_them the Holy Ghost_, even as he did unto us" (15: 8).

(6) In counseling in difficult questions of missionary policy: "It
seemed good _to the Holy Ghost_ and to us" (15: 28).

(7) In restraining the missionaries from entering into fields not yet
appointed by the Lord: They "were forbidden of the _Holy Ghost_ to
preach the gospel in Asia. . .  They assayed to go into Bithynia but
_the Spirit suffered them not_" (16: 6, 7).

Very striking is this record of the ever-present, unfailing, and minute
direction of the Holy Ghost in all the steps of this divine enterprise.
"But this was in apostolic days," it will be said.  Yes; but the
promise of the Spirit is that "He shall abide with you for the age."
Unless the age has ended he is still here, and still in office, and
still entrusted with the responsibility of carrying out that work which
is dearest to the heart of our glorified Lord.  Who can say that there
is not need in these days of a return to primitive methods and of a
resumption of the Church's primitive endowments?  The Holy Spirit is
not straitened in himself, but only in us.  If the Church had faith to
lean less on human wisdom, to trust less in prudential methods, to
administer less by mechanical {162} rules, and to recognize once more
the great fact that, having committed to her a supernatural work, she
has appointed for her a supernatural power, who can doubt that the
grinding and groaning of our cumbrous missionary machinery would be
vastly lessened, and the demonstration of the Spirit be far more
apparent?



[1] Of course Catholic writers claim that the pope is the "Vicar of
Christ" only as being the mouth-piece of the Holy Ghost.  But the
Spirit has been given to the church as a whole, that is to the body of
regenerated believers, and to every member of that body according to
his measure.  The sin of sacerdotalism is, that it arrogates for a
usurping few that which belongs to every member of Christ's mystical
body.  It is a suggestive fact that the name _klêros_, which Peter
gives to the church as the "flock of God," when warning the elders
against being _lords over God's heritage_, now appears in
ecclesiastical usage as the _clergy_, with its orders of pontiff and
prelates and lord bishops, whose appointed function it is to exercise
lordship over Christ's flock.

[2] By the candlesticks being seven instead of one, as in the
tabernacle, we are taught that whereas in the Jewish dispensation,
God's visible church was one, in the Gentile dispensation there are
many visible churches; and that Christ himself recognizes them
alike.--_Canon Garratt, "Commentary on the Revelation," p. 32._

[3] "The Work of the Holy Spirit in Man," by Pastor G. F. Tophel, p. 66.

[4] It was impossible up to the time of the glorification of Jesus to
pray to the Father in his name.  It is a fullness of joy peculiar to
the dispensation of the Spirit to be able to do so.--_Alford_.

[5] It were well for us to give more heed to the voice of Christian
history as related to such questions as these.  The rise of "sporadic
sects" like the "Quietists," the "Mystics," the "Friends," and the
"Brethren," with their emphasis on "the still voice" and "the inward
leading," is very suggestive.  If we may not go so far as some of these
go in the insistence on speaking only as sensibly moved by the Spirit
we may be admonished of the hard, artificial man-made worship which
made their protest necessary.




{163}

VIII

THE INSPIRATION OF THE SPIRIT




{164}

"Have you visited the Cathedral of Freyburg, and listened to that
wonderful organist, who with such enchantment draws the tears from the
traveler's eyes while he touches, one after another, his wonderful
keys, and makes you hear by turns the march of armies upon the beach,
or the chanted prayer upon the lake during the tempest, or the voices
of praise after it is calm?  Well, thus the Eternal God, embracing at a
glance the key-board of sixty centuries, touches by turns, with the
fingers of his Spirit, the keys which he had chosen for the unity of
his celestial hymn.  He lays his left hand upon Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, and his right hand on John, the humble and sublime prisoner of
Patmos.  From the one the strain is heard: 'Behold the Lord cometh with
ten thousand of his saints'; from the other: 'Behold he cometh with
clouds.'  And between the notes of this hymn of three thousand years
there is eternal harmony, and the angels stoop to listen, the elect of
God are moved, and eternal life descends into men's souls."--_Gaussen's
Theopneustia_.




{165}

VIII

THE INSPIRATION OP THE SPIRIT

Inspiration signifies inbreathing.  Both the scribe and the Scripture,
both the man of God and the word of God were divinely inbreathed.  In
that memorable meeting of the risen Lord and his disciples within the
closed doors, we read that "_He breathed on them_ and saith unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whosesoever sins ye forgive, they are
forgiven unto them; whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained"
(John 20: 22, R. V.).  Well may the question of the scribes concerning
Jesus now arise in our hearts concerning his disciples: "Who can
forgive sins but God only?"  And the answer should be: "True; God alone
can forgive sins.  And it is only because the Spirit of God, who is
God, is in the apostles, endowing them with his divine prerogatives,
that they are able to exercise this high authority."

We are persuaded, however, that this commission was not given to all
Christians, though all have the Spirit.  In a note in Olshausen's
Commentary the matter seems to be correctly stated: "To the apostles
was granted the power, absolute and unconditioned, of binding and
loosing, just as to them was {166} given the power of publishing truth
unmixed with error.  For _both_ they possessed miraculous spiritual
endowments."  Only we should say "sovereign" rather than "miraculous"
endowments.  "_The Spirit breatheth where he wills_, and thou hearest
his voice," said Jesus.[1]  While miraculous gifts were not confined to
the apostles, Christ may have committed to these, and to these alone,
the sovereign prerogative of forgiving sins; gifts of healing, on the
other hand, the working of miracles, prophecy, the discerning of
spirits, and tongues, being distributed throughout the church; "but all
these worketh one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one severally
even _as he will_" (1 Cor. 12: 11, R. V.).  In a word, the action of
the Holy Ghost was supremely sovereign in the assignment of spiritual
offices, and when Jesus breathed on his apostles the Holy Ghost, and
gave them authority {167} to remit sins, he separated them unto a
prerogative of which others, indwelt by the same Spirit, might have
known nothing.  It is very generally held that the order of apostles
ceased with the death of those who had seen the Lord and companied with
him until the day that he was received up.  But the reason for this
cessation has been too little considered.  May we not believe that the
apostles and their companions were commissioned to speak for the Lord
until the New Testament Scriptures, his authoritative voice, should be
completed?  If so, in the apostolate we have a provisional inspiration;
in the gospel a stereotyped inspiration; the first being endowed with
authority _ad interim_ to remit sins, and the second having this
authority _in perpetuam_.  The New Testament, as the very mouthpiece of
the Lord, pronounces forgiveness upon all in every generation who truly
repent and believe on the Son of God; and preachers in every age, with
the Bible in their hand, are authorized to do the same declaratively.
But when it is urged, as by Catholic writers, that this infallibility
for teaching and absolution, which was committed to the apostles, has
descended through a succession of ministers called the clergy, the
answer seems to be, that this authority has not been perpetuated in any
body of men apart from the Scriptures, but was transferred to the New
Testament and lodged there for all time.  Historically, at least, it
seems to have been {168} the fact, that as the apostles and prophets of
the new dispensation disappeared, the Gospels and Epistles took their
place, and that henceforth the divine authoritative voice of the Spirit
could be distinctly recognized only in the written word.  As coal has
been called "fossil sunlight," so the New Testament may be called
fossil inspiration, the supernatural illumination which fell upon the
apostles being herein stored up for the use of the church throughout
the ages.[2]

"All Scripture is given by inspiration of God
[_theopneustos_--God-breathed], and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness" (3 Tim. 3:
16).  As the Lord breathed the Spirit into certain men, and thereby
committed to them his own prerogative of forgiving sin, so he breathed
his Spirit into certain books and endowed them with his infallibility
in teaching truth.  God did not choose to inspire all good books,
though he has chosen to

{169} inbreathe one book, thereby separating it and setting it apart
from all other books.[3]  The phrase, "the Bible is simply literature,"
which some are using to-day, as a suggestion against bibliolatry, is
not true.  Literature is the letter; Scripture is the letter inspired
by the Spirit.  What Jesus said in justification of his doctrine of the
new birth is equally applicable to the doctrine of inspiration: "That
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
Spirit is spirit."  Educate, develop, and refine the natural man to the
highest possible point, and yet he is not a spiritual man till, through
the new birth, the Holy Ghost renews and indwells him.  So of
literature; however elevated its tone, however lofty its thought, it is
not Scripture.  Scripture is literature indwelt by the Spirit of God.
The absence of the Holy Ghost from any writing constitutes the
impassable gulf between it and Scripture.  Our Lord, in speaking of his
own doctrine, uses the same language, to show its separateness from
common teaching which he employs above to mark the distinction of the
new man.  He says: "It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh
profiteth nothing; _the words that I have spoken unto {170} you are
spirit and are life_" (John 6: 63, R. V.).  Words they were, and in
that respect, literature; but words divinely inbreathed and therefore
Scripture.  In fine, the one fact which makes the word of God a unique
book, standing apart in solitary separateness from all other writings,
is that which also parts off the man of God from common men--the
indwelling of the Holy Ghost.  Therefore we may say truly of the Bible,
not merely that it _was_ inspired, but it _is_ inspired; that the Holy
Ghost breathes within it, making it not only authoritative in its
doctrine but life-giving in its substance, so that they who receive its
promises by faith "have been begotten again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, through the word of God which liveth and abideth"
(1 Peter 1: 23, R. V.).

Thus far in this volume we have been dwelling upon the various works
and offices of the Paraclete.  Now we come to consider that the Holy
Spirit not only acts but speaks.  Let us listen to the repeated
affirmations of this fact.  Seven times our glorified Lord says,
speaking in the Apocalypse: "He that hath an ear, let him hear what
_the Spirit saith unto_ the churches" (Rev. 2: 7).  The Paraclete on
earth answers to the Paraclete above, so that to the voice from Heaven
saying: "Write, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth," the response is heard: "_Yea, saith the Spirit_, that they
may rest from their labors," etc. (Rev. 14: 13).  {171} This accords
with the general tenor of Scripture as to its own Author.  In referring
to the Old Testament, Peter says: "This Scripture must needs have been
fulfilled, _which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before_
concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus" (Acts 1:
16).  And again: "David himself _said by the Holy Ghost_" (Mark 12:
36), our Lord thus plainly recognizing the voice of the Spirit in the
voice of the psalmist.  So again: "_The Spirit of the Lord spake by
me_, and his word was in my tongue.  The God of Israel said, the Rock
of Israel spake to me" (2 Sam. 23: 2, 3), and "Wherefore as _the Holy
Ghost saith_, To-day if ye will hear his voice" (Heb. 3: 7).

And what is it to speak?  Is it not to express thought in language?
The difference between thinking and saying is simply the difference of
words.  Therefore, if the Holy Ghost "_saith_," we are to find in the
_words_ of Scripture the exact substance of what he saith.  Hence
verbal inspiration seems absolutely essential for conveying to us the
exact thought of God.  And while many affect to ridicule the idea as
mechanical and paltry, the conduct and method of scholars of every
shade of belief show how generally it is accepted.  For, why the minute
study of the _words_ of Scripture carried on by all expositors, their
search after the precise shade of verbal significance, their attention
to the {172} minutest details of language, and to all the delicate
coloring of mood and tense and accent?  The high scholars who speak
lightly of the theory of literal inspiration of the Scriptures by their
method of study and exegesis are they who put the strongest affirmation
on the doctrine which they deny.  Then we cannot forget what we imply
when we say that language is the expression of thought.  Words
determine the size and shape of ideas.  As exactly as the coin answers
to the die in which it is struck, does the thought answer to the word
by which it is uttered.  Vary the language by the slightest
modification, and you by so much vary the thought.

As ultra spiritualism interprets Paul's words "_a spiritual body_," to
mean a ghost, when the accent is as strongly on the _sõma_ as on the
_pneumatichon_, his real thought evidently being that of a _body
spiritualized_; so some, remembering that "the letter killeth," would
etherealize Scripture by telling us that the divine idea is the chief
thing, and the language quite secondary.  But wisely and well has
Martin Luther reminded us that "Christ did not say of his Spirit, but
of his _words_, they are spirit and life."

To deny that it is the Holy Ghost who speaks in Scripture, is an
intelligible position; but admitting that _he speaks_, we can only
understand his thoughts by listening to his words.  True, he may beget
within us emotions too deep for expression, as when {173} "The Spirit
himself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered" (Rom. 8: 26).  But the idea which is really intelligible is
the idea that is embodied in speech.  For finite minds, at least, words
are the measure of comprehensible thoughts.  Evidently Jesus claims for
his teaching not only inspiration, but verbal inspiration, when he says
that his _words_ are "spirit and life."  And to this agrees the saying
of Paul, in speaking of the inspiration of the Holy Ghost: "But God
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all
things, yea, the deep things of God.  For what man knoweth the things
of man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of
God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.  Now we have received, not
the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might
know the things which are freely given to us of God, which things also
we speak, _not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the
Holy Ghost teacheth_, comparing spiritual things with spiritual" (1
Cor. 2: 10-13).

And what if one objects that this theory makes inspiration purely
mechanical, and turns the writers of Scripture into stenographers,
whose office is simply to transcribe the words of the Spirit as they
are dictated?  It must be confessed that there is much in Scripture to
support this view of the case.  Should we see a student who, having
taken down {174} the lecture of a profound philosopher, was now
studying diligently to comprehend the sense of the discourse which he
had written, we should understand simply that he was a pupil and not a
master; that he had nothing to do with originating either the thoughts
or the words of the lecture, but was rather a disciple whose province
it was to understand what he had transcribed, and so be able to
communicate it to others.  And who can deny that this is the exact
picture of what we have in the following passage from Scripture: "Of
which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, _searching what, or
what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify,
when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the glory
that should follow_; unto whom it was revealed," etc. (1 Peter 1: 10,
11).  Here were inspired writers, studying the meaning of what they
themselves had written.  If they were prophets on the manward side,
they were evidently pupils on the Godward side.  With all possible
allowance for the human peculiarities of the writers, they must have
been reporters of what they heard, rather than the formulators of that
which they had been made to understand.  How nearly this also describes
the attitude of Christ,--a hearer that he might be a teacher: "All
things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you" (John
15: 15); {175} a reporter that he might be a revealer: "I have given
unto them _the words_ which thou gavest me" (John 17: 8).

In these days scholars are very jealous for the human element in
inspiration; but the sovereign element is what most impresses the
diligent student of this subject.  "The Spirit breatheth where he
wills."  Concerning regeneration by the Holy Ghost, we are carefully
told that it is "not of the will of the flesh, nor _of the will of
man_, but of God"; and concerning inspiration by the Spirit, the
teaching is equally explicit: "For no prophecy ever came _by the will
of man_, but men spake from God, being moved by the Holy Ghost" (2
Peter 1: 21, R. V.).

The style of Scripture is, no doubt, according to the traits and
idiosyncracies of the several writers, as the light within the
cathedral takes on its various hues from passing through the stained
windows; but to say that the thoughts of the Bible are from the Spirit,
and the language from men, creates a dualism in revelation not easy to
justify; so that we must quote with entire approval the words of an
eminent writer upon this subject: "The opinion that the subject-matter
alone of the Bible proceeded from the Holy Spirit, while its language
was left to the unaided choice of the various writers, amounts to that
fantastic notion which is the grand fallacy of many theories of
inspiration; namely, that two spiritual agencies were in operation, one
of which {176} produced the phraseology in the outward form, while the
other created within the soul the conceptions and thoughts of which
such phraseology was the expression.  The Holy Spirit, on the contrary,
as the productive _principle_, embraces the entire activity of those
whom he inspires, rendering their language the _word of God_."[4]

If it be urged that the quotations which the New Testament makes from
the Old are rarely _ipsissima verba_, the language being in many
instances greatly changed, it should be noted in reply how significant
even these changes often are.  If the Holy Spirit directed in the
writing of both books, he would have a sovereign right to alter the
phraseology, if need be, from the one to the other.  In the opinion of
many scholars the change of "the Redeemer shall come _to_ Zion, and
unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob," in Isa. 59: 20, to
"There shall come _out_ of Zion the Deliverer," in Rom. 11: 26, is an
inspired and intentional change.[5]  So of the citation from Amos 9:
11, "In that day will I raise up the tabernacle that is fallen," as
given in Acts 15:16, "After these things I will return, and I will
build again the tabernacle of David which is fallen"; the modification
of the language seems designed, in order to make clear its significance
in its present setting.  Many other examples might be given of {177} a
reshaping of his own words by the divine Author of Scripture.  On the
other hand, the constant recurrence of the same words and phrases in
books of the Bible most widely separated in the time and circumstances
of their composition, strongly suggests identity of authorship amid the
variety of penmanship.  The individuality of the writers was no doubt
preserved, only that their individuality was subordinated to the
sovereign individuality of the Holy Spirit.  It is with the written
word as with the incarnate Word.  Because Christ is divine, he is more
truly human than any whom the world has ever seen; and because the
Bible is supernatural, it is natural as no other book which was ever
written; its divinity lifts it above those faults of style which are
the fruits of self-consciousness and ambition.  Whether we read the Old
Testament story of Abraham's servant seeking a bride for Isaac, or the
New Testament narrative of the walk of the risen Christ with his
disciples to Emmaus, the inimitable simplicity of the diction would
make us think that we were listening to the dialect of the angels who
never sinned in thought, and therefore cannot sin in style, did we not
know rather that it is the phraseology of the Holy Spirit.[6]

{178}

An eminent German theologian has written a sentence so profoundly
significant that we here reproduce it in Italics: "_We can in fact
speak with good reason of a language of the Holy Ghost.  For it lies in
the Bible plainly before our eyes, how the Divine Spirit, who is the
agent of revelation, has fashioned for himself a quite peculiar
religious dialect out of the speech of that people which forms its
theatre._"[7]  So true do we hold this saying to be, that it seems to
us quite impossible that the exact meaning of many of the terms of the
New Testament Greek should be found in a Lexicon of classic Greek.
Though the verbal form is the same in both, the inbreathed spirit may
have imparted such new significance to old words, that to employ a
secular dictionary for translating the sacred oracles, were almost like
calling an unregenerate man to interpret the mysteries of the
regenerate life.  Do we not know how modern progress and discovery have
even put new meanings into many English words, so that one must be in
"the spirit of the age" in order to comprehend them?[8]  Thus {179}
likewise, even in the work of verbal criticism, it is essential that
one possess the spirit of Christ in order to translate the words of
Christ.

As to the question of the "inerrancy of Scripture," as the modern
phrase is, we may well pass by many minor arguments, and emphasize the
one great reason for holding this view, viz.: If it is God the Holy
Ghost who speaks in Scripture, then the Bible is the word of God, and
like God, infallible.  A recent brilliant writer has challenged us to
show where the Bible anywhere calls itself "The word of God."[9]  The
most elementary student of the subject can, with the aid of a
concordance, easily point out the passages which so describe it.  But
we dwell on the fact that is not only called _o logos tou theon_, "_the
Word of God_," but _ta logia tou theou_, "_the oracles of God_."  This
collective name of the Scriptures is most significant.  We need not
inquire of the heathen as to the meaning which they put upon the words
as the authoritative utterances of their gods; let the usage of
Scripture make its own impression: "What advantage then hath the Jew?
or what is the profit of circumcision?  Much every way; first of all,
that they were intrusted with _the oracles of God_" (Rom. 3: 2, R.
V.).[10]

This comprehensive expression is very helpful {180} to our faith.  When
critics are assailing the books of the Old Testament in detail, the
Holy Spirit authenticates them for us in their entirety.  As Abigail
prayed for a soul "bound in the bundle of life" with the Lord, so here
an apostle gives us the books of the Law and the Prophets and the
Psalms bound together in one bundle of inspired authority.  Stephen, in
like manner, speaks of his nation as "those who received the _lively
oracles_ (of God) to give unto us" (Acts 7: 38); and Peter says, "If
any man speak let him speak as _the oracles of God_" (1 Peter 4: 11).
And not only this; the same apostles who submitted to the authority of
the Old Testament as the oracles of God, themselves claimed to write as
the oracles of God in the New Testament.  "If any man," says Paul,
"think himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that
the things that I write unto you are the _commandments of the Lord_" (1
Cor. 14: 37).  "We are of God," writes John.  "He that knoweth God
heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us" (1 John 4: 16).
These claims are too great to be put forth concerning fallible
writings.  Admitting their premises, the Jews were right in charging
Jesus with blasphemy, in that being a man {181} he made himself God.
If Christ is not God, he is not even a good man.  And if the Scriptures
are not inerrant, they are worse than errant; since, being literature,
they make themselves the word of God.

And what if it be said that there are irreconcilable contradictions in
this book which calls itself the oracles of God?  Two things may be
said: First, it should be expected that under "the scientific method"
such contradictions should appear and constantly multiply.  The Bible
is a sensitive plant, which shuts itself up at the touch of mere
critical investigation.  In the same paragraph in which it claims that
its very words are the words of the Holy Spirit, it repudiates the
scientific method as futile for the understanding of those words: "Eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard,"--and insists on the spiritual method as
alone adequate,--"but God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit" (1
Cor. 2: 9, 10).  Not only does the Bible not yield roses to the critic,
it yields the thorns and briars of hopeless contradiction.  "_Intellige
ut credos verbum meum_," said Augustine to the rationalists of his day,
"_sed crede ut intelligas verbum Dei_."  "Understand my word, that you
may believe it; believe God's word, that you may understand it."  Faith
holds not only the keys of all the creeds, but of all the
contradictions.  He who starts out and proceeds under the conviction
that the Bible is the {182} infallible word of God, will find
discrepancies constantly turning into unisons under his study.  And
this remark leads to the second observation: that the contradictions of
man may really be the harmonies of God.  An uncultivated listener,
hearing an oratorio of one of the great masters, would detect discords
again and again in the strains; and as a matter of fact, what are
called "accidentals" in music are discords, but discords inserted to
heighten the harmony.  Thus, as one after another of the alleged
discrepancies of Scripture having been noted and made to jar upon the
ear have then been reconciled, with what an emphatic and heightened
harmony have the words of the psalmist, speaking by the Holy Ghost,
fallen on our ear: "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple"!
There seems to the critic to be historic error in the statement of
Stephen that Jacob was buried at Sychem (Acts 7: 16) instead of in the
field of Machpelah before Mamre, as recorded in Gen. 50: 13, just as it
was once thought that Luke had made a mistake, not to be explained
away, in his reference to Cyrenius in chapter 2: 1, 2.  But as the
latter contradiction has disappeared, only confirming the veracity of
Scripture by the investigation which it has called forth, so may the
former.  And so also with such alleged discrepancies as that between
the record in {183} one place that King Solomon had four thousand
stalls for horses, and in another forty thousand; or that of the
statement in one passage that King Josias began to reign at eight years
of age, and in another, at eighteen.  What if we freely admit that we
cannot reconcile these statements?  That does not prove that they are
not reconcilable.  The history of solved contradictions has certainly
shown this, that as "the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the
weakness of God stronger than men," so the discords of God are more
harmonious than men.

We may say, in closing this chapter, that almost the highest proof of
the infallibility of Scripture is the practical one, that we have
proved it so; that as the coin of the State has always been found able
to buy the amount represented on its face, so the prophecies and the
promises of Holy Scripture have yielded their face value to those who
have taken pains to prove them.  If they have not always done so, it is
probable that they have not yet matured.  Certainly there are
multitudes of Christians who have so far proved the veracity of
Scripture that they are ready to trust it without reserve in all that
it pledges for the world yet unseen and the life yet unrealized.
"Believe that thou mayest know," then, is the admonition which
Scripture and history combine to enforce.  In the farewell of that rare
saint, Adolph Monod, these golden words occur: {184} "When I shall
enter the invisible world, I do not expect to find things different
from what the word of God represented them to me here.  The voice I
shall then hear will be the same I now hear upon the earth, and I shall
say, 'This is indeed what God said to me; _and how thankful I am that I
did not wait till I had seen in order to believe_.'"



[1] John 3: 8.  "The wind bloweth where it listeth."  Without
pronouncing dogmatically, it must be said that the translation of
Bengel and some others--"_The Spirit breatheth where he wills, and thou
hearest his voice_"--has reasons in its favor which are well-nigh
irresistible; _e.g._, If _to pneuma_ here is the _wind_, it has one
meaning in the first part of the sentence and another meaning in the
second; and that meaning too, one which it bears in no other instance
of the more than two hundred and seventy uses of the word in the New
Testament.  It is not the word used in Acts 2: 2, as might be expected
if it signified wind.  Then it seems unnatural to ascribe volition to
the wind, _thelei_.  On the contrary, if the words apply to the Spirit,
the saying is in entire harmony with other Scriptures, which affirm the
sovereignty of the Holy Ghost in regeneration (John 1: 13) and in the
control and direction of those who are the subjects of the new birth (2
Cor. 12: 4-11).

[2] The proof that the inspiration of the apostles and scribes of the
New Testament was not transmitted to successors is thus stated by
Neander: "A phenomenon singular in its kind is the striking difference
between the writings of the apostles and those of the apostolic
fathers, so nearly their contemporaries.  In other instances
transitions are wont to be gradual, but in this instance we observe a
sudden change.  There is no gentle gradation here, but all at once an
abrupt transition from one style of language to another--a phenomenon
which should lead us to acknowledge the fact of a special agency of the
Divine Spirit in the souls of the apostles and of a new creative
element in the first period."--_Church History_, II., 405.

[3] There are the strongest reasons for rejecting the rendering of this
passage as given in the Revised Version: "_Every Scripture inspired of
God is also profitable_", etc.  The reader will find the objections to
this rendering powerfully and conclusively set forth in Tregelles on
Daniel.  Note, p. 267.

[4] Lee on the "Inspiration of the Holy Scripture," pp. 32, 33.

[5] See Lange's "Commentary" _in loco_.

[6] I am satisfied only with the style of Scripture.  My own style and
the style of all other men cannot satisfy me.  If I read only three or
four verses I am sure of their divinity on account of their
inimitableness.  _It is the style of the heavenly court.--Oetinger_.

[7] Rothe, "Dogmatics," p. 238.

[8] For example, Shakespeare, and Milton, and Dryden, employ the words
"car" and "engine" and "train" in their writings; but living before the
age of steam and railways they knew nothing of the meaning which these
terms convey to us.  And it is possible that Homer and Plato knew as
little of the meaning of such words as _aiôn_ and _paraklêtos_, as
found in the revelation of Jesus Christ, by whom "the ages were framed"
and the Comforter sent down.

[9] Dr. R. F. Horton, in "_Verbum Dei_."

[10] The apostle in calling the Old Testament Scriptures the "oracles
of God," clearly recognizes them as divinely inspired books.  The
Jewish church was the trustee and guardian of these oracles till the
coming of Christ.  Now the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are
committed to the guardianship of the Christian Church.--_Dr. Philip
Schaff_.




{185}

IX

THE CONVICTION OF THE SPIRIT




{186}

"The Comforter in every part of his threefold work glorifies Christ.  In
convincing of sin he convinces us of the sin of not believing on Christ.
In convincing us of righteousness, he convinces us of the righteousness
of Christ, of that righteousness which was made manifest in Christ going
to the Father, and which he received to bestow on all such as should
believe in him.  And lastly, in convincing of judgment, he convinces us
that the prince of the World was judged in the life and by the death of
Christ.  Thus throughout, Christ is glorified; and that which the
Comforter shows to us relates in all its parts to the life and work of
the incarnate Son of God."--_Julius Charles Hare_.




{187}

IX

THE CONVICTION OF THE SPIRIT

"And when he is come _he will convict the world in respect of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment_" (John 16: 8, R. V.).  It is too large a
conclusion which many seem to draw from these words, that since the day
of Pentecost the Spirit has been universally diffused in the world,
touching hearts everywhere, among Christians and heathen, among the
evangelized and the unevangelized alike, and awakening in them a sense of
sin.  Does not our Lord say in this same discourse concerning the
Comforter: "_Whom the world cannot receive_, because it seeth him not
neither knoweth him"? (John 14: 17)  With these words should be
associated the limitation which Jesus makes in the gift of the Paraclete:
"If I depart I will send him _unto you_."  Christ's disciples were to be
the recipients and distributors of the Holy Ghost, and his church the
mediator between the Spirit and the world.  "And when he is come (to you)
he will reprove the world."  And to complete the exposition, we may
connect this promise with the Great Commission, "Go ye into _all the
world_ and preach the gospel to every creature," and conclude that when
the {188} Lord sends his messengers into the world, the Spirit of truth
goes with them, witnessing to the message which they bear, convincing of
the sin which they reprove, and revealing the righteousness which they
proclaim.  We are not clear to affirm that the conviction of the Spirit
here promised goes beyond the church's evangelizing, though there is
every reason to believe that it invariably accompanies the faithful
preaching of the word.

It will help us then to a clear conception of the subject, if we consider
the Spirit of truth as sent _unto the Church_, testifying _of Christ_,
and bringing conviction _to the world_.

As there is a threefold work of Christ, as prophet, priest, and king, so
there is a threefold conviction of the Spirit answering thereto: "And he,
when he is come, will convict the world in respect of sin and of
righteousness and of judgment; of sin, because they believe not on me; of
righteousness, because I go to the Father and ye behold me no more; of
judgment, because the prince of this world hath been judged" (John 16:
8-12, R. V.).  It is concerning the testimony of Christ as he spake to
men in the days of his flesh; and concerning the work of Christ now
carried on in his intercession at God's right hand; and concerning the
sentence of Christ when he shall come again to be our judge, that this
witness of the Spirit has to do.

"_He shall convince the world of sin._"  Why is he {189} needed for this
conviction since conscience is present in every human breast, and is
doing his work so faithfully?  We reply: Conscience is the witness to the
law; the Spirit is the witness to grace.  Conscience brings legal
conviction; the Spirit brings evangelical conviction; the one begets a
conviction unto despair, the other a conviction unto hope.

"_Of sin, because they believe not on me,_" describes the ground of the
Holy Spirit's conviction.  The entrance of Christ into the world rendered
possible a sin hitherto unknown: "If I had not come and spoken unto them,
they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin" (John 15:
22).  Evil seems to have required the presence of incarnate goodness, in
order to its fullest manifestation.  Hence the deep significance of the
prophecy spoken over the cradle of Jesus: "Behold this child is set for
the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall
be spoken against, _that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed_"
(Luke 2: 34, 35).  All the most hideous sins of human nature came out
during the betrayal and trial and passion of our Lord.  In that "hour and
power of darkness" these sins seem indeed to have been but imperfectly
recognized.  But when the day of Pentecost had come, with its awful
revealing light of the Spirit of truth, then there was great contrition
in Jerusalem--a contrition the sting of {190} which we find in the charge
of Peter: "Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye have taken and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain."  Was not that deep conviction, following the gift
of the Spirit, in which three thousand were brought to repentance in a
single day, a conviction of sin because they had not believed on Christ?

For our reproof the Holy Ghost presents another side of the same fact,
calling us to repentance, not for having taken part in crucifying Christ,
but for having refused to take part in Christ crucified; not for having
been guilty of delivering him up to death, but for having refused to
believe in him who was "delivered for our offenses and raised again for
our justification."  Wherever, by the preaching of the gospel, the fact
of Christ having died for the sins of the world is made known, this guilt
becomes possible.  The sin of disbelieving on Christ is, therefore, the
great sin now, because it summarizes all other sins.  He bore for us the
penalties of the law; and thus our obligation, which was originally to
the law, is transferred to him.  To refuse faith in him, therefore, is to
repudiate the claims of the law which he fulfilled and to repudiate the
debt of infinite love which, by his sacrifice, we have incurred.
Nevertheless, the Spirit of truth brings home this sin against the Lord,
not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.
In a word, as has been well said, "it is not {191} the sin-question but
the Son-question" which we really raise now in preaching the gospel.
"Christ having perfectly satisfied God about sin, the question now
between God and your heart is: Are you perfectly satisfied with Christ as
the alone portion of your soul?  Christ has settled every other to the
glory of God."  In dealing with the guilty Jews, it was the historical
fact which the Holy Ghost urged for their conviction: "Ye denied the Holy
One and the Just, and killed the Prince of Life" (Acts 3: 14, 15).  In
dealing with us Gentiles, it is rather the theological or evangelical
fact: "Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us to God" (1 Peter 3: 18), and you are condemned
that you have not believed on him and confessed him as Saviour and Lord.
It is the same sin in the last instance, but viewed upon its reverse
side, if we may say it.  In the one case it is the guilt of despising and
rejecting the Son of God; in the other, it is the guilt of not believing
in him who was despised and rejected of men.  Yet if submissively yielded
to, the Spirit will lead us from this first stage of revelation to the
second, since what Andrew Fuller said of the doctrines of theology is
equally true of the convictions of the Spirit, that "they are united
together like chain-shot, so that whichever one enters the heart the
other must certainly follow."

"_Of righteousness, because I go to the Father and {192} ye see me no
more._"  Not until he had been seated in the heavenly places had Christ
perfected righteousness for us.  As he was "delivered for our offenses
and raised again for our justification," so must he be enthroned for our
assurance.  It is necessary to see Jesus standing at the right hand of
God, in order to know ourselves "accepted in the Beloved."  How beautiful
the culmination of Isaiah's passion-prophecy wherein, accompanying the
promise that "he shall bear the sin of many," is the prediction that "by
his knowledge _shall my righteous servant justify many_"!  But he must be
shown to be righteous, in order that he may justify; and this is what his
exaltation does.  "It was the proof that him whom the world condemned,
God justified--that the stone which the builders rejected, God made the
Headstone of the corner--that him whom the world denied and lifted up on
a cross of shame in the midst of two thieves, God accepted and lifted up
in the midst of the throne."[1]

The words "and because ye see me no more," which have perplexed the
commentators, seem to us {193} to give the real clue to the meaning of
the whole passage.  So long as the High Priest was within the veil, and
unseen, the congregation of Israel could not be sure of their acceptance.
Hence the eager anxiety with which they waited his coming out, with the
assurance that God had received the propitiation offered on their behalf.
Christ, our great High Priest, has entered into the Holy of Holies by his
own blood.  Until he comes forth again at his second advent, how can we
be assured that his sacrifice for us is accepted?  We could not be,
unless he had sent out one from his presence to make known this fact to
us.  And this is precisely what he has done in the gift of the Holy
Ghost.  "Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of
his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he
had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high" (Heb. 1: 3).  There he will remain throughout the whole
duration of the great day of atonement, which extends from ascension to
advent.  But in order that his church may have immediate assurance of
acceptance with the Father, through his righteous servant, he sends forth
the Paraclete to certify the fact; and the presence of the Spirit in the
midst of the church is proof positive of the presence of Jesus in the
midst of the throne; as is said by Peter on the day of {194} Pentecost;
"Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of
the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this which
ye now see and hear" (Acts 2: 33).

Now the Lord's words seem plain to us.  Because he ascends to the Father,
to be seen no more until his second coming, the Spirit meantime comes
down to attest his presence and approval with the Father as the perfectly
righteous One.  How clearly this comes out in Peter's defense before the
Council: "The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged
on a tree.  Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins; and we
are witnesses of these things, _and so also is the Holy Ghost_, whom God
hath given to them that obey him" (Acts 5: 30-32).  Why this two-fold
witness?  The reason is obvious.  The disciples could bear testimony to
the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ, but not to his enthronement;
that event was beyond the ken of human vision; and so the Holy Ghost, who
had been cognizant of that fact in heaven, must be sent down as a
joint-witness with the apostles, that thus the whole circle of
redemption-truth might be attested.  Therein was the promise of Jesus in
his last discourse literally fulfilled: "But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth which
{195} proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me; and ye also
shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning"
(John 15: 26, 27).

As we have said, it is not only the enthronement of Christ in righteous
approval with the Father that must be certified, but the acceptance of
his sacrificial work as a full and satisfying ground of our
reconciliation with the Father.  And the Spirit proceeding from God is
alone competent to bear to us this assurance.  Therefore in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, after the reiterated statement of our Lord's exaltation
at the right hand of God, it is added: "For by one offering he hath
perfected forever them that are sanctified, _whereof the Holy Ghost is
also a witness to us_" (Heb. 10: 14, 15).  In a word, he whom we have
known on the cross as "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the
world," must now be known to us on the throne as "_the Lord our
righteousness_."  But though the angels and the glorified in heaven see
Jesus, once crucified, now "made both Lord and Christ," we see him not.
Therefore it is written that "no man can say Jesus is Lord, _but in the
Holy Spirit_" (1 Cor. 12: 3, R. V.).  So also we are told that "if any
man sin we have a _Paraclete_ with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous" (1 John 2: 1); but we can only know Christ as such through
that "other Paraclete" sent forth from the Father.  It was promised that
"when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he shall {196} not speak from
himself; but what things soever he shall hear, these shall he speak"
(John 16: 13, R. V.).  Hearing the ascriptions of worthiness lifted up to
Christ in heaven, and beholding him who was made a little lower than the
angels for the suffering of death, now "crowned with glory and honor," he
communicates what he sees and hears to the church on earth.  Thus, as he
in his earthly life, through his own outshining and self-evidencing
perfection, "was justified in the spirit"; so we, recognizing him
standing for us in glory, and now "of God made unto us righteousness,"
are also "justified in the name of the Lord Jesus _and by the Spirit of
our God_" (1 Cor. 6: 11).

Thus, though unseen by the church during all the time of his
high-priestly ministry, our Lord has sent to his church one whose office
it is to bear witness to all he is and all he is doing while in heaven,
that so we may have "boldness and access with confidence by the faith of
him," and that so we may come boldly to the throne of grace, "the Holy
Ghost this signifying"--what he could not under the old covenant--"that
the way into the holiest of all" (Heb. 9: 8) has been made manifest.

And yet--strange paradox--in this identical discourse in which Jesus
speaks to his disciples of seeing him no more, he says: "Yet a little
while and the world seeth me no more, _but ye see me_; because I live ye
shall live also" (John 14: 19); words {197} which by common consent refer
to the same time of Christ's continuance within the veil.  But it is now
by the inward vision, which the world has not, that they are to behold
him.  And they are to behold him _for the world_, since Christ said of
him: "Whom the _world cannot receive, because_ it seeth him not, neither
knoweth him."  And yet it is "to _convince the world_" "of sin and of
righteousness and of judgment" that the Spirit was to be sent.  How shall
we make it plain?  When the sun retires beyond the horizon at night, the
world, our hemisphere, sees him no more; yet the moon sees him, and all
night long catches his light and throws it down upon us.  So the world
sees not Christ in the gracious provisions of redemption which he holds
for us in heaven, but through the illumination of the Comforter the
church sees him; as it is written: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God hath
prepared for them that love him; _but God hath revealed them unto us by
his Spirit_" (1 Cor. 2: 9, 10).  And the Church seeing these things,
communicates what she sees to the world.  Christ is all and in all; and
the Spirit receives and reflects him to the world through his people.

  The moon above, the church below,
    A wondrous race they run;
  But all their radiance, all their glow,
    Each borrows of its sun.


{198}

"_Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged._"  Here, we
believe, is a still farther advance in the revelation of the gospel, and
not a retreat to the doctrine of a future judgment, as some would teach.
For we repeat our conviction, that in this entire discourse the Holy
Spirit is revealed to us as an evangel of Grace, and not as a sheriff of
the Law.  Hear the Apostle Peter once more, as, pointing to him who had
been raised from the dead and seated in the heavenlies, he says: "By him
every one that believeth is justified from all things from which ye could
not be justified by the law of Moses" (Acts 13: 39, R. V.).
Justification, in the evangelical sense, is but another name for judgment
prejudged and condemnation ended.  In the enthroned Christ every question
about sin is answered, and every claim of a violated law is absolutely
met; and though there is no abatement in the demands of the decalogue,
yet because "Christ has become the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believeth," now "_grace reigns through righteousness_ unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord."  Strange paradox set forth in
Isaiah's passion psalm: "_By his stripes we are healed,_" as though it
were told us that sin's smiting had procured sin's remission.  And so it
is.  If the Holy Spirit shows us the wounds of the dying Christ for
condemning us, he immediately shows us the wounds of the exalted Christ
for comforting us.  {199} His glorified body is death's certificate of
discharge, the law's receipt in full, assuring us that all the penalties
of transgression have been endured, and the Sin-bearer acquitted.

The meaning of this last conviction seems plain therefore: "_Of judgment,
because the prince of this world is judged._"  Recall the words of Jesus
as he stood face to face with the cross: "Now is the judgment of this
world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out" (John 12: 31).
"The accuser of the brethren" is at last non-suited and ejected from
court.  The death of Christ is the death of death, and of the author of
death also.  "That through death he might destroy him that hath the power
of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them who, through fear of
death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage" (Heb. 2: 14, 15).  If
the relation of Satan to our judgment and condemnation is mysterious,
this much is clear, from this and several passages, that Christ by his
cross has delivered us from his dominion.  We must believe that Jesus
spoke the literal truth when he said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, he
that heareth my word and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life,
_and cometh not into judgment_, but hath passed out of death into life"
(John 5: 24, R. V.).  On the cross Christ judged sin and acquitted those
who believe on him; and in heaven he defends them against every re-arrest
by a violated law.  {200} "There is therefore now no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus" (Rom. 8: 1).  Thus the threefold conviction
brings the sinner the three stages of Christ's redemptive work, past
judgment and past condemnation into eternal acceptance with the Father.

In striking antithesis with all this, we have an instance in the Acts of
the threefold conviction of conscience, when Paul before Felix "reasoned
of _righteousness, and temperance, and the judgment to come_" (Acts 24:
25).  Here the sin of a profligate life was laid bare as the apostle
discoursed of chastity; the claims of righteousness were vindicated, and
the certainty of coming judgment exhibited; and with the only effect that
"Felix trembled."  So it must ever be under the convictions of
conscience,--compunction but not peace.  We have also an instructive
contrast exhibited in Scripture, between the co-witness of the Spirit and
the co-witness of conscience.  "_The Spirit himself beareth witness_
(_summarturei_) that we are the children of God" (Rom.  8: 16).  Here is
the assurance of sonship, with all the divine inward persuasion of
freedom from condemnation which it carries.  On the other hand is the
conviction of the heathen, who have only the law written in their hearts:
"_Their conscience bearing witness_ (_summarturousês_), their thoughts
one with another accusing, or else excusing them, in the day when God
shall judge the secrets of men" {201} (Rom. 2: 15, 16).  Conscience can
"accuse," and how universally it does so, abundant testimony of Christian
missionaries shows; and conscience can "excuse," which is the method that
guilty thoughts invariably suggest; but _conscience cannot justify_.
Only the Spirit of truth, whom the Father hath sent forth into the world,
can do this.  The work of the two witnesses may be thus set in contrast:

  _Conscience Convinces_--        _The Comforter Convinces_--
  Of sin committed;               Of sin committed;
  Of righteousness impossible;    Of righteousness imputed;
  Of judgment accomplished.       Of judgment impending.


Happily these two witnesses may be harmonized, as they are by that
atonement which reconciles man to himself, as well as reconciles man to
God.  Very significantly does the Epistle to the Hebrews, in inviting our
approach to God make, as the condition of that approach, the "having our
hearts _sprinkled from an evil conscience_."  As the High Priest carried
the blood into the Holy of Holies in connection with the old
dispensation, so does the Spirit take the blood of Christ into the inner
sanctuary of our spirit in the more wondrous economy of the new
dispensation, in order that he may "cleanse your conscience from dead
works to serve the living God" (Heb. 9: 14).  Blessed is the man who is
thus made at one with himself while made at one with God, so that he can
say: "I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, _my conscience also {202}
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost_" (Rom. 9: 11).  The believer's
conscience dwelling in the Spirit, even as his life is "hid with Christ
in God," both having the same mind and bearing the same testimony--this
is the end of redemption and this is the victory of the atoning blood.



[1] For as the ministry of Enoch was sealed by his reception into heaven,
and as the ministry of Elijah was also abundantly proved by his
translation, so also the righteousness and innocence of Christ.  But it
was necessary that the ascension of Christ should be more fully attested,
because upon his righteousness, so fully proved by his ascension, we must
depend for all our righteousness.  For if God had not approved him after
his resurrection, and he had not taken his seat at his right hand, we
could by no means be accepted of God.--_Cartwright_.




{203}

X

THE ASCENT OF THE SPIRIT




{204}

"The Apostle Paul evidently saw the redemption of the bodies of the
saints and their manifestation as the sons of God and with them the
redemption of the whole creation from its present bondage to be the
complete harvest of the Spirit, whereof the church doth now possess
only the first-fruits, that is, the first ripe grains which could be
formed into a sheaf and presented in the temple as a wave-offering unto
the Lord.  'That Holy Spirit of Promise which is the earnest of our
inheritance,' saith the same apostle--the earnest, like the
first-fruit, being only a part of that which is to be earned . . . yet
a sufficient surety that the whole shall in the fullness of the times,
be likewise ours."--_Edward Irving_.




{205}

X

THE ASCENT OF THE SPIRIT

"He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens."  So writes the apostle concerning the Paraclete who is now
with the Father, "Jesus Christ the righteous" (Eph. 4: 9).  And what is
true of the one is true of that "other Paraclete," the Holy Ghost, who
was sent down to abide with us during this age.  When he has
accomplished his temporal mission in the world he will return to heaven
in the body which he has fashioned for himself--that "one new man," the
regenerate church, gathered out from both Jews and Gentiles during this
dispensation.  For what is the rapture of the saints predicted by the
apostle when, at the sound of the trumpet and the resurrection of the
righteous dead, "we which are alive and remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air?" (1
Thess. 4: 17).  It is the earthly Christ rising to meet the heavenly
Christ; the elect church, gathered in the Spirit and named _o
christos_, (1 Cor. 12: 12,) taken up to be united in glory with
"Christ, the Head of the church, himself the Saviour of the body" {206}
(Eph. 5: 23, R. V.).  In the council at Jerusalem this is announced as
the distinctive work of the Spirit in this dispensation "to gather out
_a people for his name_."  It was not by accident and as a term of
derision that the first believers received their name; but "the
disciples were divinely called _Christians_ first in Antioch" (Acts 11:
26).  This was the name pre-ordained for them, that "honorable name" by
which they are called (James 2: 7).  When, therefore, this
out-gathering shall have been accomplished, and _the people for his
name_ shall be completed, they will be translated to be one with him in
glory, as they were one with him in name, the Head taking the body to
himself, "as Christ also, the church" (Eph. 5: 29).  And this
translation of the church is to be effected by the Holy Spirit who
dwells in her.  "But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you" (Rom. 8:
11).  It is not by acting upon the body of Christ from without, but by
energizing it from within, that the Holy Ghost will effect its
glorification.  In a word, the Comforter, who on the day of Pentecost,
came down to form a body out of flesh, will at the _Parousia_ return to
heaven in that body, having fashioned it like unto the body of Christ,
that it may be presented to him "not having spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing, . . . holy {207} and without blemish" (Eph. 5: 27).  Is it
meant to be implied in what is here said that the Comforter is to leave
the world at the time of the advent, to return no more?  By no means.
And yet what is meant needs to be very explicitly set forth.

A very able writer on the doctrine of the Spirit makes this remark, so
striking and yet so true that we have put it in italics: "_As Christ
shall ultimately give up his kingdom to the Father_ (1 Cor. 15: 24-28),
_so the Holy Ghost shall give up his administration to the Son, when he
comes in glory and all his holy angels with him_."[1]  The church and
the kingdom are not identical terms, if we mean by the kingdom the
visible reign and government of Jesus Christ on earth.  In another
sense they are identical.  As the King, so the kingdom.  The King is
present now in the world, only invisibly and by the Holy Spirit; so the
kingdom is now present invisibly and spiritually in the hearts of
believers.  The King is to come again visibly and gloriously; so shall
the kingdom appear visibly and gloriously.  In other words, the kingdom
is already here in mystery; it is to be here in manifestation.  Now the
spiritual kingdom is administered by the Holy Ghost, and it extends
from Pentecost to _Parousia_.  At the _Parousia_--the appearing of the
Son of Man in glory--when he shall take unto himself his great power
and reign (Rev. 11: 17), when he who has {208} now gone into a far
country, to be invested with a kingdom, shall return and enter upon his
government (Luke 19: 15), then the invisible shall give way to the
visible; the kingdom in mystery shall emerge into the kingdom in
manifestation, and the Holy Spirit's administration shall yield to that
of Christ.

Here our discussion properly ends, since the age-ministry of the Holy
Spirit terminates with the return of Jesus Christ in glory.  But there
is an "age to come" (Heb. 6: 5), succeeding "the present evil age"
(Gal. 1: 4), and we may, in closing, take a glimpse at that for the
light which it may throw upon the present dispensation.

What significance has the phrase, "_the first-fruits of the Spirit_,"
which several times occurs in the New Testament?  The first-fruits is
but a handful compared with the whole harvest; and this is what we have
in the gift of "the Holy Spirit of promise, _which is the earnest of
our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession_"
(Eph. 1: 13, 14).  The harvest, to which all the first-fruits look
forward, is at the appearing of the Lord.  Christ, by his rising from
the dead, became "_the first-fruits of them that slept_" (1 Cor. 15:
20).  The full harvest, of course, is at the advent, when "they that
are Christ's at his coming" shall be raised up (1 Cor. 15: 23).  So of
the Holy Ghost.  We have all the Spirit, but _not all of the Spirit_.
As a person of {209} the God-head, he is here in his entirety; but as
to his ministry, we have as yet but a part or earnest of his full
blessing.  To make this statement plain, let us observe that the work
of the Holy Spirit, during this entire dispensation, is elective.  He
gathers from Jew and Gentile the body of Christ, the _ecclesia_, the
called-out.  This is his peculiar work in this gospel age.  In a word,
the present is the age of election, and not of universal ingathering.

But is this all we have to hope for?  Let the word of God answer.
Paul, in considering the hope of Israel, says that there is at this
present time "_a remnant according to the election of grace_"; and a
little farther on he declares that in connection with the coming of the
Deliverer "_all Israel shall be saved_" (Rom. 11: 5, 26).  Here is an
elective out-gathering, and then a universal in-gathering; or, as the
apostle sums it up in this same chapter: "_If the first-fruits be holy,
so also the lump_."  On the other hand, James, speaking by the Holy
Ghost concerning the Gentiles, says first that "God did visit the
Gentiles _to take out of them a people for his name_," and "after this
will I return," etc., "that the residue of men might seek after the
Lord, and _all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called, saith the
Lord_" (Acts 15: 14, 17).  Here, again, is first an elective
out-gathering and then a total in-gathering.

{210}

Now, by looking at other scriptures, it seems clear that the Holy
Spirit is the divine agent in both these redemptions, the partial and
the total.  If we refer to Joel's great prophecy: "_I will pour out my
Spirit upon all flesh_," and then to Peter's reference to the same, as
recorded in the Acts, we are led to ask, Was this prediction completely
fulfilled on the day of Pentecost?  Clearly not.  Peter, with inspired
accuracy, says: "_This is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel_,"
without affirming that herein the prophecy of Joel was entirely
fulfilled.  Turning back to the prediction itself, we find that it
includes within its sweep "the great and the terrible day of the Lord,"
and the "bringing again of the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem" (Joel
2: 31; 3: 1), events which are clearly yet future.  If again we examine
the vivid prophecy of Israel's conversion, we observe that their
looking upon him whom they pierced, and mourning for him, follows the
prediction: "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and supplication" (Zech.
12: 10).  So in the picture of the desolations of Jerusalem, as they
have actually existed during the present age, the prophet represents
this judgment of thorns and briars and forsaken palaces and desertion
of population, as continuing "_until the Spirit be poured upon us from
on high_" (Isaiah 32: 15).

Indeed the Scriptures seem to be harmonious in {211} their teaching
that, after the present elective work of the Spirit has been completed,
there will come a time of universal blessing, when the Spirit shall
literally be "poured out upon all flesh"; when "that which is perfect
shall come" and "that which is in part shall be done away."

Thus in the doctrine of the Spirit there is a constant reference to the
final consummation.  "The Holy Spirit of God, in whom ye were sealed
_unto the day of redemption_," says Paul (Eph. 4: 30).  Again:
"Ourselves also which have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we
ourselves, groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit,
_the redemption of our body_" (Rom. 8: 23).

All which the Comforter has yet brought us, or can now bring us, is
only the first sheaf of the great harvest of redemption which awaits us
on our Lord's return.  "Ye have received _the Spirit of adoption_,
whereby we cry Abba, Father" (Rom. 8: 15); but for the adoption itself
we wait; sons of God already by birth from above, we with the whole
creation yet wait for "_the manifestation of the sons of God_" (Rom. 8:
19).

To his tender exhortation to be patient until the coming of the Lord,
which James writes in the first chapter of his epistle, there is added
the suggestive illustration: "Behold the husbandman waiteth for the
precious fruit of the earth, being patient over it until it receive the
early and latter rain." {212} As in husbandry the one rain belonged to
the time of sowing, and the other to the time of harvest, so in
redemption the early rain of the Spirit was at Pentecost, the latter
rain will be at the Parousia; the one fell upon the world as the first
sowers went forth into the world to sow, the other will accompany "the
harvest which is the end of the age," and will fructify the earth for
the final blessing of the age to come, bringing repentance to Israel
and the remission of sins, "that the times of refreshing may come from
the presence of the Lord, and that he may send Jesus Christ, before
appointed for you, whom the heavens must receive until the times of the
restitution of all things" (Acts 3: 19-21).



[1] "Through the Eternal Spirit," by Elder Cumming, D. D., p. 185.




{213}

  SCRIPTURE INDEX


                                             PAGE

  Genesis 50: 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182

  Exodus 30: 30-33 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  156

  Leviticus 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
  Leviticus 23: 11-16  . . . . . . . . . . .   29
  Leviticus 8: 12  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   88
  Leviticus 14: 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89

  1 Samuel 16: 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   88

  2 Samuel 23: 2, 3  . . . . . . . . . . . .  171

  1 Kings 19: 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   88

  Psalms 133: 1, 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58
  Psalms 17: 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  114
  Psalms 84: 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  124
  Psalms 17: 16  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  125

  Isaiah 11: 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
  Isaiah 59: 20  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  176
  Isaiah 32: 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  210

  Joel 2: 31 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  210
  Joel 3: 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  210

  Amos 9: 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  176

  Zechariah 12: 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  210

  Matthew 3: 11  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
  Matthew 12: 28 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
  Matthew 3: 11, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . .   76
  Matthew 16: 24, 25 . . . . . . . . . . . .  108
  Matthew 6: 27, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . .  115
  Matthew 18: 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  149

  Mark 13: 32  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
  Mark 12: 36  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  171

  Luke 3: 22 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
  Luke 4: 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82
  Luke 4: 18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   88
  Luke 10: 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  137
  Luke 2: 1, 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182
  Luke 2: 34, 35 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
  Luke 19: 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  208

  John 14: 23  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
  John 1: 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
  John 20: 17  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
  John 15: 26  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
  John 14: 16  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
  John 14: 18; 14: 26; 16: 13  . . . . . . .   39
  John 16: 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
  John 14: 28  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
  John 16: 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
  John 14: 12; 15: 26  . . . . . . . . . . .   44
  John 16: 8-10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   45
  John 16: 12, 13  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46
  John 16: 13, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
  John 16: 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
  John 14: 18; 14: 3 . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
  John 1: 33 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58
  John 3: 16; 1: 12  . . . . . . . . . . . .   67
  John 1: 33 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
  John 6: 27 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   77
  John 3: 33 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   78
  John 2: 23, 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   79

  John 16: 13; 14: 17; 15: 26; 16: 13  . . .   92
  John 3: 31; 8: 23  . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
  John 3: 7, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  103
  John 13: 35. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  113
  John 1: 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  124
  John 14: 23  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  138
  John 16: 23  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  147
  John 20: 22, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . .  165
  John 6: 63, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
  John 15: 15; 17: 8 . . . . . . . . . . . .  175
  John 16: 8, R. V.; 14: 17  . . . . . . . .  187
  John 16: 8, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . . . .  188
  John 15: 22  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
  John 15: 26, 27  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  195
  John 16: 13, R. V.; 14: 19 . . . . . . . .  196
  John 12: 31; 5: 24, R. V.  . . . . . . . .  199

  Acts 9: 31 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
  Acts 2: 41; 5: 14; 11: 24  . . . . . . . .   55
  Acts 10: 38  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58
  Acts 11: 16  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
  Acts 2: 38 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   69
  Acts 8: 14-17  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
  Acts 1: 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
  Acts 2: 4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82
  Acts 9: 17; 4: 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   83
  Acts 4: 31; 6: 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84
  Acts 4: 27, R. V.; 10: 38  . . . . . . . .   88
  Acts 15: 28  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132
  Acts 20: 28, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . .  134
  Acts 10: 44  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  145
  Acts 5: 9  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  150
  Acts 1: 8, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159
  Acts 13: 2; 13: 4; 13: 9; 13: 52 . . . . .  160
  Acts 15: 8; 15: 28; 16: 6, 7 . . . . . . .  161
  Acts 1: 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  171
  Acts 15: 16  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  176
  Acts 7: 38 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
  Acts 7: 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182
  Acts 3: 14, 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  191
  Acts 2: 33; 5: 30-32 . . . . . . . . . . .  194
  Acts 13: 39, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . .  198
  Acts 24: 25  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  200
  Acts 11: 26  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206
  Acts 15: 14, 17  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  209
  Acts 3: 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  212

  Romans 1: 4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   45
  Romans 8: 9  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
  Romans 6: 3, 4; 8: 2 . . . . . . . . . . .   62
  Romans 6: 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   64
  Romans 11: 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   81
  Romans 1: 4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
  Romans 6: 3, 4; 7: 4 . . . . . . . . . . .  109
  Romans 6: 11, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . . .  110
  Romans 8: 13; 8: 2 . . . . . . . . . . . .  111
  Romans 15: 30  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  112
  Romans 8: 23; 8: 11  . . . . . . . . . . .  119
  Romans 12: 2, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . . .  123
  Romans 1: 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  124
  Romans 8: 26, 27, R. V.  . . . . . . . . .  148
  Romans 8: 26 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173
  Romans 11: 26  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  176
  Romans 3: 2, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . .  179
  Romans 8: 1; 8: 16 . . . . . . . . . . . .  200
  Romans 2: 15, 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  201
  Romans 9: 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  202
  Romans 8: 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206
  Romans 11: 6, 26 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  209
  Romans 8: 23; 8: 15; 8: 19 . . . . . . . .  211

  1 Corinthians 12: 12 . . . . . . . . . . .   54
  1 Corinthians 12: 13 . . . . . . . . . . .   55
  1 Corinthians 10: 1  . . . . . . . . . . .   57
  1 Corinthians 2: 11, R. V. . . . . . . . .   90
  1 Corinthians 12: 3  . . . . . . . . . . .   91
  1 Corinthians 15: 51, 52 . . . . . . . . .  120
  1 Corinthians 15: 52; 15: 44 . . . . . . .  125
  1 Corinthians 3: 16  . . . . . . . . . . .  130
  1 Corinthians 2: 4 . . . . . . . . . . . .  143
  1 Corinthians 10: 11 . . . . . . . . . . .  156
  1 Corinthians 12: 11, R. V.  . . . . . . .  166
  1 Corinthians 2: 10-13 . . . . . . . . . .  173
  1 Corinthians 14: 37 . . . . . . . . . . .  180
  1 Corinthians 2: 9, 10 . . . . . . . . . .  181
  1 Corinthians 12: 3, R. V. . . . . . . . .  195
  1 Corinthians 6: 11  . . . . . . . . . . .  196
  1 Corinthians 2: 9, 10 . . . . . . . . . .  197
  1 Corinthians 12: 12 . . . . . . . . . . .  205
  1 Corinthians 15: 24-28  . . . . . . . . .  207
  1 Corinthians 15: 20; 15: 23 . . . . . . .  208

  2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22  . . . . . . . . .   78
  2 Corinthians 1: 21, R. V. . . . . . . . .   88
  2 Corinthians 5: 14, R. V. . . . . . . . .  110
  2 Corinthians 3: 18, R. V. . . . . . . . .  113
  2 Corinthians 3: 18  . . . . . . . . . . .  123
  2 Corinthians 3: . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132

  Galatians 5: 25  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
  Galatians 4: 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   69
  Galatians 3: 2; 3: 14  . . . . . . . . . .   71
  Galatians 4: 19  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94
  Galatians 2: 20, R. V. . . . . . . . . . .  110
  Galatians 5: 16  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
  Galatians 1: 14  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  123
  Galatians 1: 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  136
  Galatians 6: 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
  Galatians 6: 8, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . .  160
  Galatians 1: 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  208

  Ephesians 1: 7; 3: 16  . . . . . . . . . .   42
  Ephesians 1: 20, 21  . . . . . . . . . . .   45
  Ephesians 4: 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
  Ephesians 6: 18  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
  Ephesians 4: 16  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61
  Ephesians 1: 13  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   77
  Ephesians 4: 30  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   80
  Ephesians 5: 18  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
  Ephesians 4: 24  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  106
  Ephesians 2: 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
  Ephesians 4: 8-12, R. V. . . . . . . . . .  134
  Ephesians 6: 18  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  148
  Ephesians 5: 19  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  153
  Ephesians 2: 22, R. V.; 3: 16, R. V.;
            2: 18, R. V. . . . . . . . . . .  154
  Ephesians 4: 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  205
  Ephesians 5: 23; 5: 29 . . . . . . . . . .  206
  Ephesians 5: 27  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  207
  Ephesians 1: 13, 14  . . . . . . . . . . .  208
  Ephesians 4: 30  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  211

  Philippians 2: 6, 7, R. V. . . . . . . . 42, 43

  Colossians 1: 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63
  Colossians 3: 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  106
  Colossians 2: 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
  Colossians 3: 2, 5, R. V.  . . . . . . . .  110
  Colossians 3: 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155

  1 Thessalonians 2: 19  . . . . . . . . . .   50
  1 Thessalonians 3: 13  . . . . . . . . . .   60
  1 Thessalonians 1: 9 . . . . . . . . . . .  102
  1 Thessalonians 5: 23, R. V. . . . . . . .  122
  1 Thessalonians 1: 5 . . . . . . . . . . .  144
  1 Thessalonians 1: 6 . . . . . . . . . . .  145
  1 Thessalonians 4: 18  . . . . . . . . . .  155
  1 Thessalonians 4: 17  . . . . . . . . . .  205

  2 Thessalonians 2: 4 . . . . . . . . . . .  130

  2 Timothy 2: 19  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   78
  2 Timothy 3: 16  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  168

  Titus 2: 13, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . .  119

  Hebrews 1: 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
  Hebrews 9: 14  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
  Hebrews 1: 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   91
  Hebrews 6: 4, 5, R. V. . . . . . . . . . .  121
  Hebrews 6: 5, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . . .  123
  Hebrews 2: 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  144
  Hebrews 7: 25, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . .  148
  Hebrews 3: 13  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
  Hebrews 3: 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  158
  Hebrews 3: 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  171
  Hebrews 1: 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  193
  Hebrews 10: 14, 15 . . . . . . . . . . . .  195
  Hebrews 9: 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  196
  Hebrews 2: 14, 15  . . . . . . . . . . . .  199
  Hebrews 9: 14  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  201
  Hebrews 6: 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  208

  James 1: 18  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  105
  James 3: 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  126
  James 6: 16; 5: 16, R. V . . . . . . . . .  155
  James 2: 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206

  1 Peter 4: 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
  1 Peter 2: 9, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . . .   89
  1 Peter 1: 23, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . .  105
  1 Peter 4: 14  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118
  1 Peter 1: 12  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  143
  1 Peter 1: 22  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
  1 Peter 1: 23, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . .  170
  1 Peter 1: 11  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  174
  1 Peter 4: 11  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
  1 Peter 3: 18  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  191

  2 Peter 1: 4, R. V.  . . . . . . . . . . .  104
  2 Peter 1: 21, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . .  175

  1 John 2: 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
  1 John 2: 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
  1 John 2: 27 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   90
  1 John 1: 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99
  1 John 1: 8, 3: 9  . . . . . . . . . . . .  116
  1 John 3: 5, 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  117
  1 John 3: 2, R. V. . . . . . . . . . . . .  124
  1 John 4: 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
  1 John 2: 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  195

  Jude 1: 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  123
  Jude 1: 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  126
  Jude 1: 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  148

  Revelation 22: 17  . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
  Revelation 1: 18 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61
  Revelation 3: 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
  Revelation 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  133
  Revelation 2: 7; 14: 13  . . . . . . . . .  170
  Revelation 11: 17  . . . . . . . . . . . .  207




{217}

  GENERAL INDEX


                                                         PAGE

  Adam: fall of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  102
    child of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  106
    nature derived from  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
    inheritance from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118
  Adam life: birth into  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  104
  Adolph Monod: farewell of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  184
  Age of the Spirit: defined . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
  Age-work: continuance of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
  Ambrose: observation of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
  Ananias and Sapphira: sin of . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 23
  Andrews, Bishop: beautiful words of  . . . . . . . . .   54
  Anointing: Importance of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88, 89
    examples of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
  Ante-Pentecostal days: spiritual nonage of . . . . . .   48
  Apostles: Matthias chosen by . . . . . . . . . . . . .  136
    prerogatives of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  166
    order of, ceased . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  167
  Asceticism: inversion of divine order  . . . . . . . .  111
  Augustine: quotation from  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
    calls Pentecost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    saying of true . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    replies to rationalists  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  181

  Baptism: a monogram  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  109
  Baptized: into Moses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
  Bengel: statement of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
  Bible: Holy Ghost breathes within it . . . . . . . . .  170
    divine author of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
    infallibility of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  179
    a sensitive plant  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  181
  Bickersteth, E. H.: quotation from . . . . . . . . . .   81
  Boys, E.: extract from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68
  Butler, Archer: quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . .   30

  Calvary: typology of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
    once for all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
  Calvin, John; quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34
  Canon Garratt: excerpt from  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  137
  Cartwright: extract from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  192
  Choirs: composed of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  164
  Christ: life of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    on earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    inspired characterizations of  . . . . . . . . . . .   23
    image of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    fulfills all types   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
    our Passover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
    earthly work of, completed . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
    ready to be communicated . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
    expiatory work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
    accepted by God  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
    foretells Comforter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
    the testator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
    indwelling of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
    generosity of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
    earthly--equal to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
    power to impart  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   45
    coronation of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46
    prayers of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
    mystical body of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
    present by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
    visible union of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54
    manifestation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60
    indwelt by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61
    description of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61
    vivifying power of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
    disfigured . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   64
    twofold manifestation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   64
    faith of, ignored  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68
    our justification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   69
    effective service for  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
    example in all things  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
    our pattern  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
    endued by the Spirit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
    possessed by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   77
    holiness essential to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   80
    draws to himself . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   81
    justification in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
    the Holy One . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
    deity of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   91
    image of God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   91
    conformity to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94
    made atonement . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . .   95
    treasure hidden in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  100
    the heart of the church  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  100
    begotten by Holy Ghost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  106
    origin of life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
    nature derived from  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  108
    came as Saviour  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  109
    efficacy of his sacrifice  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  110
    victory through  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  111
    manifested love of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  113
    pattern of God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  114
    imparting life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  117
    inheritance from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118
    official seat of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  130
    bride of, betrayed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  133
    living voice of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  139
    identification with  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  147
    helping us to pray . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  149
    attitude of, described . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  174
    divinity of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
    spirit of, necessary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  179
    threefold work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  188
    died for the sins of the world . . . . . . . . . . .  190
    satisfied God  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  191
    perfected righteousness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  192
    our High Priest  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  193
    resurrection of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  194
    enthronement of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  193
    lifted to heaven . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  196
    continuance of within the veil . . . . . . . . . . .  197
    not seen by the world  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  197
    reflected by the Spirit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  197
    answers all questions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  198
    death of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  199
    judged sin on the cross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  199
    redemptive work of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  200
    administration of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  208
    the first-fruits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  208
  Christ-life: spiritual birth into  . . . . . . . . . .  104
  Christian Church: home of the Spirit . . . . . . . . .   20
  Christian doctrine: undeveloped  . . . . . . . . . . .   46
  Christian life: crisis in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84
    a gradual growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94
    possibilities of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   96
  Christians: good text for  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63
    ignorance of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   73
    privilege of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   93
    belief of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  117
    possessors of the Spirit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  165
    prove veracity of Scripture  . . . . . . . . . . . .  183
    divine naming of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206
  Church: first capital sin of . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
    temple of God  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    image of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    greater riches for . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   48
    history of begun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
    definition of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
    formation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54
    introduction into  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55
    unsanctified, sometimes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
    to be like Jesus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61
    appellation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
    complement of her Lord . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68
    disfigures Christ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   64
    Paraclete abides in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68
    effective service in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
    monograph of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   78
    Christ the heart of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  100
    the temple of God  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  130
    guidance of the Lord for . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132
    is manifold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  137
    dead yet living  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  138
    appointments in State  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  139
    Spirit withdrawn from  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  141
    feature of worship in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  154
    service of, described  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
    fellowship with Head of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
    requirements of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  161,162
    Spirit sent unto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  188
    communications of to the world . . . . . . . . . . .  197
    translation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206
  Comforter: another given . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
    indwelling of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    coming of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
    presence of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
    foretold by Christ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
    reverent subjection of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
    ignorant of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
    Jesus' promise of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99
    witness of the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  143
    sending of the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  147
    ministry of the  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  148
    return of to heaven  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206
    consolation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  211
  Communion: significance of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99
    through Holy Spirit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
  Conscience: definition and work of . . . . . . . . . .  189
    accusing power of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  201
  Conversion: definition of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   78
  Course of redemption: Moberly's divisions  . . . . . .   16
  Cross: plain attractions of  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  158
  Cumming, J. Elder: quotation from  . . . . . . . . . 72, 73
    excerpt from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85, 86
    quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128, 207

  Day of Pentecost: Holy Spirit embodied
          in the church at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
  Death: division of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  109
  Disciple: requirements of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
  Dispensation: mystery and glory of . . . . . . . . . .   25
  Divine love: source of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  112
  Divine ministries: succession of . . . . . . . . . . .   26

  Ephesians: description in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
  Exodus; typical illustration of  . . . . . . . . . . .   58

  Father: Jesus' return to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
  Felix: reference to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  200
  Fuller, Andrew: statement of . . . . . . . . . . . . .  191

  Gaussen's Theopneustia: quotation from . . . . . . . .  164
  Gentiles: door opened to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
  God: omnipresence of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    union of, to humanity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
    indwelling with men  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
    becomes known  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    emanation from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
    witness of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   77
    withholding from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   79
    claims of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  109
    Christ, pattern of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  114
    total surrender to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  116
    action of Spirit of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  122
    manifestation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  124
    all in all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  126
    created all men  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  103
    communion with, imperiled  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  158
  Godet: beautiful words of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84
  Godhead: mysterious unity of . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
    persons of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    co-equal partner in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    earthly ministry of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    distinctly foreshadowed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
    Paraclete a member of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
    mutual converse of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
    our relations to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   67
    executive of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
  God-Jehovah: economy of, incomplete  . . . . . . . . .   26
  God's communion: broken and restored . . . . . . . . .   30
  Great Commission: meagre giving for the  . . . . . . .  158
    record of giving of the  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159
  Gregory Nazianzen: quoted  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   52

  Hare, Julius Charles: extract from . . . . . . . . . .  186
  Harnack, Prof.: statement of . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60
  Heresy: meaning of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  116
  Holiness: explanation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   80
    synonymous name for  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  114
  Holy Ghost: "dies natalis" of  . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    personality of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
    office of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
    work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
    communicates power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
    great work of begun  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54
    statement of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55
    all filled with  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
    baptized in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
    unction of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
    incorporation into body of Christ through  . . . . .   59
    baptism of the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
    unceasing work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
    view of, urged . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68
    possession of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   70
    faith toward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   71
    traits of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   72
    blessings of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   72
    ignorance regarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   73
    Christ begotten by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
    fullness of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
    incidents regarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83, 84
    inheritance in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   85
    the gift of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   92
    crisis brought by a full reception of  . . . . . . .   94
    has been given . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   95
    present office-work of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99
    operation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  108
    hidden life of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  120
    completed in us  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  126
    the one Administrator  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  129
    prerogative of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  130
    insubordination to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  135
    appoints leaders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  136,137
    elders chosen by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  138
    ignoring voice of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  139
    preaching in the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  143
    inspiration of, ignored  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  145
    God's interpreter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  147
    prayer in the  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  150
    office of, magnified . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  152
    unction of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  156
    attempted purchase of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  158
    minute directions of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  161
    action of, supreme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  166
    renewing power of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  169
    breathes within the Bible  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
    position regarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  172
    testimony of Paul to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173
    regeneration by  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  175
    David's words concerning . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182
    disciples, recipients of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  187
    presentation of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  190
    the gift of the  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  193
    sent by the Lord . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  196
    temporal mission of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  205
    administration of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  207
    age-ministry of, terminates  . . . . . . . . . . . .  208
  Holy Spirit: lack of attention to  . . . . . . . . . .   13
    consideration of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    best treatise on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    age-ministry of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    vagueness of doctrine of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    Jesus' presence by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
    temporal mission of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
    dispensation of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
    made partakers of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
    came into the world  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    resides on earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    abides perpetually in church . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    deference paid to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
    indwelling of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    Son revealed by  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    relation of stated by Tophel . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    descent of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
    commended by Christ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
    office of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
    sent down  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
    filled with  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
    a witness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
    "dies natalis" of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
    named by our Lord  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
    subordination to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
    distributes the estate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
    the divine Conveyancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
    communicates power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
    advent of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
    prays with church  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
    history of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55
    union through  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
    duty to receive  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68
    personality of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   72
    ignorance regarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   73
    reception of gift of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   78
    our signet ring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   79
    will be the seal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   80
    interprets himself . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   85
    is the anointing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
    recognition of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   93
    agent for  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99
    power of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
    conveyance of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  105
    the Executor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  109
    subdues sinful nature  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  111
    subjection to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  126
    designation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  129
    guidance of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  131
    administration of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  133
    in church service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  142
    witness of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  144
    supremacy of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  146
    prayer inspired by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  149
    in missions of the church  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159
    acts and speaks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
    directing power of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  176
    sovereign individuality of . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
    inimitableness of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
    authenticates books for us . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
    ground of conviction of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
    an evangel of grace  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  198
    imparts to us  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  198
    church translated by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206
    Person of the Godhead  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  209
    work of, elective  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  209
    a divine agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  210
  Human system: life and death . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63

  Inspiration: significance of . . . . . . . . . . . . .  165
    gospel a stereotyped . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  167
    Scripture given by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  168
    verbal, essential  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  171
    Jesus claims verbal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173
    of the Holy Ghost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173
    of Scripture writers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173,174
  Irving, Edward: beautiful statement of . . . . . . . .  121
    quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  204
  Isaiah: passion-prophecy of  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  192
    reference to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  198

  James: words of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  209
    exhortation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  211
  Jesus: surprising saying of  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    pre-existence of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    agent in creation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    birth of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    sublime word of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    mysterious saying of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    not yet glorified  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    paschal talk of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
    atoning blood of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
    farewell sermon of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43,44
    teaching of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46
    parousia of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
    All in all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   61
    replies of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
    full of the Spirit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82
    spirit of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   91
    significant saying of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  105
    question of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
    scribes' question concerning . . . . . . . . . . . .  165
    words of concerning Spirit . . . . . . . . . . . . .  166
    doctrine of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  169
    claims of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173
    charged with blasphemy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
    limitation of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  187
    prophecy at birth of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
    literal fulfillment of promise of  . . . . . . . . .  194
    strange paradox of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  196
    words of at the cross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  199
    spake literal truth  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  199
    government of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  207
  Jesus Christ: ministry of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13
    time-ministry of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    gives Great Commission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
    dualism of teaching of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  106
  Jews: charge of against Jesus  . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
    denial of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  191
    church gathered from the . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  205
  John: mentioned  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
  Jordan: symbolism of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  104
  Jukes, Andrew: extract from  . . . . . . . . . . . . 68, 69
    excerpt from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107

  Kelly, William: observation of . . . . . . . . . . . 69, 70

  Lee, Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures:
        quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  175,176
  Leper: cleansing of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
  Lord: farewell discourse of  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
    question concerning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    deference paid to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
    glory shines forth from  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
    presentation of sheaf  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
    words of risen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
    named the Holy Ghost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
    words of concerning "Paracletos" . . . . . . . . . .   36
    Paraclete distinct from  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
    speaks concerning Spirit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
    valedictory discourse of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
    return of to glory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   48
    dying of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
    complement of the church . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63
    resurrection of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   64
    advent of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   80
    appropriating to himself . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
    assumed prerogative of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  100
    words of to Nicodemus  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
    antithesis of two natures in . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
    constant words of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  108

    fashioned to image of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  113
    mystical body of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  119
    coming of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  120
    experience of  . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . .  123
    guiding the church . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132
    post-ascension gospel of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132
    ascent of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  134
    calls Saul of Tarsus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  136
    power of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  137
    conditions imposed by  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  138
    voice of heard in church . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  138
    commission to speak for  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  167
    Spirit breathed by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  168
    testimony of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  169
    Apocalyptic words of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
    Abigail's prayer to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
    words of, concerning Comforter . . . . . . . . . . .  187
    messengers sent by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  188
    a sin against the  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  190
    exaltation of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  195
    sent the Holy Ghost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  196
    harvest at return of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  211
  Luther: pointed statement of . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
    wise words of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  172

  Manning, Henry E.: quotation from  . . . . . . . . . .   12
    best treatise from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
  Master: instructions of to disciples . . . . . . . . 36, 37
  Method: that employed in writing . . . . . . . . . . .   14
  Milton: quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  103
  Ministry: of Jesus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
  Moberly: divisions of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
    quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
  Morrison: comment of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47
  Moule, H. C. G.: excerpt from  . . . . . . . . . . . .   95
  Murray, Andrew: quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . .   66

  Neander, Church History: excerpt from  . . . . . . . .  168
  New birth: definition of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
    acquirement of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  102
  New Testament Scriptures:
        authoritative voice of the Lord  . . . . . . . .  167

  Old Testament: words of Peter concerning . . . . . . .  170
    as oracles of God  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
  Olshausen's Commentary: note from  . . . . . . . . 165, 166
  Owen, John: summing up of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82

  Paraclete: sent by Christ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    meaning of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
    attributes of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
    conclusion regarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
    duties of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
    teaching of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46
    difference of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
    realization of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
    question and answer of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
    related to limitation of Jesus . . . . . . . . . . .  187
    certifies to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  193
    with the Father  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  195
    statement concerning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  205
  Parousia: Lord's second coming . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
    introduces the church  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50
  Paschal lamb: typology of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
  Paul: epistles of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41, 42
    words of . . . . . . . . . .  71, 111, 112, 120, 180, 211
    exponent of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   83
    subject of preaching of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  143
    work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  144
    words of, interpreted  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  172
    testimony of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173
    words of, before Felix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  200
    observation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  209
  Pentecost: work inaugurated at . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
    styled "dies natalis"  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    promise fulfilled at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    impossible precedence of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
    typology of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
    predetermined  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
    has come . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
    church began its history at  . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
    story of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55
    body of Christ baptized at . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
    Holy Ghost descended at  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
    foretaste of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   70
    once for all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   72
  Persons of the Trinity: deference of . . . . . . . . .   27
  Peter: question of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
    bold testimony of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32
    deep saying of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  104
    statement of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118
    reference of to Old Testament  . . . . . . . . . . .  171
    talk of, on Pentecost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  194
    defense of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  194
    words of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  198
    inspired saying of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  210
    Prayer: a vital element  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  146
    in the name of Jesus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  147
    high ground regarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  151
    connected with Holy Ghost  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  153
    Preaching: importance of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  143
    of the cross . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  144
    the inspiration of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  145

  Redemption by Incarnation: doctrine of in vogue  . . .   67
  Regeneration: what is it?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
    power of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  102
    examples of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  106
  Resurrection: time fixed for . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
  Romans eighth: deep teachings of . . . . . . . . . . .   22
  Roos: quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46
  Rothe, Dogmatics: excerpt from . . . . . . . . . . . .  178

  Salvation: two sides to  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   67
  Sanctification: continuous . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  121
    instantaneousness of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  125
  Saul of Tarsus: sealed with the Spirit . . . . . . . .  136
  Saviour: lived before incarnation  . . . . . . . . . .   13
    redemptive work of, completed  . . . . . . . . . . .   30
    promise of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
    follow teachings of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
    and a comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
    departure of, conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
  Scriptures: teaching of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
    confounding of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   68
    examined, regarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   70
    given by inspiration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  168
    definition of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  169
    minute study of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  171
    literal inspiration of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  172
    the style of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  175
    divine Author of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
    alleged discrepancies of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182
    veracity of, confirmed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182
    infallibility of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  183
    contrast exhibited in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  200
    harmony of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  211
  Shechinah: resting-place of  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
  Son of God: naming of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
    self-emptying of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
  Sonship: doctrine of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  103
  Spirit; descending on Jesus  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    study of doctrine of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
    indwelling of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
    sending down of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
    teaching of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
    typology of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
    work of, begun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
    history of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35
    best dictionary of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36
    promise of advent of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
    the measure of the Son . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
    signified time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   48
    nature and offices of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
    influence of, manifested . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
    baptistery of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
    baptism of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
    walk in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
    praying in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
    fell on house of Cornelius . . . . . . . . . . . . .   59
    supreme work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60
    the indwelling of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   62
    enduement of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68, 76
    gift subsequent to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   69
    appropriation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   70
    God's gift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   71
    reception of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   71
    traits of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   72
    baptism in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
    Christ waited for  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
    anointing of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
    sealing of the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77, 81
    possession of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79, 80
    great office of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   80
    fullness of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   82
    reception of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   83
    infilling of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84
    supreme place of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
    anointing of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   87
    sanctification in  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89
    of God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   90
    manifestation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   90
    appellations of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   92
    Christian's privilege in . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   93
    illustrations of enduement of  . . . . . . . . . . .   93
    yearning of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   94
    energy of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   95
    communicates to us . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   99
    life by  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  100
    incorporation by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  105
    of holiness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  107
    supremacy of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  111
    effects exclusion of sin . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  112
    behind all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  113
    surrender to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
    of glory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118
    change wrought by  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  119
    working in us  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  121
    perfecting power of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  122
    descent of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  134
    power of, ignored  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  140
    is the breath of God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  141
    dispensation of the  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  146
    doctrine of the  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  148
    deepest work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  149
    ministry of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  150
    strengthening power of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  154
    access by, unto the Father . . . . . . . . . . . . .  154
    method of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  155
    inspirer of worship  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  156
    imitation of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  157
    story of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159
    directing enterprises  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160, 161
    Christians possessors of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  165
    Jesus' words concerning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  166
    authoritative voice of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  168
    intercedes for us  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173
    thoughts regarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  175
    of Christ necessary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  179
    universal diffusion of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  187
    conviction of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  188
    sent unto the church . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  188
    the witness to grace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
    proceeds from God  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  195
    sent to convince the world . . . . . . . . . . . . .  197
    reflects Christ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  197
    co-witness of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  200
    distinctive work of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  206
    elective work of, completed  . . . . . . . . . . . .  211
  Stephen: words of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  180
    error in statement of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182
  Streams of life: two contrasted  . . . . . . . . . . .  104

  Testimonies: of new life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
  Tophel, Pastor: quotation from . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
    excerpt from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   98
    criticism of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  142
  Types: accuracy of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
    foretell accurately  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   89

  Webb, Bishop: extract from . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60
  Word of God: a unique book . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
    infallible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  182