It had been a pleasant time, so pleasant, that as I handed in the books
for the last time, I sighed to think that it was over; that not only
was the task finished, but that the recovery of my fair patient's hand,
from which I had that morning removed the splint, had put an end to the
need of my help.

"What shall we do?" I asked, as we came out into the central hall.  "It
is too early for tea.  Shall we go and look at some of the galleries?"

"Why not?" she answered.  "We might look over some of the things
connected with what we have been doing.  For instance, there is a
relief of Ahkhenaten upstairs in the Third Egyptian Room; we might go
and look at it."

I fell in eagerly with the suggestion, placing myself under her
experienced guidance, and we started by way of the Roman Gallery, past
the long row of extremely commonplace and modern-looking Roman Emperors.

"I don't know," she said, pausing for a moment opposite a bust labelled
"Trajan" (but obviously a portrait of Phil May), "how I am ever even to
thank you for all that you have done, to say nothing of repayment."

"There is no need to do either," I replied.  "I have enjoyed working
with you so I have had my reward.  But still," I added, "if you want to
do me a great kindness, you have it in your power."

"How?"

"In connection with my friend, Doctor Thorndyke.  I told you he was an
enthusiast.  Now he is, for some reason, most keenly interested in
everything relating to your uncle, and I happen to know that, if any
legal proceedings should take place, he would very much like to keep a
friendly eye on the case."

"And what do you want me to do?"

"I want you, if an opportunity should occur for him to give your father
advice or help of any kind, to use your influence with your father in
favor of, rather than in opposition to, his accepting it--always
assuming that you have no real feeling against his doing so."

Miss Bellingham looked at me thoughtfully for a few moments, and then
laughed softly.

"So the great kindness that I am to do you is to let you do me a
further kindness through your friend?"

"No," I protested; "that is where you are mistaken.  It isn't
benevolence on Doctor Thorndyke's part; it's professional enthusiasm."

She smiled sceptically.

"You don't believe in it," I said; "but consider other cases.  Why does
a surgeon get out of bed on a winter's night to do an emergency
operation at a hospital?  He doesn't get paid for it.  Do you think it
is altruism?"

"Yes, of course.  Isn't it?"

"Certainly not.  He does it because it is his job, because it is his
business to fight with disease--and win."

"I don't see much difference," she said.  "It's work done for love
instead of for payment.  However, I will do as you ask if the
opportunity arises; but I shan't suppose that I am repaying your
kindness to me."

"I don't mind so long as you do it," I said, and we walked on for some
time in silence.

"Isn't it odd," she said presently, "how our talk always seems to come
back to my uncle?  Oh, and that reminds me that the things he gave to
the Museum are in the same room as the Ahkhenaten relief.  Would you
like to see them?"

"Of course I should."

"Then we will go and look at them first."  She paused, and then, rather
shyly and with a rising color, she continued: "And I think I should
like to introduce you to a very dear friend of mine--with your
permission, of course."

This last addition she made hastily, seeing, I suppose, that I looked
rather glum at the suggestion.  Inwardly I consigned her friend to the
devil, especially if of the masculine gender; outwardly I expressed my
felicity at making the acquaintance of any person whom she should honor
with her friendship.  Whereat, to my discomfiture, she laughed
enigmatically; a very soft laugh, low-pitched and musical, like the
cooing of a glorified pigeon.

I strolled on by her side, speculating a little anxiously on the coming
introduction.  Was I being conducted to the lair of one of the savants
attached to the establishment? and would he add a superfluous third to
our little party of two, so complete and companionable, _solus cum
sola_, in this populated wilderness?  Above all, would he turn out to
be a young man, and bring my aerial castles tumbling about my ears?
The shy look and the blush with which she had suggested the
introduction were ominous indications, upon which I mused gloomily as
we ascended the stairs and passed through the wide doorway.  I glanced
apprehensively at my companion, and met a quiet, inscrutable smile; and
at that moment she halted opposite a wall-case and faced me.

"This is my friend," she said.  "Let me present you to Artemidorus,
late of the Fayyum.  Oh, don't smile!" she pleaded.  "I am quite
serious.  Have you never heard of pious Catholics who cherish a
devotion to some long-departed saint?  That is my feeling toward
Artemidorus, and if you only knew what comfort he has shed into the
heart of a lonely woman; what a quiet, unobtrusive friend he has been
to me in my solitary, friendless days, always ready with a kindly
greeting on his gentle, thoughtful face, you would like him for that
alone.  And I want you to like him and to share our silent friendship.
Am I very silly, very sentimental?"

A wave of relief swept over me, and the mercury of my emotional
thermometer, which had shrunk almost into the bulb, leaped up to summer
heat.  How charming it was of her and how sweetly intimate, to wish to
share this mystical friendship with me!  And what a pretty conceit it
was, too, and how like this strange, inscrutable maiden, to come here
and hold silent converse with this long-departed Greek.  And the pathos
of it all touched me deeply amidst the joy of this new-born intimacy.

"Are you scornful?" she asked, with a shade of disappointment, as I
made no reply.

"No, indeed I am not," I answered earnestly.  "I want to make you aware
of my sympathy and my appreciation without offending you by seeming to
exaggerate, and I don't know how to express it."

"Oh, never mind about the expression, so long as you feel it.  I
thought you would understand," and she gave me a smile that made me
tingle to my fingertips.

We stood awhile gazing in silence at the mummy--for such, indeed, was
her friend Artemidorus.  But not an ordinary mummy.  Egyptian in form,
it was entirely Greek in feeling; and brightly colored as it was, in
accordance with the racial love of color, the tasteful refinement with
which the decoration of the case was treated made those around look
garish and barbaric.  But the most striking feature was a charming
panel picture which occupied the place of the usual mask.  This
painting was a revelation to me.  Except that it was executed in
tempera instead of oil, it differed in no respect from modern work.
There was nothing archaic or ancient about it.  With its freedom of
handling and its correct rendering of light and shade, it might have
been painted yesterday; indeed, enclosed in an ordinary gilt frame, it
might have passed without remark in an exhibition of modern portraits.

Miss Bellingham observed my admiration and smiled approvingly.

"It is a charming little portrait, isn't it?" she said; "and such a
sweet face too; so thoughtful and human, with just a shade of
melancholy.  But the whole thing is full of charm.  I fell in love with
it the first time I saw it.  And it is so Greek!"

"Yes, it is, in spite of the Egyptian gods and symbols."

"Rather because of them, I think," said she.  "There we have the
typical Greek attitude, the genial, cultivated eclecticism that
appreciated the fitness of even the most alien forms of art.  There is
Anubis standing beside the bier; there are Isis and Nephthys, and there
below Horus and Tahuti.  But we can't suppose Artemidorus worshiped or
believed in those gods.  They are there because they are splendid
decoration and perfectly appropriate in character.  The real feeling of
those who loved the dead man breaks out in the inscription."  She
pointed to a band below the pectoral, where, in gilt capital letters,
was written the two words, "_ARTEMIDORE EYPSYCHI_."


"Yes," I said, "it is very dignified and very human."

"And so sincere and full of real emotion," she added.  "I find it
unspeakably touching.  'O Artemidorus, farewell!'  There is the real
note of human grief, the sorrow of eternal parting.  How much finer it
is than the vulgar boastfulness of the Semitic epitaphs, or our own
miserable, insincere make-believe of the 'Not lost but gone before'
type.  He was gone from them for ever; they would look on his face and
hear his voice no more; they realized that this was their last
farewell.  Oh, there is a world of love and sorrow in those two simple
words!"

For some time neither of us spoke.  The glamour of this touching
memorial of a long-buried grief had stolen over me, and I was content
to stand silent by my beloved companion and revive, with a certain
pensive pleasure, the ghosts of human emotions over which so many
centuries had rolled.  Presently she turned to me with a frank smile.
"You have been weighed in the balance of friendship," she said, "and
not found wanting.  You have the gift of sympathy, even with a woman's
sentimental fancies."

I suspected that a good many men would have developed this precious
quality under the circumstances, but I refrained from saying so.  There
is no use in crying down one's own wares.  I was glad enough to have
earned her good opinion so easily, and when she at length turned away
from the case and passed through into the adjoining room, it was a very
complacent young man who bore her company.

"Here is Ahkhenaten--or Khu-en-aten, as the authorities here render the
hieroglyphics.  She indicated a fragment of a colored relief labeled:
'Portion of a painted stone tablet with a portrait figure of Amen-hotep
IV," and we stopped to look at the frail, effeminate figure of the
great king, with his large cranium, his queer, pointed chin, and the
Aten rays stretching out their weird hands as if caressing him.

"We mustn't stay here if you want to see my uncle's gift, because this
room closes at four to-day."  With this admonition she moved on to the
other end of the room, where she halted before a large floor-case
containing a mummy and a large number of other objects.  A black label
with white lettering set forth the various contents with a brief
explanation as follows:


"Mummy of Sebek-hotep, a scribe of the twenty-second dynasty, together
with the objects found in the tomb.  These include the four Canopic
jars, in which the internal organs were deposited, the Ushabti figures,
tomb provisions and various articles that had belonged to the deceased;
his favorite chair, his head-rest, his ink-palette, inscribed with his
name and the name of the king, Osorkon I, in whose reign he lived, and
other smaller articles.  Presented by John Bellingham, Esq."


"They have put all the objects together in one case," Miss Bellingham
explained, "to show the contents of an ordinary tomb of the better
class.  You see that the dead man was provided with all his ordinary
comforts; provisions, furniture, the ink-palette that he had been
accustomed to use in writing on papyri, and a staff of servants to wait
on him."

"Where are the servants?" I asked.

"The little Ushabti figures," she answered; "they were the attendants
of the dead, you know, his servants in the under-world.  It was a
quaint idea, wasn't it?  But it was all very complete and consistent,
and quite reasonable, too, if one once accepts the belief in the
persistence of the individual apart from the body."

"Yes," I agreed, "and that is the only fair way to judge a religious
system, by taking the main beliefs for granted.  But what a business it
must have been, bringing all these things from Egypt to London."

"It is worth the trouble, though, for it is a fine and instructive
collection.  And the work is all very good of its kind.  You notice
that the Ushabti figures and the heads that form the stoppers of the
Canopic jars are quite finely modeled.  The mummy itself, too, is
rather handsome, though that coat of bitumen on the back doesn't
improve it.  But Sebek-hotep must have been a fine-looking man."

"The mask on the face is a portrait, I suppose?"

"Yes; in fact, it's rather more.  To some extent it is the actual face
of the man himself.  This mummy is enclosed in what is called a
cartonnage, that is a case molded on the figure.  The cartonnage was
formed of a number of layers of linen or papyrus united by glue or
cement, and when the case had been fitted to a mummy it was molded to
the body, so that the general form of the features and limbs was often
apparent.  After the cement was dry the case was covered with a thin
layer of stucco and the face modeled more completely, and then
decorations and inscriptions were painted on.  So that, you see, in a
cartonnage, the body was sealed up like a nut in its shell, unlike the
more ancient forms in which the mummy was merely rolled up and enclosed
in a wooden coffin."

At this moment there smote upon our ears a politely protesting voice
announcing in sing-song tones that it was closing time; and
simultaneously a desire for tea suggested the hospitable milk-shop.
With leisurely dignity that ignored the official who shepherded us
along the galleries, we made our way to the entrance, still immersed in
conversation on matters sepulchral.

It was rather earlier than our usual hour for leaving the Museum and,
moreover, it was our last day--for the present.  Wherefore we lingered
over our tea to an extent that caused the milk-shop lady to view us
with some disfavor, and when at length we started homeward, we took so
many short cuts that six o'clock found us no nearer our destination
than Lincoln's Inn Fields; whither we had journeyed by a slightly
indirect route that traversed (among other places) Russell Square, Red
Lion Square, with the quaint passage of the same name, Bedford Row,
Jockey's Fields, Hand Court, and Great Turnstile.

It was in the last thoroughfare that our attention was attracted by a
flaring poster outside a newsvendor's bearing the startling inscription:

  "MORE MEMENTOES
  OF MURDERED MAN."


Miss Bellingham glanced at the poster and shuddered.

"Horrible, isn't it?" she said.  "Have you read about them?"

"I haven't been noticing the papers the last few days," I replied.

"No, of course you haven't.  You've been slaving at those wretched
notes.  We don't very often see the papers, at least we don't take them
in, but Miss Oman has kept us supplied during the last day or two.  She
is a perfect little ghoul; she delights in horrors of every kind, and
the more horrible the better."

"But," I asked, "what is it they have found?"

"Oh, they are the remains of some poor creature who seems to have been
murdered and cut into pieces.  It is dreadful.  It made me shudder to
read of it, for I couldn't help thinking of poor Uncle John, and, as
for my father, he was really quite upset."

"Are these the bones that were found in a watercress-bed at Sidcup?"

"Yes, but they have found several more.  The police have been most
energetic.  They seem to have been making a systematic search, and the
result has been that they have discovered several portions of the body,
scattered about in very widely separated places--Sidcup, Lee, St. Mary
Cray; and yesterday it was reported that an arm had been found in one
of the ponds called 'the Cuckoo Pits,' close to our old home."

"What! in Essex?" I exclaimed.

"Yes, in Epping Forest, quite near Woodford.  Isn't it dreadful to
think of it?  They were probably hidden when we were living there.  I
think it was that that horrified my father so much.  When he read it he
was so upset that he gathered up the whole bundle of newspapers and
tossed them out of the window; and they blew over the wall, and poor
Miss Oman had to rush and pursue them up the court."

"Do you think he suspects that these remains may be those of your
uncle?"

"I think so, though he has said nothing to that effect and, of course,
I have not made any suggestion to him.  We always preserve the fiction
between ourselves of believing that Uncle John is still alive."

"But you don't think he is, do you?"

"No, I'm afraid I don't; and I feel pretty sure that my father doesn't
think so either, but he doesn't like to admit it to me."

"Do you happen to remember what bones have been found?"

"No, I don't.  I know that an arm was found in the Cuckoo Pits, and I
think a thigh-bone was dredged up out of a pond near St. Mary Cray.
But Miss Oman will be able to tell you all about it, if you are
interested.  She will be delighted to meet a kindred spirit," Miss
Bellingham added, with a smile.

"I don't know that I claim spiritual kinship with a ghoul," said I;
"especially such a very sharp-tempered ghoul."

"Oh, don't disparage her, Doctor Berkeley!" Miss Bellingham pleaded.
"She isn't really bad-tempered; only a little prickly on the surface.
I oughtn't to have called her a ghoul; she is just the sweetest, most
affectionate, most unselfish little angelic human hedgehog that you
could find if you traveled the wide world through.  Do you know that
she has been working her fingers to the bone making an old dress of
mine presentable because she is so anxious that I shall look nice at
your little supper party."

"You are sure to do that, in any case," I said; "but I withdraw my
remark as to her temper unreservedly.  And I really didn't mean it, you
know; I have always liked the little lady."

"That's right; and now won't you come in and have a few minutes' chat
with my father?  We are quite early in spite of the short cuts."

I accepted readily, and the more so inasmuch as I wanted a few words
with Miss Oman on the subject of catering and did not want to discuss
it before my friends.  Accordingly I went in and gossiped with Mr.
Bellingham, chiefly about the work we had done at the Museum, until it
was time for me to return to the surgery.

Having taken my leave, I walked down the stairs with reflective
slowness and as much creaking of my boots as I could manage; with the
result, hopefully anticipated, that as I approached the door of Miss
Oman's room it opened and the lady's head protruded.

"I'd change my cobbler if I were you," she said.

I thought of the "angelic human hedgehog," and nearly sniggered in her
face.

"I am sure you would, Miss Oman, instantly; though, mind you, the poor
fellow can't help his looks."

"You are a very flippant young man," she said severely.  Whereat I
grinned, and she regarded me silently with a baleful glare.  Suddenly I
remembered my mission and became serious and sober.

"Miss Oman," I said.  "I very much want to take your advice on a matter
of some importance--to me, at least."  (That ought to fetch her, I
thought.  The "advice fly"--strangely neglected by Izaak Walton--is
guaranteed to kill in any weather.)  And it did fetch her.  She rose in
a flash and gorged it, cock's feathers, worsted body and all.

"What is it about?" she asked eagerly.  "But don't stand out there
where everybody can hear but me.  Come in and sit down."

Now I didn't want to discuss the matter here, and, besides, there was
not time.  I therefore assumed an air of mystery.

"I can't, Miss Oman.  I'm due at the surgery now.  But if you should be
passing and should have a few minutes to spare, I should be greatly
obliged if you would look in.  I really don't quite know how to act."

"No, I expect not.  Men very seldom do.  But you're better than most,
for you know when you are in difficulties and have the sense to consult
a woman.  But what is it about?  Perhaps I might be thinking it over."

"Well, you know," I began evasively, "it's a simple matter, but I can't
very well--no, by Jove!" I added, looking at my watch, "I must run, or
I shall keep the multitude waiting."  And with this I bustled away,
leaving her literally dancing with curiosity.




CHAPTER IX

THE SPHINX OF LINCOLN'S INN

At the age of twenty-six one cannot claim to have attained to the
position of a person of experience.  Nevertheless, the knowledge of
human nature accumulated in that brief period sufficed to make me feel
confident that, at some time during the evening, I should receive a
visit from Miss Oman.  And circumstances justified my confidence; for
the clock yet stood at two minutes to seven when a premonitory tap at
the surgery door heralded her arrival.

"I happened to be passing," she explained, and I forbore to smile at
the coincidence, "so I thought I might as well drop in and hear what
you wanted to ask me about."

She seated herself in the patients' chair and laying a bundle of
newspapers on the table, glared at me expectantly.

"Thank you, Miss Oman," said I.  "It is very good of you to look in on
me.  I am ashamed to give you all this trouble about such a trifling
matter."

She rapped her knuckles impatiently on the table.

"Never mind about the trouble," she exclaimed tartly.
"What--is--it--that--you--want--to--_ask_--me about?"

I stated my difficulties in respect of the supper-party, and, as I
proceeded, an expression of disgust and disappointment spread over her
countenance.

"I don't see why you need have been so mysterious about it," she said
glumly.

"I didn't mean to be mysterious; I was only anxious not to make a mess
of the affair.  It's all very fine to assume a lofty scorn of the
pleasures of the table, but there is great virtue in a really good
feed, especially when low-living and high-thinking have been the order
of the day."

"Coarsely put," said Miss Oman, "but perfectly true."

"Very well.  Now, if I leave the management to Mrs. Gummer, she will
probably provide a tepid Irish stew with flakes of congealed fat on it,
and a plastic suet-pudding or something of that kind, and turn the
house upside down in getting it ready.  So I thought of having a cold
spread and getting the things from outside.  But I don't want it to
look as if I had been making enormous preparations."

"They won't think the things came down from heaven," said Miss Oman.

"No, I suppose they won't.  But you know what I mean.  Now, where do
you advise me to go for the raw materials of conviviality?"

Miss Oman reflected.  "You had better let me do your shopping and
manage the whole business," was her final verdict.

This was precisely what I wanted, and I accepted thankfully, regardless
of the feelings of Mrs. Gummer.  I handed her two pounds, and, after
some protests at my extravagance, she bestowed them in her purse; a
process that occupied time, since that receptacle, besides being a sort
of miniature Record Office of frayed and time-stained bills, already
bulged with a lading of draper's samples, ends of tape, a card of linen
buttons, another of hooks and eyes, a lump of beeswax, a rat-eaten
stump of leadpencil, and other trifles that I have forgotten.  As she
closed the purse at the imminent risk of wrenching off its fastenings
she looked at me severely and pursed her lips.

"You're a very plausible young man," she remarked.

"What makes you say that?" I asked.

"Philandering about museums," she continued, "with handsome young
ladies on the pretense of work.  Work, indeed!  Oh, I heard her telling
her father about it.  She thinks you were perfectly enthralled by the
mummies and dried cats and chunks of stone and all the other trash.
She doesn't know what humbugs men are."

"Really, Miss Oman," I began.

"Oh, don't talk to me!" she snapped.  "I can see it all.  You can't
impose upon me.  I can see you staring into those glass cases, egging
her on to talk and listening open-mouthed and bulging-eyed and sitting
at her feet--now, didn't you?"

"I don't know about sitting at her feet," I said, "though it might
easily have come to that with those infernal slippery floors; but I had
a very jolly time, and I mean to go again if I can.  Miss Bellingham is
the cleverest and most accomplished woman I have ever spoken to."

This was a poser for Miss Oman, whose admiration and loyalty, I knew,
were only equaled by my own.  She would have liked to contradict me,
but the thing was impossible.  To cover her defeat she snatched up the
bundle of newspapers and began to open them out.

"What sort of stuff is 'hibernation'?" she demanded suddenly.

"Hibernation!" I exclaimed.

"Yes.  They found a patch of it on a bone that was discovered in a pond
at St. Mary Cray, and a similar patch on one that was found at some
other place in Essex.  Now, I want to know what 'hibernation' is."

"You must mean 'eburnation,'" I said, after a moment's reflection.

"The newspapers say 'hibernation,' and I suppose they know what they
are talking about.  If you don't know what it is, don't be ashamed to
say so."

"Well, then, I don't."

"In that case you had better read the papers and find out," she said, a
little illogically.  And then: "Are you fond of murders?  I am,
awfully."

"What a shocking little ghoul you must be!" I exclaimed.

She stuck out her chin at me.  "I'll trouble you," she said, "to be a
little more respectful in your language.  Do you realize that I am old
enough to be your mother?"

"Impossible!" I ejaculated.

"Fact," said Miss Oman.

"Well, anyhow," said I, "age is not the only qualification.  And
besides, you are too late for the billet.  The vacancy's filled."

Miss Oman slapped the papers down on the table and rose abruptly.

"You had better read the papers and see if you can learn a little
sense," she said severely as she turned to go.  "Oh, and don't forget
the finger!" she added eagerly.  "That is really thrilling."

"The finger?" I repeated.

"Yes.  They found a hand with one missing.  The police think it is an
important clue.  I don't know what they mean; but you read the account
and tell me what you think."

With this parting injunction she bustled out through the surgery, and I
followed to bid her a ceremonious adieu on the doorstep.  I watched her
little figure tripping with quick, bird-like steps down Fetter Lane,
and was about to turn back into the surgery when my attention was
attracted by the evolutions of an elderly gentleman on the opposite
side of the street.  He was a somewhat peculiar-looking man, tall,
gaunt, and bony, and the way in which he carried his head suggested to
the medical mind a pronounced degree of near sight and a pair of "deep"
spectacle glasses.  Suddenly he espied me and crossed the road with his
chin thrust forward and a pair of keen blue eyes directed at me through
the centers of his spectacles.

"I wonder if you can and will help me," said he, with a courteous
salute.  "I wish to call on an acquaintance, and I have forgotten his
address.  It is in some court, but the name of that court has escaped
me for the moment.  My friend's name is Bellingham.  I suppose you
don't chance to know it?  Doctors know a great many people, as a rule."

"Do you mean Mr. Godfrey Bellingham?"

"Ah!  Then you do know him.  I have not consulted the oracle in vain.
He is a patient of yours, no doubt?"

"A patient and a personal friend.  His address is Forty-nine Nevill's
Court."

"Thank you, thank you.  Oh, and as you are a friend, perhaps you can
inform me as to the customs of the household.  I am not expected, and I
do not wish to make an untimely visit.  What are Mr. Bellingham's
habits as to his evening meal?  Would this be a convenient time to
call?"

"I generally make my evening visits a little later than this--say about
half-past eight; they have finished their meal by then."

"Ah!  Half-past eight, then?  Then I suppose I had better take a walk
until that time.  I don't want to disturb them."

"Would you care to come in and smoke a cigar until it is time to make
your call?  If you would, I could walk over with you and show you the
house."

"That is very kind of you," said my new acquaintance, with an
inquisitive glance at me through his spectacles.  "I think I should
like to sit down.  It's a dull affair, mooning about the streets, and
there isn't time to go back to my chambers--in Lincoln's Inn."

"I wonder," said I, as I ushered him into the room lately vacated by
Miss Oman, "if you happen to be Mr. Jellicoe."

He turned his spectacles full on me with a keen, suspicious glance.
"What makes you think I am Mr. Jellicoe?" he asked.

"Oh, only that you live in Lincoln's Inn."

"Ha!  I see.  I live in Lincoln's Inn; Mr. Jellicoe lives in Lincoln's
Inn; therefore I am Mr. Jellicoe.  Ha! ha!  Bad logic, but a correct
conclusion.  Yes, I am Mr. Jellicoe.  What do you know about me?"

"Mighty little, excepting that you were the late John Bellingham's man
of business."

"The '_late_ John Bellingham,' hey!  How do you know he is the late
John Bellingham?"

"As a matter of fact, I don't; only I rather understood that that was
your own belief."

"You understood!  Now from whom did you 'understand' that?  From
Godfrey Bellingham?  H'm!  And how did he know what I believe?  I never
told him.  It is a very unsafe thing, my dear sir, to expound another
man's beliefs."

"Then you think that John Bellingham is alive?"

"Do I?  Who said so?  I did not, you know."

"But he must be either dead or alive."

"There," said Mr. Jellicoe, "I am entirely with you.  You have stated
an undeniable truth."

"It is not a very illuminating one, however," I replied, laughing.

"Undeniable truths often are not," he retorted.  "They are apt to be
extremely general.  In fact, I would affirm that the certainty of the
truth of a given proposition is directly proportional to its
generality."

"I suppose that is so," said I.

"Undoubtedly.  Take an instance from your own profession.  Given a
million normal human beings under twenty, and you can say with
certainty that a majority of them will die before reaching a certain
age, that they will die in certain circumstances and of certain
diseases.  Then take a single unit from that million, and what can you
predict concerning him?  Nothing.  He may die to-morrow; he may live to
be a couple of hundred.  He may die of a cold in the head or a cut
finger, or from falling off the cross of St. Paul's.  In a particular
case you can predict nothing."

"That is perfectly true," said I.  And then realizing that I had been
led away from the topic of John Bellingham, I ventured to return to it.

"That was a very mysterious affair--the disappearance of John
Bellingham, I mean."

"Why mysterious?" asked Mr. Jellicoe.  "Men disappear from time to
time, and when they reappear, the explanations that they give (when
they give any) seem more or less adequate."

"But the circumstances were surely rather mysterious."

"What circumstances?" asked Mr. Jellicoe.

"I mean the way in which he vanished from Mr. Hurst's house."

"In what way did he vanish from it?"

"Well, of course, I don't know."

"Precisely.  Neither do I.  Therefore I can't say whether that way was
a mysterious one or not."

"It is not even certain that he did leave it," I remarked, rather
recklessly.

"Exactly," said Mr. Jellicoe.  "And if he did not, he is there still.
And if he is there still, he has not disappeared--in the sense
understood.  And if he has not disappeared, there is no mystery."

I laughed heartily, but Mr. Jellicoe preserved a wooden solemnity and
continued to examine me through his spectacles (which I, in my turn,
inspected and estimated at about minus five dioptres).  There was
something highly diverting about this grim lawyer, with his dry
contentiousness and almost farcical caution.  His ostentatious reserve
encouraged me to ply him with fresh questions, the more indiscreet the
better.

"I suppose," said I, "that, under these circumstances, you would hardly
favor Mr. Hurst's proposal to apply for permission to presume death?"

"Under what circumstances?" he inquired.

"I was referring to the doubt you have expressed as to whether John
Bellingham is, after all, really dead."

"My dear sir," said he, "I fail to see your point.  If it were certain
that the man was alive, it would be impossible to presume that he was
dead; and if it were certain that he was dead, presumption of death
would still be impossible.  You do not presume a certainty.  The
uncertainty is of the essence of the transaction."

"But," I persisted, "if you really believe that he may be alive, I
should hardly have thought that you would take the responsibility of
presuming his death and dispersing his property."

"I don't," said Mr. Jellicoe.  "I take no responsibility.  I act in
accordance with the decision of the Court and have no choice in the
matter."

"But the Court may decide that he is dead and he may nevertheless be
alive."

"Not at all.  If the Court decides that he is presumably dead, then he
is presumably dead.  As a mere irrelevant, physical circumstance he
may, it is true, be alive.  But legally speaking, and for testamentary
purposes, he is dead.  You fail to perceive the distinction, no doubt?"

"I am afraid I do," I admitted.

"Yes; the members of your profession usually do.  That is what makes
them such bad witnesses in a court of law.  The scientific outlook is
radically different from the legal.  The man of science relies on his
own knowledge and observation and judgment, and disregards testimony.
A man comes to you and tells you he is blind in one eye.  Do you accept
his statement?  Not in the least.  You proceed to test his eyesight
with some infernal apparatus of colored glasses, and you find that he
can see perfectly well with both eyes.  Then you decide that he is not
blind in one eye; that is to say, you reject his testimony in favor of
facts of your own ascertaining."

"But surely that is the rational method of coming to a conclusion?"

"In science, no doubt.  Not in law.  A court of law must decide
according to the evidence which is before it; and that evidence is of
the nature of sworn testimony.  If a witness is prepared to swear that
black is white and no evidence to the contrary is offered, the evidence
before the Court is that black is white, and the Court must decide
accordingly.  The judge and the jury may think otherwise--they may even
have private knowledge to the contrary--but they have to decide
according to the evidence."

"Do you mean to say that a judge would be justified in giving a
decision which he knew to be contrary to the facts?  Or that he might
sentence a man whom he knew to be innocent?"

"Certainly.  It has been done.  There is a case of a judge who
sentenced a man to death and allowed the execution to take place,
notwithstanding that he--the judge--had actually seen the murder
committed by another man.  But that was carrying correctness of
procedure to the verge of pedantry."

"It was, with a vengeance," I agreed.  "But to return to the case of
John Bellingham.  Supposing that after the Court has decided that he is
dead he should return alive?  What then?"

"Ah!  It would then be his turn to make an application, and the Court,
having fresh evidence laid before it, would probably decide that he was
alive."

"And meantime his property would have been dispersed?"

"Probably.  But you will observe that the presumption of death would
have arisen out of his own proceedings.  If a man acts in such a way as
to create a belief that he is dead, he must put up with the
consequences."

"Yes, that is reasonable enough," said I.  And then, after a pause, I
asked: "Is there any immediate likelihood of proceedings of the kind
being commenced?"

"I understood from what you said just now that Mr. Hurst was
contemplating some action of the kind.  No doubt you had your
information from a reliable quarter."  This answer Mr. Jellicoe
delivered without moving a muscle, regarding me with the fixity of a
spectacled figurehead.

I smiled feebly.  The operation of pumping Mr. Jellicoe was rather like
the sport of boxing with a porcupine, being chiefly remarkable as a
demonstration of the power of passive resistance.  I determined,
however, to make one more effort, rather, I think, for the pleasure of
witnessing his defensive maneuvers than with the expectation of getting
anything out of him.  I accordingly "opened out" on the subject of the
"remains."

"Have you been following these remarkable discoveries of human bones
that have been appearing in the papers?" I asked.

He looked at me stonily for some moments, and then replied:

"Human bones are rather more within your province than mine, but, now
that you mention it, I think I recall having read of some such
discoveries.  They were disconnected bones, I believe."

"Yes; evidently parts of a dismembered body."

"So I should suppose.  No, I have not followed the accounts.  As we get
on in life our interests tend to settle into grooves, and my groove is
chiefly connected with conveyancing.  These discoveries would be of
more interest to a criminal lawyer."

"I thought you might, perhaps, have connected them with the
disappearance of your client?"

"Why should I?  What could be the nature of the connection?"

"Well," I said, "these are the bones of a man----"

"Yes; and my client was a man with bones.  That is a connection,
certainly, though not a very specific or distinctive one.  But perhaps
you had something more particular in your mind?"

"I had," I replied.  "The fact that some of the bones were actually
found on land belonging to your client seemed to me rather significant."

"Did it, indeed?" said Mr. Jellicoe.  He reflected for a few moments,
gazing steadily at me the while, and then continued: "In that I am
unable to follow you.  It would have seemed to me that the finding of
human remains upon a certain piece of land might conceivably throw a
_prima facie_ suspicion upon the owner or occupant of the land as being
the person who deposited them.  But the case that you suggest is the
one case in which this would be impossible.  A man cannot deposit his
own dismembered remains."

"No, of course not.  I was not suggesting that he deposited them
himself, but merely that the fact of their being deposited on his land,
in a way, connected these remains with him."

"Again," said Mr. Jellicoe, "I fail to follow you, unless you are
suggesting that it is customary for murderers who mutilate bodies to be
punctilious in depositing the dismembered remains upon land belonging
to their victims.  In which case I am skeptical as to your facts.  I am
not aware of the existence of any such custom.  Moreover, it appears
that only a portion of the body was deposited on Mr. Bellingham's land,
the remaining portions having been scattered broadcast over a wide
area.  How does that agree with your suggestion?"

"It doesn't, of course," I admitted.  "But there is another fact that I
think you will admit to be more significant.  The first remains that
were discovered were found at Sidcup.  Now, Sidcup is close to Eltham;
and Eltham is the place where Mr. Bellingham was last seen alive."

"And what is the significance of this?  Why do you connect the remains
with one locality rather than the various other localities in which
other portions of the body were found?"

"Well," I replied, rather graveled by this very pertinent question,
"the appearances seem to suggest that the person who deposited these
remains started from the neighborhood of Eltham, where the missing man
was last seen."

Mr. Jellicoe shook his head.  "You appear," said he, "to be confusing
the order of deposition with the order of discovery.  What evidence is
there that the remains found at Sidcup were deposited before those
found elsewhere?"

"I don't know that there is any," I admitted.

"Then," said he, "I don't see how you support your suggestion that the
person started from the neighborhood of Eltham."

On consideration, I had to admit that I had nothing to offer in support
of my theory; and having thus shot my last arrow in this very unequal
contest, I thought it time to change the subject.

"I called in at the British Museum the other day," said I, "and had a
look at Mr. Bellingham's last gift to the nation.  The things are very
well shown in that central case."

"Yes.  I was very pleased with the position they have given to the
exhibit, and so would my poor old friend have been.  I wished, as I
looked at the case, that he could have seen it.  But perhaps he may,
after all."

"I am sure I hope he will," said I, with more sincerity, perhaps, than
the lawyer gave me credit for.  For the return of John Bellingham would
most effectually have cut the Gordian knot of my friend Godfrey's
difficulties.  "You are a good deal interested in Egyptology yourself,
aren't you?" I added.

"Greatly interested," replied Mr. Jellicoe, with more animation than I
had thought possible in his wooden face.  "It is a fascinating subject,
the study of this venerable civilization, extending back to the
childhood of the human race, preserved for ever for our instruction in
its own unchanging monuments like a fly in a block of amber.
Everything connected with Egypt is full of an impressive solemnity.  A
feeling of permanence, of stability, defying time and change, pervades
it.  The place, the people, and the monuments alike breathe of
eternity."

I was mightily surprised at this rhetorical outburst on the part of
this dry, taciturn lawyer.  But I liked him the better for the touch of
enthusiasm that made him human, and determined to keep him astride of
his hobby.

"Yet," said I, "the people must have changed in the course of
centuries."

"Yes, that is so.  The people who fought against Cambyses were not the
race who marched into Egypt five thousand years before--the dynastic
people whose portraits we see on the early monuments.  In those fifty
centuries the blood of Hyksos and Syrians and Ethiopians and Hittites,
and who can say how many more races, must have mingled with that of the
old Egyptians.  But still the national life went on without a break;
the old culture leavened the new peoples, and the immigrant strangers
ended by becoming Egyptians.  It is a wonderful phenomenon.  Looking
back on it from our own time, it seems more like a geological period
than the life history of a single nation.  Are you at all interested in
the subject?"

"Yes, decidedly, though I am completely ignorant of it.  The fact is
that my interest is of quite recent growth.  It is only of late that I
have been sensible of the glamor of things Egyptian."

"Since you made Miss Bellingham's acquaintance, perhaps?" suggested Mr.
Jellicoe, himself as unchanging in aspect as an Egyptian effigy.

I suppose I must have reddened--I certainly resented the remark--for he
continued in the same even tone: "I made the suggestion because I know
that she takes an intelligent interest in the subject and is, in fact,
quite well informed on it."

"Yes; she seems to know a great deal about the antiquities of Egypt,
and I may as well admit that your surmise was correct.  It was she who
showed me her uncle's collection."

"So I had supposed," said Mr. Jellicoe.  "And a very instructive
collection it is, in a popular sense; very suitable for exhibition in a
public museum, though there is nothing in it of unusual interest to the
expert.  The tomb furniture is excellent of its kind and the cartonnage
case of the mummy is well made and rather finely decorated."

"Yes, I thought it quite handsome.  But can you explain to me why,
after taking all that trouble to decorate it, they should have
disfigured it with those great smears of bitumen?"

"Ah!" said Mr. Jellicoe, "that is quite an interesting question.  It is
not unusual to find mummy cases smeared with bitumen; there is a mummy
of a priestess in the next gallery which is completely coated with
bitumen except the gilded face.  Now, this bitumen was put on for a
purpose--for the purpose of obliterating the inscriptions and thus
concealing the identity of the deceased from the robbers and
desecrators of tombs.  And there is the oddity of this mummy of
Sebek-hotep.  Evidently there was an intention of obliterating the
inscriptions.  The whole of the back is covered thickly with bitumen,
and so are the feet.  Then the workers seem to have changed their minds
and left the inscriptions and decoration untouched.  Why they intended
to cover it, and why, having commenced, they left it partially covered
only, is a mystery.  The mummy was found in its original tomb and quite
undisturbed, so far as tomb-robbers are concerned.  Poor Bellingham was
greatly puzzled as to what the explanation could be."

"Speaking of bitumen," said I, "reminds me of a question that has
occurred to me.  You know that this substance has been used a good deal
by modern painters and that it has a very dangerous peculiarity; I mean
its tendency to liquefy, without any obvious reason, long after it has
dried."

"Yes, I know.  Isn't there some story about a picture of Reynolds's in
which bitumen had been used?  A portrait of a lady, I think.  The
bitumen softened, and one of the lady's eyes slipped down on to her
cheek; and they had to hang the portrait upside down and keep it warm
until the eye slipped back again into its place.  But what was your
question?"

"I was wondering whether the bitumen used by the Egyptian artists has
ever been known to soften after this great lapse of time."

"Yes, I think it has.  I have heard of instances in which the bitumen
coatings have softened under certain circumstances and become quite
'tacky.'  But, bless my soul! here am I gossiping with you and wasting
your time, and it is nearly a quarter to nine!"

My guest rose hastily, and I, with many apologies for having detained
him, proceeded to fulfil my promise to guide him to his destination.
As we sallied forth together the glamour of Egypt faded by degrees, and
when he shook my hand stiffly at the gate of the Bellinghams' house,
all his vivacity and enthusiasm had vanished, leaving the taciturn
lawyer, dry, uncommunicative, and not a little suspicious.




CHAPTER X

THE NEW ALLIANCE

The "Great Lexicographer"--tutelary deity of my adopted habitat--has
handed down to shuddering posterity a definition of the act of eating
which might have been framed by a dyspeptic ghoul.  "Eat: to devour
with the mouth."  It is a shocking view to take of so genial a
function: cynical, indelicate, and finally unforgivable by reason of
its very accuracy.  For, after all, that is what eating amounts to, if
one must needs express it with such crude brutality.  But if "the
ingestion of alimentary substances"--to ring a modern change upon the
older formula--is in itself a process material even unto carnality, it
is undeniable that it forms a highly agreeable accompaniment to more
psychic manifestations.

And so, as the lamplight, reinforced by accessory candles, falls on the
little table in the first-floor room looking on Fetter Lane--only now
the curtains are drawn--the conversation is not the less friendly and
bright for a running accompaniment executed with knives and forks, for
clink of goblet, and jovial gurgle of wine-flask.  On the contrary, to
one of us, at least--to wit, Godfrey Bellingham--the occasion is one of
uncommon festivity, and his boyish enjoyment of the simple feast makes
pathetic suggestions of hard times, faced uncomplainingly, but keenly
felt nevertheless.

The talk flitted from topic to topic, mainly concerning itself with
matters artistic, and never for one moment approaching the critical
subject of John Bellingham's will.  From the stepped pyramid of Sakkara
with its encaustic tiles to medieval church floors; from Elizabethan
woodwork to Mycenean pottery, and thence to the industrial arts of the
Stone Age and the civilization of the Aztecs.  I began to suspect that
my two legal friends were so carried away by the interest of the
conversation that they had forgotten the secret purpose of the meeting,
for the dessert had been placed on the table (by Mrs. Gummer with the
manner of a bereaved dependent dispensing funeral bakemeats), and still
no reference had been made to the "case."  But it seemed that Thorndyke
was but playing a waiting game; was only allowing the intimacy to ripen
while he watched for the opportunity.  And that opportunity came, even
as Mrs. Gummer vanished spectrally with a tray of plates and glasses.

"So you had a visitor last night, Doctor," said Mr. Bellingham.  "I
mean my friend Jellicoe.  He told us he had seen you, and mighty
curious he was about you.  I have never known Jellicoe to be so
inquisitive before.  What did you think of him?"

"A quaint old cock.  I found him highly amusing.  We entertained one
another for quite a long time with cross-questions and crooked answers;
I affecting eager curiosity, he replying with a defensive attitude of
universal ignorance.  It was a most diverting encounter."

"He needn't have been so close," Miss Bellingham remarked, "seeing that
all the world will be regaled with our affairs before long."

"They are proposing to take the case into Court, then?" said Thorndyke.

"Yes," said Mr. Bellingham.  "Jellicoe came to tell me that my cousin,
Hurst, has instructed his solicitors to make the application and to
invite me to join him.  Actually he came to deliver an ultimatum from
Hurst--but I mustn't disturb the harmony of this festive gathering with
litigious discords."

"Now, why mustn't you?" asked Thorndyke.  "Why is a subject in which we
are all keenly interested to be taboo?  You don't mind telling us about
it, do you?"

"No, of course not.  But what do you think of a man who button-holes a
doctor at a dinner-party to retail a list of ailments?"

"It depends on what his ailments are," replied Thorndyke.  "If he is a
chronic dyspeptic and wishes to expound the virtues of Doctor
Snaffler's Purple Pills for Pimply People, he is merely a bore.  But if
he chances to suffer from some rare and choice disease such as
Trypanosomiasis or Acromegaly, the doctor will be delighted to listen."

"Then are we to understand," Miss Bellingham asked, "that we are rare
and choice products, in a legal sense?"

"Undoubtedly," replied Thorndyke.  "The case of John Bellingham is, in
many respects, unique.  It will be followed with the deepest interest
by the profession at large, and especially by medical jurists."

"How gratifying that should be to us!" said Miss Bellingham.  "We may
even attain undying fame in textbooks and treatises; and yet we are not
so very much puffed up with our importance."

"No," said her father; "we could do without the fame quite well, and
so, I think, could Hurst.  Did Berkeley tell you of the proposal that
he made?"

"Yes," said Thorndyke; "and I gather from what you say that he has
repeated it."

"Yes.  He sent Jellicoe to give me another chance, and I was tempted to
take it; but my daughter was strongly against any compromise, and
probably she is right.  At any rate, she is more concerned than I am."

"What view did Mr. Jellicoe take?" Thorndyke asked.

"Oh, he was very cautious and reserved, but he didn't disguise his
feeling that I should be wise to take a certainty in lieu of a very
problematical fortune.  He would certainly like me to agree, for he
naturally wishes to get the affair settled and pocket his legacy."

"And have you definitely refused?"

"Yes; quite definitely.  So Hurst will apply for permission to presume
death and prove the will, and Jellicoe will support him; he says he has
no choice."

"And you?"

"I suppose I shall oppose the application, though I don't quite know on
what grounds."

"Before you take definite steps," said Thorndyke, "you ought to give
the matter very careful consideration.  I take it that you have very
little doubt that your brother is dead.  And if he is dead, any benefit
that you may receive under the will must be conditional on the previous
presumption or proof of death.  But perhaps you have taken advice?"

"No, I have not.  As our friend the Doctor has probably told you, my
means--or rather, the lack of them--do not admit of my getting
professional advice.  Hence my delicacy about discussing the case with
you."

"Then do you propose to conduct your case in person?"

"Yes; if it is necessary for me to appear in Court, as I suppose it
will be, if I oppose the application."

Thorndyke reflected for a few moments and then said gravely:

"You had much better not appear in person to conduct your case, Mr.
Bellingham, for several reasons.  To begin with, Mr. Hurst is sure to
be represented by a capable counsel, and you will find yourself quite
unable to meet the sudden exigencies of a contest in Court.  You will
be out-maneuvered.  Then there is the judge to be considered."

"But surely one can rely on the judge dealing fairly with a man who is
unable to afford a solicitor and counsel?"

"Undoubtedly, as a rule, a judge will give an unrepresented litigant
every assistance and consideration.  English judges in general are
high-minded men with a deep sense of their great responsibilities.  But
you cannot afford to take any chances.  You must consider the
exceptions.  A judge has been a counsel, and he may carry to the bench
some of the professional prejudices of the bar.  Indeed, if you
consider the absurd license permitted to counsel in their treatment of
witnesses, and the hostile attitude adopted by some judges toward
medical and other scientific men who have to give their evidence, you
will see that the judicial mind is not always quite as judicial as one
would wish, especially when the privileges and immunities of the
profession are concerned.  Now, your appearance in person to conduct
your case must, unavoidably, cause some inconvenience to the Court.
Your ignorance of procedure and legal details must occasion some delay;
and if the judge should happen to be an irritable man he might resent
the inconvenience and delay.  I don't say that would affect his
decision--I don't think it would--but I am sure it would be wise to
avoid giving offense to the judge.  And, above all, it is most
desirable to be able to detect and reply to any maneuvers on the part
of the opposing counsel, which you certainly would not be able to do."

"This is excellent advice, Doctor Thorndyke," said Bellingham, with a
grim smile; "but I'm afraid I shall have to take my chance."

"Not necessarily," said Thorndyke.  "I am going to make a little
proposal, which I will ask you to consider without prejudice as a
mutual accommodation.  You see, your case is one of exceptional
interest--it will become a textbook case, as Miss Bellingham
prophesied; and, since it lies within my specialty, it will be
necessary for me to follow it in the closest detail.  Now, it would be
much more satisfactory to me to study it from within than from without,
to say nothing of the credit which would accrue to me if I should be
able to conduct it to a successful issue.  I am therefore going to ask
you to put your case in my hands and let me see what can be done with
it.  I know this is an unusual course for a professional man to take,
but I think it is not improper under the circumstances."

Mr. Bellingham pondered in silence for a few moments, and then, after a
glance at his daughter, began rather hesitatingly: "It's very generous
of you, Doctor Thorndyke----"

"Pardon me," interrupted Thorndyke, "it is not.  My motives, as I have
explained, are purely egoistic."

Mr. Bellingham laughed uneasily and again glanced at his daughter, who,
however, pursued her occupation of peeling a pear with calm
deliberation and without lifting her eyes.  Getting no help from her he
asked: "Do you think that there is any possibility whatever of a
successful issue?"

"Yes, a remote possibility--very remote, I fear, as things look at
present; but if I thought the case absolutely hopeless I should advise
you to stand aside and let events take their course."

"Supposing the case should come to a favorable termination, would you
allow me to settle your fees in the ordinary way?"

"If the choice lay with me," replied Thorndyke, "I should say 'yes'
with pleasure.  But it does not.  The attitude of the profession is
very definitely unfavorable to 'speculative' practise.  You may
remember the well-known firm of Dodson and Fogg, who gained thereby
much profit, but little credit.  But why discuss contingencies of this
kind?  If I bring your case to a successful issue I shall have done
very well for myself.  We shall have benefited one another mutually.
Come now, Miss Bellingham, I appeal to you.  We have eaten salt
together, to say nothing of pigeon pie and other cates.  Won't you back
me up, and at the same time do a kindness to Doctor Berkeley?"

"Why, is Doctor Berkeley interested in our decision?"

"Certainly he is, as you will appreciate when I tell you that he
actually tried to bribe me secretly out of his own pocket."

"Did you?" she asked, looking at me with an expression that rather
alarmed me.

"Well, not exactly," I replied, mighty hot and uncomfortable, and
wishing Thorndyke at the devil with his confidences.  "I merely
mentioned that the--the--solicitor's costs, you know, and that sort of
thing--but you needn't jump on me, Miss Bellingham; Doctor Thorndyke
did all that was necessary in that way."

She continued to look at me thoughtfully as I stammered out my excuses,
and then said: "I wasn't going to.  I was only thinking that poverty
has its compensations.  You are all so very good to us; and, for my
part, I should accept Doctor Thorndyke's generous offer most
gratefully, and thank him for making it so easy for us."

"Very well, my dear," said Mr. Bellingham; "we will enjoy the sweets of
poverty, as you say--we have sampled the other kind of thing pretty
freely--and do ourselves the pleasure of accepting a great kindness,
most delicately offered."

"Thank you," said Thorndyke.  "You have justified my faith in you, Miss
Bellingham, and in the power of Dr. Berkeley's salt.  I understand that
you place your affairs in my hands?"

"Entirely and thankfully," replied Mr. Bellingham.  "Whatever you think
best to be done we agree to beforehand."

"Then," said I, "let us drink success to the cause.  Port, if you
please, Miss Bellingham; the vintage is not recorded, but it is quite
wholesome, and a suitable medium for the sodium chloride of
friendship."  I filled her glass, and when the bottle had made its
circuit, we stood up and solemnly pledged the new alliance.

"There is just one thing I would say before we dismiss the subject for
the present," said Thorndyke.  "It is a good thing to keep one's own
counsel.  When you get formal notice from Mr. Hurst's solicitors that
proceedings are being commenced, you may refer them to Mr. Marchmont of
Gray's Inn, who will nominally act for you.  He will actually have
nothing to do, but we must preserve the fiction that I am instructed by
a solicitor.  Meanwhile, and until the case goes into court, I think it
very necessary that neither Mr. Jellicoe nor anyone else should know
that I am connected with it.  We must keep the other side in the dark,
if we can."

"We will be as secret as the grave," said Mr. Bellingham; "and, as a
matter of fact, it will be quite easy, since it happens, by a curious
coincidence, that I am already acquainted with Mr. Marchmont.  He acted
for Stephen Blackmore, you remember, in that case that you unraveled so
wonderfully.  I knew the Blackmores."

"Did you?" said Thorndyke.  "What a small world it is.  And what a
remarkable affair that was!  The intricacies and cross-issues made it
quite absorbingly interesting; and it is noteworthy for me in another
respect, for it was one of the first cases in which I was associated
with Doctor Jervis."

"Yes, and a mighty useful associate I was," remarked Jervis, "though I
did pick up one or two facts by accident.  And, by the way, the
Blackmore case had certain points in common with your case, Mr.
Bellingham.  There was a disappearance and a disputed will, and the man
who vanished was a scholar and an antiquarian."

"Cases in our specialty are apt to have certain general resemblances,"
Thorndyke said; and as he spoke he directed a keen glance at his
junior, the significance of which I partly understood when he abruptly
changed the subject.

"The newspaper reports of your brother's disappearance, Mr. Bellingham,
were remarkably full of detail.  There were even plans of your house
and that of Mr. Hurst.  Do you know who supplied the information?"

"No, I don't," replied Mr. Bellingham.  "I know that I didn't.  Some
newspaper men came to me for information, but I sent them packing.  So,
I understand, did Hurst; and as for Jellicoe, you might as well
cross-examine an oyster."

"Well," said Thorndyke, "the pressmen have queer methods of getting
'copy'; but still, some one must have given them that description of
your brother and those plans.  It would be interesting to know who it
was.  However, we don't know; and now let us dismiss these legal
topics, with suitable apologies for having introduced them."

"And perhaps," said I, "we may as well adjourn to what we call the
drawing-room--it is really Barnard's den--and leave the housekeeper to
wrestle with the debris."

We migrated to the cheerfully shabby little apartment, and, when Mrs.
Gummer had served coffee, with gloomy resignation (as who should say:
"If you will drink this sort of stuff I suppose you must, but don't
blame me for the consequences"), I settled Mr. Bellingham in Barnard's
favorite lop-sided easy chair--the depressed seat of which suggested
its customary use by an elephant of sedentary habits--and opened the
diminutive piano.

"I wonder if Miss Bellingham would give us a little music?" I said.

"I wonder if she could?" was the smiling response.  "Do you know," she
continued, "I have not touched a piano for nearly two years?  It will
be quite an interesting experiment--to me; but if it fails, you will be
the sufferers.  So you must choose."

"My verdict," said Mr. Bellingham, "is _fiat experimentum_, though I
won't complete the quotation, as that would seem to disparage Doctor
Barnard's piano.  But before you begin, Ruth, there is one rather
disagreeable matter that I want to dispose of, so that I may not
disturb the harmony with it later."

He paused and we all looked at him expectantly.

"I suppose, Doctor Thorndyke," he said, "you read the newspapers?"

"I don't," replied Dr. Thorndyke.  "But I ascertain, for purely
business purposes, what they contain."

"Then," said Mr. Bellingham, "you have probably met with some accounts
of the finding of certain human remains, apparently portions of a
mutilated body."

"Yes, I have seen those reports and filed them for future reference."

"Exactly.  Well, now, it can hardly be necessary for me to tell you
that those remains--the mutilated remains of some poor murdered
creature, as there can be no doubt they are--have seemed to have a very
dreadful significance for me.  You will understand what I mean; and I
want to ask you if--if they have made a similar suggestion to you?"

Thorndyke paused before replying, with his eyes bent thoughtfully on
the floor, and we all looked at him anxiously.

"It's very natural," he said at length, "that you should associate
these remains with the mystery of your brother's disappearance.  I
should like to say that you are wrong in doing so, but if I did I
should be uncandid.  There are certain facts that do, undoubtedly, seem
to suggest a connection, and, up to the present, there are no definite
facts of a contrary significance."

Mr. Bellingham sighed deeply and shifted uncomfortably in his chair.

"It is a horrible affair!" he said huskily; "horrible!  Would you mind,
Doctor Thorndyke, telling us just how the matter stands in your
opinion--what the probabilities are, for and against?"

Again Thorndyke reflected awhile, and it seemed to me that he was not
very willing to discuss the subject.  However, the question had been
asked pointedly, and eventually he answered:

"At the present stage of the investigation it is not very easy to state
the balance of probabilities.  The matter is still quite speculative.
The bones which have been found hitherto (for we are dealing with a
skeleton, not with a body) have been exclusively those which are
useless for personal identification; which is, in itself, a rather
curious and striking fact.  The general character and dimensions of the
bones seem to suggest a middle-aged man of about your brother's height,
and the date of deposition appears to be in agreement with the date of
his disappearance."

"Is it known, then, when they were deposited?" asked Mr. Bellingham.

"In the case of those found at Sidcup it seems possible to deduce an
approximate date.  The watercress-bed was cleaned out about two years
ago, so they could not have been lying there longer than that; and
their condition suggests that they could not have been there much less
than two years, as there is apparently no vestige of the soft
structures left.  Of course, I am speaking from the newspaper reports
only; I have no direct knowledge of the matter."

"Have they found any considerable part of the body yet?  I haven't been
reading the papers myself.  My little friend, Miss Oman, brought a
great bundle of 'em for me to read, but I couldn't stand it; I pitched
the whole boiling of 'em out of the window."

I thought I detected a slight twinkle in Thorndyke's eye, but he
answered quite gravely:

"I think I can give you the particulars from memory, though I won't
guarantee the dates.  The original discovery was made, apparently quite
accidentally, at Sidcup on the fifteenth of July.  It consisted of a
complete left arm, minus the third finger and including the bones of
the shoulder--the shoulder-blade and collar-bone.  This discovery seems
to have set the local population, especially the juvenile part of it,
searching all the ponds and streams of the neighborhood----"

"Cannibals!" interjected Mr. Bellingham.

"With the result that there was dredged up out of a pond near St. Mary
Cray, in Kent, a right thigh-bone.  There is a slight clue to identity
in respect of this bone, since the head of it has a small patch of
'eburnation'--that is a sort of porcelain-like polish that occurs on
the parts of bones that form a joint when the natural covering of
cartilage is destroyed by disease.  It is produced by the unprotected
surface of the bone grinding against the similarly unprotected surface
of another."

"And how," Mr. Bellingham asked, "would that help the identification?"

"It would indicate," Thorndyke replied, "that the deceased had probably
suffered from rheumatoid arthritis--what is commonly known as rheumatic
gout--and he would probably have limped slightly and complained of some
pain in the right hip."

"I'm afraid that doesn't help us very much," said Mr. Bellingham; "for,
you see, John had a pretty pronounced limp from another cause, an old
injury to his left ankle; and as to complaining of pain--well, he was a
hardy old fellow and not much given to making complaints of any kind.
But don't let me interrupt you."

"The next discovery," continued Thorndyke, "was made near Lee, by the
police this time.  They seem to have developed sudden activity in the
matter, and in searching the neighborhood of West Kent they dragged out
of a pond near Lee the bones of a right foot.  Now, if it had been the
left instead of the right we might have a clue, as I understand your
brother had fractured his left ankle, and there might have been some
traces of the injury on the foot itself."

"Yes," said Mr. Bellingham.  "I suppose there might.  The injury was
described as a Pott's fracture."

"Exactly.  Well, now, after this discovery at Lee it seems that the
police set on foot a systematic search of all the ponds and small
pieces of water around London, and, on the twenty-third, they found in
the Cuckoo Pits in Epping Forest, not far from Woodford, the bones of a
right arm (including those of the shoulder, as before), which seem to
be part of the same body."

"Yes," said Mr. Bellingham, "I heard of that.  Quite close to my old
house.  Horrible! horrible!  It gave me the shudders to think of it--to
think that poor old John may have been waylaid and murdered when he was
actually coming to see me.  He may even have got into the grounds by
the back gate, if it was left unfastened, and been followed in there
and murdered.  You remember that a scarab from his watch-chain was
found there?  But is it clear that this arm was the fellow of the arm
that was found at Sidcup?"

"It seems to agree in character and dimensions," said Thorndyke, "and
the agreement is strongly supported by a discovery made two days later."

"What is that?" Mr. Bellingham demanded.

"It is the lower half of a trunk which the police dragged out of a
rather deep pond on the skirts of the forest at Loughton--Staple's
Pond, it is called.  The bones found were the pelvis--that is, the two
hip-bones--and six vertebrae, or joints of the backbone.  Having
discovered these, the police dammed the stream and pumped the pond dry,
but no other bones were found; which is rather odd, as there should
have been a pair of ribs belonging to the upper vertebra--the twelfth
dorsal vertebra.  It suggests some curious questions as to the method
of dismemberment; but I mustn't go into unpleasant details.  The point
is that the cavity of the right hip-joint showed a patch of eburnation
corresponding to that on the head of the right thigh-bone that was
found at St. Mary Cray.  So there can be very little doubt that these
bones are all part of the same body."

"I see," grunted Mr. Bellingham; and he added, after a moment's
thought: "Now, the question is, Are these bones the remains of my
brother John?  What do you say, Doctor Thorndyke?"

"I say that the question cannot be answered on the facts at present
known to us.  It can only be said that they may be, and that some of
the circumstances suggest that they are.  But we can only wait for
further discoveries.  At any moment the police may light upon some
portion of the skeleton which will settle the question definitely one
way or the other."

"I suppose," said Mr. Bellingham, "I can't be of any service to you in
the matter of identification?"

"Indeed you can," said Thorndyke, "and I was going to ask you to assist
me.  What I want you to do is this: Write down a full description of
your brother, including every detail known to you, together with an
account of every illness or injury from which you know him to have
suffered; also the names and, if possible, the addresses of any
doctors, surgeons, or dentists who may have attended him at any time.
The dentists are particularly important, as their information would be
invaluable if the skull belonging to these bones should be discovered."

Mr. Bellingham shuddered.

"It's a shocking idea," he said, "but, of course you are right.  You
must have the facts if you are to form an opinion.  I will write out
what you want and send it to you without delay.  And now, for God's
sake, let us throw off this nightmare, for a little while, at least!
What is there, Ruth, among Doctor Barnard's music that you can manage?"

Barnard's collection in general inclined to the severely classical, but
we disinterred from the heap a few lighter works of an old-fashioned
kind, including a volume of Mendelssohn's _Lieder ohne Worte_, and with
one of these Miss Bellingham made trial of her skill, playing it with
excellent taste and quite adequate execution.  That, at least, was her
father's verdict; for, as to me, I found it the perfection of happiness
merely to sit and look at her--a state of mind that would have been in
no wise disturbed even by "Silvery Waves" or "The Maiden's Prayer."

Thus, with simple, homely music, and conversation always cheerful and
sometimes brilliant, slipped away one of the pleasantest evenings of my
life, and slipped away all too soon.  St. Dunstan's clock was the fly
in the ointment, for it boomed out intrusively the hour of eleven just
as my guests were beginning thoroughly to appreciate one another, and
thereby carried the sun (with a minor paternal satellite) out of the
firmament of my heaven.  For I had, in my professional capacity, given
strict injunctions that Mr. Bellingham should on no account sit up
late; and now, in my social capacity, I had smilingly to hear "the
doctor's orders" quoted.  It was a scurvy return for all my care.

When Mr. and Miss Bellingham departed, Thorndyke and Jervis would have
gone too; but noting my bereaved condition, and being withal
compassionate and tender of heart, they were persuaded to stay awhile
and bear me company in a consolatory pipe.




CHAPTER XI

THE EVIDENCE REVIEWED

"So the game has opened," observed Thorndyke, as he struck a match.
"The play has begun with a cautious lead off by the other side.  Very
cautious and not very confident."

"Why do you say 'not very confident'?" I asked.

"Well, it is evident that Hurst--and, I fancy, Jellicoe too--is anxious
to buy off Bellingham's opposition, and at a pretty long price, under
the circumstances.  And when we consider how very little Bellingham has
to offer against the presumption of his brother's death, it looks as if
Hurst hadn't much to say on his side."

"No," said Jervis, "he can't hold many trumps or he wouldn't be willing
to pay four hundred a year for his opponent's chance; and that is just
as well, for it seems to me that our own hand is a pretty poor one."

"We must look through our hand and see what we do hold," said
Thorndyke.  "Our trump card at present--a rather small one, I'm
afraid--is the obvious intention of the testator that the bulk of the
property should go to his brother."

"I suppose you will begin your inquiries now?" I said.

"We began them some time ago--the day after you brought us the will, in
fact.  Jervis has been through the registers and has ascertained that
no interment under the name of John Bellingham has taken place since
the disappearance; which was just what we expected.  He has also
discovered that some other person has been making similar inquiries;
which, again, is what we expected."

"And your own investigations?"

"Have given negative results for the most part.  I found Doctor
Norbury, at the British Museum, very friendly and helpful; so friendly,
in fact, that I am thinking whether I may not be able to enlist his
help in certain private researches of my own, with reference to the
change effected by time in the physical properties of certain
substances."

"Oh; you haven't told me about that," said Jervis.

"No; I haven't really commenced to plan my experiments yet, and they
will probably lead to nothing when I do.  It occurred to me that,
possibly, in the course of time, certain molecular changes might take
place in substances such as wood, bone, pottery, stucco, and other
common materials, and that these changes might alter their power of
conducting or transmitting molecular vibrations.  Now, if this should
turn out to be the case, it would be a fact of considerable importance,
medico-legally and otherwise; for it would be possible to determine
approximately the age of any object of known composition by testing its
reactions to electricity, heat, light and other molecular vibrations.
I thought of seeking Doctor Norbury's assistance because he can furnish
me with materials for experiment of such great age that the reactions,
if any, should be extremely easy to demonstrate.  But to return to our
case.  I learned from him that John Bellingham had certain friends in
Paris--collectors and museum officials--whom he was in the habit of
visiting for the purpose of study and exchange of specimens.  I have
made inquiries of all these, and none of them had seen him during his
last visit.  In fact, I have not yet discovered anyone who had seen
Bellingham in Paris on this occasion.  So his visit there remains a
mystery for the present."

"It doesn't seem to be of much importance, since he undoubtedly came
back," I remarked; but to this Thorndyke demurred.

"It is impossible to estimate the importance of the unknown," said he.

"Well, how does the matter stand," asked Jervis, "on the evidence that
we have?  John Bellingham disappeared on a certain date.  Is there
anything to show what was the manner of his disappearance?"

"The facts in our possession," said Thorndyke, "which are mainly those
set forth in the newspaper report, suggest several alternative
possibilities; and in view of the coming inquiry--for they will, no
doubt, have to be gone into in Court, to some extent--it may be worth
while to consider them.  There are five conceivable hypotheses"--here
Thorndyke checked them on his fingers as he proceeded--"First, he may
still be alive.  Second, he may have died and been buried without
identification.  Third, he may have been murdered by some unknown
person.  Fourth, he may have been murdered by Hurst and his body
concealed.  Fifth, he may have been murdered by his brother.  Let us
examine these possibilities seriatim.

"First, he may still be alive.  If he is, he must either have
disappeared voluntarily, have lost his memory suddenly and not been
identified, or have been imprisoned--on a false charge or otherwise.
Let us take the first case--that of voluntary disappearance.
Obviously, its improbability is extreme."

"Jellicoe doesn't think so," said I.  "He thinks it quite on the cards
that John Bellingham is alive.  He says that it is not a very unusual
thing for a man to disappear for a time."

"Then why is he applying for a presumption of death?"

"Just what I asked him.  He says that it is the correct thing to do;
that the entire responsibility rests on the Court."

"That is all nonsense," said Thorndyke.  "Jellicoe is the trustee for
his absent client, and, if he thinks that client is alive, it is his
duty to keep the estate intact; and he knows that perfectly well.  We
may take it that Jellicoe is of the same opinion as I am: that John
Bellingham is dead."

"Still," I urged, "men do disappear from time to time, and turn up
again after years of absence."

"Yes, but for a definite reason.  Either they are irresponsible
vagabounds who take this way of shuffling off their responsibilities,
or they are men who have been caught in a net of distasteful
circumstances.  For instance, a civil servant or a solicitor or a
tradesman finds himself bound for life to a locality and an occupation
of intolerable monotony.  Perhaps he has an ill-tempered wife, who
after the amiable fashion of a certain type of woman, thinking that her
husband is pinned down without a chance of escape, gives a free rein to
her temper.  The man puts up with it for years, but at last it becomes
unbearable.  Then he suddenly disappears; and small blame to him.  But
this was not Bellingham's case.  He was a wealthy bachelor with an
engrossing interest in life, free to go whither he would and to do
whatsoever he wished.  Why should he disappear?  The thing is
incredible.

"As to his having lost his memory and remained unidentified, that,
also, is incredible in the case of a man who had visiting-cards and
letters in his pocket, whose linen was marked, and who was being
inquired for everywhere by the police.  As to his being in prison, we
may dismiss that possibility, inasmuch as a prisoner, both before and
after conviction, would have full opportunity of communicating with his
friends.

"The second possibility, that he may have died suddenly and been buried
without identification, is highly improbable; but, as it is conceivable
that the body might have been robbed and the means of identification
thus lost, it remains as a possibility that has to be considered,
remote as it is.

"The third hypothesis, that he may have been murdered by some unknown
person, is, under the circumstances, not wildly improbable; but, as the
police were on the lookout and a detailed description of the missing
man's person was published in the papers, it would involve the complete
concealment of the body.  But this would exclude the most probable form
of crime--the casual robbery with violence.  It is therefore possible,
but highly improbable.

"The fourth hypothesis is that Bellingham was murdered by Hurst.  Now
the one fact which militates against this view is that Hurst apparently
had no motive for committing the murder.  We are assured by Jellicoe
that no one but himself knew the contents of the will, and if this is
so--but mind, we have no evidence that it is so--Hurst would have no
reason to suppose that he had anything material to gain by his cousin's
death.  Otherwise the hypothesis presents no inherent improbabilities.
The man was last seen alive at Hurst's house.  He was seen to enter it
and he was never seen to leave it--we are still taking the facts as
stated in the newspapers, remember--and it now appears that he stands
to benefit enormously by that man's death."

"But," I objected, "you are forgetting that, directly the man was
missed Hurst and the servants together searched the entire house."

"Yes.  What did they search for?"

"Why, for Mr. Bellingham, of course."

"Exactly; for Mr. Bellingham.  That is, for a living man.  Now how do
you search a house for a living man?  You look in all the rooms.  When
you look in a room if he is there, you see him; if you do not see him,
you assume that he is not there.  You don't look under the sofa or
behind the piano, you don't pull out large drawers or open cupboards.
You just look into the rooms.  That is what these people seem to have
done.  And they did not see Mr. Bellingham.  Mr. Bellingham's corpse
might have been stowed away out of sight in any one of the rooms that
they looked into."

"That is a grim thought," said Jervis; "but it is perfectly true.
There is no evidence that the man was not lying dead in the house at
the very time of the search."

"But even so," said I, "there was the body to be disposed of somehow.
Now how could he possibly have got rid of the body without being
observed?"

"Ah!" said Thorndyke, "now we are touching on a point of crucial
importance.  If anyone should ever write a treatise on the art of
murder--not an exhibition of literary fireworks like De Quincey's, but
a genuine working treatise--he might leave all other technical details
to take care of themselves if he could describe some really practicable
plan for disposing of the body.  That is, and always has been, the
great stumbling-block to the murderer: to get rid of the body.  The
human body," he continued, thoughtfully regarding his pipe, just as, in
the days of my pupilage, he was wont to regard the black-board chalk,
"is a very remarkable object.  It presents a combination of properties,
that make it singularly difficult to conceal permanently.  It is bulky
and of an awkward shape, it is heavy, it is completely incombustible,
it is chemically unstable, and its decomposition yields great volumes
of highly odorous gases, and it nevertheless contains identifiable
structures of the highest degree of permanence.  It is extremely
difficult to preserve unchanged, and it is still more difficult
completely to destroy.  The essential permanence of the human body is
well shown in the classical case of Eugene Aram; but a still more
striking instance is that of Sekenen-Ra the Third, one of the last
kings of the seventeenth Egyptian dynasty.  Here, after a lapse of four
thousand years, it has been possible to determine not only the cause of
death and the manner of its occurrence, but the way in which the king
fell, the nature of the weapon with which the fatal wound was
inflicted, and even the position of the assailant.  And the permanence
of the body under other conditions is admirably shown in the case of
Doctor Parkman, of Boston, U. S. A., in which identification was
actually effected by means of remains collected from the ashes of a
furnace."

"Then we may take it," said Jervis, "that the world has not yet seen
the last of John Bellingham."

"I think we may regard that as almost a certainty," replied Thorndyke.
"The only question--and a very important one--is as to when the
reappearance may take place.  It may be to-morrow or it may be
centuries hence, when all the issues involved have been forgotten."

"Assuming," said I, "for the sake of argument, that Hurst did murder
him and that the body was concealed in the study at the time the search
was made.  How could it have been disposed of?  If you had been in
Hurst's place, how would you have gone to work?"

Thorndyke smiled at the bluntness of my question.

"You are asking me for an incriminating statement," said he, "delivered
in the presence of a witness too.  But, as a matter of fact, there is
no use in speculating _a priori_; we should have to reconstruct a
purely imaginary situation, the circumstances of which are unknown to
us, and we should almost certainly reconstruct it wrong.  What we may
fairly assume is that no reasonable person, no matter how immoral,
would find himself in the position that you suggest.  Murder is usually
a crime of impulse, and the murderer a person of feeble self-control.
Such persons are most unlikely to make elaborate and ingenious
arrangements for the disposal of the bodies of their victims.  Even the
cold-blooded perpetrators of the most carefully planned murders appear
as I have said, to break down at this point.  The almost insuperable
difficulty of getting rid of the human body is not appreciated until
the murderer suddenly finds himself face to face with it.

"In the case you are suggesting, the choice would seem to lie between
burial on the premises or dismemberment and dispersal of the fragments;
and either method would be pretty certain to lead to discovery."

"As illustrated by the remains of which you were speaking to Mr.
Bellingham," Jervis remarked.

"Exactly," Thorndyke answered, "though we could hardly imagine a
reasonably intelligent criminal adopting a watercress-bed as a hiding
place.

"No.  That was certainly an error of judgment.  By the way, I thought
it best to say nothing while you were talking to Bellingham, but I
noticed that, in discussing the possibility of those being the bones of
his brother, you made no comment on the absence of the third finger of
the left hand.  I am sure you didn't overlook it, but isn't it a point
of some importance?"

"As to identification?  Under the present circumstances, I think not.
If there were a man missing who had lost that finger it would, of
course, be an important fact.  But I have not heard of any such man.
Or, again, if there were any evidence that the finger had been removed
before death, it would be highly important.  But there is no such
evidence.  It may have been cut off after death, and that is where the
real significance of its absence lies."

"I don't see quite what you mean," said Jervis.

"I mean that, if there is no report of any missing man who had lost
that particular finger, the probability is that the finger was removed
after death.  And then arises the interesting question of motive.  Why
should it have been removed?  It could hardly have become detached
accidentally.  What do you suggest?"

"Well," said Jervis, "it might have been a peculiar finger; a finger,
for instance, with some characteristic deformity such as an ankylosed
joint, which would be easy to identify."

"Yes; but that explanation introduces the same difficulty.  No person
with a deformed or ankylosed finger has been reported as missing."

Jervis puckered up his brows, and looked at me.

"I'm hanged if I see any other explanation," he said.  "Do you,
Berkeley?"

I shook my head.

"Don't forget which finger it is that is missing," said Thorndyke.
"The third finger of the left hand."

"Oh, I see!" said Jervis.  "The ring-finger.  You mean that it may have
been removed for the sake of a ring that wouldn't come off."

"Yes.  It would not be the first instance of the kind.  Fingers have
been severed from dead hands--and even from living ones--for the sake
of rings that were too tight to be drawn off.  And the fact that it is
the left hand supports the suggestion; for a ring that was
inconveniently tight would be worn by preference on the left hand, as
that is usually slightly smaller than the right.  What is the matter,
Berkeley?"

A sudden light had burst upon me, and I suppose my countenance betrayed
the fact.

"I am a confounded fool!" I exclaimed.

"Oh, don't say that," said Jervis.  "Give your friends a chance."

"I ought to have seen this long ago and told you about it.  John
Bellingham did wear a ring, and it was so tight that, when once he had
got it on, he could never get it off again."

"Do you happen to know on which hand he wore it?" Thorndyke asked.

"Yes.  It was on the left hand; because Miss Bellingham, who told me
about it, said that he would never have been able to get the ring on at
all but for the fact that his left hand was slightly smaller than his
right."

"There it is, then," said Thorndyke.  "With this new fact in our
possession, the absence of the finger furnishes the starting-point of
some very curious speculations."

"As, for instance," said Jervis.

"Ah, under the circumstances, I must leave you to pursue those
speculations independently.  I am now acting for Mr. Bellingham."

Jervis grinned and was silent for a-while, refilling his pipe
thoughtfully; but when he had got it alight he resumed.

"To return to the question of the disappearance; you don't consider it
highly improbable that Bellingham might have been murdered by Hurst?"

"Oh, don't imagine I am making an accusation.  I am considering the
various probabilities merely in the abstract.  The same reasoning
applies to the Bellinghams.  As to whether any of them did commit the
murder, that is a question of personal character.  I certainly do not
suspect the Bellinghams after having seen them, and with regard to
Hurst, I know nothing, or at least very little, to his disadvantage."

"Do you know anything?" asked Jervis.

"Well," Thorndyke said, with some hesitation, "it seems a thought
unkind to rake up the little details of a man's past, and yet it has to
be done.  I have, of course, made the usual routine inquiries
concerning the parties to this affair, and this is what they have
brought to light:

"Hurst, as you know, is a stockbroker--a man of good position and
reputation; but, about ten years ago, he seems to have committed an
indiscretion, to put it mildly, which nearly got him into rather
serious difficulties.  He appears to have speculated rather heavily and
considerably beyond his means, for when a sudden spasm of the markets
upset his calculations, it turned out that he had been employing his
clients' capital and securities.  For a time it looked as if there was
going to be serious trouble; then, quite unexpectedly, he managed to
raise the necessary amount in some way and settle all claims.  Whence
he got the money has never been discovered to this day, which is a
curious circumstance, seeing that the deficiency was rather over five
thousand pounds; but the important fact is that he did get it and that
he paid up all that he owed.  So that he was only a potential
defaulter, so to speak; and discreditable as the affair undoubtedly
was, it does not seem to have any direct bearing on this present case."

"No," Jervis agreed, "though it makes one consider his position with
more attention than one would otherwise."

"Undoubtedly," said Thorndyke.  "A reckless gambler is a man whose
conduct cannot be relied on.  He is subject to vicissitudes of fortune
which may force him into other kinds of wrong-doing.  Many an
embezzlement has been preceded by an unlucky plunge on the turf."

"Assuming the responsibility for this disappearance to lie between
Hurst and--and the Bellinghams," said I, with an uncomfortable gulp as
I mentioned the names of my friends, "to which side does the balance of
probability incline?"

"To the side of Hurst, I should say, without doubt," replied Thorndyke.
"The case stands thus--on the facts presented to us: Hurst appears to
have had no motive for killing the deceased (as we will call him); but
the man was seen to enter the house, was never seen to leave it, and
was never again seen alive.  Bellingham, on the other hand, had a
motive, as he had believed himself to be the principal beneficiary
under the will.  But the deceased was not seen at his house, and there
is no evidence that he went to the house or to the neighborhood,
excepting the scarab that was found there.  But the evidence of the
scarab is vitiated by the fact that Hurst was present when it was
picked up, and that it was found on a spot over which Hurst had passed
only a few minutes previously.  Until Hurst is cleared, it seems to me
that the presence of the scarab proves nothing against the Bellinghams."

"Then your opinions on the case," said I, "are based entirely on the
facts that have been made public?"

"Yes, mainly.  I do not necessarily accept those facts just as they are
presented, and I may have certain views of my own on the case.  But if
I have, I do not feel in a position to discuss them.  For the present,
discussion has to be limited to the facts and inferences offered by the
parties concerned."

"There!" exclaimed Jervis, rising to knock his pipe out, "that is where
Thorndyke has you.  He lets you think you're in the thick of the 'know'
until one fine morning you wake up and discover that you have only been
a gaping outsider; and then you are mightily astonished--and so are the
other side, too, for that matter.  But we must really be off now,
mustn't we, reverend senior?"

"I suppose we must," replied Thorndyke; and, as he drew on his gloves,
he asked: "Have you heard from Barnard lately?"

"Oh, yes," I answered.  "I wrote to him at Smyrna to say that the
practise was flourishing and that I was quite happy and contented, and
that he might stay away as long as he liked.  He writes by return that
he will prolong his holiday if an opportunity offers, but will let me
know later."

"Gad," said Jervis, "it was a stroke of luck for Barnard that
Bellingham happened to have such a magnificent daughter--there! don't
mind me, old man.  You go in and win--she's worth it, isn't she,
Thorndyke?"

"Miss Bellingham's a very charming young lady," replied Thorndyke.  "I
am most favorably impressed by both the father and the daughter, and I
only trust that we may be able to be of some service to them."  With
this sedate little speech Thorndyke shook my hand, and I watched my two
friends go on their way until their fading shapes were swallowed up in
the darkness of Fetter Lane.




CHAPTER XII

A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY

It was two or three mornings after my little supper party that, as I
stood in the consulting-room brushing my hat preparatory to starting on
my morning round, Adolphus appeared at the door to announce two
gentlemen waiting in the surgery.  I told him to bring them in, and a
moment later Thorndyke entered, accompanied by Jervis.  I noted that
they looked uncommonly large in that little apartment, especially
Thorndyke, but I had no time to consider this phenomenon, for the
latter, when he had shaken my hand, proceeded at once to explain the
object of their visit.

"We have come to ask a favor, Berkeley," he said; "to ask you to do us
a very great service in the interests of your friends the Bellinghams."

"You know I shall be delighted," I said warmly.  "What is it?"

"I will explain.  You know--or perhaps you don't--that the police have
collected all the bones that have been discovered and deposited them in
the mortuary at Woodford, where they are to be viewed by the coroner's
jury.  Now, it has become imperative that I should have more definite
and reliable information than I can get from the newspapers.  The
natural thing for me would be to go down and examine them myself, but
there are circumstances that make it very desirable that my connection
with the case should not leak out.  Consequently, I can't go myself,
and, for the same reason, I can't send Jervis.  On the other hand, as
it is now stated pretty openly that the police consider the bones to be
almost certainly those of John Bellingham, it would seem perfectly
natural that you, as Godfrey Bellingham's doctor, should go down to
view them on his behalf."

"I should like to," I said.  "I would give anything to go; but how is
it to be managed?  It would mean a whole day off and leaving the
practise to look after itself."

"I think it could be managed," said Thorndyke; "and the matter is
really important for two reasons.  One is that the inquest opens
to-morrow, and some one certainly ought to be there to watch the
proceedings on Godfrey's behalf; and the other is that our client has
received notice from Hurst's solicitors that the application will be
heard in the Probate Court in a few days."

"Isn't that rather sudden?" I asked.

"It certainly suggests that there has been a good deal more activity
than we were given to understand.  But you see the importance of the
affair.  The inquest will be a sort of dress rehearsal for the Probate
Court, and it is quite essential that we should have a chance of
estimating the management."

"Yes, I see that.  But how are we to manage about the practise?"

"We shall find you a substitute."

"Through a medical agent?"

"Yes," said Jervis, "Turcival will find us a man; in fact, he has done
it.  I saw him this morning; he has a man who is waiting up in town to
negotiate for the purchase of a practise and who would do the job for a
couple of guineas.  Quite a reliable man.  Only say the word, and I
will run off to Adam Street and engage him definitely."

"Very well.  You engage the locum tenens, and I will be prepared to
start for Woodford as soon as he turns up."

"Excellent!" said Thorndyke.  "That is a great weight off my mind.  And
if you could manage to drop in this evening and smoke a pipe with us we
could talk over the plan of campaign and let you know what items of
information we are particularly in want of."

I promised to turn up at King's Bench Walk as soon after half-past
eight as possible, and my two friends then took their departure,
leaving me to set out in high spirits on my scanty round of visits.

It is surprising what different aspects things present from different
points of view; how relative are our estimates of the conditions and
circumstances of life.  To the urban workman--the journeyman baker or
tailor, for instance, laboring year in year out in a single building--a
holiday ramble on Hampstead Heath is a veritable voyage of discovery;
whereas to the sailor the shifting panorama of the whole wide world is
but the commonplace of the day's work.

So I reflected as I took my place in the train at Liverpool Street on
the following day.  There had been a time when a trip by rail to the
borders of Epping Forest would have been far from a thrilling
experience; now, after vegetating in the little world of Fetter Lane,
it was quite an adventure.

The enforced inactivity of a railway journey is favorable to thought,
and I had much to think about.  The last few weeks had witnessed
momentous changes in my outlook.  New interests had arisen, new
friendships had grown up, and above all, there had stolen into my life
that supreme influence that, for good or for evil, according to my
fortune, was to color and pervade it even to its close.  Those few days
of companionable labor in the reading-room, with the homely
hospitalities of the milk-shop and the pleasant walks homeward through
the friendly London streets, had called into existence a new world--a
world in which the gracious personality of Ruth Bellingham was the one
dominating reality.  And thus, as I leaned back in the corner of the
railway carriage with an unlighted pipe in my hand, the events of the
immediate past, together with those more problematical ones of the
impending future, occupied me rather to the exclusion of the business
of the moment, which was to review the remains collected in the
Woodford mortuary, until, as the train approached Stratford, the odors
of the soap and bone-manure factories poured in at the open window and
(by a natural association of ideas) brought me back to the object of my
quest.

As to the exact purpose of this expedition, I was not very clear; but I
knew that I was acting as Thorndyke's proxy and thrilled with pride at
the thought.  But what particular light my investigations were to throw
upon the intricate Bellingham case I had no very definite idea.  With a
view to fixing the procedure in my mind, I took Thorndyke's written
instructions from my pocket and read them over carefully.  They were
very full and explicit, making ample allowance for my lack of
experience in medico-legal matters:--


"1. Do not appear to make minute investigations or in any way excite
remark.

"2. Ascertain if all the bones belonging to each region are present,
and if not, which are missing.

"3. Measure the extreme length of the principal bones and compare those
of opposite sides.

"4. Examine the bones with reference to age, sex, and muscular
development of the deceased.

"5. Note the presence or absence of signs of constitutional disease,
local disease of bone or adjacent structures, old or recent injuries,
and any other departures from the normal or usual.

"6. Observe the presence or absence of adipocere and its position, if
present.

"7. Note any remains of tendons, ligaments or other soft structures.

"8. Examine the Sidcup hand with reference to the question as to
whether the finger was separated before or after death.

"9. Estimate the probable period of submersion and note any changes (as
e.g., mineral or organic staining) due to the character of the water or
mud.

"10. Ascertain the circumstances (immediate and remote) that led to the
discovery of the bones and the names of the persons concerned in those
circumstances.

"11. Commit all information to writing as soon as possible, and make
plans and diagrams on the spot, if circumstances permit.

"12. Preserve an impassive exterior: listen attentively but without
eagerness; ask as few questions as possible; pursue any inquiry that
your observations on the spot may suggest."


These were my instructions, and, considering that I was going merely to
inspect a few dry bones, they appeared rather formidable; in fact, the
more I read them over the greater became my misgivings as to my
qualifications for the task.

As I approached the mortuary it became evident that some, at least, of
Thorndyke's admonitions were by no means unnecessary.  The place was in
charge of a police sergeant, who watched my approach suspiciously; and
some half-dozen men, obviously newspaper reporters, hovered about the
entrance like a pack of jackals.  I presented the coroner's order which
Mr. Marchmont had obtained, and which the sergeant read with his back
against the wall, to prevent the newspaper men from looking over his
shoulder.

My credentials being found satisfactory, the door was unlocked and I
entered, accompanied by three enterprising reporters, whom, however,
the sergeant summarily ejected and locked out, returning to usher me
into the presence and to observe my proceedings with intelligent but
highly embarrassing interest.

The bones were laid out on a large table and covered with a sheet,
which the sergeant slowly turned back, watching my face intently as he
did so to note the impression that the spectacle made upon me.  I
imagine that he must have been somewhat disappointed by my impassive
demeanor, for the remains suggested to me nothing more than a rather
shabby set of "student's osteology."  The whole collection had been set
out by the police surgeon (as the sergeant informed me) in their proper
anatomical order; notwithstanding which I counted them over carefully
to make sure that none were missing, checking them by the list with
which Thorndyke had furnished me.

"I see you have found the left thigh-bone," I remarked, observing that
this did not appear in the list.

"Yes," said the sergeant; "that turned up yesterday evening in a big
pond called Baldwin's Pond in the Sandpit plain, near Little Monk Wood."

"Is that near here?" I asked.

"In the forest up Loughton way," was the reply.

I made a note of the fact (on which the sergeant looked as if he was
sorry he had mentioned it), and then turned my attention to a general
consideration of the bones before examining them in detail.  Their
appearance would have been improved and examination facilitated by a
thorough scrubbing, for they were just as they had been taken from
their respective resting-places, and it was difficult to decide whether
their reddish-yellow color was an actual stain or due to a deposit on
the surface.  In any case, as it affected them all alike, I thought it
an interesting feature and made a note of it.  They bore numerous
traces of their sojourn in the various ponds from which they had been
recovered, but these gave me little help in determining the length of
time during which they had been submerged.  They were, of course,
encrusted with mud, and little wisps of pond-weed stuck to them in
places; but these facts furnished only the vaguest measure of time.

Some of the traces were, indeed, more informing.  To several of the
bones, for instance, there adhered the dried egg-clusters of the common
pond-snail, and in one of the hollows of the right shoulder-blade (the
"infraspinous fossa") was a group of the mud-built tubes of the red
river-worm.  These remains gave proof of a considerable period of
submersion, and since they could not have been deposited on the bones
until all the flesh had disappeared they furnished evidence that some
time--a month or two at any rate--had elapsed since this had happened.
Incidentally, too, their distribution showed the position in which the
bones had lain, and though this appeared to be of no importance in the
existing circumstances, I made careful notes of the situation of each
adherent body, illustrating their position by rough sketches.

The sergeant watched my proceedings with an indulgent smile.

"You're making a regular inventory, sir," he remarked, "as if you were
going to put 'em up for auction.  I shouldn't think those snails' eggs
would be much help in identification.  And all that has been done
already," he added as I produced my measuring-tape.

"No doubt," I replied; "but my business is to make independent
observations, to check the others, if necessary."  And I proceeded to
measure each of the principal bones separately and to compare those of
the opposite sides.  The agreement in dimensions and general
characteristics of the pairs of bones left little doubt that all were
parts of one skeleton, a conclusion that was confirmed by the eburnated
patch on the head of the right thigh-bone and the corresponding patch
in the socket of the right hip-bone.  When I had finished my
measurements I went over the entire series of bones in detail,
examining each with the closest attention for any of those signs which
Thorndyke had indicated, and eliciting nothing but a monotonously
reiterated negative.  They were distressingly and disappointingly
normal.

"Well, sir, what do you make of 'em?" the sergeant asked cheerfully as
I shut up my notebook and straightened my back.  "Whose bones are they?
Are they Mr. Bellingham's, think ye?"

"I should be very sorry to say whose bones they are," I replied.  "One
bone is very much like another, you know."

"I suppose it is," he agreed; "but I thought that, with all that
measuring and all those notes, you might have arrived at something
definite."  Evidently he was disappointed in me; and I was somewhat
disappointed in myself when I contrasted Thorndyke's elaborate
instructions with the meager result of my investigations.  For what did
my discoveries amount to?  And how much was the inquiry advanced by the
few entries in my notebook?

The bones were apparently those of a man of fair though not remarkable
muscular development; over thirty years of age, but how much older I
was unable to say.  His height I judged roughly to be five feet eight
inches, but my measurements would furnish data for a more exact
estimate by Thorndyke.  Beyond this the bones were quite
uncharacteristic.  There were no signs of disease either local or
general, no indications of injuries either old or recent, no departures
of any kind from the normal or usual; and the dismemberment had been
effected with such care that there was not a single scratch on any of
the separate surfaces.  Of adipocere (the peculiar waxy or soapy
substance that is commonly found in bodies that have slowly decayed in
damp situations) there was not a trace; and the only remnant of the
soft structures was a faint indication, like a spot of dried glue, of
the tendon on the tip of the right elbow.

The sergeant was in the act of replacing the sheet, with the air of a
showman who has just given an exhibition, when there came a sharp
rapping on the mortuary door.  The officer finished spreading the sheet
with official precision, and having ushered me out into the lobby
turned the key and admitted three persons, holding the door open after
they had entered for me to go out.  But the appearance of the newcomers
inclined me to linger.  One of them was a local constable, evidently in
official charge; a second was a laboring man, very wet and muddy, who
carried a small sack; while in the third I thought I scented a
professional brother.

The sergeant continued to hold the door open.

"Nothing more I can do for you, sir?" he asked genially.

"Is that the divisional surgeon?" I inquired.

"Yes.  I am the divisional surgeon," the newcomer answered.  "Did you
want anything of me?"

"This," said the sergeant, "is a medical gentleman who has got
permission from the coroner to inspect the remains.  He is acting for
the family of the deceased--I mean, for the family of Mr. Bellingham,"
he added in answer to an inquiring glance from the surgeon.

"I see," said the latter.  "Well, they have found the rest of the
trunk, including, I understand, the ribs that were missing from the
other part.  Isn't that so, Davis?"

"Yes, sir," replied the constable.  "Inspector Badger says all the ribs
is here, and all the bones of the neck as well."

"The inspector seems to be an anatomist," I remarked.

The sergeant grinned.  "He is a very knowing gentleman, is Mr. Badger.
He came down here this morning quite early and spent a long time
looking over the bones and checking them by some notes in his
pocket-book.  I fancy he's got something on, but he was precious close
about it."

Here the sergeant shut up rather suddenly--perhaps contrasting his own
conduct with that of his superior.

"Let us have these new bones out on the table," said the police
surgeon.  "Take the sheet off, and don't shoot them out as if they were
coals.  Hand them out carefully."

The laborer fished out the wet and muddy bones one by one from the
sack, and as he laid them on the table the surgeon arranged them in
their proper relative positions.

"This has been a neatly executed job," he remarked; "none of your
clumsy hacking with a chopper or a saw.  The bones have been cleanly
separated at the joints.  The fellow who did this must have had some
anatomical knowledge, unless he was a butcher, which by the way, is not
impossible.  He has used his knife uncommonly skilfully, and you notice
that each arm was taken off with the scapula attached, just as a
butcher takes off a shoulder of mutton.  Are there any more bones in
that bag?"

"No, sir," replied the laborer, wiping his hands with an air of
finality on the posterior aspect of his trousers; "that's the lot."

The surgeon looked thoughtfully at the bones as he gave a final touch
to their arrangement, and remarked:

"The inspector is right.  All the bones of the neck are there.  Very
odd.  Don't you think so?"

"You mean----"

"I mean that this very eccentric murderer seems to have given himself
such an extraordinary amount of trouble for no reason that one can see.
There are these neck vertebrae, for instance.  He must have carefully
separated the skull from the atlas instead of just cutting through the
neck.  Then there is the way he divided the trunk; the twelfth ribs
have just come in with this lot, but the twelfth dorsal vertebra to
which they belong was attached to the lower half.  Imagine the trouble
he must have taken to do that, and without cutting or hacking the bones
about, either.  It is extraordinary.  This is rather interesting, by
the way.  Handle it carefully."

He picked up the breast-bone daintily--for it was covered with wet
mud--and handed it to me with the remark:

"That is the most definite piece of evidence we have."

"You mean," I said, "that the union of the two parts into a single mass
fixes this as the skeleton of an elderly man?"

"Yes, that is the obvious suggestion, which is confirmed by the deposit
of bone in the rib-cartilages.  You can tell the inspector, Davis, that
I have checked this lot of bones and that they are all here."

"Would you mind writing it down, sir?" said the constable.  "Inspector
Badger said I was to have everything in writing."

The surgeon took out his pocket-book, and, while he was selecting a
suitable piece of paper, he asked: "Did you form any opinion as to the
height of the deceased?"

"Yes, I thought he would be about five feet eight" (here I caught the
sergeant's eyes, fixed on me with a knowing leer).

"I made it five eight and a half," said the police surgeon; "but we
shall know better when we have seen the lower leg-bones.  Where was
this lot found, Davis?"

"In the pond just off the road in Lord's Bushes, sir, and the inspector
has gone off now to----"

"Never mind where he's gone," interrupted the sergeant.  "You just
answer questions and attend to your business."

The sergeant's reproof conveyed a hint to me on which I was not slow to
act.  Friendly as my professional colleague was, it was clear that the
police were disposed to treat me as an interloper who was to be kept
out of the "know" as far as possible.  Accordingly I thanked my
colleague and the sergeant for their courtesy, and bidding them adieu
until we should meet at the inquest, took my departure and walked away
quickly until I found an inconspicuous position from which I could keep
the door of the mortuary in view.  A few moments later I saw Constable
Davis emerge and stride away up the road.

I watched his rapidly diminishing figure until he had gone as far as I
considered desirable, and then I set forth in his wake.  The road led
straight away from the village, and in less than half a mile entered
the outskirts of the forest.  Here I quickened my pace to close up
somewhat, and it was well that I did so, for suddenly he diverged from
the road into a green lane, where for a while I lost sight of him.
Still hurrying forward, I again caught sight of him just as he turned
off into a narrow path that entered a beech wood with a thickish
undergrowth of holly, along which I followed him for several minutes,
gradually decreasing the distance between us, until suddenly there fell
on my ear a rhythmical sound like the clank of a pump.  Soon after I
caught the sound of men's voices, and then the constable struck off the
path into the wood.

I now advanced more cautiously, endeavoring to locate the search party
by the sound of the pump, and when I had done this I made a little
detour so that I might approach from the opposite direction to that
from which the constable had appeared.

Still guided by the noise of the pump, I at length came out into a
small opening among the trees and halted to survey the scene.  The
center of the opening was occupied by a small pond, not more than a
dozen yards across, by the side of which stood a builder's handcart.
The little two-wheeled vehicle had evidently been used to convey the
appliances which were deposited on the ground near it, and which
consisted of a large tub--now filled with water--a shovel, a rake, a
sieve, and a portable pump, the latter being fitted with a long
delivery hose.  There were three men besides the constable, one of whom
was working the handle of the pump, while another was glancing at a
paper that the constable had just delivered to him.  He looked up
sharply as I appeared, and viewed me with unconcealed disfavor.

"Hallo, sir!" said he.  "You can't come here."

Now, seeing that I was actually here, this was clearly a mistake, and I
ventured to point out the fallacy.

"Well, I can't allow you to stay here.  Our business is of a private
nature."

"I know exactly what your business is, Inspector Badger."

"Oh, do you?" said he, surveying me with a foxy smile.  "And I expect I
know what yours is, too.  But we can't have any of you newspaper gentry
spying on us just at present, so you just be off."

I thought it best to undeceive him at once, and accordingly, having
explained who I was, I showed him the coroner's permit, which he read
with manifest annoyance.

"This is all very well, sir," said he as he handed me back the paper,
"but it doesn't authorize you to come spying on the proceedings of the
police.  Any remains that we discover will be deposited in the
mortuary, where you can inspect them to your heart's content; but you
can't stay here and watch us."

I had no defined object in keeping a watch on the inspector's
proceedings; but the sergeant's indiscreet hint had aroused my
curiosity, which was further excited by Mr. Badger's evident desire to
get rid of me.  Moreover, while we had been talking, the pump had
stopped (the muddy floor of the pond being now pretty fully exposed),
and the inspector's assistant was handling the shovel impatiently.

"Now I put it to you, Inspector," said I, persuasively, "is it politic
of you to allow it to be said that you refused an authorized
representative of the family facilities for verifying any statements
that you may make hereafter?"

"What do you mean?" he asked.

"I mean that if you should happen to find some bone which could be
identified as part of the body of Mr. Bellingham, that fact would be of
more importance to his family than to anyone else.  You know that there
is a very valuable estate and a rather difficult will."

"I didn't know it, and I don't see the bearing of it now" (neither did
I for that matter); "but if you make such a point of being present at
the search, I can't very well refuse.  Only you mustn't get in our way,
that's all."

On hearing this conclusion, his assistant, who looked like a
plain-clothes officer, took up his shovel and stepped into the mud that
formed the bottom of the pond, stooping as he went and peering among
the masses of weed that had been left stranded by the withdrawal of the
water.  The inspector watched him anxiously, cautioning him from time
to time to "look out where he was treading"; the laborer left the pump
and craned forward from the margin of the mud, and the constable and I
looked on from our respective points of vantage.  For some time the
search was fruitless.  Once the searcher stooped and picked up what
turned out to be a fragment of decayed wood; then the remains of a
long-deceased jay were discovered, examined, and rejected.  Suddenly
the man bent down by the side of a small pool that had been left in one
of the deeper hollows, stared intently into the mud, and stood up.

"There's something here that looks like a bone, sir," he sang out.

"Don't grub about then," said the inspector.  "Drive your shovel right
into the mud where you saw it and bring it to the sieve."

The man followed out these instructions, and as he came shoreward with
a great pile of the slimy mud on his shovel we all converged on the
sieve, which the inspector took up and held over the tub, directing the
constable and laborer to "lend a hand," meaning thereby that they were
to crowd round the tub and exclude me as completely as possible.  This,
in fact, they did very effectively with his assistance, for, when the
shovelful of mud had been deposited on the sieve, the four men leaned
over it and so nearly hid it from view that it was only by craning
over, first on one side and then on the other, that I was able to catch
an occasional glimpse of it and to observe it gradually melting away as
the sieve, immersed in the water, was shaken to and fro.

Presently the inspector raised the sieve from the water and stooped
over it more closely to examine its contents.  Apparently the
examination yielded no very conclusive results, for it was accompanied
by a series of rather dubious grunts.

At length the officer stood up, and turning to me with a genial but
foxy smile, held out the sieve for my inspection.

"Like to see what we have found, doctor?" said he.

I thanked him and stood over the sieve.  It contained the sort of
litter of twigs, skeleton leaves, weed, pond-snails, dead shells, and
fresh-water mussels that one would expect to strain out from the mud of
an ancient pond; but in addition to these there were three small bones
which at first glance gave me quite a start until I saw what they were.

The inspector looked at me inquiringly.  "H'm?" said he.

"Yes," I replied.  "Very interesting."

"Those will be human bones, I fancy; h'm?"

"I should say so undoubtedly," I answered.

"Now," said the inspector, "could you say, offhand, which finger those
bones belong to?"

I smothered a grin (for I had been expecting this question), and
answered:

"I can say offhand that they don't belong to any finger.  They are the
bones of the left great toe."

The inspector's jaw dropped.

"The deuce they are!" he muttered.  "H'm.  I thought they looked a bit
stout."

"I expect," said I, "that if you go through the mud close to where this
came from you'll find the rest of the foot."

The plain-clothes man proceeded at once to act on my suggestion, taking
the sieve with him to save time.  And sure enough, after filling it
twice with the mud from the bottom of the pool, the entire skeleton of
the foot was brought to light.

"Now you're happy, I suppose," said the inspector when I had checked
the bones and found them all present.

"I should be more happy," I replied, "if I knew what you were searching
for in this pond.  You weren't looking for the foot, were you?"

"I was looking for anything that I might find," he answered.  "I shall
go on searching until we have the whole body.  I shall go through all
the streams and ponds around here, excepting Connaught Water.  That I
shall leave to the last, as it will be a case of dredging from a boat
and isn't so likely as the smaller ponds.  Perhaps the head will be
there; it's deeper than any of the others."

It now occurred to me that as I had learned all that I was likely to
learn, which was little enough, I might as well leave the inspector to
pursue his researches unembarrassed by my presence.  Accordingly I
thanked him for his assistance and departed by the way I had come.

But as I retraced my steps along the shady path I speculated profoundly
on the officer's proceedings.  My examinations of the mutilated hand
had yielded the conclusion that the finger had been removed after death
or shortly before, but more probably after.  Some one else had
evidently arrived at the same conclusion, and had communicated his
opinion to Inspector Badger; for it was clear that that gentleman was
in full cry after the missing finger.  But why was he searching for it
here when the hand had been found at Sidcup?  And what did he expect to
learn from it when he found it?  There is nothing particularly
characteristic about a finger, or, at least, the bones of one; and the
object of the present researches was to determine the identity of the
person of whom these bones were the remains.  There was something
mysterious about the affair, something suggesting that Inspector Badger
was in possession of private information of some kind.  But what
information could he have?  And whence could he have obtained it?
These were questions to which I could find no answer, and I was still
fruitlessly revolving them when I arrived at the modest inn where the
inquest was to be held, and where I proposed to fortify myself with a
correspondingly modest lunch as a preparation for my attendance at the
inquiry.




CHAPTER XIII

THE CORONER'S QUEST

The proceedings of that fine old institution, the coroner's court, are
apt to have their dignity impaired by the somewhat unjudicial
surroundings amidst which they are conducted.  The present inquiry was
to be held in a long room attached to the inn, ordinarily devoted, as
its various appurtenances testified, to gatherings of a more convivial
character.

Hither I betook myself after a protracted lunch and a meditative pipe,
and being the first to arrive--the jury having already been sworn and
conducted to the mortuary to view the remains--whiled away the time by
considering the habits of the customary occupants of the room by the
light of the objects contained in it.  A wooden target with one or two
darts sticking in it hung on the end wall and invited the Robin Hoods
of the village to try their skill; a system of incised marks on the
oaken table made sinister suggestions of shove-halfpenny; and a large
open box filled with white wigs, gaudily colored robes and wooden
spears, swords and regalia, crudely coated with gilded paper, obviously
appertained to the puerile ceremonials of the Order of Druids.

I had exhausted the interest of these relics and had transferred my
attentions to the picture gallery when the other spectators and the
witnesses began to arrive.  Hastily I seated myself in the only
comfortable chair beside the one placed at the head of the table,
presumably for the coroner; and I had hardly done so when the latter
entered accompanied by the jury.  Immediately after them came the
sergeant, Inspector Badger, one or two plain-clothes men, and finally
the divisional surgeon.

The coroner took his seat at the head of the table and opened his book,
and the jury seated themselves on a couple of benches on one side of
the long table.

I looked with some interest at the twelve "good men and true."  They
were a representative group of British tradesmen, quiet, attentive, and
rather solemn; but my attention was particularly attracted by a small
man with a very large head and a shock of upstanding hair whom I had
diagnosed, after a glance at his intelligent but truculent countenance
and the shiny knees of his trousers, as the village cobbler.  He sat
between the broad-shouldered foreman, who looked like a blacksmith, and
a dogged, red-faced man whose general aspect of prosperous greasiness
suggested the calling of a butcher.

"The inquiry, gentlemen," the coroner commenced, "upon which we are now
entering concerns itself with two questions.  The first is that of
identity: who was this person whose body we have just viewed?  The
second is: How, when, and by what means did he come by his death?  We
will take the identity first and begin with the circumstances under
which the body was discovered."

Here the cobbler stood up and raised an excessively dirty hand.

"I rise, Mr. Chairman," said he, "to a point of order."  The other
jurymen looked at him curiously and some of them, I regret to say,
grinned.  "You have referred, sir," he continued, "to the body which we
have just viewed.  I wish to point out that we have not viewed a body;
we have viewed a collection of bones."

"We will refer to them as the remains, if you prefer it," said the
coroner.

"I do prefer it," was the reply, and the objector sat down.

"Very well," rejoined the coroner, and he proceeded to call the
witnesses, of whom the first was a laborer who had discovered the bones
in the watercress-bed.

"Do you happen to know how long it was since the watercress-beds had
been cleaned out previously?" the coroner asked, when the witness had
told the story of the discovery.

"They was cleaned out by Mr. Tapper's orders just before he gave them
up.  That will be a little better than two years ago.  In May it were.
I helped to clean 'em.  I worked on this very same place and there
wasn't no bones there then."

The coroner glanced at the jury.  "Any questions, gentlemen," he asked.

The cobbler directed an intimidating scowl at the witness and demanded:

"Were you searching for bones when you came on these remains?"

"Me!" exclaimed the witness.  "What should I be searching for bones
for?"

"Don't prevaricate," said the cobbler sternly; "answer the question:
Yes or no."

"No, of course I wasn't."

The juryman shook his enormous head dubiously as though implying that
he would let it pass this time but it mustn't happen again; and the
examination of the witnesses continued, without eliciting anything that
was new to me or giving rise to any incident, until the sergeant had
described the finding of the right arm in the Cuckoo Pits.

"Was this an accidental discovery?" the coroner asked.

"No.  We had instructions from Scotland Yard to search any likely ponds
in this neighborhood."

The coroner discreetly forbore to press this matter any further, but my
friend the cobbler was evidently on the qui vive, and I anticipated a
brisk cross-examination for Mr. Badger when his turn came.  The
inspector was apparently of the same opinion, for I saw him cast a
glance of the deepest malevolence at the too inquiring disciple of St.
Crispin.  In fact, his turn came next, and the cobbler's hair stood up
with unholy joy.

The finding of the lower half of the trunk in Staple's Pond at Loughton
was the inspector's own achievement, but he was not boastful about it.
The discovery, he remarked, followed naturally on the previous one in
the Cuckoo Pits.

"Had you any private information that led you to search this particular
neighborhood?" the cobbler asked.

"We had no private information whatever," replied Badger.

"Now I put it to you," pursued the juryman, shaking a forensic, and
very dirty, forefinger at the inspector; "here are certain remains
found at Sidcup; here are certain other remains found at St. Mary Cray,
and certain others at Lee.  All those places are in Kent.  Now isn't it
very remarkable that you should come straight down to Epping Forest,
which is in Essex, and search for those bones and find 'em?"

"We were making a systematic search of all likely places," replied
Badger.

"Exactly," said the cobbler, with a ferocious grin, "that's just my
point.  I say, isn't it very funny that, after finding the remains in
Kent some twenty miles from here, with the River Thames between, you
should come here to look for the bones and go straight to Staple's
Pond, where they happen to be--and find 'em?"

"It would have been more funny," Badger replied sourly, "if we'd gone
straight to a place where they happened _not_ to be--and found them."

A gratified snigger arose from the other eleven good men and true, and
the cobbler grinned savagely; but before he could think of a suitable
rejoinder the coroner interposed.

"The question is not very material," he said, "and we mustn't embarrass
the police by unnecessary inquiries."

"It's my belief," said the cobbler, "that he knew they were there all
the time."

"The witness has stated that he had no private information," said the
coroner; and he proceeded to take the rest of the inspector's evidence,
watched closely by the critical juror.

The account of the finding of the remains having been given in full,
the police surgeon was called and sworn; the jurymen straightened their
backs with an air of expectancy, and I turned over a page of my
notebook.

"You have examined the bones at present lying in the mortuary and
forming the subject of this inquiry?" the coroner asked.

"I have."

"Will you kindly tell us what you have observed?"

"I find that the bones are human bones, and are, in my opinion, all
parts of the same person.  They form a skeleton which is complete with
the exception of the skull, the third finger of the left hand, the
knee-caps, and the leg-bones--I mean the bones between the knees and
the ankles."

"Is there anything to account for the absence of the missing finger?"

"No.  There is no deformity and no sign of its having been amputated
during life.  In my opinion it was removed after death."

"Can you give us any description of the deceased?"

"I should say that these are the bones of an elderly man, probably over
sixty years of age, about five feet eight and a half inches in height,
of rather stout build, fairly muscular, and well preserved.  There are
no signs of disease excepting some old-standing rheumatic gout of the
right hip-joint."

"Can you form any opinion as to the cause of death?"

"No.  There are no marks of violence or signs of injury.  But it will
be impossible to form any opinion as to the cause of death until we
have seen the skull."

"Did you note anything else of importance?"

"Yes.  I was struck by the appearance of anatomical knowledge and skill
on the part of the person who dismembered the body.  The knowledge of
anatomy is proved by the fact that the corpse has been divided into
definite anatomical regions.  For instance, the bones of the neck are
complete and include the top joint of the backbone known as the atlas;
whereas a person without anatomical knowledge would probably take off
the head by cutting through the neck.  Then the arms have been
separated with the scapula (or shoulder-blade) and clavicle (or
collar-bone) attached, just as an arm would be removed for dissection.

"The skill is shown by the neat way in which the dismemberment has been
carried out.  The parts have not been rudely hacked asunder, but have
been separated at the joints so skilfully that I have not discovered a
single scratch or mark of the knife on any of the bones."

"Can you suggest any class of person who would be likely to possess the
knowledge and skill to which you refer?"

"It would, of course, be possessed by a surgeon or medical student, and
possibly by a butcher."

"You think that the person who dismembered this body may have been a
surgeon or a medical student?"

"Yes; or a butcher.  Some one accustomed to the dismemberment of bodies
and skilful with the knife."

Here the cobbler suddenly rose to his feet.

"I rise, Mr. Chairman," said he, "to protest against the statement that
has just been made."

"What statement?" demanded the coroner.

"Against the aspersion," continued the cobbler, with an oratorical
flourish, "that has been cast upon a honorable calling."

"I don't understand you," said the coroner.

"Doctor Summers has insinuated that this murder was committed by a
butcher.  Now a member of that honorable calling is sitting on this
jury----"

"You let me alone," growled the butcher.

"I will not let you alone," persisted the cobbler.  "I desire----"

"Oh, shut up, Pope!"  This was from the foreman, who, at the same
moment, reached out an enormous hairy hand with which he grabbed the
cobbler's coat-tails and brought him into a sitting posture with a
thump that shook the room.

But Mr. Pope, though seated, was not silenced.  "I desire," he said,
"to have my protest put on record."

"I can't do that," said the coroner, "and I can't allow you to
interrupt the witnesses."

"I am acting," said Mr. Pope, "in the interests of my friend here and
the members of a honorable----"

But here the butcher turned on him savagely, and, in a hoarse
stage-whisper, exclaimed:

"Look here, Pope; you've got too much of what the cat licks----"

"Gentlemen! gentlemen!" the coroner protested sternly; "I cannot permit
this unseemly conduct.  You are forgetting the solemnity of the
occasion and your own responsible positions.  I must insist on more
decent and decorous behavior."

There was profound silence, in the midst of which the butcher concluded
in the same hoarse whisper:

"--licks 'er paws with."

The coroner cast a withering glance at him, and, turning to the
witness, resumed the examination.

"Can you tell us, Doctor, how long a time has elapsed since the death
of the deceased?"

"I should say not less than eighteen months, but probably more.  How
much more it is impossible from inspection alone to say.  The bones are
perfectly clean--that is, clean of all soft structures--and will remain
substantially in their present condition for many years."

"The evidence of the man who found the remains in the watercress-bed
suggests that they could not have been there for more than two years.
Do the appearances in your opinion agree with that view?"

"Yes; perfectly."

"There is one more point, Doctor; a very important one.  Do you find
anything in any of the bones, or all of them together, which would
enable you to identify them as the bones of any particular individual?"

"No," replied Dr. Summers; "I found no peculiarity that could furnish
the means of personal identification."

"The description of a missing individual has been given to us," said
the coroner; "a man, fifty-nine years of age, five feet eight inches in
height, healthy, well preserved, rather broad in build, and having an
old Pott's fracture of the left ankle.  Do the remains that you have
examined agree with that description?"

"Yes, so far as agreement is possible.  There is no disagreement."

"The remains might be those of that individual?"

"They might; but there is no positive evidence that they are.  The
description would apply to a large proportion of elderly men, except as
to the fracture."

"You found no signs of such a fracture?"

"No.  Pott's fracture affects the bone called the fibula.  That is one
of the bones that has not yet been found, so there is no evidence on
that point.  The left foot was quite normal, but then it would be in
any case, unless the fracture had resulted in great deformity."

"You estimated the height of the deceased as half an inch greater than
that of the missing person.  Does that constitute a disagreement?"

"No; my estimate is only approximate.  As the arms are complete and the
legs are not, I have based my calculations on the width across the two
arms.  But measurement of the thigh-bones gives the same result.  The
length of the thigh-bones is one foot seven inches and five-eighths."

"So the deceased might not have been taller than five feet eight?"

"That is so; from five feet eight to five feet nine."

"Thank you.  I think that is all we want to ask you, Doctor; unless the
jury wish to put any questions."

He glanced uneasily at that august body, and instantly the
irrepressible Pope rose to the occasion.

"About that finger that is missing," said the cobbler.  "You say that
it was cut off after death?"

"That is my opinion."

"Now can you tell us why it was cut off?"

"No, I cannot."

"Oh, come now, Doctor Summers, you must have formed some opinion on the
subject."

Here the coroner interposed.  "The Doctor is only concerned with the
evidence arising out of the actual examination of the remains.  Any
personal opinions or conjectures that he may have formed are not
evidence, and he must not be asked about them."

"But, sir," objected Pope, "we want to know why that finger was cut
off.  It couldn't have been took off for no reason.  May I ask, sir, if
the person who is missing had anything peculiar about that finger?"

"Nothing is stated to that effect in the written description," replied
the coroner.

"Perhaps," suggested Pope, "Inspector Badger can tell us."

"I think," said the coroner, "we had better not ask the police too many
questions.  They will tell us anything that they wish to be made
public."

"Oh, very well," snapped the cobbler.  "If it's a matter of hushing it
up I've got no more to say; only I don't see how we are to arrive at a
verdict if we don't have the facts put before us."

All the witnesses having now been examined, the coroner proceeded to
sum up and address the jury.

"You have heard the evidence, gentlemen, of the various witnesses, and
you will have perceived that it does not enable us to answer either of
the questions that form the subject of this inquiry.  We now know that
the deceased was an elderly man, about sixty years of age, and about
five feet eight to nine in height; and that his death took place from
eighteen months to two years ago.  That is all we know.  From the
treatment to which the body has been subjected we may form conjectures
as to the circumstances of his death.  But we have no actual knowledge.
We do not know who the deceased was or how he came by his death.
Consequently, it will be necessary to adjourn this inquiry until fresh
facts are available, and as soon as that is the case, you will receive
due notice that your attendance is required."

The silence of the Court gave place to the confused noise of moving
chairs and a general outbreak of eager talk amidst which I rose and
made my way out into the street.  At the door I encountered Dr.
Summers, whose dog-cart was waiting close by.

"Are you going back to town now?" he asked.

"Yes," I answered; "as soon as I can catch a train."

"If you jump into my cart I'll run you down in time for the five-one.
You'll miss it if you walk."

I accepted his offer thankfully, and a minute later was spinning
briskly down the road to the station.

"Queer little devil, that man Pope," Dr. Summers remarked.  "Quite a
character; a socialist, laborite, agitator, general crank; anything for
a row."

"Yes," I answered; "that was what his appearance suggested.  It must be
trying for the coroner to get a truculent rascal like that on a jury."

Summers laughed.  "I don't know.  He supplies the comic relief.  And
then, you know, those fellows have their uses.  Some of his questions
were pretty pertinent."

"So Badger seemed to think."

"Yes, by Jove," chuckled Summers.  "Badger didn't like him a bit; and I
suspect the worthy inspector was sailing pretty close to the wind in
his answers."

"You think he really has some private information?"

"Depends upon what you mean by 'information.'  The police are not a
speculative body.  They wouldn't be taking all this trouble unless they
had a pretty straight tip from somebody.  How are Mr. and Miss
Bellingham?  I used to know them when they lived here."

I was considering a discreet answer to this question when we swept into
the station yard.  At the same moment the train drew up at the
platform, and, with a hurried hand-shake and hastily spoken thanks, I
sprang from the dog-cart and darted into the station.

During the rather slow journey homeward I read over my notes and
endeavored to extract from the facts they set forth some significance
other than that which lay on the surface, but without much success.
Then I fell to speculating on what Thorndyke would think of the
evidence at the inquest and whether he would be satisfied with the
information that I had collected.  These speculations lasted me, with
occasional digressions, until I arrived at the Temple and ran up the
stairs rather eagerly to my friends' chambers.

But here a disappointment awaited me.  The nest was empty with the
exception of Polton, who appeared at the laboratory door in his white
apron, with a pair of flat-nosed pliers in his hands.

"The Doctor had to go down to Bristol to consult over an urgent case,"
he explained, "and Doctor Jervis has gone with him.  They'll be away a
day or two, I expect, but the Doctor left this note for you."

He took a letter from the shelf, where it had been stood conspicuously
on edge, and handed it to me.  It was a short note from Thorndyke
apologizing for his sudden departure and asking me to give Polton my
notes with any comments that I had to make.

"You will be interested to learn," he added, "that the application will
be heard in the Probate Court the day after to-morrow.  I shall not be
present, of course, nor will Jervis, so I should like you to attend and
keep your eyes open for anything that may happen during the hearing and
that may not appear in the notes that Marchmont's clerk will be
instructed to take.  I have retained Dr. Payne to stand by and help you
with the practise, so that you can attend the Court with a clear
conscience."

This was highly flattering and quite atoned for the small
disappointment; with deep gratification at the trust that Thorndyke had
reposed in me, I pocketed the letter, handed my notes to Polton, wished
him "Good-evening," and betook myself to Fetter Lane.




CHAPTER XIV

WHICH CARRIES THE READER INTO THE PROBATE COURT

The Probate Court wore an air of studious repose when I entered with
Miss Bellingham and her father.  Apparently the great and inquisitive
public had not become aware of the proceedings that were about to take
place, or had not realized their connection with the sensational
"Mutilation Case"; but barristers and Pressmen, better informed, had
gathered in some strength, and the hum of their conversation filled the
air like the droning of the voluntary that ushers in a cathedral
service.

As we entered, a pleasant-faced, elderly gentleman rose and came
forward to meet us, shaking Mr. Bellingham's hand cordially and
saluting Miss Bellingham with a courtly bow.

"This is Mr. Marchmont, Doctor," said the former, introducing me; and
the solicitor, having thanked me for the trouble I had taken in
attending at the inquest, led us to a bench, at the farther end of
which was seated a gentleman whom I recognized as Mr. Hurst.

Mr. Bellingham recognized him at the same moment and glared at him
wrathfully.

"I see that scoundrel is here!" he exclaimed in a distinctly audible
voice, "pretending that he doesn't see me, because he is ashamed to
look me in the face, but----"

"Hush! hush! my dear sir," exclaimed the horrified solicitor; "we
mustn't talk like that, especially in this place.  Let me beg you--let
me entreat you to control your feelings, to make no indiscreet remarks;
in fact, to make no remarks at all," he added, with the evident
conviction that any remarks that Mr. Bellingham might make would be
certain to be indiscreet.

"Forgive me, Marchmont," Mr. Bellingham replied contritely.  "I will
control myself: I will really be quite discreet.  I won't even look at
him again--because, if I do, I shall probably go over and pull his
nose."

This form of discretion did not appear to be quite to Mr. Marchmont's
liking, for he took the precaution of insisting that Miss Bellingham
and I should sit on the farther side of his client, and thus
effectually separate him from his enemy.

"Who's the long-nosed fellow talking to Jellicoe?" Mr. Bellingham asked.

"That is Mr. Loram, K.C., Mr. Hurst's counsel; and the
convivial-looking gentleman next to him is our counsel, Mr. Heath, a
most able man and"--here Mr. Marchmont whispered behind his
hand--"fully instructed by Doctor Thorndyke."

At this juncture the judge entered and took his seat; the usher
proceeded with great rapidity to swear in the jury, and the Court
gradually settled down into that state of academic quiet which it
maintained throughout the proceedings, excepting when the noisy
swing-doors were set oscillating by some bustling clerk or reporter.

The judge was a somewhat singular-looking old gentleman, very short as
to his face and very long as to his mouth; which peculiarities,
together with a pair of large and bulging eyes (which he usually kept
closed), suggested a certain resemblance to a frog.  And he had a
curious frog-like trick of flattening his eyelids--as if in the act of
swallowing a large beetle--which was the only outward and visible sign
of emotion that he ever displayed.

As soon as the swearing in of the jury was completed Mr. Loram rose to
introduce the case; whereupon his lordship leaned back in his chair and
closed his eyes, as if bracing himself for a painful operation.

"The present proceedings," Mr. Loram explained, "are occasioned by the
unaccountable disappearance of Mr. John Bellingham, of 141, Queen
Square, Bloomsbury, which occurred about two years ago, or, to be more
precise, on the twenty-third of November, nineteen hundred and two.
Since that date nothing has been heard of Mr. Bellingham, and, as there
are certain substantial reasons for believing him to be dead, the
principal beneficiary under his will, Mr. George Hurst, is now applying
to the Court for permission to presume the death of the testator and
prove the will.  As the time which has elapsed since the testator was
last seen alive is only two years, the application is based upon the
circumstances of the disappearance, which were, in many respects, very
singular, the most remarkable feature of that disappearance being,
perhaps, its suddenness and completeness."

Here the judge remarked in a still, small voice that "It would,
perhaps, have been even more remarkable if the testator had disappeared
gradually and incompletely."

"No doubt, my lord," agreed Mr. Loram; "but the point is that the
testator, whose habits had always been regular and orderly, disappeared
on the date mentioned without having made any of the usual provisions
for the conduct of his affairs, and has not since then been seen or
heard of."

With this preamble Mr. Loram proceeded to give a narrative of the
events connected with the disappearance of John Bellingham, which was
substantially identical with that which I had read in the newspapers;
and having laid the actual facts before the jury, he went on to discuss
their probable import.

"Now, what conclusion," he asked, "will this strange, this most
mysterious train of events suggest to an intelligent person who shall
consider it impartially?  Here is a man who steps forth from the house
of his cousin or his brother, as the case may be, and forthwith, in the
twinkling of an eye, vanishes from human ken.  What is the explanation?
Did he steal forth and, without notice or hint of his intention, take
train to some seaport, thence to embark for some distant land, leaving
his affairs to take care of themselves and his friends to speculate
vainly as to his whereabouts?  Is he now hiding abroad, or even at
home, indifferent alike to the safety of his own considerable property
and the peace of mind of his friends?  Or is it that death has come
upon him unawares by sickness, by accident, or, more probably, by the
hand of some unknown criminal?  Let us consider the probabilities.

"Can he have disappeared by his own deliberate act?  Why not? it may be
asked.  Men undoubtedly do disappear from time to time, to be
discovered by chance or to reappear voluntarily after intervals of
years and find their names almost forgotten and their places filled by
new-comers.  Yes; but there is always some reason for a disappearance
of this kind, even though it be a bad one.  Family discords that make
life a weariness; pecuniary difficulties that make life a succession of
anxieties; distaste for particular circumstances and surroundings from
which there seems no escape; inherent restlessness and vagabond
tendencies, and so on.

"Do any of these explanations apply to the present case?  No, they do
not.  Family discords--at least those capable of producing chronic
misery--appertain exclusively to a married state.  But the testator was
a bachelor with no encumbrances whatever.  Pecuniary anxieties can be
equally excluded.  The testator was in easy, in fact, in affluent
circumstances.  His mode of life was apparently agreeable and full of
interest and activity, and he had full liberty of change if he wished.
He had been accustomed to travel, and could do so again without
absconding.  He had reached an age when radical changes do not seem
desirable.  He was a man of fixed and regular habits, and his
regularity was of his own choice and not due to compulsion or
necessity.  When last seen by his friends, as I shall prove, he was
proceeding to a definite destination with the expressed intention of
returning for purposes of his own appointing.  He did return and then
vanished, leaving those purposes unachieved.

"If we conclude that he has voluntarily disappeared and is at present
in hiding, we adopt an opinion that is entirely at variance with all
these weighty facts.  If, on the other hand, we conclude that he has
died suddenly, or has been killed by an accident or otherwise, we are
adopting a view that involves no inherent improbabilities and that is
entirely congruous with the known facts; facts that will be proved by
the testimony of the witnesses whom I shall call.  The supposition that
the testator is dead is not only more probable than that he is alive; I
submit it is the only reasonable explanation of the circumstances of
his disappearance.

"But this is not all.  The presumption of death which arises so
inevitably out of the mysterious and abrupt manner in which the
testator disappeared has recently received most conclusive and dreadful
confirmation.  On the fifteenth of July last there were discovered at
Sidcup the remains of a human arm--a left arm, gentlemen, from the hand
of which the third, or ring, finger was missing.  The doctor who has
examined that arm will tell you that the finger was cut off either
after death or immediately before; and his evidence will prove
conclusively that that arm must have been deposited in the place where
it was found just about the time when the testator disappeared.  Since
that first discovery, other portions of the same mutilated body have
come to light; and it is a strange and significant fact that they have
all been found in the immediate neighborhood of Eltham or Woodford.
You will remember, gentlemen, that it was either at Eltham or Woodford
that the testator was last seen alive.

"And now observe the completeness of the coincidence.  These human
remains, as you will be told presently by the experienced and learned
medical gentleman who has examined them most exhaustively, are those of
a man of about sixty years of age, about five feet eight inches in
height, fairly muscular and well preserved, apparently healthy, and
rather stoutly built.  Another witness will tell you that the missing
man was about sixty years of age, about five feet eight inches in
height, fairly muscular and well preserved, apparently healthy, and
rather stoutly built.  And--another most significant and striking
fact--the testator was accustomed to wear upon the third finger of his
left hand--the very finger that is missing from the remains that were
found--a most peculiar ring, which fitted so tightly that he was unable
to get it off after once putting it on; a ring, gentlemen, of so
peculiar a pattern that had it been found on the body must have
instantly established the identity of the remains.  In a word,
gentlemen, the remains which have been found are those of a man exactly
like the testator; they differ from him in no respects whatever; they
display a mutilation which suggests an attempt to conceal an
identifying peculiarity which he undoubtedly presented; and they were
deposited in their various hiding-places about the time of the
testator's disappearance.  Accordingly, when you have heard these facts
proved by the sworn testimony of competent witnesses, together with the
facts relating to the disappearance, I shall ask you for a verdict in
accordance with that evidence."


Mr. Loram sat down, and adjusting a pair of pince-nez, rapidly glanced
over his brief while the usher was administering the oath to the first
witness.

This was Mr. Jellicoe, who stepped into the box and directed a stony
gaze at the (apparently) unconscious judge.  The usual preliminaries
having been gone through, Mr. Loram proceeded to examine him.

"You were the testator's solicitor and confidential agent, I believe?"

"I was--and am."

"How long have you known him?"

"Twenty-seven years."

"Judging from your experience of him, should you say that he was a
person likely to disappear voluntarily and suddenly to cease to
communicate with his friends?"

"No."

"Kindly give your reasons for that opinion."

"Such conduct on the part of the testator would be entirely opposed to
his habits and character as they are known to me.  He was exceedingly
regular and business-like in his dealings with me.  When traveling
abroad he always kept me informed as to his whereabouts, or, if he was
likely to be beyond reach of communication, he always advised me
beforehand.  One of my duties was to collect a pension which he drew
from the Foreign Office, and on no occasion, previous to his
disappearance, has he ever failed to furnish me punctually with the
necessary documents."

"Had he, so far as you know, any reasons for wishing to disappear?"

"No."

"When and where did you last see him alive?"

"At six o'clock in the evening, on the fourteenth of October, nineteen
hundred and two, at 141, Queen Square, Bloomsbury."

"Kindly tell us what happened on that occasion."

"The testator had called for me at my office at a quarter past three,
and asked me to come with him to his house to meet Doctor Norbury.  I
accompanied him to 141, Queen Square, and shortly after we arrived
Doctor Norbury came to look at some antiquities that the testator
proposed to give to the British Museum.  The gift consisted of a mummy
with four Canopic jars and other tomb-furniture which the testator
stipulated should be exhibited together in a single case and in the
state in which they were then presented.  Of these objects, the mummy
only was ready for inspection.  The tomb-furniture had not yet arrived
in England, but was expected within a week.  Doctor Norbury accepted
the gift on behalf of the Museum, but could not take possession of the
objects until he had communicated with the Director and obtained his
formal authority.  The testator accordingly gave me certain
instructions concerning the delivery of the gift, as he was leaving
England that evening."

"Are those instructions relevant to the subject of this inquiry?"

"I think they are.  The testator was going to Paris, and perhaps from
thence to Vienna.  He instructed me to receive and unpack the
tomb-furniture on its arrival, and to store it, with the mummy, in a
particular room, where it was to remain for three weeks.  If he
returned within that time he was to hand it over in person to the
Museum authorities; if he had not returned within that time, he desired
me to notify the Museum authorities that they were at liberty to take
possession of and remove the collection at their convenience.  From
these instructions I gathered that the testator was uncertain as to the
length of his absence from England and the extent of his journey."

"Did he state precisely where he was going?"

"No.  He said he was going to Paris and perhaps to Vienna, but he gave
no particulars and I asked for none."

"Do you, in fact, know where he went?"

"No.  He left the house at six o'clock wearing a long, heavy overcoat
and carrying a suit-case and an umbrella.  I wished him 'Good-by' at
the door and watched him walk away as if going toward Southampton Row.
I have no idea where he went, and I never saw him again."

"Had he no other luggage than the suit-case?"

"I do not know, but I believe not.  He was accustomed to travel with
the bare necessaries, and to buy anything further he wanted _en route_."

"Did he say nothing to the servants as to the probable date of his
return?"

"There were no servants excepting the caretaker.  The house was not
used for residential purposes.  The testator slept and took his meals
at his club, though he kept his clothes at the house."

"Did you receive any communication from him after he left?"

"No.  I never heard from him again in any way.  I waited for three
weeks as he had instructed me, and then notified the Museum authorities
that the collection was ready for removal.  Five days later Doctor
Norbury came and took formal possession of it, and it was transferred
to the Museum forthwith."

"When did you next hear of the testator?"

"On the twenty-third of November following at a quarter-past seven in
the evening.  Mr. George Hurst came to my rooms, which are over my
office, and informed me that the testator had called at his house
during his absence and had been shown into the study to wait for him.
That on his--Mr. Hurst's--arrival it was found that the testator had
disappeared without acquainting the servants of his intended departure,
and without being seen by anyone to leave the house.  Mr. Hurst thought
this so remarkable that he had hastened up to town to inform me.  I
also thought it a remarkable circumstance, especially as I had received
no communication from the testator, and we both decided that it was
advisable to inform the testator's brother, Godfrey, of what had
happened.

"Accordingly Mr. Hurst and I proceeded as quickly as possible to
Liverpool Street and took the first train available to Woodford, where
Mr. Godfrey Bellingham then resided.  We arrived at his house at five
minutes to nine, and were informed by the servant that he was not at
home, but that his daughter was in the library, which was a detached
building situated in the grounds.  The servant lighted a lantern and
conducted us through the grounds to the library, where we found Mr.
Godfrey Bellingham and Miss Bellingham.  Mr. Godfrey had only just come
in and had entered by the back gate, which had a bell that rang in the
library.  Mr. Hurst informed Mr. Godfrey of what had occurred, and then
we left the library to walk up to the house.  A few paces from the
library I noticed by the light of the lantern, which Mr. Godfrey was
carrying, a small object lying on the lawn.  I pointed it out to him
and he picked it up, and then we all recognized it as a scarab that the
testator was accustomed to wear on his watch-chain.  It was fitted with
a gold wire passed through the suspension hole and a gold ring.  Both
the wire and the ring were in position, but the ring was broken.  We
went to the house and questioned the servants as to visitors; but none
of them had seen the testator, and they all agreed that no visitor
whatsoever had come to the house during the afternoon or evening.  Mr.
Godfrey and Miss Bellingham both declared that they had neither seen
nor heard anything of the testator, and were both unaware that he had
returned to England.  As the circumstances were somewhat disquieting, I
communicated, on the following morning, with the police and requested
them to make inquiries; which they did, with the result that a
suit-case bearing the initials 'J. B.', was found to be lying unclaimed
in the cloakroom at Charing Cross Station.  I was able to identify the
suit-case as that which I had seen the testator carry away from Queen
Square.  I was also able to identify some of the contents.  I
interviewed the cloakroom attendant, who informed me that the suit-case
had been deposited on the twenty-third about 4:15 p.m.  He had no
recollection of the person who deposited it.  It remained unclaimed in
the possession of the railway company for three months, and was then
surrendered to me."

"Were there any marks or labels on it showing the route by which it had
traveled?"

"There were no labels on it and no marks other than the initials 'J.
B.'"

"Do you happen to know the testator's age?"

"Yes.  He was fifty-nine on the eleventh of October, nineteen hundred
and two."

"Can you tell us what his height was?"

"Yes.  He was exactly five feet eight inches."

"What sort of health had he?"

"So far as I know his health was good.  I am not aware that he suffered
from any disease.  I am only judging by his appearance, which was that
of a healthy man."

"Should you describe him as well preserved or otherwise?"

"I should describe him as a well preserved man for his age."

"How should you describe his figure?"

"I should describe him as rather broad and stout in build, and fairly
muscular, though not exceptionally so."

Mr. Loram made a rapid note of these answers and then said:

"You have told us, Mr. Jellicoe, that you have known the testator
intimately for twenty-seven years.  Now, did you ever notice whether he
was accustomed to wear any rings upon his fingers?"

"He wore upon the third finger of his left hand a copy of an antique
ring which bore the device of the Eye of Osiris.  That was the only
ring he ever wore as far as I know."

"Did he wear it constantly?"

"Yes, necessarily; because it was too small for him, and having once
squeezed it on he was never able to get it off again."

This was the sum of Mr. Jellicoe's evidence, and at its conclusion the
witness glanced inquiringly at Mr. Bellingham's counsel.  But Mr. Heath
remained seated, attentively considering the notes that he had just
made, and finding that there was to be no cross-examination, Mr.
Jellicoe stepped down from the box.  I leaned back on my bench, and,
turning my head, observed Miss Bellingham deep in thought.

"What do you think of it?" I asked.

"It seems very complete and conclusive," she replied.  And then, with a
sigh, she murmured: "Poor old Uncle John!  How horrid it sounds to talk
of him in this cold-blooded, business-like way, as 'the testator,' as
if he were nothing but a sort of algebraical sign."

"There isn't much room for sentiment, I suppose, in the proceedings of
the Probate Court," I replied.  To which she assented, and then asked:
"Who is this lady?"

"This lady" was a fashionably dressed young woman who had just bounced
into the witness-box and was now being sworn.  The preliminaries being
finished, she answered Miss Bellingham's question and Mr. Loram's by
stating that her name was Augustina Gwendoline Dobbs, and that she was
housemaid to Mr. George Hurst, of "The Poplars," Eltham.

"Mr. Hurst lives alone, I believe?" said Mr. Loram.

"I don't know what you mean by that," Miss Dobbs began; but the
barrister explained:

"I mean that I believe he is unmarried?"

"Well, and what about it?" the witness demanded tartly.

"I am asking you a question."

"I know that," said the witness viciously; "and I say that you've no
business to make any such insinuations to a respectable young lady when
there's a cook-housekeeper and a kitchenmaid living in the house, and
him old enough to be my father----"

Here his lordship flattened his eyelids with startling effect, and Mr.
Loram interrupted: "I make no insinuations.  I merely ask, Is your
employer, Mr. Hurst, an unmarried man, or is he not?"

"I never asked him," said the witness sulkily.

"Please answer my question--yes or no."

"How can I answer your question?  He may be married or he may not.  How
do I know?  I'm no private detective."

Mr. Loram directed a stupefied gaze at the witness, and in the ensuing