I

These opportunities for doing good come to the one who is a Christian.

First: I would not preach to others what I did not first preach to
myself, but there are many of us as ministers like Chalmers, who was
one day visiting an old man seventy-two years of age, apparently in
perfect health.  They talked together about everything but Christ.  The
minister was inclined to speak about his soul, but did not.  Before
morning the old man was dead.  Dr. Chalmers returned to the house,
called all the old man's household about him, and offered the most
touching apology and prayer.  He spent the entire day in the woods,
saying, "If I had been faithful this might not have been."  I have no
question but God would say, "So shall thy judgment be."

Second: You who are Christian workers have failed.  A Christian
merchant was told that there was a certain man with whom he had traded
for years to whom he had never spoken about his soul.  "I will speak
the next time I see him," he said, but he never came, for while he was
busy here and there the man was gone from him.  Before he came again
death met him.  So shall his judgment be.

Third: You who are parents have failed.  Years ago a young Scotchman
from Fife, in Scotland, was leaving home.  He was not an active
Christian.  His mother went with him to the turn of the road and said,
"Now, Robert, there is one thing you must promise before you go."
"No," said the lad, "I will not promise until I know."  "But it will
not be difficult," said his mother.  "Then I will promise," he said.
And she said, "Every night before you lie down to sleep read a chapter
and pray."  He did not want to promise it, but he did.  Who was that
Robert?  It was Robert Moffat, the great missionary, who, when he came
into the Kingdom, brought almost a continent in after him.  Many a
mother has lost her opportunity to speak to her boy, and she has lost
it because she has not lived as a mother should who would help her boy.
So shall her judgment be.


II

These opportunities come to the unsaved.  The Bible is full of men who
have had an opportunity to be saved but are lost.

First: There is Herod.  His face blanches as he listens to the truth,
he is ready to forsake some of his sin; but more is required than that
to be a Christian, and Herod fails.

Second: Look at Felix.  As he gazes into the face of Paul the Apostle
and hears his message, he trembles; a moment more he will be a
Christian; but more is required than that to be saved, and Felix is
lost.

Third: Behold Judas.  See him at the feet of Jesus.  Later he is full
of remorse because he has sold him for thirty pieces of silver; but
mere remorse never saved a soul, and Judas is lost.

You have doubtless heard of that young girl of whom the poet tells us.
She had a string of pearls in her hand and her hand is in the water,
the string is broken, and one by one the pearls slip away.  So it has
been with you who have been Christians.  My hope is that there may be
one pearl left yet.  To-day is the accepted time; do not let the
opportunity slip.


III

The Bible is full of men just the opposite who had opportunities to be
saved and embraced them.

First: Zaccheus.  There was just one day, one hour, one moment; when
Jesus would pass by, and Zaccheus ran to the sycamore tree; but he made
haste and came down, and that saved him.

Second: Bartimeus.  There was just a moment when Jesus was near to hear
the sound of his voice.  If Bartimeus failed that moment he would be
blind forever.  I can see him quickly turning his sightless eyes in the
direction of the Savior.  He cried unto him and it was his earnestness
that saved him.  We must make haste while yet it is to-day.

Third: Coming down from the mountain, where he had preached his great
sermon, Jesus beheld the leper.  He was dead, according to the law, yet
he had a napkin bound about his mouth.  If one had called to him, "Your
child is dead," he could not have gone to see the little one.  But he
breaks through all of this and cries, "If thou wilt thou canst make me
clean."  It was his desperation that saved him.

Fourth: Look at the dying thief, so near that he could have touched
Christ if he had been free.  Here yawned before him the very brink of
hell, here was judgment for his sins, for he acknowledged that he was
justly punished.  I can see him struggle to decide whether he shall
speak or not, and at last he cries, "Lord, remember me."  And Jesus
said, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise."  It was his last
chance, and he took it.  And this may be yours.  God forbid that you
should let the opportunity slip away.

But whether my message is to ministers, to Christian workers, to
parents or to the unsaved, I call your attention to this fact: It was
when the soldier was busy that the prisoner escaped.  Many of you have
been busy about pleasure, and some day it will mock you.  You have been
caught by the fascination of business, and it does not prevent your
soul having been surrounded by sin from which after a while you cannot
escape, and if the opportunity slips away so shall our judgment be, for
we must decide it.  In a few years at the latest, possibly in a few
months, perhaps in a few weeks--who knows but within a few
days?--eternity shall be upon us.  If it is an opportunity that is gone
or a soul that is lost it will be a sad eternity indeed for us.  To
this end may God keep us watchful.




A GREAT VICTORY

TEXT: "_And they stood every man in his place round about the camp, and
all the host ran, and cried, and fled._"--Judges 7:21.

Few things in this world are so inspiring to the traveler and at the
same time so depressing as a city or temple in ruins.  I remember a
delightful experience in passing through the ruins of Karnak and Luxor,
on the Nile in Egypt, and later passing through Phylae at Assuan on the
Nile; and these two thoughts, each the opposite of the other, kept
constantly coming to my mind.  The loneliness is oppressive, and one
would be delighted to hear the song of a bird, the bark of a dog, or
the cry of a child.  These ruins were once happy homes, or were temples
filled with worshipers.  Here little children played and gray-haired
patriarchs worshiped their gods.

Akin to this picture is the one of the people of Israel at the time of
this story, and the alternating feelings of pleasure and sadness keep
constantly coming and going.  The condition of the land beggared
description.  Homes were there, but no children were about the doors;
there were fields, but no crops to be harvested; pastures, but no
cattle fed upon them; the hills were to be seen, but no flocks bleated
on their sides; people were there, but they were found in the caves and
hiding away on the mountain sides.  When they had entered Canaan, these
chosen people of God, he had said unto them, "And it shall come to
pass, if thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee
this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations
of the earth; and all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake
thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God.
Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the
field.  Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep.  Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.
Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be
when thou goest out.  The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up
against thee to be smitten before thy face; they shall come out against
thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.  The Lord shall command
the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou settest
thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the Lord thy
God giveth thee.  The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto
himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways.  And all the
people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the
Lord; and they shall be afraid of thee."

We have here the Old Testament Beatitudes, and there is nothing like
them.

The story with which the text is associated really begins in the first
verse of the sixth chapter of Judges, "And the children of Israel did
evil in the sight of the Lord; and the Lord delivered them into the
hand of Midian seven years."  But there must also be read in connection
with this the last verse of the fifth chapter of Judges, "So let all
thine enemies perish, O Lord; but let them that love him be as the sun
when he goeth forth in his might.  And the land had rest forty years."

It seems incredible that there could be such a difference in the
experiences of God's people, and yet, as you study them in all their
wanderings, you will find, if you turn over but one leaf of the Bible,
the people who sing to-day are active in evil to-morrow, and the
history of Israel is the history of one's self.  Life is like a short
ladder, as some one has said, and we spend most of our time going up to
pray and down to sin.  There is a striking picture in the second verse
of the sixth chapter.  The chosen people of God were dwelling in caves
instead of their rightful positions in their homes, and the same is
true to-day; men who ought to be at the front are left behind because
they are living selfish lives or lives of sin.  Do not for a moment
think that I am saying that because a man is living out of sight that
he is doing nothing, for we have only to remember Gideon to know that
this is not true.  He was a hidden man doing an honest work, and the
Angel of the Lord called him, saying, "The Lord is with thee, thou
mighty man of valor."  To this Gideon makes a significant reply in the
thirteenth verse of the sixth chapter of Judges, "And Gideon said unto
him, Oh, my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen
us? and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying,
Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? but now the Lord hath forsaken
us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites."  For the angel
had said, "The Lord is with thee, Gideon," and Gideon had said, "If the
Lord is with us, then how can these things be?"  And the angel did not
say it.  How often it is true that we miss the truth of God because we
miss the grammar of the Bible.  When Gideon had thus replied, we read
in the fourteenth verse of the sixth chapter, "And the Lord _looked_
upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel
from the hand of the Midianites; have not I sent thee?"  And the thing
to pay special attention to there is that the angel _looked_ at Gideon.
Sometimes in translating a foreign language you come upon a word which
you cannot express in your own language; so it is with us here, for the
Lord looked Gideon into a new man and said unto him, "Go and thou shalt
save the people," which leads me to say that one man right with God is
mightier than a host against God.  The seventh chapter of Judges opens
with the significant word "then."  You must have all that goes before
in your mind to appreciate this word.  God has a plan for every life,
and all your sickness, your disappointment, your discipline, is for
something.  There must be a "then" for you.  It is the call of God and
the answer to it that makes real life.  Compare Gideon the farmer with
Gideon the soldier, and you will see the difference in a human life.
Let one, however low or ignorant, but hear the voice of God and respond
to it, and when such an one answers God's call for his country, for the
church, or for Christ, the heroic in him is being stirred.

It is said that years ago there used to be a man in Mr. Spurgeon's
Tabernacle who never had spoken in his social meetings, for the reason
that he had a stammering tongue.  One day he heard the great preacher
say that the Lord could use even the tongue of the stammerer.  It sent
him to his home, and to his knees, and when he rose to his feet after
having yielded himself wholly to God, as if by miracle God gave him the
gift of speech, and I have been told that no one in the Tabernacle
spoke more to the edification of the people or the praise of God than
he.

Some years ago when John G. Woolley was delivering his closing address
on the commencement day at college a young boy heard him under peculiar
circumstances.  He had walked in from the country.  It was a hot day,
and to quench his thirst he had tasted the water of one of the springs.
It made him very ill, and just to escape the heat of the sun he crept
under the platform, which had been erected upon the college campus for
the commencement exercises.  While there he fell asleep and was
awakened by the sound of a musical voice.  Something that the
graduating student said stirred his soul, and he there made a vow that
he would be a preacher.  It was God's call to him and his answer.  He
has since become one of the world's most famous preachers, and his
influence has been as wide as the world itself.  When the Midianites
stood against the children of Israel God called Gideon to lead an army
against them, and this text is part of this story.

The scene was remarkable.  Thirty-two thousand people following
Gideon's leadership with the first flush of the battle upon them.  They
were ready to march, and God said when he looked at them, "The people
are too many."  They would seem to us to have been too few, for
literally a multitude of Midianites stood against him.  But we go wrong
so often by applying human arithmetic to divine decrees.  It is said
that when Napoleon marched with his soldiers he was counted as being
equal to 40,000 of his men, and so, after all, it is not a question of
numbers with God, but of the few men whom he can use.

The test by means of which Gideon's army was decreased was remarkable.
In Judges, the seventh chapter and the second to seventh verses, we
read, "And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are
too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel
vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.  Now
therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever
is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from Mount
Gilead.  And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and
there remained ten thousand.  And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people
are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them
for thee there; and it shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This
shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I
say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.  So
he brought down the people unto the water; and the Lord said unto
Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog
lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth
down upon his knees to drink.  And the number of them that lapped,
putting their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men; but all the
rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.  And the
Lord said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that lapped will I save
you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand; and let all the other
people go every man unto his place."  This test is going on now among
men; by the way we walk and talk, by the way we listen and work, men
form their judgment of us, and so does God.  We may measure our
spiritual state by the way we spend our leisure moments, by the way we
spend our Saturday afternoons, by our rest days, and by the books we
read.  There is flowing past us the stream of literature and the stream
of pleasure, and the question is whether we are going to fall down
before these streams to drink or whether we are just going to dip up as
we hurry along to fulfill our mission; or, in other words, whether we
are to be so taken up with God's plan that we have no time to idle away
and no disposition to turn aside.

"It does not so much matter how many members one may have in his
church, for under the banner of a popular Christianity soldiers march.
What if there should be a struggle ahead when to be a Christian would
mean to suffer martyrdom, or dying at the stake, or contending with the
beasts of Ephesus like Paul, how then do you think it would be?"  And
yet all the time to-day the struggle is going on; both from within and
from without the foe is assailing us, the Bible is being attacked,
Christ is being denied, the resurrection is counted a myth, and the
future is being questioned, and in every part of the church it would
seem as if men thought that the life of the Christian was all a
holiday, for people are idling, gossiping, buying and selling, marrying
and giving in marriage, instead of being in the thick of the fight in
the name of the Lord of hosts.  Give us three hundred in the church
right with God rather than the thirty-two thousand compromising with
sin and the world, and we shall win the victory.


I

I am impressed in this story with the thought of how much may be
accomplished without wealth, influence or material strength.  We
somehow seem to think that we cannot work as ministers without a fine
equipment.  We have an idea that we must have a committee back of us to
be assured of success, that if we are without influence we have a small
mission in the world, forgetting that Michelangelo wrought the frescoes
in the Sistine Chapel with the ochres which he digged with his own
hands in the garden of the Vatican; forgetting also that the greatest
work in the world has been accomplished by men like Gideon, who delayed
not for elaborate preparation, but just took firebrands and
torches--indeed, anything they could lay their hands upon--and cried
out, "The sword of the Lord and of Gideon," and won the victory.  The
text is most striking, and presents an outline which any one ought to
be able to see.


II

_They stood_.  It is not so easy to stand as to march or to fight.  I
have been told that the most difficult service of the soldier is picket
duty; and yet never until we learn to stand shall we be able to fight.
In the fourteenth chapter of Exodus, the thirteenth and fourteenth
verses, we read, "And Moses said unto the people.  Fear ye not, stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you
to-day, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to-day, ye shall see them
again no more forever.  The Lord shall fight for you and ye shall hold
your peace."  And again, in 2 Chronicles, the twentieth chapter and the
seventeenth verse, it is recorded, "Ye shall not need to fight in this
battle: set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the
Lord with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed;
to-morrow go out against them, for the Lord will be with you."

Three thoughts are impressed upon my mind:

First: _Before any service, let us stand, giving God a chance with us_.
Let him use you and not you use him so much.  In the beginning of his
Christian service Hudson Taylor, the China Inland missionary, was
desirous of being used and cried out for God to send him out into
service.  At last God seemed to say to him, "My child, I have made up
my mind to save inland China.  If you will come and walk with me I will
do it through you," and the China Inland Mission was born.

Second: _Wait for orders_.  In Ephesians the sixth chapter and the
tenth to the thirteenth verses, we have the following description of a
soldier: "Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might.  Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the devil.  For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in
high places.  Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to
stand."  The striking part of that description is the sentence, "having
done all, to stand."  In other words, with all our ingenuity and our
planning, with all our preparation and equipment, we lack one thing:
that one thing is the touch of the Almighty God.

Third: _Be willing to do the common thing_.  It was rather interesting
to march with thirty-two thousand, and a striking thing to break
pitchers and cry aloud, "The sword of the Lord and of Gideon," but just
to stand was a different matter, and not at all easy.  If we were only
willing to do the common things for Christ we should accomplish more in
our lives.

The great Bethany Sunday school building standing in Philadelphia is a
model in its perfect equipment.  The mighty Sunday school held there is
one of the wonders of the world.  The building was begun not only in
the mind and heart of the distinguished superintendent, the Hon. John
Wanamaker, but when he appealed for funds as they were then needed one
of the poorest children in the city made practically the first and best
contribution.  She gathered bones from the alleyways, sold them and
brought her few pennies to help make this wonderful work a success.


III

_Every man in his place_.

First: Let us remember that God has a plan for every life.  Ephesians
4:8-13, "Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.  (Now that he ascended,
what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the
earth?  He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things.)  And he gave some,
apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors
and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ."

Second: That which in our lives fits into God's plans dignifies and
strengthens in every way.

A few years ago there was a young man selling farming implements.  He
felt inclined to do Christian work, and later on became a Christian
Association secretary.  He became known locally because of his ability
to sing in a male quartette.  He was a good singer.  Whether he was
more than the average secretary I do not know.  He one day felt the
call to preach and shrank back from it because he felt he was without
ability, then gave himself to God without reserve.  He has since become
one of the greatest preachers to men in our country, has possibly led
more men to Christ than any other man of his day, and it was my
privilege a short time ago to see hundreds of men under the power of
his preaching come to Christ; and this was all because Fred B. Smith
gave himself unreservedly to Christ.

Third: It may be a very ordinary service that God calls you to perform,
but if you feel it your place your service will please him.  Rev. Dr.
Torrey tells the story of the poor mother who by hard day's work made
it possible for her boy to attend college.  The day of the graduation
came, and he said to her, "You must go with me to the commencement."
Naturally she shrank from it, for her clothing was of the poorest sort;
but he said that there would be no commencement without her.  He was
the valedictorian of his class.  Proudly he led her into the hall, and
with beaming face she listened while the great throng applauded his
brilliant speech.  When he received his gold medal he walked down from
the platform and pinned it upon her breast, saying, "This is yours,"
and she was as proud as any queen could have been.  It was a very
common thing to wash and iron for one's daily living, but to be honored
thus was something any mother might long to experience.  She simply did
her best in a humble way and pleased God.


IV

_Round about the Camp_.

First: Let it be remembered that we have a responsibility to others.
Some years ago on the Irish Sea a terrific storm was raging.  It was
known that just off the coast a vessel was going to pieces.  Suddenly
two men, an old sea captain and his son, put out through the storm.
Everybody tried to persuade them not to do so, for it seemed to be
absolutely useless.  Over the waves, which appeared almost mountain
high, they pushed along until at last amid the cheers of the waiting
throng they returned with their little boat filled with those who had
been all but lost upon the ship.  When the minister said to the old sea
captain, "Why do you do this?  Why take such a risk?" he answered, "I
have been there myself, and I knew the danger."  It is because we have
been once in sin and now are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ
that we say something to those who are about us.

Second: We are responsible for others.  When Horace Bushnell was a
tutor in Yale he was a stumbling block to all the students because he
was not a Christian.  He realized this himself, and yet he said, "How
can I accept Christ or the Bible, for I do not believe in either one."
And then the question came to him as from God, "What do you believe?"
and he said, "I only know there is a difference between right and
wrong."  God seemed to say to him, "Have you ever taken that stand
where you would say, 'I am committed to the right even if it ends in
death'?" and he said, "I never have."  Falling upon his knees he said,
"O God, if Jesus Christ be true, reveal him to me and I will follow
him."  And he began to walk in the light, which constantly increased,
and almost every student in Yale came to Christ.  "No man liveth unto
himself alone."  We are responsible for the souls of other men.  We are
also responsible for their service; if we are half-hearted they will
surely be.


V

"_And the host ran, and cried and fled._"  What hosts are against us
to-day?

First: As individuals there may be coming constantly to our minds a
question of doubt, of pride, or of secret sin, and we wonder if these
are evidences that we are not Christians.  Not at all.  They are but
the fruit of our old nature, and are the hosts encamped against us.  We
have only to take our stand with Christ, right with him, and we shall
win the victory.

Second: In the Church we meet with indifference, worldliness,
infidelity, and we wonder how we may win the victory.  The answer is
simply, "We have but to be right with God and to walk with God," and
three hundred such followers of his could put the enemy to rout quickly.

Third: There is also a battle which those of us who are Christians are
obliged to fight.  It has to do with the unsaved man.  Men are not
Christians to-day not because they do not believe, not because they are
without interest in the future, but simply because they have put off
and put off, and I know of no way to overcome this difficulty except by
taking one's stand with Christ and with those who are like-minded with
Christ.  Having first concern for the lost, then his intense
earnestness in their salvation, the proscrastination of the sinner will
flee away.  For such a victory as this we plead and pray.




PAUL A PATTERN OF PRAYER

TEXT: "_If ye shall ask anything in my name I will do it._"--John 14:14.

Jesus testified in no uncertain way concerning prayer, for not alone in
this chapter does he speak but in all his messages to his disciples he
is seeking to lead them into the place where they may know how to pray.

In this fourteenth chapter of John, where he is coming into the shadow
of the cross and is speaking to his disciples concerning those things
which ought to have the greatest weight with them, the heart of his
message seems to be prayer.  What an encouragement it is to his
disciples to pray when they remember that he said, "Verily, verily, I
say unto you.  He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do
also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my
Father.  And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that
the Father may be glorified in the Son" (John 14:12-13).

Jesus was himself a pattern of prayer.  He had prayed under all
circumstances; with him the day was born in prayer, went along in
meditation and closed in most intimate fellowship and communion with
his Father.  Under all circumstances, whether it be the raising of
Lazarus from the dead, or the breathing in of the very spirit of God so
essential to him in his earthly ministry, he prayed; and because he was
a man of prayer himself, he could speak to his disciples with authority
concerning this subject.

If we ourselves would know how to pray there are certain great
principles which must be remembered when we come to him.

First: _We must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them
that diligently seek him_.  If one has hazy or mystical ideas of Christ
then from the very nature of the case prayer is impossible.

Second: _We must believe his word_.  Mr. Spurgeon's statement that when
he went to God he always went pleading a promise is the secret of his
great success as a man of prayer.  Earthly parents are not insensible
to the pledges they make to their children and surely God cannot be.

Third: _We must confess and forsake our sins_.  To confess sin is to
arraign before us those sins of which we know ourselves to be guilty,
and when they appear before us in solemn and awful procession we must
heartily renounce them.  If we do not we cannot pray.  In another place
in God's word we read, "Ye ask and receive not, because, . . ." and
while in the verse the rest of the sentence is "Ye ask amiss," we might
finish by saying, "We ask and receive not, because our lives are not
right in God's sight."

Fourth: _We must exercise our faith_.  The little child who prayed for
rain and then wanted to carry an umbrella with her when the sun was
shining is an oft repeated illustration, but such faith as this is what
every child of God must practice.

The text is exceedingly broad.  "If ye shall ask anything in my name I
will do it."  It is broad enough to include temporal blessing and
spiritual power, comprehensive enough to lead us to believe that God
will direct our lives if we ask him and will bear our burdens even
though they be almost insignificant in their weight.  Thank God for the
"anything" in the text!

It may be stated truly that God's promises to Israel are especially
concerning temporal blessing and that his promises to the church have
particular reference to spiritual possessions; and they both, the
history of Israel and the history of the church, prove that God will
give to us temporally as well as spiritually.  These blessings are
included in the "anything."

I have been greatly impressed with Paul as a pattern in prayer, and for
the outline of this message as well as for many of the suggestions I am
indebted to an English clergyman, the Rev. E. W. Moore, who has
written, "The Christ Controlled Life," and "Christ in Possession," and
has recently sent out a little book entitled, "The Pattern Prayer Book."

I have noticed in studying Paul that the burden of his prayer was for
spiritual blessing rather than for temporal power, and throughout the
Epistles at least seven illustrations are to be found concerning this
subject.


I

_Prayer for Pentecost_.  Ephesians 3:17-19, "That Christ may dwell in
your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may
be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God."

Just what is the burden of this prayer of Paul's?

First: He is not asking for that indwelling which is ours at
conversion; for this he would not need to pray, for at the moment of
regeneration Christ is ours and eternal life (which is only another way
of saying, "the life of the eternal") is our never failing possession.

Second: He is not asking for the bodily presence of Christ, as some
have suggested, for in this scripture he states that it is by faith
that Christ is to dwell with us.

Third: It is by no means a figurative expression, for if this were true
there would be no comfort in it to God's children.  Yet, as a matter of
fact, this prayer of Paul's has been an inspiration to God's people
everywhere.  It is rather a special Pentecostal privilege for God's
children concerning which Paul is praying.  In Galatians 4:19 we read,
"My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be
formed in you."

And this is his petition.  Let it be noticed that the tense of the verb
in this connection denotes singleness of action, so that Paul's prayer
may be answered not gradually but immediately.  If this be true then
let it be answered now for you and for me.

There are three blessings which would flow out of this answer to prayer.

First: _Constancy of experience_.  "That Christ may dwell," pleads the
Apostle.  It does not mean that he is to come in a fitful experience,
but the language of the hymn is true,

  "Abide with me; fast falls the even tide,
  The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide;
  When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
  Help of the helpless, oh, abide with me."


Second: _Strength will be our possession_, for the Apostle tells us
that we are to be "rooted and grounded in him."  As the roots of the
tree take hold upon the ground and the giant oak withstands the storms
of the Northern coasts, so we may withstand temptation and trial and be
more than conquerors if this prayer is answered.

Third: _There will be cleansing_, for we are told that "as a man
thinketh in his heart so is he."  We are told also that we must keep
our hearts with all diligence, for out of them are the issues of life.
It is easy enough to understand how our lives would be pure if Christ
were only in possession.


II

_Prayer for Perception_.  Colossians 1:9-10, "For this cause we also,
since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire
that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding; that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto
all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the
knowledge of God."  The need of this prayer was not that the Colossians
were weak, or that they had been conspicuous in the failure of their
Christian experience, for in the third and fourth verses of the first
chapter of Colossians, Paul says concerning them, "We give thanks to
God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye
have to all the saints"; and then in the face of this statement he
prayed earnestly for them.  The subject of his prayer was not that he
desired anything, humanly speaking, very great for them; he did not ask
honor, nor did he desire that wealth should be theirs, but merely
states in the ninth verse that they might be filled with the knowledge
of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.  I have been
told that literally, this means that they might have full knowledge,
not simply a passing opinion concerning him and his work.

If we study this particular scripture in which Paul is praying for the
Colossians we will learn how this prayer is to be answered.

First: We must meditate upon God's word.  He makes himself especially
known to his people in his word.  There are certain great principles
which we must remember if we would know God's will.

(1) _We must present our bodies to him_.  Romans 12:1, "I beseech you
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service."

(2) _We must be delivered from this present evil age_.  Galatians 1:4,
"Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father."

(3) _We must separate ourselves from the world_.  1 Thessalonians 4:3,
"For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should
abstain from fornication."

(4) _We must be thankful_.  1 Thessalonians 5:18, "In everything give
thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you."

(5) _We must continue patiently to serve and follow him_.  1 Peter
2:15, "For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men."

All of these things are God's will for us.  If we but practice them the
results can be only beneficial.  As a result of such a study of God's
word the general knowledge of God and his will shall be ours.

Second: The spiritual perception spoken of in this particular scripture
may be ours, as we listen to the Spirit of God, for he will speak to us
God's message and make known to us God's will.  The purpose of this
prayer of Paul's for the Colossians was that they might walk worthy to
all pleasing.  What a joy it is to know that we may please God!  For
this we should be grateful.


III

_Prayer for Purity_.  1 Thessalonians 5:23-24, "And the very God of
peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul
and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.  Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it."

This prayer is also remarkable if we notice the spiritual condition of
the Thessalonians, for of them we read that they had received the word
of God with joy, and had turned from idols to serve the living God, and
yet the Apostle prays for their sanctification.  By this he does not
mean sinlessness, and a careful study of his position would lead us to
know that he does not teach that sanctification may be ever apart from
growth.  We must day by day come more and more into the likeness of
Christ.  There are three words which it would be well for us to
remember in our study of this subject.

First: _Position_.  If we would grow unto his likeness we must be where
he can let shine upon us the light of his countenance.  Frances Ridley
Havergal had an aeolian harp sent to her which she tried to play with
her fingers, and failed.  At last a friend suggested that she place it
in the window, and the music as the wind touched the strings was
entrancing.  We must be where he can use us.

Second: _Purification_.  Sanctification is necessary because God uses
only that which is clean, never an unclean life.

Third: _Possession_.  It is really Christ filling us, and he will fill
us if we give him the opportunity.  The extent of this work is made
plain in Paul's prayer:

(1) The spirit is touched, and the spirit is that part of our nature
which is capable of fellowship with God.

(2) The soul is filled, and the soul is the seat of all our
intellectual faculties.

(3) The body is possessed, and since the body is just the servant of
the higher powers of man, we can easily understand how necessary the
work is.  It is needful,

(_a_) For our peace, for the God of peace is to sanctify us.

(_b_) For our prayers.  For Paul is talking about prayer when he
praises.

(_c_) For our praise, for we are told that we must rejoice evermore.


IV

_Prayer for Power_.  Ephesians 1:15-20, "Wherefore I also, after I
heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints,
cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers;
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give
unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him:
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what
is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty
power; which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead,
and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places."

The Church at Ephesus was in every way remarkable, but to this people
Paul wrote his most spiritual epistle, which in itself is a compliment
to them, for as in another instance it was not necessary for him to
write unto them as if they were carnal.  With this people for the space
of two or three years he labored, as we find recorded in Acts the
nineteenth chapter and the tenth verse, "And this continued by the
space of two years; so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word
of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks."  Acts 20:31, "Therefore
watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears."

There were no divisions in this church as at Corinth; there were no
heresies as at Galatia, and no dissensions as at Philippi; and yet, for
all that, he prays most earnestly.  The natural question for us to ask
is, just what is it for which he prays, and the question is easily
answered.

First: For advancement in knowledge; he asks God that the eyes of their
understanding might be enlightened.  Under this general petition there
are three special requests.

(1) _That they might know the hope of their calling_.  We have but to
study Paul's Epistles to realize that this calling involved:

A perfect vision, for one day it is Christ's promise and teaching that
they shall see him as he is.  The hope of this would keep them faithful.

It involved, in the next place, a perfect likeness, for, seeing him as
he is, they would become like him, and the hope of this would keep them
clean.

It involved, in the third place, a perfect union, for when this hope of
their calling is fulfilled there is no possibility of anything coming
between the believer and Christ; so the fellowship must be perfect.

(2) Paul also requests that they may know the riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the saints.  That is very wonderful.  He does not
say the riches of the saints in him--that could be easily understood;
but what an inspiration it is to know that he has glory in us, and that
the mere possession of poor, frail creatures like ourselves is to him a
perfect delight!  We sometimes say that we could not get along without
Christ, but how inspiring it is to know that he could not and he would
not get along without us!

(3) The Apostle also prays that the church at Ephesus might know what
is the exceeding greatness of Christ's power towards us.  It is not
simply a great power that is described but an exceedingly great power.
There is absolutely no limit to what he can accomplish in and through
us if we but yield ourselves unreservedly to him.

Second: Another question, may naturally come to us.  Why have we not
this power of his?  The answer is simply because the eyes of our
understanding have not been enlightened.  We have been too much
self-centered and too closely wedded to the world.  We need a stronger
vision.  There are stars in the heavens to-day that have never yet been
seen, not because they do not exist but because there has been no glass
invented strong enough to take them in.  Each new day brings a vision
of new heavenly bodies.  We also need stronger faith, for if we have
become persuaded of the fact that he can do all things the victory is
won when we take this position.


V

_Prayer for Perseverance_.  Philippians 1:9-11, "And this I pray, that
your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all
judgment; that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere and without offence till the day of Christ.  Being filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory
and praise of God."  Paul has a tender affection for this Philippian
Church.  Naturally he would wish for them only the best things, and the
burden of this prayer of his is,

First: That they might be able to persevere to the end, or rather to
the day of Christ.  Let it not be forgotten that he who said, "Nothing
can separate us from the love of God," at the same time prays that
those who are the object of this love may be faithful in their
perseverance until time shall be no more.  It is God's privilege to
preserve us, it is our privilege to persevere; and if we study the
words "preserve" and "persevere" we shall find that they are composed
of almost the same letters with only a slightly different arrangement.
We must be exceedingly careful in our walk and we must rely perfectly
upon Christ.

Second: Paul prays for the purity of these Philippians when he asks
that they may be sincere and without offence.  I have been told that
the word "sincere" sometimes means sunlight; which leads me to say that
our conduct as Christians should be such as to bear the clearest light
of investigation.  Possibly the use of this word grew out of the custom
of the people who stored away their goods in the darkest corners of the
bazaar where their defects could not be seen plainly.  When the
purchase had been consummated they were brought out into the sunlight.
The word also means "wax."  It is said that in the days of imperial
Rome when a sculptor came to a flaw in the marble he filled it with wax
to hide the defect, but when the hot days came and the wax was melted
the defect was seen plainly.  Paul is desiring for these Philippians
that there may be none of this, but that their lives should commend
themselves both to God and to men.

Third: He desires that they may be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, not simply that they may produce fruit of one sort or
another.  It is not enough simply to bear fruit.  "Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit."  This is the overflow experience
of the Christian and must be realized by us all.


VI

_Prayer for Perfectness_.  Hebrews 13:20-21, "Now the God of peace,
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of
the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you
perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is
wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for
ever and ever.  Amen."  The burden of this prayer of the Apostle is
that his people may do the will of God.  This is required in all times
and for various reasons.

First: The glory of God demands it, and unless we are doing his will we
are robbing him of his glory.  Revelation 4-11, "Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory and honor and power: for thou hast created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created."

Second: Our own happiness depends upon it.  Let it not be thought for a
moment that we are simply to do God's will when some sort of trial is
upon us, but rather let us remember the scriptural expression, "I
delight to do thy will, O God."  What if God's will should be done for
but one year in all things in any of our cities; would the result be
anything else than perfect joy?

Third: Our safety depends upon it.  We must lean hard upon God's will.
In Switzerland at one of the most dangerous passes, where men used to
travel with their faces white with fear, to-day any ordinary traveler
can pass in safety because along the edge of the cliff there is an iron
rail against which you may lean and have almost no danger beside you.
This iron rail corresponds to the will of God for Christians.  Paul
also asks in this prayer that God's people may be made perfect to do
his will.  We need not be afraid of this word perfect, nor of Paul's
prayer, for as Dr. Moore has said, it is not a perfection of doing but
a perfection to do, not a finality but a fitting.  The same Greek word
is used elsewhere, as for example,

"Fitted."  Romans 9:22, "What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction."

"Prepared."  Hebrews 10:5, "Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he
saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou
prepared me."

"Framed."  Hebrews 11:3, "Through faith we understand that the worlds
were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not
made of things which do appear."

"Restored."  Galatians 6:1, "Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a
fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted."

"Mend."  Mark 1:19, "And when he had gone a little farther thence, he
saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in
the ship mending their nets."

The illustration has been used of a man with his leg out of joint.  He
cannot walk except with great pain, but when he puts himself without
reserve into the hands of the doctor and the leg is set he can then
rise and walk.  He is not a perfect walker, but he is made perfect to
walk.  And the idea of all the verses above quoted is that we may be
set with right relations to Christ that he may have his way with us,
that we may stand where he willed we should stand; and as a result we
shall be well pleasing in his sight.


VII

_Prayer for Peace_.  2 Thessalonians 3:16, "Now the Lord of peace
himself give you peace always by all means.  The Lord be with you all."
Peace is most difficult to define.  It is the opposite of unrest,
confusion and strife; and this peace for which the Apostle prays is,
first, not the peace of indifference.  Let this never be forgotten.
Second: It is not the peace of prosperous surroundings.  Some people
frequently fail at this point but it is the very peace of God himself.
The peace here prayed for looks in three directions.

First: Godward.  "Being justified by faith we have peace with God."
His pardoning voice we hear and he is reconciled.

Second: Inward.  "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; let
not your heart be troubled."

Third: Outward.  With such a possession we may meet trial and bear
burdens and never be moved.  How may we secure such a possession?

(1) By having confidence in Christ's work, for when he met his
disciples and showed them his hands and his side, he said, "Peace be
unto you."

(2) By submission to Christ's rule.  "Thou wilt keep him in perfect
peace," or, as the literal translation is, "Thou wilt keep him in
peace, peace, who trusteth in thee because his mind is set on thee."
This is our possession, and for that Paul prays.




A STARTLING STATEMENT

TEXT: "_The wicked shall not be unpunished._"--Prov. 11:21.

There are very many passages of Scripture which ought to be read in
connection with this text; as for example, "Fools make a mock at sin"
(Proverbs 14:9), for only a fool would.  Better trifle with the
pestilence and expose one's self to the plague than to discount the
blighting effects of sin.  And, again, "The soul that sinneth it shall
die" (Ezekiel 18:4).  From this clear statement of the word of God
there is no escape.  Or, again, "Our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance" (Psalm 90:8).  There is really nothing hidden from his
sight.  We may conceal our sinful thoughts from men and sometimes even
our evil practices; but not from God.  Or again, "Sin, when it is
finished, bringeth forth death" (James 1:15).  Here is unexampled
progress indicated from which there never has been the slightest
deviation.  But one of the sharpest texts in all the Word of God, and
one which men somehow in these days seem to ignore, is Paul's
expression, "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he also reap" (Galatians 6:7), and if we compare
this reference in the New Testament to the text in the Old Testament
the harvest indeed seems to be sure, for "The wicked shall not be
unpunished."

There is a note of truth in all of these statements for both saint and
sinner.  Jeremiah the thirtieth chapter and the eleventh verse, "For I
am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee: though I make a full end of
all nations whither I have scattered thee, yet I will not make a full
end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave
thee altogether unpunished."  The old Prophet is speaking to the people
of Israel; and while he tells them that they are God's people,
nevertheless they shall not altogether go unpunished, for if they sow
to the flesh they must of the flesh reap corruption.  In Deuteronomy
the fifth chapter and the ninth verse, we read, "Thou shalt not bow
down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me."  It is a
solemn fact that the sins of the fathers descend upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation.  It is more solemn that so blighting
is the effect of sin that the fourth generation is the last.  There is
no fifth.  Even though we be pardoned from sin forever, we shall not
altogether go unpunished.

Certainly it is true that if one rejects Jesus Christ, punishment for
him is absolutely certain.  The other day in the city of Chicago the
following appeared in the _Inter-Ocean_ as an editorial under the title
of "Preaching for Men."

"To those who look upon men as they are it is simply astounding that so
many preachers should act as if the hope of reward alone could be
efficient to move average mankind to leave sin and follow after
righteousness.  In every other relation of human life every man is
constantly confronted with the alternative: Do right and be rewarded;
do wrong and be punished.  The pressure of fear as well as the pressure
of hope is continually upon him.  He knows that he may conceal his
wrongdoing from the eye of man, but he is always under the fear of
discovery and punishment.  But he goes to church, and in nine cases out
of ten the preacher, while insisting that he can hide nothing from the
eye of God, yet says nothing to arouse in him that fear of God which is
the beginning of wisdom.  If he turn from religion to science he finds
science more positive of the certainty of punishment than of the
certainty of reward.  Science cannot, for example, assure him of a long
life, even though he scrupulously obey hygienic laws.  But it can
assure him of a speedy death if he wantonly violates those laws.
Precisely this fact that the consequences of sin in punishment can be
foretold more positively than the consequences of righteousness in
reward is what makes fear the strongest influence dominating and
directing human conduct.  Yet many preachers deliberately abandon the
appeal to fear and then wonder why their preaching does not move men to
active righteousness.  When more preachers recover from the delusion
into which so many of them have fallen such complaints will diminish.
For all human experience proves that the preaching that appeals to fear
of punishment as well as to hope of reward is the preaching that is
really effective--is the preaching of all the great preachers of the
past and the present--is the preaching that moves."

The statement of the text is exceedingly plain and the teaching is
unquestioned.  It is a good thing for us to-day to understand what sin
is, for if we have a wrong conception of sin it naturally follows that
we shall have a wrong conception of the atonement.  Without an
understanding of sin there is no sense of guilt, and without the sense
of guilt there is no cry for pardon.  The best definitions that I have
ever found for sin are written in the word of God.


I

1. "Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the
transgression of the law" (1 John 3:4).  The word "transgression" means
to go across.  Does your life parallel God's law or cross it?  Your
answer to this question determines the measure of your sin.  You have
only to read the ten commandments and try to mold your life by them to
find your answer.  Better still, you have only to read these
commandments in the light of Jesus' interpretation, where the look of
lust is adultery and anger without cause is murder, to see how far
short you have come; and if this is true certainly you are a sinner,
and the text is for you.  "The wicked shall not be unpunished."

2. "All unrighteousness is sin; and there is a sin not unto death" (1
John 5:17).  Righteousness means right relations with God.  You may
make ever so strong a claim to right living and speak ever so
vehemently concerning the good that you are accomplishing in the world,
but the first question for you to settle is this, What is your relation
to God and what have you to say with reference to your acceptance or
rejection of Jesus Christ?  It is a solemn thought that whatever we do
counts for nothing if our relation to God be wrong, while the little
that we may do may count for much if we have taken the right position
before him.

3. "Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him
it is sin" (James 4:17).

Omission, according to this scripture, is sin; neglected opportunity is
sin, shirking responsibility is sin, refusing to obey God is sin; and
so when I ask you about being a Christian, if it is best and right and
you acknowledge that it is, then if you are not a Christian, this very
fact is in itself sin, for when one knows the right and refuses to do
it he is a sinner, and the text is true--"The wicked shall not be
unpunished."

4. "And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of
faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin" (Romans 14:23).  Active
doubt is sin.  If you have a doubt concerning the sinfulness of certain
things, then to do those things is sin.  If I have the least doubt
concerning the amusements which may be questionable, or the position
which may be doubtful, so long as a doubt or a question remains these
things are sin; and the Bible states the fact that "The wicked shall
not be unpunished."

5. "And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment" (John 16:8).  Unbelief is the chiefest
of sins.  It is to reject Jesus Christ, it is to close in our own faces
the door of hope, it is to trample the blood of the Son of God under
our feet, and it means also to insult the spirit of grace.

One morning in the city of New York a man dashed down the street and
past three men standing on the pier.  They could not tell how old he
was, nor how he was dressed, but they saw him jump upon the bulkhead
near by, strip off his overcoat, coat and hat, and, before they could
stir to save him, plunge off the end of the pier.  There was a short
rope lying near by, and seizing this a man ran with his companions to
the point from which the man had jumped.  They threw the rope toward
the struggling figure that they could just make out below them.  The
rope fell a foot and a half too short.  Then they ran back to the gas
plant and got a longer rope.  The ice was running so thick in the river
that the man's head and shoulders were still to be seen above the water
when they returned.  Taking careful aim they threw the rope squarely
across the struggling form, shouting,  "Catch it and we'll pull you
in."  The unknown man, however, making a last effort, threw the rope
aside and shouted back: "Oh, to h--- with it!  I'm through!"  Then he
sank out of sight.  That is a picture of the man who, having offered to
him mercy and grace in Jesus Christ, spurns all that God offers, and is
therefore hopeless.

Sin separates us from God.

Sin separates us from each other.

Sin pollutes us and we become impure.

Sin deceives us and we are in danger and know it not.

A friend of mine walking along the streets of Cincinnati early one
morning saw a young girl standing upon the very edge of the roof of one
of the highest office buildings.  She was carefully balancing herself
and every moment it seemed as if she would fall.  The elevator was not
running, but he made his way hurriedly to the roof of the building,
walked carefully across it, seized her by the hand, drew her back and
found that she had risen in her sleep and all unconsciously was
standing on the very brink of eternity.  This is what sin does for us,
and it is a solemn thought that for all such the text is true, "The
wicked shall not be unpunished."


II

I do not make my appeal, however, on the ground that the punishment is
all for the future, for that is indeed sure.  I ask you the question,
Do you believe in heaven as a place of rewards?  If so, the same
argument will prove the existence of hell.  Do you reject hell, because
it seems to you to be inconceivable?  Then the same argument will blot
heaven out of existence.  What it is that awaits the wicked, I am sure
I do not know--only that it is to be away from God, with the door of
hope shut forever, and the Bible tells me that there is weeping and
wailing and gnashing of teeth, for the wicked shall not be unpunished.
I lift my voice against the punishment here, for sin is so sure in its
deadly work, it is so insidious in its influence, that before you know
it it is upon you; just one day of trifling and you are gone.

The people about Pittsburg will never forget the Cheswick mine horror
in 1903, when one hundred and eighty-two dead men were taken from the
mine.  Under the direction of one of the mining engineers, a rescuing
party started into the mine to see if there was any hope of saving the
men who might be yet alive.  The journey is described by one who
volunteered to go with the engineer on his perilous journey.  "When we
got to the foot of the shaft, Mr. Taylor lighted a cigar.  He blew out
a great cloud of smoke and watched it drift into a passage.  'This
way,' he said, 'The smoke will follow the pure air draught.'  So we
went on, Mr. Taylor blowing clouds of smoke, and we following them.
Suddenly he wheeled and yelled; 'The black damp is coming!'  The cigar
smoke had stopped as though it had come to a stone wall, and was now
drifting over our heads.  We ran with death at our heels, ran with our
tongues dry and swelling and our eyes smarting like balls of fire.  It
seemed only a minute until Mr. Taylor shrieked and fell forward on his
face.  He crawled along for a while on his hands and knees, and then
fell again and lay still.  I stopped for a second, with the idea of
carrying him.  Then I realized how hopeless that was.  We were still a
quarter of a mile from the mouth of the pit.  He was a very heavy man,
and I, as you see, am small and weak.  Again I ran choking and beating
my head with my hands.  I fell, cut my face, called upon God, struggled
to my feet and fell again.  So I plunged on, falling and fighting
forward.  Black madness came upon me.  The horrible, sickening
after-damp was tearing my heart up through my dry throat.  My brain was
bursting through my temples.  Then a stroke, as though by a sledge
hammer, and I knew nothing more.  They found me at ten minutes past one
Tuesday morning.  At first they thought I was dead.  Then they saw my
head rise and fall while I weakly pounded on a rock with a stick that I
had caught in my delirium."  This is to me a striking picture of what
sin does for us.  There is no one so strong but he may be overpowered
by its awful influence.  God save us from it, for "The wicked shall not
be unpunished."


III

Oh, is there no hope?  For it would seem from the message thus far as
if nothing but despair was ahead of us.  Two ways to escape from the
power of sin have been suggested; one is man's way, the other is God's.
Let us consider them both.

1. Man suggests reformation.  But how about the sins of the past?  They
are still untouched.  Man tells the sinner to do his best; but how
about the will which has been weakened by sinful practices, and which
seems unable to act?  Man tells the depraved man to change his
surroundings; but how about the heart that is unclean?  The fact is,
man's way will not reach us.

In January, 1904, the American Liner New York left Southampton and came
into the New York harbor with a sad story to tell.  A sailor was
suspended over the side of the vessel making repairs when an enormous
wave tore him away, and he was very soon under the forepart of the
ship.  The waves began to carry him away, and a life line was thrown to
him with a buoy attached.  The sailor, sometimes visible and then
obscured by the rising of a swell, grasped the line, and a cheer went
up.  He took a half turn with the line around his waist, was rolling
himself over into the bight of the line and it looked as if he would be
saved.  The sailors on deck were just about to haul in.  The poor
fellow's hands and fingers must have been numb, for he suddenly rolled
out of the half-formed bight, losing his grip upon the line.

None of the passengers could help the man, none of the crew dared jump
to his rescue, no boat could live in such a maelstrom.  The sailor, who
was struggling and being whirled around and bobbing like a cork, his
oilskins partially spreading out and sustaining him, kept drifting
further and further away.

Aroused by the commotion, the second officer came on deck just as the
sailor lost his hold.  Tossing aside his cap, overcoat and jacket, he
bade the seamen take a bowline hitch around his body and lower him
away.  The volunteer life-saver was cheered by the passengers as he
went over.  It was bitter cold, the sleet sharp and the swells ugly.  A
strong swim in the trough of the seas and over the crests and the
officer might reach the seaman.  It was his only chance.

He had no more than touched the spume before the waves hurled him
against the side of the steamer again and again, bruising his ankle and
knee, but he struck out bravely and gradually drew nearer the sailor.
For fifteen minutes the second officer struggled.  During one of his
brave spurts in the direction of the struggling man he looked up to the
rail.  The practiced eye of the seafaring man saw something that caused
him suddenly to turn and breast his way back to the ship.  The line was
too short.  The seaman holding the line attached to the officer had in
his hands the mere end of it, and there was not another bit to pay out.
It was a sixty fathom line, "all gone," and the officer yet only half
way to the drowning man.  It was too late to splice another.  Had it
been thought of in time the man might have been saved.  A longer
struggle was useless, and the officer allowed himself to be hauled
aboard, leaving the helpless man to go to his last account.  That is
always the difficulty with man's effort to save the lost.  It does not
reach far enough and fails just when it ought to hold.

2. God's way.  "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all
sin," that is God's message.  "Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon."  This is God's invitation.  "I even I, am he that blotteth out
thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins."
This is God's pledge, and he has never failed to keep it.

In the old days, when England and Scotland were at war, the English
came up against Bruce.  They drove him from his castle and as he fled
away from them they let loose his own bloodhounds and set them upon his
trail.  His case seemed hopeless.  He could hear the bay of the hounds
in the distance, and those who were with him had just about given up in
despair; but not so with Bruce.  He came to a stream, flowing through
the forest, he plunged in, waded three bow-shots up the stream and then
out upon the other side.  The hounds came up to the stream, stopped and
sniffed; they had lost the track.  They turned back defeated, and Bruce
in time won the day.  Is it not like this with our sins?  Like a pack
of hounds they are after me; wherever I flee they are close upon me.
"The wages of sin is death," I am told, but I have found the way of
escape.  Here flows a stream which runs red with the blood of Jesus
Christ, and I plunge in and am free.

  "There is a fountain filled with blood,
    Drawn from Immanuel's veins;
  And sinners plunged beneath that flood
    Lose all their guilty stains."




THE GRACE OF GOD

TEXT: "_I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy sins._"--Isaiah 43:25.

In looking over an old volume of Sermons preached by H. Grattan
Guiness, forty-five years ago, I came across the message which he
delivered with this text as a basis.  So deep was the impression made
upon me by my first reading of the sermon that I have taken Mr.
Guiness' outline and ask your careful attention to its development.

If one should enter a jewelry store and ask to see a diamond, or any
other precious stone, the jeweler would first spread upon his show case
a black cloth and then place the diamonds upon it, not only for
protection but also in order that the black background might bring out
distinctly the brilliancy and worth of the gems.  So God gives this
best of all his promises with the dark picture of sin clearly and
thoughtfully portrayed.  In verses twenty-second to the twenty-fourth
we read, "But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been
weary of me, O Israel.  Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of
thy burnt offerings; neither hast thou honored me with thy sacrifices.
I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with
incense.  Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast
thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to
serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities."

In these verses God says that his people have not called upon him in
prayer, they have not presented their offerings, neither have they
presented unto him themselves.  He also affirms that they have wearied
of him, and that they have also wearied him with their iniquities, and
then he exclaims, "I have not caused thee to serve with an offering,
nor wearied thee with incense," and with these clear statements he
gives us the gracious statement of the text, "I, even I, am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins."

Mr. Guiness gives us four beautiful thoughts in this text concerning
our sins.

First: They are blotted out from God's Book.

Second: They are blotted out with God's hand.

Third: They are blotted out for his sake.

Fourth: They are blotted from his memory.

A more admirable outline of a text of Scripture I do not know, a more
cheering message to a child of God I have never found.


I

Not long ago, in Chicago, a young man was induced to confess to one
whom he thought was his friend the killing of his father and mother.
As the confession was being made, as he supposed to but one person, it
was all being taken down by those who were near enough to hear him
speak, and when he appeared before the court his own confession was
used against him and sent him to a life imprisonment in the
penitentiary.  What was true of this young man is true of us.  Every
sermon the minister preaches is recorded, every word an individual
speaks is put down.  It is a solemn thought to realize, that at the
judgment we shall give account for even our idle words.

Science has proven that our acts, our words and even our thoughts make
their indelible record.

Not long ago in our home we came across a long-unused phonograph.  We
started it going, placing upon it one of the cylinders which had been
packed away with the phonograph, and were startled to hear the voice of
one who had been dead for years.  We heard the message he dictated, the
song in which he joined and the laugh with which he closed it, and yet
his voice has long been silent in death.  There is not a sin of your
youth which has not made its record, not a passion of your mature years
that does not stand somewhere against you, not an act, a feeling or an
imagination that has not been indelibly written; not all the changes of
time, not all the efforts of man, can wipe these things out.

In the British Museum there is a piece of stone not larger than the
average Bible at least four thousand years old, and in the center of
the stone there is a mark of a bird's foot; four thousand years ago the
track was made, and for four thousand years the record has stood.  If
these things are true of us--and they are, according to the Word of
God--then what prospect is there for us but that of eternal punishment?
For when we stand at the judgment there shall appear before us the sins
of omission and the sins of commission, the sins we have forgotten and
the sins we have but recently committed against ourselves, against our
fellow men, and against God.

It is indeed a black picture, and with whitened faces and rapidly
beating hearts we ask, Is there any hope?  I bring you God's gracious
answer to this important question: "I, even I, am he that blotteth out
thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins."
Notice, it is the voice of God speaking.  "I, even I," he exclaims,
"will blot out your transgressions."

It is, first of all, a commercial term.  We were in debt to God,
hopelessly in debt, and our obligation has been canceled; over against
our sin is placed the righteousness of the Son of God, and we are free.

  "Jesus paid it all,
    All to him I owe;
  Sin had left a crimson stain,
    He washed it white as snow."


It is also a chemical expression, for it is a picture of God applying
the blood of Jesus Christ to every page of the written record.  The
sins of our youth long ago passed out of mind; the sins of our manhood,
which have taken up every part of our being, the sins of to-day--all
have gone, for he himself has blotted them out.  When we realize that
we are forgiven of God it means more than if we were forgiven of men,
for in the might of his forgiveness our past sins are gone, they shall
not even be mentioned against us; the fear of judgment is taken away,
for Jesus himself says, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death
unto life" (John 5:24).  It is the Passover story over again, "When I
see the blood, I will pass over you."  Thus are our sins blotted out.


II

It is with God's hand that the work is done; and for very many reasons
this is a great comfort to us.

First: Because it was God's hand that made the record, he it was who
put down all your sins.  He never rested in his work; week after week,
month after month, year after year, the recording work was being done
until your record became blacker than the blackest midnight; and behold
the hand that made the record blots it out.

Second: It was his hand against which you offended.  Your sin was
against yourself.  It is true it hurt your character, lowered your
self-respect; but more especially was it against God, for you despised
his authority, forsook his service, broke his laws, defied his justice;
you grieved his spirit, and you crucified his Son.  And behold it is
the hand against which you committed all these offenses which blotted
out your transgressions.

Third: It is the offended hand which blots them out.  It was the hand
that opened the fountains of the deep, and behold the floods came, the
waters above and the waters below clasped their hands and destruction
was everywhere save in the Ark.  It was his hand that brought
destruction upon the cities of the plain, consuming them with a mighty
flame, and it was his hand that opened the sea for the children of
Israel and then closed the sea over the pursuing Egyptians.  The very
thought of the offended hand makes us tremble, but behold, it is this
hand that blots out all our transgressions.

Fourth: It is the hand of justice that does the work.  The same hand
wrote, "The wicked shall not go unpunished," and wrote again, "The soul
that sinneth it shall die," and wrote yet again, "The wages of sin is
death."  This hand is stretched forth in our behalf.

I doubt not the question has often come to us, "How can God be just and
be the justifier of them that believe?"  In the light of such
statements as these just quoted I am sure it is for this reason--it is
for the offering of the just for the unjust.  He made him to be sin for
us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.  A man was needed for such an offering, and Christ became man.
The man required must be born under the law, so Christ came in the
likeness of sinful flesh.  The man born under the law must be without
sin, so he was born pure.  The man born under the law and without sin
must be willing to die, and so he came saying, "I delight to do thy
will, O God."  And the man born under the law, without sin and willing
to die must be able to provide an atonement which would make the
wandering sinner and the love of God one, and so Christ at the command
of God was thus furnished a sacrifice of sufficient power and magnitude
to save the whole world.  It is this hand of God that blots out our
transgressions.

Fifth: It is the hand of the Supreme Being that does the work.  What a
word of encouragement this is.  It was this hand that made the worlds
and hurled them off into space.  It was this hand that created man and
made him in the likeness of God.  It was this hand that formed the
countless number of angels, and has ever directed their heavenly
movements.  It was this hand that wrote the law upon Sinai.  And it was
this hand that holds the keys of the kingdoms of heaven and hell.  He
blots out our transgressions.  From his decision there can be no
appeal.  With such a work as this, who shall lay anything to the charge
of God's elect?  Would God that justifieth do it, or Christ that died
consent to it?  In the light of such a thought the Apostle Paul says,
"For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord" (Romans
8:38-39).


III

Our sins are blotted out for his sake.  God saves the sinner not alone
because of pity for the sinner, and certainly not simply because he is
in danger of hell, but in order that he may glorify himself; and this
is no selfish glorification, but rather in order that he may show to us
now and throughout all the ages what he really is.  God has made
different revelations of himself.  We have beheld his wisdom in
creation, in his providences and in his word.  We have seen his justice
in that he gave his only begotten Son to die for poor lost men.  We
have seen his power in the working of miracles and the transforming
effect of his grace.  It remains for us to see his love in the story of
salvation, for until we behold him as the Savior of the sinner we do
not know him.  It is this that shall make us not only rejoice here in
time but rejoice with joy unspeakable in eternity.  The Apostle Paul
writes in Ephesians 2:7-8, "That in the ages to come he might shew the
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ
Jesus.  For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
yourselves: it is the gift of God."


IV

Our sins are blotted out from God's memory.  The last of this wonderful
text is the best.  When we detect a failure of memory here in this
world among our friends it is an evidence of weakness, but it is no
weakness in God to forget.  This is but another one of those
expressions descriptive of God in which human language is used to
describe a thought and in which human language is too poor an agency to
convey all the depth of the meaning.  It is just another picture of God
stooping down to meet our weakness and it is God assuring us that our
sins are gone completely.  It is as if they never had existed, for they
shall never stand against us and in the day of judgment they shall not
even be mentioned.  Our sins must have been a grief to him, just as the
sin of an earthly child is the source of sorrow to an earthly parent;
but they are so no longer, for he has forgotten.  The Bible represents
God as being angry because of our transgressions, but if ever there was
anger with him it is so no longer, for you cannot be angry with a
person whose injury against you you have forgotten entirely.  We do not
in this world speak of what we have forgotten, nor will God speak of
our sins.  We do not punish what we have forgotten, nor will God permit
us to be punished, for he has blotted out our transgressions and will
remember them no more.  There is no awaiting penalty for your sin,
there is no judgment to meet at the great white throne, there is no
hell for you at the last, for your sins, for Christ's sake, have been
forgotten.

If you cast a stone into the water and it sinks away there is for a
time a ripple, where the stone has gone down; but in a moment it has
gone forever, you can see it no more.  So God has cast our sins into
the sea and the place where they have gone cannot even be found.


V

But what must I do to take advantage of all this gracious offer of God?
I answer according to the Scripture.  There must be true repentance;
repentance is a change of mind, it is having a new mind for God.  There
must be regeneration; regeneration is a change of nature, it is a new
heart for God.  There must be conversion; conversion is a change of
living and a new life for God.  If we would be born from above we must
accept God's word.

Two friends were conversing one evening.  One of them with a skeptical
mind had just rejected the Bible because it did not tell him the things
that he would know.  He insisted on knowing how the worlds were made,
and demanded that he should be told concerning the origin of heaven and
why God permitted it, and because the Bible failed here he would have
none of it.  Just as his friend was leaving the skeptic said to him,
"Here is my lantern.  I want you to take it and it will light you
home."  But the lantern was refused by the Christian man, "for," said
he, "this lantern will not light up the mountains in the distance, nor
the valley stretching away at my feet."  His friend was amazed.  "Man,"
said he, "take the lantern; it will make a road for you across the moor
and light up your pathway home."  "Oh," said his friend, "if that is
true I will take it; but listen to me.  So is the Bible not for distant
paths of investigation; it is not so much to tell us concerning
creation and existence--we shall know these things by and by.  It is
for the path at your feet and it will light you home a space at a
time."  The skeptical man saw it in an instant, he took God's word and
came back again to the faith of his childhood.

So I offer it to you with its promises as of lanterns, if its commands
are carefully received and followed out.  You, too, may pass from
darkness into light and you may claim from God this text of mine which
says, "I even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy sins."




CONVERSION

TEXT: "_And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven._"--Matt. 18:3.

Jesus Christ was the world's greatest teacher and preacher.  Multitudes
followed him because he taught them, not as the scribes, but as one
having authority.  He came to them with the deepest truth of God, but
couched in such familiar expressions, and told in such a fascinating
way, that all men heard him and went their way rejoicing that so great
a teacher had come into the world as the messenger of God.  He desired
to speak to them concerning the kingdom, and seeing on the distant
hillside a farmer sowing his seed, he gave them the parable of the
sower; and every farmer in his company began to understand his message.
He told them the story of a woman baking bread, and in the spreading of
the leaven every housekeeper had a vision of one of the deepest
principles of the coming kingdom.  He gave them the account of the boy
who went away from his home, breaking his mother's heart, and,
according to tradition, putting her in her grave; causing his old
father to bow his head in shame again and again, and yet in spite of it
all, his father loving him; and every listener learned from the story a
lesson concerning the love of God which could have been given to him in
no other way.  He was acknowledged as the world's greatest teacher and
preacher.

The text is introduced by the word "verily," and this is peculiar to
Jesus.  The word calls especial attention to the coming message.  It
was as if he had sounded a bell and said, "Stop and listen"; and
wherever the word "verily" occurs the Bible reader would do well to
give heed to the message of Jesus.

What hope is there for the moralist when Jesus said, "Except ye be
converted"?  What hope can there be for the man who says God is so
merciful that he will not allow him finally to be lost when Jesus said
"Ye shall not enter into the kingdom, except ye be converted and become
as little children."

It will be necessary for us to read carefully verses eight and nine in
this eighteenth chapter of Matthew, if we would be impressed with the
importance of conversion.  There are solemn words here.  "Wherefore if
thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from
thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather
than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire.
And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it
is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having
two eyes to be cast into hellfire."

I have been told that there are two ways of reading this text.  The
first is as we have it in the King James version; the second would make
it read thus: "Verily, I say unto you, except ye convert yourselves and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven."  Those who hold to this second reading say that there is a
difference between regeneration and conversion--that regeneration is
God's part of the contract, while conversion is ours; that conversion
is simply having the willing mind, while regeneration is God's
imparting to us his own life; and to convert one's self is simply to be
willing to be saved.  And this is all-important, for even God himself
cannot save us against our wills.  But I prefer to use, in my treatment
of the text, the generally accepted idea of conversion, and wish my
message to center around the following questions: What is conversion?
How may I be converted?  Do I know when I was converted?  How may I
know certainly?


I

What is conversion?  I own a piece of property, and you desire to
purchase it.  You pay me a price, and the property is transferred from
my ownership to yours.  It is a converted piece of property.  This is
just a hint as to what conversion is.  We were sold under sin; and if
any should object to this expression, we have sold ourselves under sin.
Jesus came and in the shedding of his own blood paid the price of our
redemption.  As a child of God, I am bought back from bondage to
freedom.  To be converted is to be turned about.  Going away from God,
I turn towards him.  With my face set away from heaven, I deliberately
turn and accept Jesus, who said, "I am the way, the truth, and the
life."  To be converted is to cross the line which separates light from
darkness, and may be done as easily as if one drew a line in the path
before him and stepped over it.  Both of these would be by the act of
one's will; only it is to be remembered that when by faith we accept
Jesus there is imparted to us a knowledge which comes from the Holy
Ghost alone; while we seem to be acting in our own strength, yet really
it is in the strength of God.  Let it be remembered, however, that no
two people may have exactly the same experience.  There is an
illustration of this in the healing of the blind men in the New
Testament.  I can imagine them having a convention, and each giving his
testimony.  One declares that the only way to receive your sight is to
have clay and spittle put upon your eyes and to wash in the pool of
Siloam.  Another ridicules this experience and declares that only the
touch of the fingers of Jesus is necessary.  Still another speaks and
emphatically declares that even the touch of Jesus is superfluous, for
at the command of Jesus he saw clearly.  Another says that
instantaneous sight is impossible, and describes his own experience,
when he saw men like trees, walking.  But when all have given their
testimony, they finally unite in declaring that whereas they once were
blind, now they can see; and after all this is the important matter.  A
friend of mine described a number of people who came to view "The
Angelus" that celebrated masterpiece of Millet's.  Some people admired
the perspective; others, the figure of the man; others, that of the
woman.  One man simply stood aghast as he looked, and exclaimed, "What
a marvelous frame that picture has!" and no two people expressed the
same opinion concerning the masterpiece.  How could we expect them to
have the same experience in coming to Christ?

It may be that some will say, "Why insist upon conversion when my life
is a moral one?"  And my answer is that the difficulty with morality is
that it is worked out according to men's standard and falls far short
of God's.

In my first pastorate I had a blind man as one of my hearers.  He used
to walk about the village where I preached, generally without a guide,
and apparently went as easily as a man with eyes.  He had a little
stick in his hands, with which he touched the trees and the fences, and
seemed to know by the very sound where he was.  One day at noon, when
he should be going home, I saw him walking rapidly away from his home.
I finally convinced him that he was going in the wrong direction, and
he asked me to set him straight, which I did.  Going in the new
direction, he used his stick in the same fashion, used his legs in the
same mechanical way, but the difference between the man in the first
instance and the second was this--that in the first picture he was
going away from home, while in the second he was going homeward
rapidly.  The trouble with man's morality is that it is self-centered
and not Christ centered if he is rejected.


II

How may I be converted?  For from the text which says "Except ye be
converted" it would seem as if some power outside of ourselves must be
working in our behalf, and this is true.  The foundation of it all is
the atonement by Christ, his sacrificial death upon the cross.
Rejecting this truth, there is no hope for us.  In our sinful
condition, the spirit of God rouses us, convicts us of sin, convinces
us of our need of a Savior, and finally God, in his grace, gives us the
strength to yield, and we pass from darkness to light.

Sometimes great need drives us to light, as in the case of Nicodemus;
while again great sin compels us to come to him, as in the case of the
thief on the cross.  But whether it be need or sin, let us start with
little faith, if we have no more, and God will meet us the moment we
start.  I once conducted services in a soldiers' home.  The commanding
officer told me, when the service was concluded, of a former inmate, an
old sea captain, who came to the institution a confessed infidel.  He
refused to attend any of the services in the chapel; finally he was
taken ill, and then the commanding officer entered his room, asking him
to read the Scriptures, which he declined to do.  Again he came
suggesting that he read the Bible to see if there was any part he could
believe, and a bottle of red ink and a pen were left by his bedside,
the officer suggesting that he mark any verse red if he could accept
it.  This appealed to the dying man and he said, "Where shall I read?"
The officer said "Begin with John's Gospel."  And he did so.  He read
through two chapters without making a mark, and through fifteen verses
of the third chapter.  Then he came to the sixteenth verse, which is a
picture of the very heart of God, and he reached for his pen and marked
the verse red.  When this much of the story had been told we reached
the old captain's room and passed the threshold to find the bed empty,
for he was gone.  "I wish you might have seen his Bible," said the
captain.  "I sent it to his family recently.  There was not a page in
it that was not marked red."  Over his bed swung a pasteboard anchor;
marked upon it were these words--"I have cast my anchor in safe
harbor."  For he had gone home.


III

Do you know when you were converted?  That is, do you know the exact
time?  There are two extremes in experiences in this matter.  I recall
the experience of an old man who sat in my lecture room one Friday
evening, and just as the hands of the clock marked the hour 9:30 he
said "I will," and came to Christ.  That was the moment of his
conversion.  But, as for myself, I have not had this experience; I do
not know just when I turned to Christ.  It must have been when I was
but a small child.  One of the best women I know has had an experience
similar to mine, while one of the greatest preachers in the land has
told me that he was a drunkard until he was 21 years of age, and then,
on his knees, by his father's death bed, he came to the Savior.  After
all, it is not so much a question of the knowledge of the day, or the
hour, or the month of one's conversion as "Do we now know Christ?"


IV

How may we know that we have passed from death into life?  Certainly
not with our feelings as a proof, for they change as the sands shift on
the seashore.  If our feelings be the foundation, then we may be in the
kingdom and out of it a great many times a day.  It is not always to be
determined by a great change in one's life, for men who have not
accepted Christ have had such an experience.  There is only one sure
way of knowing it, and that is on the authority of the word of God.
John 5:24, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word,
and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation: but is passed from death unto life."  And John
6:47, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on me hath
everlasting life."

It is said that Napoleon while riding in front of his soldiers lost
control of his horse, when a private stepped from the ranks, seized the
horse's bridle and saved the officer's life.  Napoleon saluted him and
called him captain.  "But, sir," said he, "I am not a captain, only a
private."  "Then," said Napoleon, "I will commission you captain."  And
immediately he stepped into the company of those officers; they ordered
him to the ranks, but he said, "I am a captain."  "By whose authority?"
they said.  If then he had replied, "Because I feel like a captain,"
how ridiculous it would have been!  Pointing to Napoleon, he said, "I
am a captain, because he said it."  Thus with God's word as a
foundation we stand secure.


V

Do not forget to notice that we are told that we must come like little
children.  Not like the philosophers of the world, but like little
children who always trust implicitly those who are about them.  If we
would be saved, we must be willing to be taught, and we must some time
make a beginning.  Then why not now?

Some years ago John B. Gough visited a home in a New England city, and
the heartbroken mother told him that her boy, who was an inebriate, was
confined in an upper room in the house, which was much like a cell.
The great temperance leader went to speak to him and said "Edward, why
don't you pray?" and he said, "Because I don't believe in prayer."
"But," said Mr. Gough, "You must believe in God."  And he replied, "I
do not believe in anything."  "I am sure you are wrong in this," said
he, "for I know that you believe in your mother."  Then there came a
new look into his face when he said, "Yes, I believe in her."  "Well,"
said Mr. Gough, "you must then believe in love.  Let us fall upon our
knees and pray."  And the young man began, "O love," and the spirit of
God said unto him, "God is love," and he changed his prayer and said "O
God," and then came the same spirit and said, "God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten son," and he said "O Christ," and when
he said this the deed was done.  He immediately rose from his knees,
and he has been free ever since.




FIVE KINGS IN A CAVE

TEXT: "_And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto
Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the
captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your
feet upon the necks of these kings.  And they came near, and put their
feet upon the necks of them.  And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor
be dismayed, be strong and of good courage: for thus shall the Lord do
to all your enemies against whom ye fight._"--Joshua 10:24-25.

The history of the children of Israel is one of the most fascinating
stories ever written.  It abounds in illustrations which are as
practical and helpful as any that may be used to-day, drawn from our
every-day experience.  God certainly meant that we should use their
story in this way, for in the New Testament we read that the things
which happened to them were as ensamples for us.  The word "ensample"
means type, or figure, or illustration.

To appreciate this text and the story of the five imprisoned kings we
must go back a little bit to the place where the leadership of Moses
had been transferred to Joshua.  God is never at a loss for a man; his
plans are never frustrated.  If Moses is to be set aside Joshua is in
preparation for his position.  Doubtless Joshua may have felt somewhat
restrained, as he was kept in a position of not very great prominence,
but he certainly realized when he stood as the leader of the children
of Israel that all things had been working together for the good of his
leadership, and doubtless he praised Jehovah for his goodness to him.
There are many incidents in connection with the immediate story of the
children of Israel which should be mentioned here.

When they were ready to move towards Canaan Joshua told them that when
the soles of the feet of the priests touched the water of the Jordan
the water would stand on either side before them and they could pass
dry shod into Canaan.  Suddenly the marching began.  They stood within
three feet of the waters, which ran the same as they had been running
for years; then two feet, then one, and then six inches, but there was
no parting of the waters before them.  Let us remember that God had
said, "When the soles of the feet of the priests touch the water they
shall separate."  And it was even as he said, and on dry land the
children of Israel passed over to the other side.  It is a perfectly
natural thing for one who is unregenerate to say, "Why insist upon
confession, and the acceptance of Christ, and how can the mere
acceptance of the Savior save me from the penalty and the power of
sin?"  But a countless multitude will rise to-day to say, "It was when
we stepped out upon what we could not understand and what seemed as
impassable and impossible as the parting of the waters of the Jordan
that God gave us light and peace."

When once they were in Canaan what an interesting story that is in
connection with Rahab of Jericho!  The spies had entered her home and a
mob outside was seeking them that they might put them to death.  Rahab
promised them deliverance, only she exacted from them a promise in
return that they would save alive her father and her mother and her
loved ones; and when she let them down by means of a cord from the
window of her home they said to her, "Bind this scarlet cord in the
window and gather your loved ones here and they shall be saved."  And
when the children of Israel had marched about Jericho and the walls
were about to fall, suddenly they lifted their eyes and they saw the
red cord fluttering from the window, and while all else was destroyed
Rahab and all her loved ones were saved.

What a little thing evidently stood between them and death--just a red
cord!  And yet as a matter of fact it is only a red cord that is
between us and death--namely, the blood of the Son of God; for, as in
the Old Testament times when God saw the blood and the destroying angel
passed over the home, so in these New Testament times the blood which
has been received by faith insures us our safety and we are set free
from sin's penalty and sin's power.

The story of Achan is a note of warning.  It is rather singular that
when the children of Israel had taken Jericho they failed at Ai, and
yet not singular when we realize that one man had sinned in all the
company.  He had taken gold and silver and a Babylonish garment and had
hidden the same in his tent, and this was in direct disobedience to the
commands of Joshua.  The sad thing about sin is that we cannot sin and
suffer alone.  Our friends suffer, our kindred must bear a part of the
woe with us.  When Achan sinned the children of Israel lost a victory.
Sin is progressive.  In the seventh chapter of Joshua and the
twenty-first verse, we read, "When I saw among the spoils a goodly
Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of
gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and
behold they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the
silver under it."  And you will notice that, first he saw, then he
coveted, then he took.  It is always thus; a sinful imagination will
lead to outbreaking iniquity, and a small sin encouraged will
ultimately mean disgrace.

The story of the Gibeonites is also interesting.  They had heard of the
power of the children of Israel and were afraid of them; but they made
up their minds to deceive them.  So, lest the Israelites should think
that they came from a near by territory and therefore should turn
against them they put on old clothes, wore old shoes upon their feet
and carried musty bread in their baggage.  Then they stood before
Israel and said, "We have come from a far country; look at our
clothing, it is worn out; and at our shoes, they are in holes; and at
our bread, it was fresh when we started, it is musty to-day."

And Joshua said, "We will make them hewers of wood and drawers of
water," and they were saved from death but they served in bondage.  Let
this be remembered always that deception inevitably means bondage.  One
is in bondage to his conscience, for it constantly reproves him.  He is
in bondage to the one he has deceived, for he can never stand honestly
before him.  He is most of all in bondage to his sin, for he will
surely be found out.

The Amorites were against the children of Israel and they were a great
company.  It is in connection with their struggle against this power
that the text is written.


I

The Israelites started in this conflict with a mighty power against
them, as we have seen.  But so have we.  There are first of all the
tendencies of our old nature against which we must fight, for just as
with the law of gravitation if I take my hand away from a book or a
stone it falls to the floor or the ground because this law pulls it
downward, so there is a law in my members and has been in the life of
every man since Adam's day pulling me away from the true to the false.
It is for this reason that it is easier to do wrong than to do right,
to be untrue than to be true.  Then there is against us the very world
in which we live.  Its atmosphere, its business, even its social life
is tainted with that which is sinful or to say the least questionable,
and he who lives in the world and is in any sense of it has a hard
battle to fight.  But there are two special things which are against us.

First: The sins which we have encouraged.  It may be in the beginning
very small, but Satan is perfectly satisfied if he can have the least
hold upon the life of the one whom he wishes to wrong.  I read in a
Chicago paper the story of a woman who was making a heroic struggle
against an awful curse.  She had become addicted to the use of
morphine.  For fourteen years she was a consumer of the drug.
Apparently she could not shake off the habit.  Building up a resistance
to the action of the drug, her system became accustomed to enormous
quantities of it.  She could not eat, nor sleep, nor work without it.
Most of her scanty earnings went to purchase it.  She was a seamstress,
and by toiling many hours a day managed to get enough money to buy it.
Some years back she had been a happy wife and mother.  Her husband
loved her; she was devoted to him and to their two children.  She lost
him; she lost the care of her children; rapidly she drifted away from
them.  The powerful narcotic helped to deaden her pain.  When her
anguish became unbearable a double dose of it would enable her to
drowse away the hours.

"I will never again touch or taste morphine, so help me God!" she said.
Immediately she discontinued the use of the drug wholly.  She could get
no sleep; she could not swallow food half the time or retain it.  She
was beset by horrible visions.  She was racked by an inexpressible
longing.  But she held on.  Those who knew her and watched her
agonizing battle with astonishment and sympathy told her that she was
killing herself.  "It may be," she would answer, "but I shall die true
to my oath."  "But," they would urge, "a habit like yours, which has
obtained for years, should be broken gradually."  "I will master it.  I
have blotted it from my life," she would answer.  "I shall quit it this
way even if I go into the grave.  It has mastered me; it has cost me my
home, husband and children; now I will master it."  She started at
shadows, her nights were nights of horror; she would bury her nails in
the palms of her hands and compress her lips to keep from screaming.
There was no rest for her.  Still she tried to work and grew weaker.
"You cannot give me that," she said, "I remember my oath.  Give me any
medicine you choose save opium.  God would forsake me now if I forsook
my promise to him."  The physician remonstrated with her, but in vain,
so he gave her a substitute which failed of its effect, as he knew it
would, and she died.  Even when the hand of death had clutched her
grimly, though her terrific sufferings would have been allayed by the
poison, she refused to take it.  Any person in the room would have
bought it for her and administered it gladly, so that she might pass
away in peace, but she would not prove traitor to herself.  She was a
friendless woman except for acquaintances recently made.  Her life had
been sad and hard.  Held in the grip of an enemy that set its mark upon
her, she was shunned and went her downward way alone.  Those who were
with her say that just before the end came she smiled, knowing that she
had won her fight; and yet years ago she began to trifle with sin, and
it had mastered her.

Again, we have against us sins which not only have been encouraged but
have been committed again and again until they have become a habit of
our lives, and he who has such a sin as this finds himself in the grip
of one who is a tyrant.

In a city paper the other day I came across the story of a man who once
had some prominence in the world but began to go wrong, naturally
drifted towards the evil and finally found himself surrounded by the
lowest of companions.  Because of his natural ability he easily assumed
leadership.

The particular form of crime they practiced was administering chloral
to those who sat at the bar in the saloon to drink.  They did this by
attracting the attention of the man who was to drink to something else
in the room and then the deadly knock-out drops would be administered
and they would rob the man.  One night the dose was too strong and the
victim died.  The one who caused his death came before the city
authorities recently to give himself up and pitifully ask that he might
be quickly sent to death to pay the penalty of his crime for, said he,
"From that moment my mind has never been at rest.  I wandered about
town for two or three days trying to get rid of the sight of that
fellow's face; but at night was when I suffered.  The moment I dozed
off I could see him in my dreams beckoning and laughing as he dragged
me over some cliff, and I waked up cold with fear.  No one knows what I
suffered.  I left the city.  I went to Denver.  I went to Butte.  I
traveled everywhere, but wherever I went night and day that dead man
was hovering around me.  I couldn't sleep and my mind began to weaken.
One night I went into a gambling den.  I thought the excitement might
drive that vision out of my head.  I played roulette.  I bet on the
black; the red won.  And right before me I saw that printer's face just
like I see you now, grinning as the dealer dragged in my money.  I ran
out of that club like a crazy man and wandered about town till I saw a
freight train pulling out of the yards.  I climbed into an empty box
car and lay down in the corner to rest.  For a few moments the face was
gone.  Suddenly a flash of lightning lit up that car as bright as this
cell, and there, just a couple of feet from me, I saw that man I'd
killed plainer than I see you.  He reached out and caught me by the
arm.  I screamed and jumped out of the car.  They found me next day
lying beside the track; and when they got me to a hospital, as I hope
for pardon, that thing's black and blue finger marks showed on my
shoulder.  I've been in a lot of places since that but I never got over
it.  Finally it got so bad I couldn't stand it and I came back to
Chicago to confess."  And just as we have all these things against us
so the children of Israel had the Amorites against them and the five
kings were unitedly arrayed to fight them.


II

But there was a sure deliverance for Israel and there is a sure
deliverance for us.  God promised to be with Joshua and his people.
Joshua 1:5, "There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all
the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee."  Even the things that were
impossible he helped them to accomplish.  Joshua 6:1-2, "Now Jericho
was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out,
and none came in.  And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, I have given
unto thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of
valor."  Even where men had failed him he gave them victory.  Joshua
8:1-2, "And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou
dismayed: take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai:
see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his
city, and his land; and thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst
unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the city behind it."  Even where the forces were combined against
them it made no difference.  Joshua 10:8, "And the Lord said unto
Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there
shall not a man of them stand before thee."  So it is with us.  God has
promised to deliver us, and over our sinful nature, the atmosphere of
the world, sins encouraged and sins committed, we may expect a complete
victory.  Everything is at man's disposal if only God is with him.  In
connection with the children of Israel even the day was made longer
that they might fight their battles.  Joshua 10:12-14, "Then spake
Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites
before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun,
stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.
And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had
avenged themselves upon their enemies.  Is not this written in the book
of Jasher?  So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted
not to go down about a whole day.  And there was no day like that
before it, or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a
man: for the Lord fought for Israel."  The weak were made strong that
the enemy might not triumph over them.  "If God be for us who can be
against us?"  In this struggle with the Amorites Israel won the day.


III

The victory of the Israelites over the Amorites was like the general
deliverance which God has given us from the power of sin, but there are
certain sins which may pursue us, and from these we ought to be set
free.  When the children of Israel started from Egypt and had passed
through the Red Sea certain of the Egyptians started after them, the
waters of the Sea came together and they were put to death.  The next
day the Israelites camped upon the shore and they could easily go back.
Doubtless more than one could say as he turned over the body of a dead
man to see his face, "Why, this is my old tax master who used to beat
me.  He will never have power over me again."  Is such a deliverance as
this from individual sins possible?  I think it is.  I can think of
five sins which stand in the way of men and which maybe likened to the
five kings shut up in the cave.

First: Sinful imagination or secret sins.  I doubt not but that almost
every one whose eyes may light upon this sentence has been guilty at
this point.  He may have said again and again, "I will never do this
thing again," and he has put the king into the cave and rolled the
stone against the door.

Second: Impurity.  It may be that some one who reads this sentence will
plead guilty at this point, and he may have said, "This sin which is
now my defeat began with only a suggestion of evil which I encouraged;
but I will never be guilty again," and he puts the sin into the cave
and rolls the stone against the door.

Third: Intemperance, not simply in the matter of drinking strong drink,
but it may be intemperance in the matter of dress, or eating, or
pleasure; in other words, it is the lack of self-control.  This has
been the defeat of more men than one, and as you stop and think you
say, "I will never lose control of myself again," and you put the sin
within the cave and roll the stone against the door.

Fourth: Dishonesty; not simply in what you do but in what you say, for
one may be dishonest in speech as well as in appropriating that which
does not belong to him.  If you should be condemned just here and have
determined never to fail again at this point, by an act of your will
you consign this king to the cave and close up the entrance.

Five: Unbelief, which is the greatest sin of all and is the last and
greatest sin to be put into the cave.  As a result of such an action
there may be temporary relief, but not permanent, for the kings may
break away from the cave and organize their forces against you once
more and you go down.  Here comes in the power of the text.  Bring the
kings out, every one of them, and put your feet upon their necks and
stand in all your right and dignity as Christian men, and expect
deliverance not so much because of what you are but because of the fact
that from the days of the first sin it has been said, "The seed of the
woman shall bruise the serpent's head."

Near Toledo, Ohio, there used to live an old doctor noted for his
infidelity.  He was violent in his opposition to the church.  One day
he called Robert Ingersoll to the town where he lived and paid him two
hundred dollars, that he might by means of his lecture break up the
revival meeting.  Everybody was afraid of him.  He heard of an old
preacher back in the country who was a stranger to the schools but not
a stranger to God, and he asked his friends to make it possible for him
to meet him.  Finally they met, and the infidel with a sneer said, "So
you believe the Bible, do you?" and he said, "Yes, sir; do you?"  "And
you believe in God, do you?" and he said, "Yes, sir."  "Well, I want
you to understand that I am an infidel, and believe none of these
things."  The old minister looked at him and said simply, "Well, is
that anything to be proud of?" and it was an arrow that went straight
through the unbeliever.  He went back to his office and began to think
it over.  "Anything to be proud of," he said, and he finally realized
that he was not in a favorable position.  Then he thought of an old
Christian he knew and said, "If I could be such a Christian as that I
would come to Christ."  He went to tell the minister, and the minister
said to him, "Get down on your knees and tell God so," and he began to
tell him, then broke down and sobbed out his confession of sin.  His
cry for deliverance was heard, and he rose up a free man in Christ
Jesus.  From that day till this he has been freed from every one of his
sins, is preaching the Gospel and counts it his highest joy to
contribute in every possible way to the enlargement of the bounds of
the Kingdom of God.  So there is deliverance from every form of sin if
we will but move in God's way.




DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE IN CHRISTIAN WORK

TEXT: "_Salute no man by the way._"--Luke 10:4.

Luke is the only one of the Evangelists giving us the account of the
sending out of the seventy.  The others tell us that Christ called
certain men unto him and commissioned them to tell his story; but in
this instance after Jesus had said, "Foxes have holes, and birds of the
air have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head," he
calls the seventy and sends them forth prepared to endure any sacrifice
or suffer any affliction if only they may do his will.  And when he had
said unto another, "Follow me," but he answered, "Suffer me first to go
and bury my father," Jesus said unto him (Luke 9:60-62), "Let the dead
bury their dead; but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.  And
another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid
them farewell which are at home at my house.  And Jesus said unto him,
No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for
the kingdom of God."  From this expression of the Master we quite
understand that no other service, however important it may seem to us,
is to come between us and our devotion to him.  And in the expression
concerning the man having put his hand to the plow and looking back we
have one of the strongest illustrations that Jesus ever used.  He does
not say that if any one puts his hand to the plow and turns back to
some other form of service he is not fit for the Kingdom of God, but
what he says is this: If any man has his hands to the plow and simply
looks back he is not fit for the Kingdom; and this for two reasons:

First: Because no man could plow as he ought to unless he would keep
his eyes straight ahead of him, and

Second: No man could plow if he has his mind fixed upon something else.
Jesus wants his disciples to know that his work is the important work,
that nothing can surpass it.  Not only is it wrong for us to turn away
from him to any other service but it is a sin even to take our eyes off
of him to gaze upon anything else.  Under such sharp teaching as this
he sends forth the seventy.

Let it be noted, first, that he sent them forth two by two.  Perhaps
one was sent because he was strong in the opposite direction from his
fellow laborer.  Who knows but one could speak and the other could
sing?  Certainly one was the complement of the other.  And they went
forth with burning hearts to give the message of Jesus.  That
illustration in the New Testament where four men brought the sick man
to Jesus is along the same line.  Two men might have failed utterly,
three men would have found it difficult service, for four men it was
easy.

I once made my way into the office of a doctor to ask him to come to
Christ.  The meetings were in progress in the church and I thought he
was interested.  He received me kindly, but firmly declined even to
talk of Christ and I left him, utterly discouraged.  The next night the
man gave his heart to Christ, and for this reason, I believe.  We had
made him in a little company of church officers a subject of prayer,
and you cannot pray earnestly for one for any length of time without
speaking to him concerning his soul's salvation.  Without having had a
conference four men determined to see the doctor, and they all called
upon him within two hours of time.  When the first came he laughed at
him; when the second came his prominence in the business world at least
commanded the doctor's respect; when the third came, having driven four
miles in from the country, he began to be interested; and with the
coming of the fourth there was awakened in him a deep conviction.  He
closed his office, went to his home and before the evening hour of
service came had accepted Christ.

We have practically the same commission as the seventy.  "As the Father
hath sent me even so send I you," said Jesus to us.  These conditions
are as true to-day as in those days in the work of the seventy.

The harvest is great.  There possibly never has been a time when more
people are absenting themselves from the church than at the present
time.  These men and women are fit subjects for the Gospel.  The
seventy went as the messengers of peace, so may we go.  There are
troubled hearts all about us, there are those who are in despair, men
and women who are saying, "Peace, peace," when there is no peace, while
ours is the very message of peace.  Jesus said to them, "Carry neither
purse nor scrip nor shoes," for their dependence was upon him.  So must
it be to-day.  Not upon method nor upon skill must we depend, nor upon
the schemes of men, however successful they may have been in the past,
but upon him.  In those days the men were sick and troubled, in these
days they are dead in sins and as his messengers we carry the message
of love.


I

This expression of the text meant very much to the Oriental, for as a
matter of fact the salutation of the Eastern people frequently took a
half an hour of time, and sometimes an hour would be consumed.  They
touched their turbans, fell upon their knees, saluted one another with
a holy kiss, talked together concerning their own interests.  These
things were a part of the salutation.  Jesus says to the seventy,
"Salute no man as you go."  They were not bidden to be impolite--this
is farthest from the spirit of the Christian--yet they were
commissioned to be about the king's business and the king's business
required haste.

The idea of the text is that there must be definiteness of purpose in
Christian work.  When Elisha kept his eyes fixed upon Elijah there came
to him as the result the mantle of Elijah and he was clothed with
power.  When Gehazi followed Elisha's command and as he went to the
home of the Shunammite saluted no one he became the forerunner of life
to the child.  And when Paul said, "This one thing I do," and nothing
could swerve him from his path of duty, he became the mightiest
preacher in the world's history since Christ.  But let it not be
thought for a moment that we are advocating a gloomy religion; far from
it.

I like the story of the little girl who went one day into her
grandfather's room to ask him to read to her and found him asleep with
his head upon the back of the chair, his Bible upon his knees and the
sunlight coming through the window at the proper angle to cast about
him a halo of glory, and she ran to her mother saying, "I have been in
grandpa's room and I have seen God."  If as a Christian the people of
the world can have any thought other than this, that we at times at
least remind them of Christ, something is wrong with our Christian
experience.

There were two sides to the experience of Jesus.  In one we see him at
the wedding rejoicing with those that did rejoice, making wine out of
water and contributing to the happiness of all those who were present.
In the other instance we see him upon the mountain side and crying out,
"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem!" with an almost breaking heart.

When Charles G. Finney was in Utica there came down to see him a woman
who was concerned for the town in which she lived.  She returned to her
home and through days and nights found it impossible either to eat or
to sleep because she realized the lost condition of those about her.
At last when she was so weak that she could not pray, she had rest only
when those about her prayed for her.  When Mr. Finney reached that town
one of the greatest revivals in his history as an evangelist was the
result.

I was one day engaged with other pastors in an eastern city in a Gospel
campaign.  The ministers were preaching in turn each day and when it
came my time to preach I could find in all the audience scarcely one of
my people.  Up to that day the interest had been remarkable, but
somehow from that day on, although people had been converted by the
hundred, there was no perceptible spiritual impression.  When the
meetings had closed one of the prominent society leaders of my church
came to explain to me why she was away from the service and she said,
"I gave my afternoon reception and the people of our church were
there."  When I told her that I felt that as a result of that afternoon
reception our own church had lost a blessing she seemed utterly amazed;
and yet to this day I am firmly persuaded that hundreds of people might
have come to Christ if we had not in that day grieved the Spirit.


II

The text means that those of us who are Christians shall show by our
very faces that we are on the king's business and that it is solemn
business.

One day a man knocked at the door of my study, was admitted, sat down
on the couch in the room and began to sob.  He did not need to tell me
why he had come.  I knew, but finally when he sobbed it out this was
his message: "I have come to ask you to bury my wife, and to ask if you
will not go with me to comfort the children, for they are heartbroken."
I knew by the very look of his face that he had lost a loved one.  Do
you think for a moment that those who gaze at us would imagine that we
had the least conviction that people away from Christ were lost?  I am
sure they would not.

The text also means that we shall be desperately in earnest.  A father
and his boy heard a minister preach a sermon on the judgment and as
they went to their home the father said, "My boy, it was a great sermon
and you must think about it."  And the boy did.  He made his way to his
room and threw himself on his bed only to hear his father downstairs
laughing and singing; and he said to himself, "It is not true, for if
my father believed I was in danger of the judgment he could not laugh
and he would not sing."  That day was the turning point in the boy's
life.  He became a man of renown but never a believer in Jesus Christ
as we accept him.

The text also indicates how we should pray, with an eye single to his
glory but with a purpose that cannot be shaken.  Pray as the Shunammite
prayed, pray as the woman besought the unjust judge; such prayer brings
victory.


III

Did you ever realize that you were standing in the way of the
conversion of your friends?  How about your living?  If your testimony
rings anything else than true to Christ you are a stumbling block in
the way of some one.

How about your testimony?  In the meetings to which I referred there
came a young woman one day evidently greatly moved.  First one pastor
would speak to her and then another, and finally I was given the
privilege.  For a long time I could not understand her words for her
sobs and then she said, "I am a Christian, a member of one of the
churches in this movement.  I have been engaged to a young man for the
last three years.  He was not a Christian.  Three weeks ago he was
taken ill and a week ago he died.  In all the time that I knew him I
never spoke to him about Christ.  I do not know that he even knew that
I was a Christian, and now," she said, with a heart which seemed to be
literally crushed, "he has gone and I never warned him."  And the text
means that no one could come within the reach of our influence without
having at least a suggestion made by ourselves to them that we are the
followers of Christ and that we long to have them know him who means so
much to us.




THE MORNING BREAKETH

TEXT: "_Watchman, what of the night?  The watchman said, The morning
cometh, and also the night._"--Isaiah 21:11-12.

It is very interesting to note that, whether we study the Old Testament
or the New, nights are always associated with God's mornings.  In other
words, he does not leave us in despair without sending to us his
messengers of hope and cheer.

The Prophet Isaiah in this particular part of his prophecy seems to be
almost broken-hearted because of the sin of the people.  As one of the
Scotch preachers has put it, he has practically sobbed himself to
sleep.  A great shadow has fallen upon the people of God and he is in
despair because of it.  They have sown to the wind and now they are
reaping the whirlwind, a result which is inevitable.  They are away
from Zion with its temple, and are deprived of the view of those
mountains which are round about Jerusalem and to this day are clad with
vines and olive trees.  They are in captivity and are the abject slaves
of the enemies of God.  Isaiah's heart is well-nigh crushed, but in the
midst of the despair he has a vision of the chariots coming and hears a
cry which rejoices his soul, "Babylon is fallen."  It is because of
these tidings that he cries out in the words of the text.

What a night they had had of it!  They had been in darkness that was
ever increasing, and the song of thanksgiving which used to fill their
souls because of the nearness of Jehovah had entirely departed from
them.

The figure of the watchman is often used in the Bible, as for example
when he stands upon the city walls and is told that if he sounds the
trumpet telling of the approach of the enemy and the people hear and do
not take warning their blood is upon their own heads, while if he fails
to sound the trumpet and the people are cut off, their blood is
required at the watchman's hand.  And again in the first chapter of
Zechariah the eighth to the eleventh verses, "I saw by night, and
behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle
trees that were in the bottom; and behind him were there red horses,
speckled and white.  Then said I, O my Lord, what are these?  And the
angel that talked with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be.
And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These
are they whom the Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth.
And they answered the angel of the Lord that stood among the myrtle
trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and
behold all the earth sitteth still and is at rest."  For here the man
standing in the midst of the myrtle trees is him of whom the prophets
did speak, while the messengers are those who bring him tidings of the
progress of his kingdom.  But again where David comes to the watch
tower and sees the two messengers running, the second one bringing him
tidings of the death of his son, and from this watch tower he staggers
back again to his room crying out, "O Absalom, my son, would God I had
died for thee!"

The poet usually sings of the night as a time of beauty.  He sings of
the moon and the stars; but in the Bible night always stands for that
which is dark, foul, loathsome, sinful, cold and deadly.  There are
different nights mentioned in the Scripture, for the most part in the
Old Testament.  There was that night in Eden when sin blinded the eyes
of Adam and Eve and a great darkness fell round about them.  There was
the night of the flood, all because the people had neglected God; and
there was the night of the destroying angel passing over the cities of
Egypt, all because of the indifference of those who knew not God.  But
even in these nights God does not leave his people without help, for in
Eden we read, "The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head";
while in the flood behold the Ark; and in the Passover night we see the
blood of the Paschal lamb sprinkled upon the lintels of the door.

There are different mornings mentioned in the Scriptures, and as a rule
we find them in the New Testament.

The morning of his birth.

The morning of his resurrection.

The morning of his miracle when the empty nets are filled and the
discouraged fishermen are made to rejoice.

The morning of his return, when, after the rising of the morning star,
an endless day of blessing shall be ushered in.

It used to be the custom in Scotland, especially in Aberdeen, for the
night watchman of the city guard as he paced the streets to cry aloud,
"Twelve o'clock and the night is dark; one o'clock and the storm is
heavy," and the restless sleeper would toss upon his pillow and listen
for the tidings of the morning hour, "Two o'clock and the morning is
starry."  It is in this spirit that we listen to-day to the cry of the
watchman when he declares, "The morning cometh and also the night."


I

We are in a sense in the night in these days, even though we are
Christians.

First: Because of the existence of sin.  It is everywhere, in the heart
as a mighty principle of evil pulling us down as the law of gravitation
pulls material substances toward the earth's center.  In the life as
shown by our habits and practices, for these are the fruits of sin.  In
the very air we breathe sin is manifest, and sin has brought the night.

Second: I sometimes think that the darkness is increasing because as
ministers we fail to preach concerning sin.  We speak of it as an error
or a mistake; we talk about the devil and call him his Satanic majesty;
we preach about hell and call it the lost world, while it is true that
in the olden days when men trembled under the word of the preacher the
man of God spoke of the devil and hell and sin in all their awfulness.
But the morning cometh, for while it is true that sin is in the world
and it has gripped many of us, yet because of Christ's death upon the
cross we are free from the penalty of sin; we may be free from the
power of sin, for the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets us
free from the law of sin and death; we may be free from the practice of
sin, for Christ is the secret of our deliverance.  But the text tells
us that while the morning cometh the night also appears.  And so for
those of us whose lives have been such a struggle we cry, "Is there no
deliverance?" and I answer, yes, we shall one day be free from the
presence of sin; and that will be at his return when we shall see him
and be like him, and the new day which is never to close shall be upon
us.

Third: We are in the night because of the existence of sorrow.  Next to
sin this is the greatest fact in the world, for men are born unto
trouble as the sparks fly upward.  And somehow the morning and the
night as they are fastened together in this text present to us the
story of our lives, for we are first in the morning when everything
seems peaceful, and almost immediately in the night when we are really
in despair.

I journeyed from Naples to Rome over a fine piece of railway and found
myself now in the darkness of a tunnel and almost immediately rushing
out onto a fertile plain.  That railroad is the story of many a life.
But "Is there no deliverance that is complete?" and I answer, yes,
there is a time coming when there shall be no sea and no tears and no
night, for the former things are passed away.

Fourth: We are in the night because of mystery.  Life is full of
questions.  "Why must I have this trial or pain or trouble?"  So many
of us are asking these questions, and there is really no answer, at
least none for the present.  And yet God has not deceived us, for he
has said, "What I do thou knowest not now but thou shalt know
hereafter."  He tells us that when we see him we shall know, but also
declares that no one can see his face and live; and then, said the
sainted Augustine, "Let me die that I may see him."  It is true that we
shall go on from light into darkness, from morning into the night, but
is there no final deliverance?  And I answer, yes, when we see him and
become like him we shall know as we are known.  Let us wait and believe
until that day.

Have you ever seen a perfect rainbow--that is, a rainbow in a perfect
circle?  I never have.  The most perfect one I have ever seen was on
the plains of Jericho, but it was a half circle.  However, in the
Revelation we are told that in that day there shall be a rainbow round
about the throne, when half circles shall be made whole and half things
shall be made complete; that is the morning for which we long.


II

But there is another suggestion, "the morning cometh and also the
night."  There is the thought of the transition from the one to the
other.  We certainly have been in the night so far as our living is
concerned and our working, but now I feel sure there is coming a change
and we are living in a critical time.  May God help us to be faithful.

All truth is like a cycle and at different points in the circumference
there are truths which must be especially emphasized.

The late A. J. Gordon once preached a sermon on the "Recurrence of
Doctrine," in which he stated that while in one day justification by
faith was the prominent truth for the church, in another sanctification
was prominent, in still another the return of the Lord, and in still
another the doctrine of the Holy Spirit.  All this I firmly believe and
it only proves to me that the prominent truth for to-day is every man
for his neighbor, every friend for his friend, every parent for his
child, the individual seeking the individual for Christ.  God is
calling us to action; let us not fail.

I have a friend who used to use an illustration of a sea captain, his
first mate and his wife wrecked upon a rocky shore, huddled together
upon a rock out from the shore but too far for them to escape by
throwing themselves into the waves.  The life-line is shot out to them
and the captain puts it round his first mate and bids him jump and he
is drawn to the shore in safety.  Then he put the cord around the waist
of his wife, but the current is running in such a way that she must
spring at just the proper second or she will be thrown back against the
rocks and be killed.  And he shouts to her, "Spring!" but she waited to
kiss him and waited too long, sprang into the sea and was thrown back
against the rock and drawn shoreward lifeless.  Whether that story is
true or not I cannot say, but it is an illustration of the present day
to me.  God is saying, "Now is the day of opportunity."  May he pity us
if we fail!


III

While all that has been said is true concerning the morning  of the
Eternal Day, in another sense it is true that already a brighter day is
breaking.

First: A better day for Bible study.  This old Book which people have
feared was going to pass away is better to-day than ever.  It is the
object of deeper affection, and there is no question but that more
people are believing in it to-day as the inspired Word of God than for
years; and all because they have tested it and it has stood the test.

Second: A better day of prayer is dawning.  Fifty thousand people in
Great Britain are banded together to pray and to pray until the
blessing comes if that be for years.  Oh, that God would teach us to
pray!  We do not half understand what it means to ask God for blessings.

A story of prayer which would seem impossible if I did not know it to
be true, for I have friends who have been in the town where it occurred
and have met the descendants of the old sea captain, is the story of
the captain who took his boy and others to fish and in the midst of the
hurricane the boy was washed over board.  Broken-hearted, he returned
to the shore and the fisher wife, as was her custom, came down to meet
them, only to sob her way back to her home because her boy was gone.
They spent the night in the kirk in prayer, when the minister said,
"Why not ask God to restore his body?" and they did.  They put out to
sea and journeyed sixty miles until he told them to stop and when they
let over the grappling hooks they knew by the very tug of the rope that
they had his body.  They bore it back again to the broken-hearted
captain and his wife, who had all the time been waiting in the kirk in
prayer.  May God teach us how to pray!

A brighter day is dawning, and while it may be that some of us cannot
see it, while there may be skeptics who say it is not exactly true, yet
I know from what I have seen myself that the darkness is passing away.

In June, 1897, the steamer Catalonia at ten o'clock at night was found
to be on fire.  One of my friends has told me that he paced the deck
and considered himself lost because the flames were burning fiercely.
Finally the fire was under control and the people sang, "Praise God
from whom all blessings flow."  Telling me of the lessons that he
learned on this awful journey, he said: "That night at twelve o'clock,
when the pumps were being forced and the clouds of smoke were taking on
new dimensions and we were wondering what the morning would bring us,
the man on the bridge shouted, as he had at each midnight of the trip,
'Eight bells, all's well!'"  Had the man down in a stateroom watching
by the side of his sick wife heard the words, he might have said, "It's
a falsehood," but that man's vision was restricted by the narrow walls
of his stateroom.  Had the mother and daughter, sitting in the cabin,
with their arms about each other, wondering why they had been allowed
to sail on the Catalonia and leave their loved ones behind, heard it,
they might have said, "The man is beside himself," but they could not
see beyond the cabin.  Had the lonely traveler who stood near the
hatchway given it a thought he might have said, "It's a lie," but he
could not see through the clouds of smoke at which he stared silently.
But the vision of the watch swept the horizon, and there was no
obstruction in the ship's path.  He knew that each revolution of the
Catalonia's machinery pushed the ship on her way to Queenstown.  He had
a right to say it.

I somehow seem to hear the sound of the goings in the tops of the trees
and have evidence that God is coming to his church with blessing.  It
is true there is in some quarters indifference, in many places
worldliness, but I can see no insurmountable barrier in the way of the
progress of the Kingdom of God.




AN OBSCURED VISION

(Preached at the opening of the Winona Lake Bible Conference.)

TEXT: "_Where there is no vision, the people perish._"--Proverbs 29:18.

It is not altogether an easy matter to secure a text for such an
occasion as this; not because the texts are so few in number but rather
because they are so many, for one has only to turn over the pages of
the Bible in the most casual way to find them facing him at every
reading.

Feeling the need of advice for such a time as this, I asked a number of
my friends who knew me intimately and knew the occasion which was
before me to suggest what in their minds would be an appropriate
Scripture, and in their suggestions I have had the most singular
indication of the leading of Providence.

One said, "Use Hosea 5:4, where God in speaking concerning his people
Israel says, 'They will not frame their doings,'" which means that his
people would not set before themselves the way in which they were
going; or it might mean that they would not set up a plan for their
lives which would be according to his will and which he might bring on
to completion.

Another said, "Use Genesis 26:18," where we are told that Isaac digged
again the wells of his father Abraham.  This is a suggestive incident
and has in it a message for to-day, for if there is one thing needed
more than another it is that the old wells at which our fathers drank
and were refreshed and which, alas! in these modern times have been
filled in, at least to a certain extent, should be opened and men be
summoned once again to drink of their living waters.

Another said, "Use Jeremiah 6:16, 'Ask for the old paths;'" for as a
matter of fact we cannot improve upon the ways in which our fathers
walked, so far as the revelation of God is concerned or the doing of
his will.

Still another suggested that I should use Isaiah 62:10, "Gather out the
stones, lift up a standard for the people," in which the description is
of a great prince coming and all hindrances should be removed that the
journey might be robbed of its difficulties and dangers.

You will notice if you have watched the suggestions of these Christian
workers that the texts are practically all the same, and then when I
tell you that the line of thought they have indicated was the very line
which God suggested to me weeks and months before the conference you
will be impressed as I have been that this subject is not of my own
choosing, and therefore must be a message from God.  Neither is the
text one of my own choosing, for God pressed it in upon me again and
again and from it I was afraid to turn away.

I like the text because it is in the book of Proverbs.  This book is
not simply a collection of wise sayings and affectionate exhortations,
for you will remember that the Proverbs were put down after the event
and not before its occurrence.  This being true, Proverbs presents an
established fact: here we find what the wise men in all the ages have
learned to be truth.  If they speak of sin and its penalty they do it
in the light of their own experience; if they say the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of knowledge they mean that they have tried other
sources of wisdom and all have failed but this.  All this makes the
text exceedingly valuable, for the wise men of other days must have
tried to walk without the vision and not only failed themselves but
have set the people astray.

By a vision we do not mean simply an imagination or dream which might
come to some person who had little practical understanding of the ways
of life, but we mean an appreciation of God's thought and approximate
understanding of his plan and a desire to know his will.

The word "perish," does not mean destruction, but rather the idea is to
"run wild"; so the literal rendering of the text is, "Where there is no
revelation the people run wild"--that is to say, if God is put out of
thought every man is a law unto himself and therefore is dangerous to
the community in which he lives.  He is like a ship sailing for a
harbor without chart or compass and with utter indifference to the pole
star.  Whatever your impressions, convictions or purposes, they should
always be squared by reverent, careful and profound study of God's will
and word.

The first sentence of the Bible is this, "In the beginning God," and it
must be the first sentence of every plan and of every purpose of the
individual and the community or there is danger ahead.


I

There ought never to be an age without a vision, indeed without
repeated visions.  If there should be such a time it might be a time of
prosperity, but inevitably souls would be neglected.  There ought not
to be an individual without a vision.  If there should be such an one
he is missing the best of his life.  If there be no vision the horizon
of man may be bounded by his office, his store, his home, his own city
or his native land, while as a matter of fact this is only a part of
what God meant him to do and to be.  God's plans are from everlasting
to everlasting.  The wonderful work he is doing in this world is only a
part of the plan, for in the ages to come he expects to show forth the
manysidedness of his grace and reveal to us the depth of his love to us
in Christ.

John McNeill's friend had an eagle which he had reared in the farm yard
with the ordinary fowl that lived there.  This friend sold his property
and determined to move to another part of Scotland.  He could dispose
of his horses and sell his chickens but no one wanted the eagle.  What
should he do with it?  He determined to teach it to fly, and threw it
up in the air only to have it come down with a thud upon the ground.
Then he lifted it and placed it upon the barn yard fence and was
holding it for a moment when suddenly the eagle lifted its eyes and
caught a glimpse of the sun.  It stretched forth its head as far as it
could, threw out one wing, then another, and with a scream and a bound
was away flying upward until it was lost in the face of the sun.  This
is what we are needing to-day--namely, to lift up our eyes and see
God's plan and try to understand his purposes.  The eagle so long had
held its head down that it had lost the vision of the sun; the first
glimpse of it set him free.  What we mean by a vision, therefore, is an
appreciation of God's purposes and plans and a hearty yielding to him
for service in the accomplishment of the same.

Joseph Cook when he was making a plea for China's millions said one
day, "Put your ear down to the ground and listen and you will hear the
tramp, tramp, tramp of four hundred millions of weary feet."  I have to
say this morning, Lift up your eyes and look, open your ears and listen
and you will both see and hear that God has a great plan for us which
he will reveal to all if only we will permit him to do so.  In
proportion as a people loses its faith in a revelation from God it
falls into decay.  The student of history recalls vividly the story of
the French Revolution, which is a proof of this statement.

God has always spoken concerning his plans and it has been to living
men and women that he has granted visions.  He came to Abraham and he
saw Christ's day and was glad: he visited Moses and he endured as
seeing him who is invisible: he was lifted up before Isaiah and he
first confessed his sin and shame, then cried, "Here am I, send me."
He granted Saul of Tarsus a vision of himself as he approached Damascus
until he cried, "Who art thou?" and then began to walk in fellowship
with him until like the hero that he was he mounted from the Eternal
City to that City which has foundations whose Builder and Maker is God.
He stood before John as in apocalyptic vision he saw him with his head
and his hair, white like wool, as white as snow and his eyes as a flame
of fire.

But if you should say, "Oh, yes, but this is in Bible times and we are
living in a different age," then hear me when I say that he has come to
living men and women in our own day with a revelation of his will.  He
spoke to Zinzendorf and we have a mighty work among the Moravians.  He
revealed himself to the Wesleys and we have the mighty movement of
Methodism.  He talked with Edwards and we have the great Revival of New
England.  He revealed himself to Finney and we have the great
manifestation of power in the state of New York.  He walked and talked
with Moody and we have the greatest evangelistic work of his day and
generation with Moody as his instrument.  These were all men with
visions.  He has come to great missionaries like Paton who saw the New
Hebrides Islands evangelized while yet they sat in darkness, because he
saw God.  He has spoken to our own Fulton in China, who writes that the
people are flocking to Christ.  To him it is no surprise, for he knew
that they would do it while others were still skeptical.  He knew it
because he knew God.

Let us remember that, however true it may be that God speaks in
conscience, providence, through the church and by the preaching of his
Word, his supreme revelation is in his own Word.  This Book contains
the revealed will of God and this Book is his Word.


II

Why are we not having revelations to-day as we know they have been
given at other times?  Why is not some one in our own land especially
working out some of the great plans and purposes of God?  The question
is easily answered.  The difficulty is not with God.  He is the same
forever.  We alone must be at fault.  Without any spirit of harsh
criticism and with a prayer to God that he will make my spirit as he
would have it, permit me to say that I fear the visions are not being
given to us for the following reasons:

First: Because of the disrespect shown to his Son.  We have come to a
time when men seek to limit his knowledge, and occasionally they are
saying that he did not know concerning the things of which he spake.
Such blasphemy makes us shudder.  There is a disposition to
misinterpret his teaching.  They did it in Paul's day and he spoke by
inspiration when he said, "If any man present another gospel than that
which I have presented let him be accursed."  There is a disposition to
rob him of his deity.  "Is Jesus divine?" was the question asked not
long ago of one who called himself a minister, and he answered, "Yes,
in the sense that Buddha is divine or Confucius is divine."  Our faces
grow white with fear as we listen to such blasphemous statements in
such an age as this.  This helps to overcast the sky and God can hardly
trust us with a vision in such an atmosphere.

Second: An irreverent criticism of the Word of God.  That there is a
reverent criticism all will allow, and that many who are walking these
paths are devout believers in God and in his word I would like to be
among the first to acknowledge.  There are three kinds of critics
to-day.  First: Those who honestly want the best and who are studying
carefully and prayerfully to know the truth.  Second: Those who ape
scholarship.  Third: Those whose lives may not be right, and for them
if any part of the Bible could be cut away they would be less
condemned.  We need not fear, however; our Bible is not in danger, for
this is largely a question of scholarship.  Some of you who listen to
me may not class yourselves as scholars.  I certainly do not put myself
in that company, but one thing I know: I have seen the Bible work as no
other book has ever worked, and I have seen Jesus Christ save
miraculously multitudes of poor lost sinners.  I am not disturbed for
the future; there are as great scholars as the world has ever known who
still hold to your mother's Bible and who have lost not one whit of
confidence in it.

Thomas Newberry, a devout English student, spent fifty years in study
to give the world his Newberry Bible.  He said, "I accept the theory of
the plenary inspiration of the Scriptures.  I have studied every 'jot
and tittle' of the Word of God and after these fifty years I see no
reason for changing my position."  Scholars' names almost without
number could be mentioned as believing in the Scriptures as the
divinely inspired Word of God.  For myself I would have great assurance
in standing side by side with Dr. Paton, and I would not think of
trembling so long as our sainted Dr. Moorehead walks courageously along
life's journey as he nears its end with faith in God's Word unshaken,
with confidence in God's Son constantly growing.  This blessed old Book
has been railed at in all the ages.  Men have professed to overthrow
it, they have cut and slashed at it like Jehoiakim of old, but it is
better than ever to-day.  It is the Word of God.  Heaven and earth may
pass away but this Word, never.

Not long ago I attended a conference of Christian workers and was told
by one of them that I could not appreciate the Bible except I read it
with the thought of literary criticism in mind.  My friend interpreted
a portion of the Word of God for me in this way and it was beautiful.
It reminded me of nothing so much as a diamond perfectly cut, kissed by
the sunlight and throwing back its sparkling light to me as I gazed
upon it.

Another said that I would never be able to understand the Bible until I
read it from the standpoint of the elocutionist in the best use of that
expression, and he read in my hearing the story of Joseph and his
brethren and I felt that I myself had never read the Bible before and
really had never heard it read.

Still another came with his higher criticism and said that much of the
Bible was mythical, that the stories I had loved were simply
allegorical; and I listened to him and went back to my Bible to read,
only to find that you may read it any way, spell it out in your youth
letter by letter, read it through your tears as you reach middle life
and your heart is aching, hold it against your heart when your eyes are
too dim to read its pages, and it will yield to you a sweetness which
is actually beyond the power of man to describe.  This is a wonderful
Book and in this Book God reveals himself.  Handle it irreverently and
you will have no vision.

Third: It seems to me that the church is not what she ought to be, and
this being true the vision is denied.  One of my friends said the other
day that the difficulty with the church is that she has lost her
interrogation point.  At the day of Pentecost people were saying, "What
do these things mean?"  To-day they never think of saying it.  I have
been told in a little pamphlet issued by an English writer that the
church has lost her possessive case, which means that somehow she has
gone on without realizing that the risen, glorified Christ is her
blessed Lord.  It is a great thing to say "Jesus"; infinitely greater
is it to say "My Jesus."  The church has lost her imperative mode.  In
days that are past it was possible for the church to stand in the
presence of evil and say, "In the name of Almighty God this iniquity
must stop."  But to-day it is not possible.  The church has lost her
present tense.  We are constantly looking for blessings in the future.
God's promises are all written for the present.  It is to the church on
fire that God grants a vision.

Fourth: Some of the difficulty must rest with us as ministers of the
Gospel.  I fear that some of us have lost our message.  It has loosened
its grip upon us, and you never can move another man until you are
first moved yourself by the message you would give to him.

At a great gathering not long ago I heard a distinguished Eastern
professor speaking.  The topic of his lecture was "My Foster Children,"
and these foster children were some animals which he had had as pets,
whose habits he had carefully studied.  One was a Gila monster from the
plains of Arizona, another was a horned owl, the third was a rat, and
the fourth was an opossum.  If you can imagine more uninteresting
subjects than these you are more imaginative than myself, and yet he
thrilled me and held three thousand people in breathless interest.  Oh,
my brethren, if I believe in Jesus Christ as the Son of God and as a
Savior able not only to save to the uttermost but to keep through
eternity, and that message grips me, I am a poor preacher if I fail
with it to grip and move other men.  I fear we have lost our boldness.
I am a minister of the glorious Gospel of the grace of God and I have a
right to demand a hearing and to give my message, not because of what I
am myself--God forbid--but because of what my Savior is.  Some of us
have lost our passion for souls; we mourn over it, we know that when we
once had this it was the secret of a successful ministry.  It is not
wrong for me to say to you this morning that to the minister without a
message, to the minister who has lost his holy boldness, to the
minister who has anything less than a burning passion for souls, God
cannot give his vision.


III

I know that I have your deepest sympathy in the longing which I now
express for this great gathering--namely, that God would give to us a
vision.

First: As to what the Bible really is.  One of my friends told me the
other day of a blind girl who could not read because she had been too
busy and somehow had not thought that she could use the raised letters
which have been such a boon to God's blind children.  I am told she
learned that she might read while on these grounds last summer.  It was
made possible later on for her to have a teacher and she began to study
little books until she could read quite fluently.  One day unknown to
her there was brought into her home a Bible with raised letters and
without telling what the book was it was opened at the fourteenth
chapter of John and she was bidden to read in it.  She had no sooner
touched the page, her fingers enabling her to read, "Let not your heart
be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me," than with radiant
face she exclaimed, "Why this is God's Word; the very touch of it is
different."  I would that we might have this vision.

Second: I wish that we might have a vision of Christ.  He is the
chiefest among ten thousand, and the one altogether lovely.  He is a
mighty Savior and a mighty helper.  I cannot bring him a burden too
great, nor talk to him about a trial too insignificant.  Oh, that we
might see him as he is!

And finally, I wish that we might know what service is, for knowing
this we would be instant in season and out of season.  Some years ago
Fannie Crosby, the blind hymn writer, was speaking in one of the
missions in New York City.  Suddenly she stopped and said, "I wonder if
there is not some wandering boy in this audience this evening who would
have the courage to step out from this audience and come up and stand
by my side so that I might put my arms around him and kiss him for his
mother?"  There was a hush upon the audience; then a boy from the rear
seat started and came to the platform, and with her arms around about
him and her lips against his cheek for his mother's sake, Fannie Crosby
said, "Oh, my friends, let us rescue the perishing."  From this meeting
she went to her home, and sitting in her room wrote:

      "Rescue the perishing,
      Care for the dying,
  Snatch them in pity from sin and the grave,
      Weep o'er the erring one,
      Lift up the fallen,
  Tell them of Jesus, the Mighty to save."


Years afterward she spoke in St. Louis at a great meeting and related
this incident.  Before she had finished a man in the audience sprang to
his feet and said, "Miss Crosby, listen to me.  I am a prosperous
merchant in this city, a husband and a father, a Christian and an
officer in the church.  I was that boy around whom you threw your
arms."  Such an experience as that is worth a lifetime of service.  I
wish to put myself on record.  I know that many of you are with me.  I
stand for nothing in these days that would in the least obscure men's
vision of the power of God, or their vision of the glorious majesty of
the Son of God, and I count nothing worth while except to do that thing
which would mean the winning of a soul to Jesus Christ.

I believe God is giving to some men in these days a vision as to what
may be accomplished if only a mighty work of grace should be given to
us.  He certainly is ready to pour out his Spirit upon his own people,
and it is only necessary that we should first of all realize our
weakness, then understand his power, realize that souls are lost and
dying and then know that he is able to save to the uttermost; and above
all to realize that in all ages he has used human instruments for the
accomplishment of his purposes, and realizing these things to see that
our lives are right in his sight, to have such a victory for God as the
world has never seen.  For this day we hope and pray and cry aloud, "O
Lord, how long, how long?"




THE COMPASSION OF JESUS

TEXT: "_But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with
compassion._"--Matt. 9:36.

The keynote of the earthly ministry of Jesus Christ was "compassion."
You have but to follow him in his journeys by day and by night to find
the proof of this statement.  Whether he ministers to the sick of the
palsy, turns aside to help the father whose child is dead, heals the
woman with the issue of blood, drives away the leprosy from the man
dead by law, stops to open the eyes of the blind man by the wayside,
helps the beggar or wins the member of the Sanhedrim, he is always the
same.

If you journey with him in the morning on the shores of the Sea of
Galilee, or at noon rest with him as he sits on the well curb of
Jacob's well; it you stop with him in the evening as he bares his side
and thrusts forth his hand to the doubting Thomas, or behold him as he
is roused from his sleep in the boat to quiet the storm; if you study
him on the mountain side at midnight or behold him in the garden of
Gethsemane when no one beholds his agony but the eye of his Father--you
will learn that he was always compassionate.  You cannot discover him
under any circumstances when this statement is not true of him.

This ninth chapter of Matthew is indeed remarkable.  It can be
appreciated only when we read the closing part of the eighth chapter,
for it is here that the people, angry because of the destruction of the
swine, besought him to leave their country; and it is here we see him
taking his departure.  Men have since that time driven him from their
hearts and their homes for reasons quite as trifling.  It is a sad
thing to know that any one can drive him away if he chooses to do so.

The chapter is remarkable, however, because here we not only read the
story of the calling of Matthew from his position of influence, but
find more specific cases of healing than in most other chapters of the
New Testament.  There is the healing of the sick of the palsy in the
second verse, the significant part of which is he was healed when Jesus
saw _their_ faith; the picture of the father whose child was dead and
then raised by him, in the eighteenth verse and the twenty-fifth verse;
the account of the woman with the issue of blood, in the twentieth
verse, and the picture of discouragement when all earthly physicians
had failed changed into great joy when the virtue of the great
physician healed her: the account of the dumb man, in the thirty-second
verse, who was possessed of a devil as well; and then in the
thirty-fifth verse a general statement concerning him to the effect
that he healed all manner of diseases.

The chapter is also remarkable because these cases presented to Jesus
were of the very worst sort.  The man with the palsy could not come
himself, however much he wanted to do so, and four men were required to
bring him; the child was dead and so beyond all human help; the two
blind men were undoubtedly beggars and outcasts; the dumb man was
possessed of a devil in addition to his dumbness; the group of people
who were subjects of his healing power had every manner of disease, but
while the people were different and the cases were desperate, Jesus was
always the same.

There were six specific illustrations of healing: three of these came
to Jesus for themselves, the two blind men and the woman; two others
were brought to him, the man sick with the palsy and the man who was
dumb; and for the other case the father came and took Jesus to the
child.  In all the general cases Jesus went himself to the suffering.

When all these subjects have been presented then comes the text, which
is its own outline.  There is first the picture of the multitudes, a
great number of people.  Then the statement that they had fainted;
literally it is, "they were tired."  Then they were described as sheep,
the only animal known which in its wandering cannot find its way home
of itself.  And finally it was stated that they had no shepherd, the
responsibility for their wandering resting upon others rather than upon
themselves.  This is the outline of this message.


I

The picture which Jesus beheld as he walked through his own country is
repeated to-day on every side of us, and he is still moved with
compassion because of those who are helpless and undone.  It is true we
have done something for him.  The last census shows that the membership
of the Protestant churches has increased more rapidly than the
population.  For this we should be thankful.  It is also true that the
church machinery of the day is well nigh perfect: the buildings and
equipment with which we have to do have never been excelled.  Yet,
counting the membership of both the Catholic and Protestant churches,
there are forty million people to-day in our land who are not in the
church and who evidently do not care for the church.  With these people
there seems to be a growing indifference to everything that is
spiritual.

A man in an apartment house in New York, when asked the other day to do
something for a poor family for the sake of God, answered
blasphemously, "I do not care for the opinion of men, I do not even
care for God himself; I am for myself first, last and all the time."
As we walk the streets we ought to be impressed with the fact that men
on every side of us are lost in the proportion of one to four.  As we
sit in a car we ought to be impressed with the fact that one in four
have rejected Christ and are hopeless.  In every city it is literally
true that there are thousands of unchurched people without God and
without hope in the world.  Of them the text would be true.  "But when
he saw the multitudes he was moved with compassion."


II

When Jesus saw these multitudes he saw them fainting or literally
"growing tired," and this is the picture of lost people to-day.  I am
persuaded that they are tired of many things which follow in the wake
of sin.

1. They must be weary of the hollowness of the world, for it cannot
satisfy.  I one day talked with a woman in Massachusetts whose
opportunity to mingle with the so-called best people of the world had
been unexcelled.  She had been a chosen and welcomed guest in the homes
of royalty and knew intimately every President of the United States
since she had grown to womanhood.  After her conversion I asked her if
the life of the world had satisfied; her answer was, "It is hollowness
and sham almost from beginning to end."

2. The unchurched people must be weary of an accusing conscience.
There is no unrest like it.  The man who sees the folly of his conduct
and whose conscience will not let him sleep, the man who realizes the
blighting power of sin and yet seems powerless to heed the call of
conscience, is in a pitiful condition.

  "And I know of the future judgment,
    How dreadful so'er it may be,
  That to sit alone with my conscience
    Would be judgment enough for me."


3. They must be tired of the world's sorrow, for it is on every side.
We are born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward and I cannot but
think that in all parts of our cities to-day the people away from
Christ are saying, "Oh, that I knew where peace might be found."

4. I know they are tired of the slavery of Satan.  A man formerly
prominent in social and political circles, the cashier of a bank, when
he found that he was a defaulter took his own life and left a letter
for his wife in which he said, "Oh, if some one had only spoken to me
when I so much needed help all this might have been different."


III

In the Old Testament and New, God's people are represented by the
figure of sheep.  Especially it seems to me this must be a good figure,
because sheep when wandering find it impossible to seek again for
themselves their home, and in their helplessness they fittingly
represent the one who wanders away from God.  There are so many people
to-day who are trying to find their way back without Christ.  They are
like wandering sheep.  There are so many who are seeking to climb up
some other way into the favor of God.  These are on every side of us,
and the time has come for us to present unto them Jesus Christ the
Savior of the world.


IV

These people that Jesus saw were shepherdless.  The responsibility for
their wandering therefore rested not so much upon themselves as upon
the fact that the one who should have cared for them was not doing so.
We are our brother's keeper, whether we are willing to acknowledge it
or not.

In meetings in California one of the ministers went forth during the
week to invite those who were away from Christ to come to him.  He
found an old white-haired soldier who said, "When I was in the army
years ago I promised God that I would be a Christian.  I have never
kept my word.  Yes, I will come to him now."  And when he came his wife
and children came with him.  "All these years," he said, "I have waited
for some one to ask me."  He called upon another man who had been
impressed in the meetings and this man acknowledged that he had long
felt his need of help, that he had prayed the night before, "O God, if
you want me to come to thee send some one to speak to me."  When the
minister came the man trembled when he said, "You must be the messenger
of God for whom I have been waiting," and he came beautifully to
Christ.  On every side of us people are waiting as sheep without a
shepherd for us simply to do our duty.


V

The result of this vision which Jesus had was that he did an unusual
thing.  In the tenth chapter and the first verse we read, "And when he
had called unto him his twelve disciples he gave them power against
unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness
and all manner of disease."  Which leads me to say that we must have
the same spirit.  Our present day church methods reach not more than
one-fourth the unsaved and many of these come from the ranks of our
Sunday schools and from Christian homes where for one reason or another
they have not made a profession of their faith in Christ.
Three-fourths of the lost are left to wander farther and farther away
simply because they will not yield to our present day church methods.
This is not as Jesus would have it.

In the twenty-first chapter of John the fifth and sixth verses we read,
"Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat?  They answered
him, No.  And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the
ship, and ye shall find.  They cast therefore, and now they were not
able to draw it for the multitudes of fishes."  Although these
disciples had toiled and taken nothing the results were all changed
when they cast their net on the right side of the boat.  May it not be
that we have been fishing on the wrong side or fishing in our own
strength, or, as some one has said, fishing in too shallow water, when
we should have been casting our nets in the deep?  The fact is, we need
him and without him we can do nothing.

I have been told that of the forty distinct cases of healing in the New
Testament only six came to Jesus by themselves.  Twenty were brought to
Jesus and to the fourteen others Jesus was taken.  I doubt not that the
proportion is the same to-day, and if it is true then our methods of
work must be changed and instead of praying for them to seek Jesus we
must either take them to Jesus or bring the Master into their company.
There can be no successful winning of the multitudes until the personal
element enters into it all.

1. There must be prayer.  When Jacob went forth to meet Esau he walked
with fear and trembling, but in Genesis thirty-second chapter and
twenty-eighth verse we read, "And he said, Thy name shall be called no
more Jacob, but Israel, for as a prince hast thou power with God and
with men, and hast prevailed," so that long before Esau was met victory
was won.  There must be no attempt to win the lost without first of all
we have gained an audience with God in prayer, and if we pray as we
ought to pray he will give us the assurance of victory before we start
upon our mission.

2. There must be personal contact.  It is said that a man recently went
into a jewelry store to buy an opal and rejected all that were
presented to him.  One of them he rejected instantly.  The salesman
picked it up and closed it in his hand and finally in a casual way
opened his hand and placed the opal upon the counter.  "Why," said the
customer, "that is the opal I want.  I have never seen anything finer,"
and yet he had rejected it first.  The salesman told him that it was a
sensitive opal and needed the touch of a human hand before it could
reveal its beauty.  Oh, how many souls there are like this in the world!

I have read that when Robert Louis Stevenson visited the island of the
lepers where Father Damien did his illustrious work he played croquet
with the children, using the same mallets that they used; and when it
was suggested that he put gloves upon his hands he refused to do so
because, he said, "it will remind them the more of the difference
between us."  This spirit must prevail in our work if we are to win
souls.

Two things we may do to reach the lost.

(1) Speak to them.  The power of human speech is simply marvelous.  A
Sunday school boy appeared in a Baptist Church to apply for membership
and when they asked him about his conversion he said, "My Sunday school
teacher took me for a walk one Sunday in Prospect Park and talked with
me about Jesus and I gave myself to him."  One of the officers of my
church when an unsaved man was asked by his minister to attend special
services in the church and then was urged by his wife to go with her.
Both invitations were angrily declined.  He at last agreed to escort
her to the church but not to enter in.  The biting cold wind of the
night drove him into the church and he was just in time to hear the
minister's appeal to the unsaved.  All were asked to lift their hands
who would know Christ and then he remembered that when he was a boy and
had been drowning in Lake George he lifted up his hand as high as he
could and his brother took hold of it and kept him from sinking.
Suddenly it came to him in the church that he was sinking in another
way, and instantly he raised his hand and Christ took hold of it.  I do
not know of a more godly man among all my list of friends than he; and
he says to-day that the invitation given to him and refused with anger
led him to Christ.

(2) Write.  The chief justice of the supreme court of a western state
was not a Christian until a few years ago.  He was a genial, kindly
man, and naturally a great lawyer, but he had never confessed Christ as
his Savior, and apparently had little real interest in the church.  One
day the pastor of the Presbyterian church determined that he would
write him a letter, and then decided that so great a man would not
receive his communication and destroyed it.  But the pastor's wife had
more faith and urged him to write again.  He did so, and sent the
second letter and forwarded with it Spurgeon's "All of Grace."  He
received word almost instantly that the chief justice had been deeply
impressed, and that as a matter of fact he was waiting for years for
some one to speak to him.  The letter moved him and the little book
gave him the instructions needed.  To-day he is one of the brightest
Christians I know.  His face is a benediction.  He said to me one day
that it was a wonderful thing to be a Christian; that he never allowed
any one to meet him that he did not talk with him about his soul.  Are
there not hundreds and thousands of other men waiting, as the chief
justice waited, for some one to speak or write?

3. There must be a personal consecration not only to Christ but to the
work if we would be successful.  The biography of Helen Kellar