(1)                    (2)
      __________             __________
     |\         |\          |           \
     |  \       |  \        |             \
     |    \ ____|____\      |               \
     |     |    |     |     |                |
     |_____|____|     |     |                |
      \    |     \    |      \               |
        \  |       \  |        \             |
          \|_________\|          \ __________|


Once more we ascended into space.  "Hitherto," said the Sphere, "I have
shewn you naught save Plane Figures and their interiors.  Now I must
introduce you to Solids, and reveal to you the plan upon which they are
constructed.  Behold this multitude of moveable square cards.  See, I
put one on another, not, as you supposed, Northward of the other, but
ON the other.  Now a second, now a third.  See, I am building up a
Solid by a multitude of Squares parallel to one another.  Now the Solid
is complete, being as high as it is long and broad, and we call it a
Cube."

"Pardon me, my Lord," replied I; "but to my eye the appearance is as of
an Irregular Figure whose inside is laid open to the view; in other
words, methinks I see no Solid, but a Plane such as we infer in
Flatland; only of an Irregularity which betokens some monstrous
criminal, so that the very sight of it is painful to my eyes."

"True," said the Sphere, "it appears to you a Plane, because you are
not accustomed to light and shade and perspective; just as in Flatland
a Hexagon would appear a Straight Line to one who has not the Art of
Sight Recognition.  But in reality it is a Solid, as you shall learn by
the sense of Feeling."

He then introduced me to the Cube, and I found that this marvellous
Being was indeed no Plane, but a Solid; and that he was endowed with
six plane sides and eight terminal points called solid angles; and I
remembered the saying of the Sphere that just such a Creature as this
would be formed by a Square moving, in Space, parallel to himself:  and
I rejoiced to think that so insignificant a Creature as I could in some
sense be called the Progenitor of so illustrious an offspring.

But still I could not fully understand the meaning of what my Teacher
had told me concerning "light" and "shade" and "perspective"; and I did
not hesitate to put my difficulties before him.

Were I to give the Sphere's explanation of these matters, succinct and
clear though it was, it would be tedious to an inhabitant of Space, who
knows these things already.  Suffice it, that by his lucid statements,
and by changing the position of objects and lights, and by allowing me
to feel the several objects and even his own sacred Person, he at last
made all things clear to me, so that I could now readily distinguish
between a Circle and a Sphere, a Plane Figure and a Solid.

This was the Climax, the Paradise, of my strange eventful History.
Henceforth I have to relate the story of my miserable Fall:--most
miserable, yet surely most undeserved!  For why should the thirst for
knowledge be aroused, only to be disappointed and punished?  My
volition shrinks from the painful task of recalling my humiliation;
yet, like a second Prometheus, I will endure this and worse, if by any
means I may arouse in the interiors of Plane and Solid Humanity a
spirit of rebellion against the Conceit which would limit our
Dimensions to Two or Three or any number short of Infinity.  Away then
with all personal considerations!  Let me continue to the end, as I
began, without further digressions or anticipations, pursuing the plain
path of dispassionate History.  The exact facts, the exact words,--and
they are burnt in upon my brain,--shall be set down without alteration
of an iota; and let my Readers judge between me and Destiny.

The Sphere would willingly have continued his lessons by indoctrinating
me in the conformation of all regular Solids, Cylinders, Cones,
Pyramids, Pentahedrons, Hexahedrons, Dodecahedrons, and Spheres:  but I
ventured to interrupt him.  Not that I was wearied of knowledge.  On
the contrary, I thirsted for yet deeper and fuller draughts than he was
offering to me.

"Pardon me," said I, "O Thou Whom I must no longer address as the
Perfection of all Beauty; but let me beg thee to vouchsafe thy servant
a sight of thine interior."

SPHERE.  My what?

I.  Thine interior:  thy stomach, thy intestines.

SPHERE.  Whence this ill-timed impertinent request?  And what mean you
by saying that I am no longer the Perfection of all Beauty?

I.  My Lord, your own wisdom has taught me to aspire to One even more
great, more beautiful, and more closely approximate to Perfection than
yourself.  As you yourself, superior to all Flatland forms, combine
many Circles in One, so doubtless there is One above you who combines
many Spheres in One Supreme Existence, surpassing even the Solids of
Spaceland.  And even as we, who are now in Space, look down on Flatland
and see the insides of all things, so of a certainty there is yet above
us some higher, purer region, whither thou dost surely purpose to lead
me--O Thou Whom I shall always call, everywhere and in all Dimensions,
my Priest, Philosopher, and Friend--some yet more spacious Space, some
more dimensionable Dimensionality, from the vantage-ground of which we
shall look down together upon the revealed insides of Solid things, and
where thine own intestines, and those of thy kindred Spheres, will lie
exposed to the view of the poor wandering exile from Flatland, to whom
so much has already been vouchsafed.

SPHERE.  Pooh!  Stuff!  Enough of this trifling!  The time is short,
and much remains to be done before you are fit to proclaim the Gospel
of Three Dimensions to your blind benighted countrymen in Flatland.

I.  Nay, gracious Teacher, deny me not what I know it is in thy power
to perform.  Grant me but one glimpse of thine interior, and I am
satisfied for ever, remaining henceforth thy docile pupil, thy
unemancipable slave, ready to receive all thy teachings and to feed
upon the words that fall from thy lips.

SPHERE.  Well, then, to content and silence you, let me say at once, I
would shew you what you wish if I could; but I cannot.  Would you have
me turn my stomach inside out to oblige you?

I.  But my Lord has shewn me the intestines of all my countrymen in the
Land of Two Dimensions by taking me with him into the Land of Three.
What therefore more easy than now to take his servant on a second
journey into the blessed region of the Fourth Dimension, where I shall
look down with him once more upon this land of Three Dimensions, and
see the inside of every three-dimensioned house, the secrets of the
solid earth, the treasures of the mines in Spaceland, and the
intestines of every solid living creature, even of the noble and
adorable Spheres.

SPHERE.  But where is this land of Four Dimensions?

I.  I know not:  but doubtless my Teacher knows.

SPHERE.  Not I.  There is no such land.  The very idea of it is utterly
inconceivable.

I.  Not inconceivable, my Lord, to me, and therefore still less
inconceivable to my Master.  Nay, I despair not that, even here, in
this region of Three Dimensions, your Lordship's art may make the
Fourth Dimension visible to me; just as in the Land of Two Dimensions
my Teacher's skill would fain have opened the eyes of his blind servant
to the invisible presence of a Third Dimension, though I saw it not.

Let me recall the past.  Was I not taught below that when I saw a Line
and inferred a Plane, I in reality saw a Third unrecognized Dimension,
not the same as brightness, called "height"?  And does it not now
follow that, in this region, when I see a Plane and infer a Solid, I
really see a Fourth unrecognized Dimension, not the same as colour, but
existent, though infinitesimal and incapable of measurement?

And besides this, there is the Argument from Analogy of Figures.

SPHERE.  Analogy!  Nonsense:  what analogy?

I.  Your Lordship tempts his servant to see whether he remembers the
revelations imparted to him.  Trifle not with me, my Lord; I crave, I
thirst, for more knowledge.  Doubtless we cannot SEE that other higher
Spaceland now, because we we have no eye in our stomachs.  But, just as
there WAS the realm of Flatland, though that poor puny Lineland Monarch
could neither turn to left nor right to discern it, and just as there
WAS close at hand, and touching my frame, the land of Three Dimensions,
though I, blind senseless wretch, had no power to touch it, no eye in
my interior to discern it, so of a surety there is a Fourth Dimension,
which my Lord perceives with the inner eye of thought.  And that it
must exist my Lord himself has taught me.  Or can he have forgotten
what he himself imparted to his servant?

In One Dimension, did not a moving Point produce a Line with TWO
terminal points?

In Two Dimensions, did not a moving Line produce a Square with FOUR
terminal points?

In Three Dimensions, did not a moving Square produce--did not this eye
of mine behold it--that blessed Being, a Cube, with EIGHT terminal
points?

And in Four Dimensions shall not a moving Cube--alas, for Analogy, and
alas for the Progress of Truth, if it be not so--shall not, I say, the
motion of a divine Cube result in a still more divine Organization with
SIXTEEN terminal points?

Behold the infallible confirmation of the Series, 2, 4, 8, 16: is not
this a Geometrical Progression?  Is not this--if I might quote my
Lord's own words--"strictly according to Analogy"?

Again, was I not taught by my Lord that as in a Line there are TWO
bounding Points, and in a Square there are FOUR bounding Lines, so in a
Cube there must be SIX bounding Squares?  Behold once more the
confirming Series, 2, 4, 6:  is not this an Arithmetical Progression?
And consequently does it not of necessity follow that the more divine
offspring of the divine Cube in the Land of Four Dimensions, must have
8 bounding Cubes: and is not this also, as my Lord has taught me to
believe, "strictly according to Analogy"?

O, my Lord, my Lord, behold, I cast myself in faith upon conjecture,
not knowing the facts; and I appeal to your Lordship to confirm or deny
my logical anticipations.  If I am wrong, I yield, and will no longer
demand a fourth Dimension; but, if I am right, my Lord will listen to
reason.

I ask therefore, is it, or is it not, the fact, that ere now your
countrymen also have witnessed the descent of Beings of a higher order
than their own, entering closed rooms, even as your Lordship entered
mine, without the opening of doors or windows, and appearing and
vanishing at will?  On the reply to this question I am ready to stake
everything.  Deny it, and I am henceforth silent.  Only vouchsafe an
answer.

SPHERE.  (AFTER A PAUSE).  It is reported so.  But men are divided in
opinion as to the facts.  And even granting the facts, they explain
them in different ways.  And in any case, however great may be the
number of different explanations, no one has adopted or suggested the
theory of a Fourth Dimension.  Therefore, pray have done with this
trifling, and let us return to business.

I.  I was certain of it.  I was certain that my anticipations would be
fulfilled.  And now have patience with me and answer me yet one more
question, best of Teachers!  Those who have thus appeared--no one knows
whence--and have returned--no one knows whither--have they also
contracted their sections and vanished somehow into that more Spacious
Space, whither I now entreat you to conduct me?

SPHERE (MOODILY).  They have vanished, certainly--if they ever
appeared.  But most people say that these visions arose from the
thought--you will not understand me--from the brain; from the perturbed
angularity of the Seer.

I.  Say they so?  Oh, believe them not.  Or if it indeed be so, that
this other Space is really Thoughtland, then take me to that blessed
Region where I in Thought shall see the insides of all solid things.
There, before my ravished eye, a Cube, moving in some altogether new
direction, but strictly according to Analogy, so as to make every
particle of his interior pass through a new kind of Space, with a wake
of its own--shall create a still more perfect perfection than himself,
with sixteen terminal Extra-solid angles, and Eight solid Cubes for his
Perimeter.  And once there, shall we stay our upward course?  In that
blessed region of Four Dimensions, shall we linger on the threshold of
the Fifth, and not enter therein?  Ah, no!  Let us rather resolve that
our ambition shall soar with our corporal ascent.  Then, yielding to
our intellectual onset, the gates of the Sixth Dimension shall fly
open; after that a Seventh, and then an Eighth-- How long I should have
continued I know not.  In vain did the Sphere, in his voice of thunder,
reiterate his command of silence, and threaten me with the direst
penalties if I persisted.  Nothing could stem the flood of my ecstatic
aspirations.  Perhaps I was to blame; but indeed I was intoxicated with
the recent draughts of Truth to which he himself had introduced me.
However, the end was not long in coming.  My words were cut short by a
crash outside, and a simultaneous crash inside me, which impelled me
through space with a velocity that precluded speech.  Down! down! down!
I was rapidly descending; and I knew that return to Flatland was my
doom.  One glimpse, one last and never-to-be-forgotten glimpse I had of
that dull level wilderness--which was now to become my Universe
again--spread out before my eye.  Then a darkness.  Then a final,
all-consummating thunder-peal; and, when I came to myself, I was once
more a common creeping Square, in my Study at home, listening to the
Peace-Cry of my approaching Wife.




Section 20.  How the Sphere encouraged me in a Vision



Although I had less than a minute for reflection, I felt, by a kind of
instinct, that I must conceal my experiences from my Wife.  Not that I
apprehended, at the moment, any danger from her divulging my secret,
but I knew that to any Woman in Flatland the narrative of my adventures
must needs be unintelligible.  So I endeavoured to reassure her by some
story, invented for the occasion, that I had accidentally fallen
through the trap-door of the cellar, and had there lain stunned.

The Southward attraction in our country is so slight that even to a
Woman my tale necessarily appeared extraordinary and well-nigh
incredible; but my Wife, whose good sense far exceeds that of the
average of her Sex, and who perceived that I was unusually excited, did
not argue with me on the subject, but insisted that I was ill and
required repose.  I was glad of an excuse for retiring to my chamber to
think quietly over what had happened.  When I was at last by myself, a
drowsy sensation fell on me; but before my eyes closed I endeavoured to
reproduce the Third Dimension, and especially the process by which a
Cube is constructed through the motion of a Square.  It was not so
clear as I could have wished; but I remembered that it must be "Upward,
and yet not Northward", and I determined steadfastly to retain these
words as the clue which, if firmly grasped, could not fail to guide me
to the solution.  So mechanically repeating, like a charm, the words,
"Upward, yet not Northward", I fell into a sound refreshing sleep.

During my slumber I had a dream.  I thought I was once more by the side
of the Sphere, whose lustrous hue betokened that he had exchanged his
wrath against me for perfect placability.  We were moving together
towards a bright but infinitesimally small Point, to which my Master
directed my attention.  As we approached, methought there issued from
it a slight humming noise as from one of your Spaceland bluebottles,
only less resonant by far, so slight indeed that even in the perfect
stillness of the Vacuum through which we soared, the sound reached not
our ears till we checked our flight at a distance from it of something
under twenty human diagonals.

"Look yonder," said my Guide, "in Flatland thou hast lived; of Lineland
thou hast received a vision; thou hast soared with me to the heights of
Spaceland; now, in order to complete the range of thy experience, I
conduct thee downward to the lowest depth of existence, even to the
realm of Pointland, the Abyss of No dimensions.

"Behold yon miserable creature.  That Point is a Being like ourselves,
but confined to the non-dimensional Gulf.  He is himself his own World,
his own Universe; of any other than himself he can form no conception;
he knows not Length, nor Breadth, nor Height, for he has had no
experience of them; he has no cognizance even of the number Two; nor
has he a thought of Plurality; for he is himself his One and All, being
really Nothing.  Yet mark his perfect self-contentment, and hence learn
this lesson, that to be self-contented is to be vile and ignorant, and
that to aspire is better than to be blindly and impotently happy.  Now
listen."

He ceased; and there arose from the little buzzing creature a tiny,
low, monotonous, but distinct tinkling, as from one of your Spaceland
phonographs, from which I caught these words, "Infinite beatitude of
existence!  It is; and there is none else beside It."

"What," said I, "does the puny creature mean by 'it'?" "He means
himself," said the Sphere:  "have you not noticed before now, that
babies and babyish people who cannot distinguish themselves from the
world, speak of themselves in the Third Person?  But hush!"

"It fills all Space," continued the little soliloquizing Creature, "and
what It fills, It is.  What It thinks, that It utters; and what It
utters, that It hears; and It itself is Thinker, Utterer, Hearer,
Thought, Word, Audition; it is the One, and yet the All in All.  Ah,
the happiness ah, the happiness of Being!"

"Can you not startle the little thing out of its complacency?" said I.
"Tell it what it really is, as you told me; reveal to it the narrow
limitations of Pointland, and lead it up to something higher."  "That
is no easy task," said my Master; "try you."

Hereon, raising my voice to the uttermost, I addressed the Point as
follows:

"Silence, silence, contemptible Creature.  You call yourself the All in
All, but you are the Nothing:  your so-called Universe is a mere speck
in a Line, and a Line is a mere shadow as compared with--"  "Hush,
hush, you have said enough," interrupted the Sphere, "now listen, and
mark the effect of your harangue on the King of Pointland."

The lustre of the Monarch, who beamed more brightly than ever upon
hearing my words, shewed clearly that he retained his complacency; and
I had hardly ceased when he took up his strain again.  "Ah, the joy,
ah, the joy of Thought!  What can It not achieve by thinking!  Its own
Thought coming to Itself, suggestive of Its disparagement, thereby to
enhance Its happiness! Sweet rebellion stirred up to result in triumph!
Ah, the divine creative power of the All in One!  Ah, the joy, the joy
of Being!"

"You see," said my Teacher, "how little your words have done.  So far
as the Monarch understands them at all, he accepts them as his own--for
he cannot conceive of any other except himself--and plumes himself upon
the variety of 'Its Thought' as an instance of creative Power.  Let us
leave this God of Pointland to the ignorant fruition of his
omnipresence and omniscience:  nothing that you or I can do can rescue
him from his self-satisfaction."

After this, as we floated gently back to Flatland, I could hear the
mild voice of my Companion pointing the moral of my vision, and
stimulating me to aspire, and to teach others to aspire.  He had been
angered at first--he confessed--by my ambition to soar to Dimensions
above the Third; but, since then, he had received fresh insight, and he
was not too proud to acknowledge his error to a Pupil.  Then he
proceeded to initiate me into mysteries yet higher than those I had
witnessed, shewing me how to construct Extra-Solids by the motion of
Solids, and Double Extra-Solids by the motion of Extra-Solids, and all
"strictly according to Analogy", all by methods so simple, so easy, as
to be patent even to the Female Sex.




Section 21.  How I tried to teach the Theory of Three Dimensions
               to my Grandson, and with what success



I awoke rejoicing, and began to reflect on the glorious career before
me.  I would go forth, methought, at once, and evangelize the whole of
Flatland.  Even to Women and Soldiers should the Gospel of Three
Dimensions be proclaimed.  I would begin with my Wife.

Just as I had decided on the plan of my operations, I heard the sound
of many voices in the street commanding silence.  Then followed a
louder voice.  It was a herald's proclamation.  Listening attentively,
I recognized the words of the Resolution of the Council, enjoining the
arrest, imprisonment, or execution of any one who should pervert the
minds of the people by delusions, and by professing to have received
revelations from another World.

I reflected.  This danger was not to be trifled with.  It would be
better to avoid it by omitting all mention of my Revelation, and by
proceeding on the path of Demonstration--which after all, seemed so
simple and so conclusive that nothing would be lost by discarding the
former means.  "Upward, not Northward"--was the clue to the whole
proof.  It had seemed to me fairly clear before I fell asleep; and when
I first awoke, fresh from my dream, it had appeared as patent as
Arithmetic; but somehow it did not seem to me quite so obvious now.
Though my Wife entered the room opportunely just at that moment, I
decided, after we had exchanged a few words of commonplace
conversation, not to begin with her.

My Pentagonal Sons were men of character and standing, and physicians
of no mean reputation, but not great in mathematics, and, in that
respect, unfit for my purpose.  But it occurred to me that a young and
docile Hexagon, with a mathematical turn, would be a most suitable
pupil.  Why therefore not make my first experiment with my little
precocious Grandson, whose casual remarks on the meaning of 3^3 had met
with the approval of the Sphere?  Discussing the matter with him, a
mere boy, I should be in perfect safety; for he would know nothing of
the Proclamation of the Council; whereas I could not feel sure that my
Sons--so greatly did their patriotism and reverence for the Circles
predominate over mere blind affection--might not feel compelled to hand
me over to the Prefect, if they found me seriously maintaining the
seditious heresy of the Third Dimension.

But the first thing to be done was to satisfy in some way the curiosity
of my Wife, who naturally wished to know something of the reasons for
which the Circle had desired that mysterious interview, and of the
means by which he had entered the house.  Without entering into the
details of the elaborate account I gave her,--an account, I fear, not
quite so consistent with truth as my Readers in Spaceland might
desire,--I must be content with saying that I succeeded at last in
persuading her to return quietly to her household duties without
eliciting from me any reference to the World of Three Dimensions.  This
done, I immediately sent for my Grandson; for, to confess the truth, I
felt that all that I had seen and heard was in some strange way
slipping away from me, like the image of a half-grasped, tantalizing
dream, and I longed to essay my skill in making a first disciple.

When my Grandson entered the room I carefully secured the door.  Then,
sitting down by his side and taking our mathematical tablets,--or, as
you would call them, Lines--I told him we would resume the lesson of
yesterday.  I taught him once more how a Point by motion in One
Dimension produces a Line, and how a straight Line in Two Dimensions
produces a Square.  After this, forcing a laugh, I said, "And now, you
scamp, you wanted to make me believe that a Square may in the same way
by motion 'Upward, not Northward' produce another figure, a sort of
extra Square in Three Dimensions.  Say that again, you young rascal."

At this moment we heard once more the herald's "O yes! O yes!" outside
in the street proclaiming the Resolution of the Council.  Young though
he was, my Grandson--who was unusually intelligent for his age, and
bred up in perfect reverence for the authority of the Circles--took in
the situation with an acuteness for which I was quite unprepared.  He
remained silent till the last words of the Proclamation had died away,
and then, bursting into tears, "Dear Grandpapa," he said, "that was
only my fun, and of course I meant nothing at all by it; and we did not
know anything then about the new Law; and I don't think I said anything
about the Third Dimension; and I am sure I did not say one word about
'Upward, not Northward', for that would be such nonsense, you know.
How could a thing move Upward, and not Northward?  Upward and not
Northward!  Even if I were a baby, I could not be so absurd as that.
How silly it is!  Ha! ha! ha!"

"Not at all silly," said I, losing my temper; "here for example, I take
this Square," and, at the word, I grasped a moveable Square, which was
lying at hand--"and I move it, you see, not Northward but--yes, I move
it Upward--that is to say, not Northward, but I move it somewhere--not
exactly like this, but somehow--" Here I brought my sentence to an
inane conclusion, shaking the Square about in a purposeless manner,
much to the amusement of my Grandson, who burst out laughing louder
than ever, and declared that I was not teaching him, but joking with
him; and so saying he unlocked the door and ran out of the room.  Thus
ended my first attempt to convert a pupil to the Gospel of Three
Dimensions.




Section 22.  How I then tried to diffuse the Theory
               of Three Dimensions by other means, and of the result



My failure with my Grandson did not encourage me to communicate my
secret to others of my household; yet neither was I led by it to
despair of success.  Only I saw that I must not wholly rely on the
catch-phrase, "Upward, not Northward", but must rather endeavour to
seek a demonstration by setting before the public a clear view of the
whole subject; and for this purpose it seemed necessary to resort to
writing.

So I devoted several months in privacy to the composition of a treatise
on the mysteries of Three Dimensions.  Only, with the view of evading
the Law, if possible, I spoke not of a physical Dimension, but of a
Thoughtland whence, in theory, a Figure could look down upon Flatland
and see simultaneously the insides of all things, and where it was
possible that there might be supposed to exist a Figure environed, as
it were, with six Squares, and containing eight terminal Points.  But
in writing this book I found myself sadly hampered by the impossibility
of drawing such diagrams as were necessary for my purpose; for of
course, in our country of Flatland, there are no tablets but Lines, and
no diagrams but Lines, all in one straight Line and only
distinguishable by difference of size and brightness; so that, when I
had finished my treatise (which I entitled, "Through Flatland to
Thoughtland") I could not feel certain that many would understand my
meaning.

Meanwhile my life was under a cloud.  All pleasures palled upon me; all
sights tantalized and tempted me to outspoken treason, because I could
not but compare what I saw in Two Dimensions with what it really was if
seen in Three, and could hardly refrain from making my comparisons
aloud.  I neglected my clients and my own business to give myself to
the contemplation of the mysteries which I had once beheld, yet which I
could impart to no one, and found daily more difficult to reproduce
even before my own mental vision.

One day, about eleven months after my return from Spaceland, I tried to
see a Cube with my eye closed, but failed; and though I succeeded
afterwards, I was not then quite certain (nor have I been ever
afterwards) that I had exactly realized the original.  This made me
more melancholy than before, and determined me to take some step; yet
what, I knew not.  I felt that I would have been willing to sacrifice
my life for the Cause, if thereby I could have produced conviction.
But if I could not convince my Grandson, how could I convince the
highest and most developed Circles in the land?

And yet at times my spirit was too strong for me, and I gave vent to
dangerous utterances.  Already I was considered heterodox if not
treasonable, and I was keenly alive to the danger of my position;
nevertheless I could not at times refrain from bursting out into
suspicious or half-seditious utterances, even among the highest
Polygonal and Circular society.  When, for example, the question arose
about the treatment of those lunatics who said that they had received
the power of seeing the insides of things, I would quote the saying of
an ancient Circle, who declared that prophets and inspired people are
always considered by the majority to be mad; and I could not help
occasionally dropping such expressions as "the eye that discerns the
interiors of things", and "the all-seeing land"; once or twice I even
let fall the forbidden terms "the Third and Fourth Dimensions".  At
last, to complete a series of minor indiscretions, at a meeting of our
Local Speculative Society held at the palace of the Prefect
himself,--some extremely silly person having read an elaborate paper
exhibiting the precise reasons why Providence has limited the number of
Dimensions to Two, and why the attribute of omnividence is assigned to
the Supreme alone--I so far forgot myself as to give an exact account
of the whole of my voyage with the Sphere into Space, and to the
Assembly Hall in our Metropolis, and then to Space again, and of my
return home, and of everything that I had seen and heard in fact or
vision.  At first, indeed, I pretended that I was describing the
imaginary experiences of a fictitious person; but my enthusiasm soon
forced me to throw off all disguise, and finally, in a fervent
peroration, I exhorted all my hearers to divest themselves of prejudice
and to become believers in the Third Dimension.

Need I say that I was at once arrested and taken before the Council?

Next morning, standing in the very place where but a very few months
ago the Sphere had stood in my company, I was allowed to begin and to
continue my narration unquestioned and uninterrupted.  But from the
first I foresaw my fate; for the President, noting that a guard of the
better sort of Policemen was in attendance, of angularity little, if at
all, under 55 degrees, ordered them to be relieved before I began my
defence, by an inferior class of 2 or 3 degrees.  I knew only too well
what that meant.  I was to be executed or imprisoned, and my story was
to be kept secret from the world by the simultaneous destruction of the
officials who had heard it; and, this being the case, the President
desired to substitute the cheaper for the more expensive victims.

After I had concluded my defence, the President, perhaps perceiving
that some of the junior Circles had been moved by my evident
earnestness, asked me two questions:--

1.  Whether I could indicate the direction which I meant when I used
the words "Upward, not Northward"?

2.  Whether I could by any diagrams or descriptions (other than the
enumeration of imaginary sides and angles) indicate the Figure I was
pleased to call a Cube?

I declared that I could say nothing more, and that I must commit myself
to the Truth, whose cause would surely prevail in the end.

The President replied that he quite concurred in my sentiment, and that
I could not do better.  I must be sentenced to perpetual imprisonment;
but if the Truth intended that I should emerge from prison and
evangelize the world, the Truth might be trusted to bring that result
to pass.  Meanwhile I should be subjected to no discomfort that was not
necessary to preclude escape, and, unless I forfeited the privilege by
misconduct, I should be occasionally permitted to see my brother who
had preceded me to my prison.

Seven years have elapsed and I am still a prisoner, and--if I except
the occasional visits of my brother--debarred from all companionship
save that of my jailers.  My brother is one of the best of Squares,
just, sensible, cheerful, and not without fraternal affection; yet I
confess that my weekly interviews, at least in one respect, cause me
the bitterest pain.  He was present when the Sphere manifested himself
in the Council Chamber; he saw the Sphere's changing sections; he heard
the explanation of the phenomena then given to the Circles.  Since that
time, scarcely a week has passed during seven whole years, without his
hearing from me a repetition of the part I played in that
manifestation, together with ample descriptions of all the phenomena in
Spaceland, and the arguments for the existence of Solid things
derivable from Analogy.  Yet--I take shame to be forced to confess
it--my brother has not yet grasped the nature of the Third Dimension,
and frankly avows his disbelief in the existence of a Sphere.

Hence I am absolutely destitute of converts, and, for aught that I can
see, the millennial Revelation has been made to me for nothing.
Prometheus up in Spaceland was bound for bringing down fire for
mortals, but I--poor Flatland Prometheus--lie here in prison for
bringing down nothing to my countrymen.  Yet I exist in the hope that
these memoirs, in some manner, I know not how, may find their way to
the minds of humanity in Some Dimension, and may stir up a race of
rebels who shall refuse to be confined to limited Dimensionality.

That is the hope of my brighter moments.  Alas, it is not always so.
Heavily weighs on me at times the burdensome reflection that I cannot
honestly say I am confident as to the exact shape of the once-seen,
oft-regretted Cube; and in my nightly visions the mysterious precept,
"Upward, not Northward", haunts me like a soul-devouring Sphinx.  It is
part of the martyrdom which I endure for the cause of the Truth that
there are seasons of mental weakness, when Cubes and Spheres flit away
into the background of scarce-possible existences; when the Land of
Three Dimensions seems almost as visionary as the Land of One or None;
nay, when even this hard wall that bars me from my freedom, these very
tablets on which I am writing, and all the substantial realities of
Flatland itself, appear no better than the offspring of a diseased
imagination, or the baseless fabric of a dream.




                           THE END of FLATLAND

  |                          THE END of                           |
  |        ______                                                 |
  |       /       /     /|   ------  /     /|      /|    /  /-.   |
  |     /----   /     /__|    /    /     /__|    /  |  /  /   /   |
  |   /       /___  /    |  /    /___  /    |  /    |/  /__.-'    |
  |                                                               |
  | The baseless fabric of my vision                              |
  |                                 Melted into air into thin air |
  | Such stuff as dreams are made of                              |