bought its first hard drive for about $1500 dollars, for Apple's
new Personal Computer.  Not counting inflation we can buy drives
that will hold 1,000 times as much data for the same price.  The
true cost, counting inflation, would be that our $1500 would buy
closer to 10,000 times as much space because our $1500 from 1979
is equivalent to about $5,000 today, if we get the new "magneto-
resistive" drive from IBM.  This is NOT counting ZIP compression
or other compression programs.  If you count them, you would get
about 5,000 times as much data for your money today as in 1979.

 5 million bytes = $1500 in 1979 = one copy of Shakespeare
12 billion bytes = $4500 in 1995 [inflation has tripled plus]
25 billion bytes . . .with compression programs.

This is 5,000 copies of the Complete Shakespeare on one disk, or
less then $1 per copy.  This upsets those who think there should
not be unlimited numbers of books in the world, so definition of
copyright and consequently the definition of public domain is in
danger of being changed, as they have been every time in history
that the public got too much information.

If the trend listed above continues for only 15 more years, 2010
will see drives containing 25 million copies of Shakespeare, for
the same price as the drive that could only hold one copy thirty
years earlier, and the price per copy will be so low that it may
take more money to run the calculation to figure the prices than
the prices actually are.

This is the real reason copyright gets extended, history repeats
itself, over and over again, and "those who do not study history
are condemned to repeat it."  What they want is to insure you do
not study history, so they can do the same things over and over,
because that is the easiest way for them to make money.  Change,
especially the kinds that are happening in the computers' world,
is what scares them.  When changes comes along, they try as hard
as they can to keep things the way they were, and knowhere is it
more obvious than now.  Most copyrighted materials are gone, out
of print forever, in only five years, maybe 75% in ten years, in
15 years probably 87% are out of print, 20 years at that rate is
93%, 25 years is 96%, 30 years is 98% and 35 years would be well
over 99%. . .and that doesn't even take into account the shorter
term runs of newspapers, magazines, TV show, movies, records and
all those things that most people don't even expect to last more
than year in the public eye.  The fact is that probably only .1%
or less of anything published in the 1920s is still in print for
the original edition. . .that is only one item out of 1,000, and
that estimate is probably quite high.  The point is that can our
copyright laws support the withholding of 1,000 books for 1 that
is actually available. . .we don't make our driving laws for the
1 out of 1,000 that could be race car drivers, that would be one
of the silliest laws on record.  We have to make our laws so the
law applies well to everyone, not just to make the rich richer--
or in this case the Information Rich richer.

Much of this new effort not to let anything out of copyright was
made by the music industry, which just had the best year of all,
ever, shipping over a billion CD's, tapes, records and videos.

Why, will all this success, they want to keep copyrights on 1920
items that are 99% out of print. . .is a question worth asking--
the answer is the copyright has always been extended when books,
or other forms of information, have become too plentiful; we SAY
we want everyone to be well read and well informed, and then the
law makes it more difficult.  Just look as what has happened for
literacy in the United States during the period that a copyright
law demanded that nothing become Public Domain coming up to 1975
. . .is keeping Hemingway or Winnie-the-Pooh from becoming parts
of the Public Domain going to improve the US literacy rate?

We hope with your assistance we can mount a successful effort to
free Winnie-the Pooh, imprisoned by various copyright laws since
his birth in 1926. . .all copyright laws referred to were United
States copyright laws in effect at various times Winnie-the-Pooh
has been incarcerated.  Other countries have different copyright
laws, and Winnie-the-Pooh was written in England, so a variation
in the US laws cannot be said to have affects other copyrights.

However, the above example is pretty valid for any book that was
published in the US during the 1920s or 1930's.



Ladies and Gentlemen. . .Start Your Engines!


The Race to the Information Age Has Begun.

It began in a much more quiet manner than the Golden Spike
which joined the two halves of a Transcontinental Railroad
exactly 100 years earlier. . .so much more quietly that we
never knew it was happening, and we were all left standing
there at the starting gate, gawking at Men on the Moon.

It all happened about 25 years ago, in 1969, but the media
never put the word "Internet" on the front page of a major
newspaper until the Wall Street Journal did it, on October
29, 1991. . .yet even so, most of you probably never heard
or saw the word Internet in the media until 1994, with the
25th Anniversay hardly ever mentioned, as the idea was for
everyone to think the Internet is the newest thing around,
and to get us all to buy tickets for $20-$25 a month.

What is the "First Rule of Reporting a Story?". . .oh yes:


Follow The Money

Right now there are 40-50 million people on the Internet--
and if someone could figure out how to make them all pay a
$20-$25 fee. . .that would be $100 million a month or over
a billion dollars a year.

Wow. . .if they can do that to an Information Superhighway
that had been running free of charge since the 60's, might
be they will figure out how to do it with those Interstate
Superhighways made of concrete, too, most of them have not
been running any longer than that.

The NSFNet [National Science Foundation Network] was being
cussed and discussed by the powers that be in the hopes it
could be dismantled at the same time most of us were first
hearing about the Internet, and none of us would notice it
when we were all asked to pay that billion dollars a year,
for something that had been as free as the highway systems
to the Information Rich/Etite for all those years.


Let's Follow The Money Some More

The first hard drives anyone used on the Internet were not
very big in terms of how much information they would hold,
but they were HUGE compared to any other hard drives every
computer has used for over 15 years. . .they were the size
of washing machines, and could not hold information as big
as the Bible or Shakespeare.

Today, for 1% of the price you can get 1,000 times as much
storage space. . .2,000 times as much, if you use a modern
compression program when storing your information.

The point I am trying to make here is that the price of an
electronic storage device has fallen literally closer to 0
than to 1% of the price it was when the Internet started--
and this is schedule to continue for the next few decades,
which means we will all be able to affort drives that will
be able to hold the entire Library of Congress. . . .if it
is allowed.

But it won't be.

There's the rub.

The point I am trying to make is that just because we will
finally have the box capable of storing the entire Library
of Congress. . .they will make sure we don't get to, ever,
for we will be dead by the time anything we see today gets
old enough for the copyright to expire.


Let's Follow The Money Some More

Just a few months ago, the music industry completed record
sales figures for any year in history, moving 1 billion of
a combination of CDs, tapes, records and music videos, for
a staggering $12 billion dollars.

The response to this success, a few weeks ago, was for the
music industry to propose, not a rebate to their customers
but just the opposite, an additional 20 years during which
the music industry could have a continued monopoly on that
music, and. . .purely incidentally. . .this monopoly would
also be extended to books, television, movies, video games
and everything else that could be copyrighted.

I think the only way to understand this is to put it in an
elementary perspective such as this:

Right now, you take your kid to see a movie, any movie the
producers are releasing right now.  Let's say your kid has
been alive 5 years, under current law, that kid has to get
to 80 years old before s/he can own a copy of that movie--
without the permission of the copyright holder. . .and the
average age such kids can be expected to live is less than
80 years. . .thus making the copyright permanent for us or
the kids we take to the movies.

The same is true for all current copyrighted materials and
the music industry is trying to add another 20 years to an
already "life sentence". . .and this when their sales have
just broken all records in history, if you will pardon the
pun. . . .

Since the founding of the United States when copyrights or
patents were proposed by Thomas Jefferson for 17 years the
period was lengthened to 28 years, plus another 28 years--
and most recently to 75 years for corporate copyrights and
"life plus 50 years" for individual copyrights.

That means that "Zen and the Art of the Internet," written
by a 20 year old, who will be expected to live for another
55 years or so, will still be under copyright sentencing a
century from now, and will be totally out of date and will
be totally useless other than as a historical footnote.

If this is the response of an industry that has just had a
huge record bashing year of sales, a response not to lower
prices but to raise them, then we are doing something in a
backwards manner in the case of copyright.

When car makers have really good years, or really bad ones
for that matter, they work very hard to attract customers,
with new innovations, more car for the money, financing on
better terms, or whatever, and when they have record years
they give their workers huge bonuses, which I am sure most
of you have heard about recently, and they also compete in
an aggressive manner to keep sales up.

Copyright and patents are what allow people NOT to compete
in the marketplace, as least for the first decade or two a
new item is in the marketplace. . .only now copyrights are
being extended to include the entire lifetime, not only of
the copyright holder, but of the audience as well.

Something is wrong.


The Information Age Is Being Ruled By The Information Rich
As Surely as the Transcontinental Railroads Were Ruled For
Decades By The Robber Barons.

The Information Rich had a free ride on the Superhighways,
about 25 years worth of free ride, and now the Information
Poor want a ride so the Information Rich are shutting down
the free rides and are selling tickets. . .selling tickets
to something which until this year was so inexpensive that
it it hardly paid to figure out what to charge any person,
much less any institution.


End of the .01 edition of:

A Brief History of the Internet

by Michael S. Hart             

March, 1995  [Etext #250]      

Copyright 1995