Down The Chimney

BY

SHEPHERD KNAPP

[Illustration]



1921

THE HEIDELBERG PRESS




TO THOSE

WHO FIRST ACTED IN THIS PLAY

TO THOSE WHO WITH SO MUCH SKILL AND PATIENCE

TRAINED THE PARTICIPANTS

AND TO THE FRIENDLY AUDIENCES OF BOYS AND GIRLS

WHO ENCOURAGE US BY THEIR APPLAUSE

IT IS DEDICATED






Preface


This play is intended, not only for acting, but also for reading.
It is so arranged that boys and girls can read it to themselves,
just as they would read any other story. Even the stage directions and
the descriptions of scenery are presented as a part of the narrative.
At the same time, by the use of different styles of type, the speeches
of the characters are clearly distinguished from the rest of the text,
an arrangement which will be found convenient when parts are being
memorized for acting.

The play has been acted more than once, and by different groups of
people; sometimes on a stage equipped with footlights, curtain, and
scenery; sometimes with barely any of these aids. Practical suggestions
as to costumes, scenery, and some simple scenic effects will be found
at the end of the play.

What sort of a Christmas play do the boys and girls like, and in what
sort do we like to see them take part? It should be a play, surely, in
which the dialogue is simple and natural, not stilted and artificial;
one that seems like a bit of real life, and yet has plenty of fancy and
imagination in it; one that suggests and helps to perpetuate some of
the happy and wholesome customs of Christmas; above all, one that is
pervaded by the Christmas spirit. I hope that this play does not
entirely fail to meet these requirements.

Worcester, Mass.

SHEPHERD KNAPP.






Down the Chimney


The First Scene


_Now the curtain opens, and you see the Roof of a House, just as
Mother Goose promised. Keep your eyes open to see what will happen next,
for here comes_ JACK FROST, _who is dressed all in white. He walks
with a quick and nimble step, and this is what he says_:

Would you believe from the look of things, that to-morrow is Christmas?
There is not a flake of snow anywhere. This roof is as clear as it is
in summer. These pine trees, whose boughs hang over the roof, are all
green. The chimney has not even an icicle on it. I hear people saying
that we have no old-fashioned winters any more. Even old Mother Cary
said to me the other day, "Jack Frost," said she, "when are you going
to give them a real snow-storm?" But I told her not to be impatient:
I would attend to it all in good time. And when I do begin, it doesn't
take me long to get up a fine old storm, I can tell you. _Now he walks
up to the Chimney, and knocks on the side of it_. Say, old fellow.
_He waits a moment; then knocks again_. Wake up there. _He waits
a moment; then knocks again_. Wake up, I say.

_And now--would you believe it?--the Chimney opens, first, one of his
eyes, then the other; and then his mouth and nose appear together. Each
of his eyes is exactly the shape and size of one brick. So is his nose.
And his mouth is as long as two bricks side by side. They all turn a
very bright red, when they appear, as though light were shining through
them._

JACK FROST _goes on talking_: What do you mean, Mr. Chimney, by
going to sleep in winter, I'd like to know? Summer is the time for you
chimneys to go to sleep; but in winter when the people in the houses
have their fires burning, you ought to keep wide awake, so as to carry
off the smoke; don't you know that? Sleepy head! You ought to be ashamed
of yourself.

THE CHIMNEY _answers_: Nothing of the sort. Have you forgotten what
night this is, Jack Frost? Don't you know that this is Christmas Eve,
when the fires are all put out, so that Santa Claus can climb down
without getting burned? That's why I was taking a little nap. See? _He
winks with one eye._

JACK FROST _says_: Oh, that's it, is it? Well, that's true enough.
I hadn't thought of old Santa Claus. He'll be here before long,
probably.

Yes, too soon, _says_ THE CHIMNEY; for I haven't had my sleep half
out, and here you are, keeping me awake for nothing. With your kind
permission, I'll take another forty winks.

_And now his eyes close, then his nose and mouth disappear, and in a
moment he is sound asleep again._

Lazy old fellow! _exclaims_ JACK FROST. Well, I must get to work if
we are to have a real old-fashioned storm before morning. And first for
some wind. Where are those Wind Fairies, I wonder? They ought to be here
by now. _He puts his hands beside his mouth, and calls in a high
voice:_ Hoo--oo! Hoo--oo!

THE WIND FAIRIES _are heard from far, far away, calling in answer:_
Hoo-oo! Hoo-oo!

JACK FROST, _as soon as he hears them, says joyfully:_ There they
are. They'll be here in a second.

_And now you can hear the Wind Fairies coming gradually nearer, making
the wind-noise as the come, like this:_

  z--z--z z--z--z z--Z--Z--Z--z--z--z
  z--z--z z--z--z z--Z--Z--Z--z--z--z


_This grows louder and louder, till suddenly in come the Wind Fairies,
running. They are all in gray; they have on gray peaked caps, gray capes
which comes down to their knees, and long gray stockings; and they have
gray masks over the upper parts of their faces. The Fairies stop short
before Jack Frost, and make him a low bow. Then they sing their song,
which is called_


THE SONG OF THE WIND FAIRIES[1]

  Do you hear us blow, in our coats of gray?
  Do you hear us blow, till the trees rock and sway?
  Do you hear us blow--for from far, far away
  We have come with a storm for your Christmas.

  REFRAIN

  Oh, the sound of the wind is strange for to hear;
  And the breath of the wind, it is cold and clear;
  You'll hear us blow, as we fly thro' the air,
  And we've brought you a storm for your Christmas.

  You can hear us sigh at the window-pane;
  And we moan and cry in the snow and the rain.
  Then away we fly, for we may not remain,
  But we leave you a storm for your Christmas.

  REFRAIN

  Oh, the sound of the wind is strange for to hear;
  And the breath of the wind, it is cold and clear;
  You'll hear us blow, as we fly thro' the air,
  And we've brought you a storm for your Christmas.


[Footnote 1: To the tune "_D' ye ken John Peel?_"]

_As soon as the song is over, off run the Wind Fairies, making the
wind-noise as they go, which grows fainter and fainter as they get
further and further away, like this_

  Z--Z--Z--z--z--z  z--z--z  z--z--z
  Z--Z--Z--z--z--z  z--z--z  z--z--z


_When the sound of the wind has quite died away_, THE CHIMNEY
_opens one eye, and speaking slowly and sleepily, says:_ Look here,
Jack, something's going on in my inside. _He opens the other eye, and
his nose and mouth appear. He speaks more briskly_: It feels as
though there were something hot in there. Do you suppose those stupid
people in the house down below have forgotten all about Santa Claus, and
are lighting the fire on the hearth? I believe they are. I wish you'd
just climb up on my shoulder, and shout down to them to stop. Do:
there's a good fellow.

JACK FROST _climbs up, puts his head over the chimney, then draws back
coughing_. Fire? _cries he_. I should say there was, and smoke,
too; enough to choke a locomotive. _He cautiously peers down_.
Hello there, you people, put that fire out. Do you hear? Put it out.
Santa Claus is coming. Do you hear what I say? SANTA CLAUS IS COMING.
Put out that fire.

_There is a pause; then a hissing sound, loud at first, then dying
away, like this_:

  S--S--S--s--s--s--s--s--s


There! _says_ JACK FROST, they've thrown a pitcherful of water on
it. _He climbs down from the chimney_.

THE CHIMNEY, _who has now grown sleepy again, says to him, in a voice
that grows fainter and fainter_: Thank you, my dear fellow:
you--real--ly (_Here one eye closes_) are--ver--y--ki--_And he
never finishes the sentence, for the other eye closes, and the nose and
mouth "go out" at the same moment._

Asleep again, I declare, says JACK FROST, _with disgust_. Well, now
for the Snow Fairies.

_He walks to the edge of the roof at one side, and blows a shrill
blast on a whistle. Almost at once snow begins to fall from the sky,
slowly at first, then more and more. Jack Frost looks up at it and nods
his head approvingly. When it is snowing very hard, in come on tip-toe,
very softly, the Snow Fairies, dressed in snowy white, with white hoods
and muffs. Some of them quietly spread snow on the boughs of the trees,
taking it out of their muffs; others hang flakes on the Chimney, in such
a way as to make eyebrows, mustache, and beard for the face. But this
doesn't show at first, because the Chimney is still asleep. Then the
Fairies, standing in front of the Chimney, so that they hide it, sing
their song, which is called_


THE SONG OF THE SNOW FAIRIES[2]

  When children go to bed at night,
  We fairies come with snow-flakes white;
  Cover the earth, silent and still;
  House-top, and tree-top, and field and hill.

  When children wake at morning light,
  They find the world all snowy white.
  Where, then, are we? Who of you know?
  Cosily tucked in our beds of snow.


[Footnote 2: To the tune of Schumann's "_Kindernacht._"]

THE CHIMNEY, _who is still hidden behind the Snow Fairies, wakes up
while they are singing the last line, and calls out_: What's this,
I'd like to know? Who's been decorating my face?

_The Snow Fairies stand back on either side, so that his face can now
be seen, with its white eyebrows and mustache and beard, all made of
snow-flakes; and he goes on talking in a jolly voice_: Oh, you sly
ones, you are at your old tricks. Well, well, I'm really glad to see
you. It seems like old times to have snow at Christmas. Now don't mind
me; go on with your work; cover me up with your snowflakes as much as
you choose--eyes, nose, mouth, and all; I don't mind it a bit.

_So the Snow Fairies, moving softly about, hang more snow-flakes on
the chimney, even over his eyes and nose and mouth, which show dimly
through the snow. His eyes blink now and then._

_And now, sleigh-bells are heard in the distance._

Hark! _cries_ JACK FROST.

_They all listen: the bells are still heard, a little nearer._

_Then_ JACK FROST _continues_: There comes Santa Claus, sure
enough. Let's give the old fellow a surprise. Here! All hide behind the
Chimney.

_Very quickly, but very quietly, too, they all hide. The sleigh-bells
come nearer and nearer, till they seem to be just outside: then they
stop, and a voice, which plainly belongs to_ SANTA CLAUS,
_says_: Whoa! Quiet, Prancer! Blitzen, stand still there!

_And now Santa Claus himself appears, with his pack of toys. He walks
to the middle of the roof, and sets down the pack._

It certainly is getting cold, _says_ SANTA CLAUS _to himself. For
he does not see Jack Frost and the Snow Fairies, who are hidden behind
the Chimney. He goes on talking_: And what a lot of snow there is
about here. It is really like the Christmas eves we used to have fifty
years ago. My pack seems to be coming undone. _He stoops to fix
it._ I should hate to have it burst open, while I was going down the
Chimney.

_Now the Snow Fairies have come out from behind the Chimney, and are
stealing up behind him on tip-toe. When they are quite close, they throw
great handfuls of snow at him. He starts up, surprised, but bursts into
a great laugh_:

Ho! ho! ho! This is a fine way to treat an old man! _says_ SANTA
CLAUS. Ho! ho! ho! ho! This is fine fun indeed! Hello, Jack Frost, is
that you? And how are you, my little roley-poley snow-balls? White and
light as ever, I see. And you've made me all white too, but not very
light, I fear. Well, well, be off with you, for I must go down the
Chimney.

_He bows to the Chimney, whose eyes blink through the snow._

Good evening, my old friend, _says_ SANTA CLAUS. YOU are enjoying
good health, I hope. May I climb down inside of you as usual?

THE CHIMNEY _answers, in a muffled voice, because he is so covered up
with snow_: Go ahead, Santa, I'm used to it.

_So Santa Claus climbs to the top of the Chimney, steps over, and
after throwing a kiss to the Snow Fairies, who return it, he goes down
out of sight._

_And that is the end of the First Scene._






THE INTERLUDE


_Again, before the Second Scene begins_, MOTHER GOOSE _comes out
in front of the curtain and this is what she says_:

Well, my dears, I hope you are enjoying my little Play. And what do you
suppose comes next? Wouldn't you like to see who lives down inside that
house, where the chimney was; and what they were doing while Jack Frost
and the others were up on the roof, and whether they heard the Wind
Fairies; and whether they knew that the Snow Fairies had come; and how
they came to make that mistake, lighting a fire in the fireplace where
Santa Claus had come down? Well, that is just what the next scene is to
be about. Last time we were up on the roof; this time we shall be down
in the Room, in front of the fire-place. So be still and listen
carefully, for now it is going to begin.






The Second Scene


_When the curtain opens this time, you can see into the Room of the
House, just as Mother Goose promised. Notice that on one side of the
fire-place is a window with curtains drawn, on the other, a washstand
with howl and pitcher. In front, on right and left, are two large beds.
In the middle of the room, with her hack to the fire-place, the
Grandmother is seated on a low chair, and about her in a half-circle on
stools, sit the eight grandchildren, four girls and four boys, all in
their night-clothes and wrappers._

ISABEL _begins by asking_: Grandmother, how old are you?

GRANDMOTHER _replies_: How old do you think, my dear?

ISABEL _guesses_: A hundred?

Almost, _says_ GRANDMOTHER: Why, I can remember when all your
mothers and fathers were little boys and girls like you. Your mother,
Margaret and Sally, and your father, Jack and Tom and Helen, and your
father, Isabel, and your mother, Ned and Frank, were my little boys and
girls, you know; and on Christmas Eve I used to sit with them in the
nursery, just as I am sitting with you now. That is why I told them
to go downstairs and leave me alone with you for a little while
tonight--for the sake of old times. Yes, they used to sit around me
just like this, and then I used to tell them a story.

A story! A story! _cry_ ALL THE CHILDREN.

_And_ GRANDMOTHER _says_: Shall I tell you one? _The
children all nod_. Let me think, _says she_.

_The Wind Fairies are heard outside, making the wind-noise, like
this_:


  z--z--z  z--z--z  z--Z--Z--Z--z--z--z
  z--z--z  z--z--z  z--Z--Z--Z--z--z--z


GRANDMOTHER _listens to them, then begins her story_: Well, once
there was a wicked king, who didn't like cold weather; so he sent his
soldiers, and told them to catch all the cold Wind Fairies and--

TOM _interrupts her to ask_: Are there really Wind Fairies, Grandmother?

GRANDMOTHER _answers_: Of course there are. I think I heard them a
moment ago. Listen!

_They all listen. The Wind Fairies are heard outside, like this_:

  z--z--z z--z--z z--Z--Z--Z--z--z--z


Do you hear them? _asks_ GRANDMOTHER. _The children all nod_.
Yes, _she continues, going on with the story_, the king told his
soldiers to catch all the Wind Fairies, and all the Snow Fairies, and
Jack Frost himself, and to lock them all up in prison.

And did the soldiers do it? _asks_ HELEN.

Yes, _answers_ GRANDMOTHER. They locked up all of them except one
little Wind Fairy, and he was so small and so quick, that they couldn't
catch him; and what do you suppose he did? He rattled the windows so
hard that the king couldn't sleep, and he blew so hard down the chimney
and through the cracks around the doors, that he blew out all the lights
in the king's house, and gave the king such a bad cold in his head,
that--

_Here Grandmother herself sneezes. And the Wind Fairies are heard
outside, like this_:

  z--z--z  z--z--z  z--Z--Z--Z--z--z--z


How the wind does blow tonight, _says_ GRANDMOTHER. Children, it
seems to me very cold in this room. _She looks around to see what
makes it so chilly._ Why, bless me, _she says_, they have forgotten
to light the fire. _She rises, the children also, and they all go
toward the fire-place._ Frank, _says_ GRANDMOTHER, hand me the matches.
_He brings them. She stoops at the hearth, the children standing
around, and soon a bright glow appears and is seen to dance about._
There, that will soon make a fine blaze, _says she._ Hold up your
hands, children, and warm them.

_But suddenly from up the chimney comes the voice of_ JACK FROST:
Hello there, you people, put that fire out. _Grandmother and the
children are startled._ Do you hear? _shouts_ JACK FROST. Put it
out. Santa Claus is coming. Do you hear what I say? SANTA CLAUS IS
COMING. Put out that fire.

Why, children, _cries_ GRANDMOTHER, I had forgotten all about that.
Quick! We must indeed put the fire out at once. Ned, bring me that
pitcher of water.

_He brings it; she throws the water on the fire. The glow disappears
and a great hissing sound is heard, loud at first, then dying away, like
this_:

  S--S--S--s--s--s--s--s--s--s--s--s--s--s


There! _says_ GRANDMOTHER. It is quite out, you see. And now, you
must hang up your stockings, quickly, and hurry into bed. _A shrill
whistle is heard outside_. What was that? GRANDMOTHER _asks_.

It sounded like a whistle out of doors, _answers_ MARGARET; _and
she goes to the window and looks out._ Why, Grandmother, _says
she_, it's beginning to snow.

Good! _says_ GRANDMOTHER. That will make it easier for Santa Claus
to get here in his sleigh. So make haste with your stockings, and then,
before you get into bed, we will read from the Good Book about what
happened on the first Christmas night so many, many years ago.

_They bring their stockings and hang them in a row over the
fire-place. Meantime Grandmother has taken the big Bible, and seated
herself in the low chair in the middle of the room. The children, when
the stockings are hung, group themselves beside her, standing, looking
over her shoulders, her arms around some of them. Then_ GRANDMOTHER
_reads_:

And there were shepherds in the same country abiding in the field, and
keeping watch by night over their flock. And an angel of the Lord stood
by them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them; and they were
sore afraid.

And the angel said unto them, "Be not afraid; for, behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people. For there
is born to you this day in the city of David a Saviour, who is Christ
the Lord. And this shall be the sign unto you: Ye shall find a babe
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and lying in a manger?"

And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, and saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, good will toward men."

And it came to pass, when the angels went away from them into heaven,
the shepherds said one to another, "Let us now go even unto Bethlehem,
and see this thing that is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known
to us."

And they came with haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying
in the manger.

_Then_ GRANDMOTHER _closes the Book_. And now your prayers,
_says she_.

_They all kneel down for a few moments, the boys by the bed on the
right, the girls by the bed on the left. Then they rise and climb into
the beds._

_But_ SALLY _has a question to ask_: May we sing one song,
Grandmother, before we go to sleep?

_And_ GRANDMOTHER _answers_, Well, just one.

_Then sitting up in the bed, they sing the dear old song, that is
called_


THE CAROL OF CHRISTMAS NIGHT

  Holy night! peaceful night!
  All is dark save the light
  Yonder where they sweet vigil keep
  O'er the Babe, who in silent sleep
  Rests in heavenly peace.

  Silent night! holiest night!
  Darkness flies; all is light!
  Shepherds hear the angels sing,
  "Hallelujah! Hail the King!
  Christ, the Saviour, is here,
  Jesus, the Saviour, is here."


_When the song is finished, they all lie down. Grandmother tucks the
bed-clothes about their shoulders, and goes out. Soon they are all
asleep._

_Then a faint sound of sleigh-bells is heard on the roof._

_Then all is quiet for a moment._

_And THEN Santa Claus comes down the chimney, and steps out
into the room. Silently he looks at both beds, full of sleeping
children, turning his pocket flash light on them, so as to see them
better. He counts the children in each bed. Then he counts the stockings
hanging by the fire-place to be sure they are all there. Next he fills
each of the stockings, taking the toys out of his pack. Then he takes
his empty bag, and, after looking once more at the children, he
disappears up the Chimney._

_And this is the end of the Play_.






Characters And Costumes


MOTHER GOOSE--The conventional costume; full skirt, peaked hat, cane,
spectacles, mits. It is effective for her to draw her lips tight over
her teeth so that her speech is that of a toothless old woman.

JACK FROST--All in white, decorated with tinsel, tall peaked cap, white
gloves.

THE CHIMNEY--No costume; for he sits inside the chimney throughout.

THE WIND FAIRIES--Four little boys, all in gray, capes, caps,
half-masks, long stockings.

THE SNOW FAIRIES--Four little girls, all in white, capes or coats,
hoods, muffs. The muffs full of loose cotton, which they use as snow,
to hang on trees and chimney, and to throw at Santa Claus.

SANTA CLAUS--The conventional costume; white hair and beard; pack, with
few toys protruding from the top.

THE GRANDMOTHER--Gray hair, lace cap, gray or black dress.

THE GRANDCHILDREN--Four boys in pajamas, with wrappers over them; four
girls in night dresses with kimonos over them.




Scenery And Scenic Effects

SCENE I.


The Chimney, which must be large enough to hold two people, one of them
Santa Claus with his pack of toys, may consist of a light frame covered
with turkey red cambric and backed with cardboard or heavy paper.
The cambric should be marked off into bricks. The face is produced by
cutting away the cardboard or paper backing behind two bricks for the
eyes, one for the nose and two together for the mouth. Boxes must cover
these openings on the inside, one for each eye and a larger one for
mouth and nose together. In these three boxes are three electric lights
which can be turned on and off independently by the boy inside the
chimney. Dry batteries have been used when an electric current was not
available. The light shining through the cambric makes the face. Turning
off, and on again, the light behind one of the eyes makes the chimney
wink, etc. Small hooks or nails, sticking out above the eyes, under the
nose, and under the mouth, should be provided to hold the snow which the
fairies hang on to represent eyebrows, mustache and beard.

The background and flies for this scene should be made of black cambric,
dull side out, and a dim light should be used, blue or green preferable,
so distributed as not to throw shadows on the "sky."

The trees may be real spruces or pines, or may be painted, or may be
made of green cambric touched up with paint or charcoal.

The wind noise is made by some one behind the scenes, preferably not the
Wind Fairies themselves. It should be plainly heard. The same applies to
the sound of water thrown on the fire.

If accompaniment is desired for the songs, a violin gives a better
effect than a piano.

The effect of falling snow is produced by a simple machine, consisting
of a connected series of perforated cardboard boxes suspended from a
cord or wire, and filled with finely cut paper. At one end they are
attached to a wire spring, and by a cord at the other end they are
shaken, so as to make the paper snow shower down. Such a machine may be
bought for a small sum from firms dealing in Sunday School supplies.
Two of them used together are more adequate than one.


SCENE II.


It is not necessary to use real beds. Boards on low horses or boxes
will make excellent substitutes, and a strip of cloth will conceal their
structure. An advantage of this plan is that they need not be as long
as regulation beds. Four children to a bed means packing them like
sardines, but it can be done, and it always amuses the audience.

The effect of a fire on the hearth can be made by quick motions
with an ever-ready flashlight operated from behind. The children and
Grandmother, standing in front, allow but an imperfect view of the
fire-place, so that the illusion is easy to produce. The fireplace,
however, may be a real one, if that is more convenient. In that case the
flashlight must be operated by one of the children, kneeling in front of
the fire-place; and when Santa Claus enters the room must be absolutely
dark, so that he will first be seen when he turns on his flashlight, as
he crouches before the fire-place, having apparently just come down the
chimney.

If candies or gifts are to be distributed to children in the audience,
as when this play is used as the Christmas entertainment of a Sunday
School, Mother Goose may come out again, as soon as the curtain closes
after the second scene, and speak as follows:

Well, my dear children, my little Play for you is finished, and I hope
you liked it. There is just one thing left to be said. Those little boys
and girls whom you saw asleep in their beds found that Santa Claus had
not only put into their stockings presents for THEM, but also left
something for YOU; and what do you suppose it was? A box of candy for
each one of you, and if you will sit still a moment longer, the curtain
will open again, and the candy will be handed to you. And so, my dears,
as I say Good-night, I wish you all (or I hope you have all had) a Merry
Christmas and (wish you) a Happy New Year.