CHAPTER XVII

A thaw had followed the long frost and from the South, on eager feet,
came Primavera, hooded still but clasping pale buds to her breast.

Birds sang as she glided by, anemones peered through the grass and in
the olive trees young leaves danced in the sun like silver coins,
tossed up by gay Mother Earth as ransom to the pirate Winter.

Light poured down from the sapphire sky, gilding the ivory city of
towers as McTaggart drove through the winding roads, the Marchesa,
still muffled in furs, beside him.

They had been to the borders of his estate, by vineyards planted on the
slopes in terraces like a giant staircase, screened from the north by
dark lines of cypresses, warped with the cruel wind; past fields of
oranges and lemons, covered with screens of plaited reeds, to the
agent's house where they had lunched and tasted later the olive oil,
smooth and sweet, stored in huge jars, suggesting those of the "Forty
Thieves."

Now they were returning home, drowsy from the long day spent in the
open air, happily tired, soothed by the motion of the carriage.

A mischievous breeze played with the veil the Marchesa wore, of heavy
crape, and every now and then McTaggart could catch a glimpse of her
rounded chin and that flower-like mouth beneath the folds, vivid, alive
and tantalizing.

He watched for it, lazily, leaning back against the high, padded
cushions, and, conscious suddenly of his gaze, she turned her head and
broke the silence.

"You are quite decided then, Pietro?"  Her voice was sweetly
disconsolate.  "You will not come with me to Fiesole?"

"I can't, really.  I'm very sorry.  I must be getting back to
England"--a faint smile curved his lips.  "I've important business
there just now.  I assure you I'd stay if I could."

His aunt laughed, a trifle sharply.

"That means a woman, I should say!--'Important business'--at your age.
There never yet was a Maramonte who was happy unless he was playing
with fire."

Her dark eyes flashed through her veil an inquisitive glance, but he
shook his head.  He was not in a mood for confidences.  Moreover, he
knew that Cydonia's birth would hardly fulfil his aunt's requirements
and dreaded a possible catechism.

"It's your sister's villa, near Florence, where you are going, isn't
it?"

The Marchesa nodded lazily.

"And beautiful..." she stirred herself--"it faces the Arno valley with
a wide loggia due south.  She's my eldest sister--I was the baby--and
her daughter, Bianca, must be sixteen.  There's no son--such a grief!
My brother-in-law breaks his heart about it.  He is a Florentine
himself, with an old palazzo (now shut up) and some fine pictures near
the Cascine."

"You will be happy there?" asked Peter.

"But, yes!"  She shrugged her shoulders lightly.  "For a time, until my
mourning's over.  It's a quiet spot, Fiesole, and I am very attached to
my sister.  Then I shall go to live in Rome."

"And your life begins?"  He guessed her thought.

"Chi lo sa?"  But her eyes were bright.  "At any rate, it's farewell to
Siena!  In Rome one can live as one likes."

"May I come and see you there?"

Impulsively she turned to him.

"Mais je crois bien!--For as long as you can.  I shall be proud of my
handsome nephew.  And then, caro mio, I will find you a wife."  She
nodded her head with an air of wisdom.

"Some beautiful Roman.  Let me think ... There is Princess Doria's only
girl--the Principe was my mother's cousin--and Donna Maria
Archiveschi...?  Well--we shall choose, you and I."

A sudden thought sprang into her brain.  Why not Bianca?--her sister's
child.  What an excellent match it would be for her--as soon as she
should leave the convent.

Moreover, it would suit the Marchesa.  She would have a double right of
entry in the Maramonte family circle and indulge to the full her love
of intrigue.

Following up this train of thought, she smiled sweetly at McTaggart.

"You could not spare me one week now?--a little week before you return
...?  At Fiesole--just think again.  To abandon your poor aunt at
once--one sees you do not care for her! ... Just seven days, Pietro
mio, to leave me happily settled there?"

She drew back her veil and her velvet eyes, like darkest pansies,
pleaded mutely.  McTaggart summoned all his strength, conjuring up
Cydonia.

"_Please_ don't make it any harder!  I'd love to come, you know that.
It's not every day in one's life one ... inherits such a perfect aunt!"

He smiled at her with real affection.

"I'll come back when you're at Rome--(and not alone!" he said to
himself).  "But I'm bound to return to England first and settle up my
business there."

"You talk as if you kept a shop!"  She shrugged her shoulders
pettishly.  "What does the Marquis Maramonte want with commissions on
the 'Bourse'?"

He laughed outright with the memory of her disgusted, lovely face when
he had told her of his profession.

"Fi donc!"  Mischievous, she shook a slender finger at him.  "It would
make poor Gino turn in his grave."

"And serve him right!" was McTaggart's thought.  He could not forgive
the dead man for his heartless treatment of his sister.  He had the
Italian's centuries-deep love of justice and liberty and was not
without a strain of revenge, the lingering trace of some far-off
"Vendetta."

He sat there moody, his mouth hard; grimly glad that the scales of fate
had weighed in favour of his rise into the power denied to her.

The sun, sinking toward the hills, plunged the city walls in shadow as
they drove through the Porta Romana and past the great church of the
Servites.

Then, winding round the ancient market, they emerged into the open
"Campo"--that curious shell-shaped piazza where throbs the heart of old
Siena.

"What is that tower?"  McTaggart pointed.  "I can see it from my
bedroom window."

"The Torre del Mangia," his aunt replied, "above the palace of the
Commune.  You must see the frescoes in the Chapel, by Bazzi--pure
quattro cento.  And there is the famous Fonte Gaia--after Giacomo della
Quercia.  The original fragments are in the museum.  That is a
copy--but still fine.  This Square is where 'il Palio' is run, the two
occasions in the year when Siena awakes to life----" she smiled
scornfully as she spoke.

"Dio!--I shall be glad to go--it is a city of the dead.  And cold...!"
She shivered and drew her furs closer, aware of the sunset hour.

They came at last into the palace.  Beppo received them in the hall
with letters for his young master.  McTaggart eagerly gathered them up.

"Bring 'sweet wine' into the boudoir," said the Marchesa to the
servant.  She turned to her nephew.  "It's warmer there.  I will join
you when I get rid of my furs."

But McTaggart went to his room first, anxious to find if the letters
held any news of Cydonia, and, locking the door, sat down by his stove.

There were three of them, sent on from his club.  A line from Bethune,
a tailor's bill and an envelope in a clerkly hand.  He tore it open
carelessly.

Then, quickly, he turned it over, glanced at the signature, set his
teeth; and his face flushed with growing anger as he went through the
contents again.

It was signed "Ebenezer Cadell," and contained a narrow unfastened note.

He read that too, then leaned back and swore aloud in his bitter
chagrin.

Never in all his wildest dreams had he pictured himself a jilted man!
Yet here it was--he smiled sourly--Cydonia had thrown him over!

Cydonia--the woman he loved.  The girl for whom, in his loyalty, he had
sworn to sacrifice the pride of his ancient and historic name.

She had "made a mistake."  He read it again, holding to the light of
the stove the mauve paper with the monogram "C" engraved in a fantastic
wreath.

She was "too young"--as her "parents said"--"to think of marriage for
some years."  She hoped "Peter would understand"--and "not feel very
hurt!"  She would "like to keep him as a friend."

("I'll be damned if she will!"--said the angry man.)

Her Mother had been "quite ill" again, upset by their "secrecy."

("Dash it all!"  In the midst of his pain McTaggart smiled.  "She can't
expect a proposal in public--whatever is she driving at?")

Cydonia hoped he would not write.  "Father" thought it better not.  She
was "_VERY_ sorry."  For the first time the careful writing shook a
little.  A line crossed through revealed the fact that she would "miss
him dreadfully."

But she thought her parents "knew best."  They had been "very kind" to
her--and "Father was writing to explain."

This statement was distinctly true.  For Cadell rubbed salt into the
sore!

McTaggart turned once more to his letter.

To begin with it was plain he mistrusted McTaggart's unforeseen
departure; only too evident that he thought this foreign trip a way of
escape from the outcome of an evening's folly!

But, in any case, whether or no his intentions toward Cydonia were
honorable and uninvolved by any "pecuniary consideration," McTaggart
stood no earthly chance of success as his son-in-law.

Cydonia was destined to higher flights ... (McTaggart thought of
Bethune's words: "Some young ass with a title and debts!")

She would inherit a large fortune and her beauty and costly education
"would fit her for any position."

"She's _almost_ worthy," McTaggart sneered, "to become the Marchesa
Maramonte."

For anger was still dominant.  The lonely longing was to follow.

The letter, pompous, devoid of tact, went on to a definite prohibition.
Cadell closed the door of his house in the face of the undesirable
suitor.  A note of spite rang out sharp in the older man's reference to
his daughter's note.  "The enclosure will make the matter clear."

It did.  McTaggart leaned down and pushed both letters into the stove,
watching the flames rise high, turning love into ashes.


Long he sat there, his chin on his hands, his blue eyes staring into
space.  The clock ticked on noisily, marking the death of more than
Time.  Broken ideals, vanished dreams ... enthusiasm, loyalty; wasted
at an unworthy shrine--his mind veered round at last to Fantine.

Women were all alike, it seemed.  Creatures of impulse, without
honour...

There came a knock at his bedroom door--a message from the Marchesa.

He rose to his feet with a curious smile.  The French maid was waiting
outside.

McTaggart, pointing to Bethune's letter, explained that business of
importance required an immediate answer.  He would be with her mistress
shortly--the time to write a hurried line...

He paused as the girl raised her eyes and, in the darkness of the
passage, slipping an arm round her waist, he stole a kiss from her
fresh mouth, amused at the maid's swift surrender.

Then he passed her and went downstairs.  "That's the only way to treat
them!" he said to himself, with no sense of pleasure, but a perverse,
cold disgust.

In the hall he sat down, drew out a sheet of black-edged paper with a
coronet engraved upon it and wrote forthwith to Cadell.

He abided by the parent's decision ... Cydonia was, indeed, young ...
He wished, however, to make it clear that his departure for Italy had
been, by its nature, unavoidable.

His uncle and his cousins were dead.  He gave them their full sonorous
titles.  And, as heir to their fortune and estates, his presence had
been imperative.

A faint flicker of malice passed over his mouth as he wrote the phrase
and pictured the recipient's eyes starting out of his red face.

Mr. Cadell could rest assured that never again would McTaggart trespass
across the threshold of his house ... He thanked him for past
hospitality.

Then he signed it, read it through, folded it neatly and enclosed it.

Before him lay a bunch of seals and a long stick of black wax.  He lit
the taper and, smiling slightly, gathered up the largest of these on
which were the Maramonte arms surmounted by a coronet.

He pressed it down heavily onto the liquid splash of wax.

"It's snobbish"--his lips curled--"but I know Cadell--it will make him
squirm!"

He rang and handed the letter to Beppo.  "For the post--presto!"--and
walked upstairs.  "May I come in?"  He opened the door of his Aunt's
boudoir, his eyes bright with the pain his smiling mouth concealed.

"Ah, mon cher, how late you are!"  It might have been Fantine--he said
to himself.  But there he misjudged his aunt.

There were only, really, two sorts of women--his bitter reasoning went
on--the innocent and stupid and weak: and the strong ones, clever and
corrupt.

"Sit down and have some wine."  From her seat in the low "bergere" she
held out an inviting hand.  "Dio! how cold you are!"

For his fingers were icy, his brain hot.

"Never with you, ma chere tante--Impossible."  He bent his head to kiss
her fragrant slender wrist--then changed his mind as he caught a glance
from the dark eyes full of coquetry.

For the first time he took advantage of the new relationship, but
without pleasure, merely an outward symbol of the queer recklessness he
felt.

"My business is settled.  Are you glad?  I'm coming with you to
Fiesole."

She offered him her other cheek with the frank gaiety of a child.

"Tu vois!"  She laughed merrily.  "But, indeed, I am charmed.  And my
sister, too--she will be glad to welcome you."  Her face sobered on the
words.  She poured him out a glass of wine, watching his smile fade
away.  He looked pale and strained now.  Shrewdly she probed his change
of mood.

"That 'business'----" she said to herself.  "I was right--a woman!--I
wonder where?  The boy's wounded--one sees that--let's hope it's only a
passing fancy.  All the better for my plan ... at no time is a man so
weak as after a lover's quarrel.  But now--one must move cautiously.  I
shall wire to Fiesole to-night--Bianca must leave the Convent.  It
would be wise to find her there--a surprise to us both."  She glanced
at the clock.  Then, in her soft, musical voice, she went on with her
speech.

"You will not find it dull, I hope?  With my mourning, you understand,
we shall live very quietly.  Just you and I and my sister there--and my
brother-in-law, en famille."

"I shall like that," he spoke sincerely.  "I'm rather tired of London
life--a little rest will do me good.  It's so nice of you to wish to
have me."

He sipped the glass of sweet liqueur he held with a sudden secret
craving for a good strong brandy and soda to steady his quivering
nerves.

For the reaction was coming on.  Beneath his armour of wounded pride a
sense of loss was stabbing him.

He did not close his eyes that night.




CHAPTER XVIII

Meanwhile, under grey skies, in a gloomy room near Primrose Hill,
another young man faced (with dismay) a definite tide in his affairs.

He sat in a shabby dressing-gown before a table covered with papers,
sorted now in grim piles of unpaid bills, reading a writ.

Stephen Somerfield stared at it, his weak good-looking face drawn into
lines of hopeless disgust.

"It's a deuce of a mess!"  So he summed it up.  "What an unlucky beggar
I am!--I thought it was pretty bad, but this"--he threw down the
document--"is the limit!"

For months past he had postponed a thorough survey of his liabilities,
with the shallowness of his character, preferring to ignore the worst.
Even now, when he found himself hopelessly involved in debt, he could
raise no better reason for it than his own "chronic ill-luck!"

With this phrase he stifled his conscience.  Where another man would
have realized the necessity for immediate action, he sat there numbed,
half unbelieving, a martyr in his own opinion.

He felt no spur toward work as a means to solve the enigma.  He could
only look back and vent his anger on those concerned in his career who
had failed at length to come forward to the assistance of a wastrel.

He cursed his father, his hand clenched, his green eyes full of spite.

He could see him now, still erect despite the heavy burden of years, at
that final painful interview, when heart-sore at his son's extravagance
he had flatly refused further help.

He allowed Stephen two hundred a year, in addition to the eighty pounds
his mother had left him, annually, considering this a fair arrangement,
and had told him crudely to "go and work!"

But work was the last thing Stephen sought.  He had had the misfortune
when barely twenty to meet a rich widow, double his age, who had taken
a fancy to the boy.

She had made him a home in her pleasant house, petted and fed him much
in the fashion she would have treated a favourite spaniel, but secretly
amused by his pretensions.

With his sentimental, greenish eyes under their long, fair lashes, his
clear complexion and pointed chin he had seemed not unlike a pretty
girl.

He suited her purpose very well, not important enough to cause scandal,
and this rich and somewhat lonely woman had paid gladly for his
companionship.

It suited Stephen Somerfield, too.

He escorted her everywhere, enjoying the luxury of her car, executing
her commissions, buying theatre tickets and planning facilities for her
continual round of pleasure.

But she never made the signal mistake of sharing her purse with the
man.  There were no "perquisites" to be gleaned, save an occasional
lonely "fiver" handed over for Bridge at her house.

She paid his expenses only when with him; and, when she died suddenly,
after a bare two days' illness, every penny of her money went back to
her husband's people.

Before this disaster fell, Stephen had been caught up in the movement,
then new, of Woman's Suffrage, in his liege lady's train.

He turned it to account in the lean days that followed, glad to augment
his slender income by becoming the paid secretary to one of the most
prominent branches.

Here fortune sent him Mrs. Uniacke, eager, hypnotized in turn by the
shrill cry of woman's wrongs, but ignorant of business matters, glad to
turn to him for advice.  Little by little he strengthened the tie,
slipping into her daily life; inwardly sore at the "chronic ill-luck"
which forced him to accept her poor hospitality after a course of Ritz
dinners, yet too shrewd to miss the economy, under the present heavy
cloud.

But nothing could check his love of show.  He ran up tailor bills
galore; hatters and bootmakers learned to know him, credit was failing
everywhere.  Now the day of reckoning had dawned, tradesmen's patience
at an end.

Something must be done at once.  He swore moodily at his bills.

He got up from his seat at the table, went to the cupboard, found a
cork-screw and opened a bottle of brandy there with this typical
reflection:

"I'm jolly glad now I ordered a dozen!  A stroke of luck meeting
Charlie like that..."  He referred to a school friend of narrow means
who had lately entered a wine merchant's business and had run against
Stephen in the street and parted from him with an order.

He filled his glass up with water--the grocer had flatly refused to
deliver further syphons to his credit--and, on his way back to the
table, he paused for a moment thoughtfully to study his pale face in
the glass.

"I wonder?"  He smiled at the reflection, smoothing back his sleek hair.

"You never know ... I've a mind to try it!--Women are queer
kittle-cattle.  It's just on the cards she'd rise to it.  Anyhow, it
can do no harm."

He sat down, drank thirstily, then took up his pen and with knit brows.

"Dear Mrs. Uniacke," he began at the top of a plain sheet of paper.
(No date and no address; he was not without a certain method!)

"Will you excuse my dining with you?  I'm so sorry and disappointed,
but the fact is I am faced to-night with harassing business of my own
and really quite unfit for company.

"For some time past I've longed to tell you of all these painful
worries of mine.  You're so awfully kind and _understanding_..."

He broke off and drained his glass.

"She'll like that--they always do!" then picked up his pen again.

"I'm really in a dreadful hole.  I think I explained to you once that
my father has never been quite fair to me--a hard man, fond of his
money--and my sister is his favourite child.  I lost my mother years
ago and have no one to turn to in my trouble except yourself--so I hope
you'll forgive me--but I'm feeling so utterly wretched to-night.

"The fact is I can't go on living in London on my means.  It's
impossible with my small salary and the result is pressing debts.

"I'm seriously thinking of cutting it all----" ("She won't like
that!"--he smiled as he wrote) "and trying again in a new
land--Australia--perhaps, or Canada.  This country is played out--the
competition too strong--and, unless I can see my way clear to
raising----"

he paused--"a hundred pounds ... (I daren't ask more at the start, and
this would prove a useful sop...) I'm afraid I shall have to throw up
my work and, what is more painful still--to say good-bye to my few real
friends and start afresh overseas.

"I've written and written to my father!--but he simply ignores my
prayer for help.  If only my mother were alive how different life would
be for me!"

He smiled sourly over the phrase.  For Mrs. Somerfield's early death
had been accelerated by drink--one of the many crushing blows his
hard-working father had survived.

"I know," he started to write again, "you will treat this letter as
_strictly private_.  I am bound to come in for a good round sum when my
father dies, and with help _now_ I could guarantee to return the
loan--with the usual interest, of course.

"I feel I have not the slightest excuse for turning to you in my
need--but I can't bear to think of parting with the one true friend
life has brought me.

"You have been _more_ than ... a sister to me (I can't say
'Mother'--it's too absurd), and, if ever a man were grateful for it,
that man is

"Your ... broken,
  "STEPHEN."

He read it through thoughtfully, smiling a little at the finale.

"'Broke' would be better!--but, on the whole, I think it's a pretty
useful epistle."

He fastened and sealed it carefully, then glanced at the clock and rang
the bell.

"It ought to catch Mrs. Uniacke before Jill gets back from college."

An untidy maid answered the summons, thrusting her head round the door,
with a soiled collar, elaborate hair and a certain pretty anaemic
fairness.

"Well--what now, Mr. Stephen?"

"Come here, Letty."  He beckoned to her.  "Would you like to do
something for me?"  He smiled, laying a hand on her arm.  The girl
coloured at his touch.

"You're always wantin' somethin'," she said.

"And get it sometimes--eh, Letty?  There--don't be cross!  Give us a
kiss..."

But she drew herself away from him with a toss of her averted head.

"I'm not that sort--I've told you so."  Her voice was sullen, her face
strained.

"You've no call to talk like that--I'd lose my place if the Missus
knew--it ain't fair..."

She wavered suddenly under the sentimental eyes.

"Well--I'll do it.  A letter, I s'pose?  To that 'ouse in the Terrace
where you go night after night to meet yer ... 'Jill'!"  She brought
the name out with a snap.

"Wrong this time----" he still smiled, looking up at the moody face,
faintly coloured under its curls of puffed-out, ashen hair.

"Jill is no friend of mine, my dear.  She hates me--and it's mutual!
This is a letter to her mother--business for the Woman's Cause."

The girl brightened visibly.

"Well--I 'ope we gets the vote.  It's time we did and better wages.
I'm sick of being called 'Skivvy!  Skivvy!' by every shop boy in Chalk
Farm.  We'll make _them_ 'skivvies' by-and-bye!  I'm tired o'
men--they're all alike!  They gets the fun while we slave--it's a dog's
life to be a girl!"

"Not always."  Stephen answered softly.  "Not when you're pretty--eh,
Letty?"

He placed the letter in her hand, and, stooping quickly, stole a kiss.

She sprang back with a little cry.  Then stood there, her lip
quivering, tears not far from her hazel eyes.

"I told you ... I wouldn't.  Never again!"

"Oh! a kiss!--what's a kiss?"  He shrugged his shoulders
contemptuously.  "There--run away--can't you see I'm busy?"  He sat
down again at the table.

For a moment the child hesitated--for child she was by the test of
time--love and resentment struggling within her; then, with tight lips,
she flung away.

"Good Lord!"  Stephen yawned.  "Bother the girl.  I've turned her head.
I'd like to leave these beastly rooms--only there's that confounded
bill.  And Letty's useful, after a fashion."

His eyes fell on the fire.  He knew she stole many a lump of coal when
his meagre scuttle failed--pitying the improvident man she had made the
hero of her dreams; under the spell of his green eyes and careless
familiarity.

Meanwhile, as he sat and smoked one of Mrs. Uniacke's cigarettes, with
which he had carefully filled his case after his last meal with her,
the servant crossed Primrose Hill, through the damp evening air, and,
gaining the terrace near the park, delivered her lord's begging letter.

Jill had not yet returned home.  Roddy was far away at school and a
silence hung about the house with its dingy blinds and fogged windows.

Mrs. Uniacke was upstairs, mending the edge of a shabby skirt that had
suffered during a rainy day from a long tramp in a procession.

Indeed, the wear and tear of 'the Cause' reflected itself in her very
clothes; but the thin face, with its bird-like look of brightness and
vivid emotion, its high cheek-bones, and quick flush, was filled with
the inner fire of hope.

They were getting nearer to their goal.  She said the words softly
aloud as she bent her frail shoulders over the bed, pinning together
the frayed edges.

"Pioneers, O Pioneers..."  She could hear the throb of marching steps,
see at last the faint line of the distant hills where freedom lay.
What mattered, then, if the road were long, and the sharp rock cut her
weary feet, when on the horizon a new day dawned--an era of justice for
her sex?

Something achieved, something done...

There came a knock at her bedroom door and Lizzie entered with a letter
between a dirty finger and thumb.

An odd premonition of disaster seized Mrs. Uniacke as she took it.  She
waited for the servant to go before she broke the careful seal.  And,
as she read, she gave a gasp.  Stephen--leaving her? ... deserting the
Cause...?  Here was a shattering of her dreams, a swift blow out of the
dark.

She left her sewing and sat down, the letter open on her knees.

One definite thought held her now--this must be stopped--at any cost!

But where was she to find the money?  She crossed to the table by the
window, unlocked a drawer and drew out her pass-book, turning the pages
feverishly.

There was Roddy, clamouring for clothes, household bills in abeyance,
Jill's music lessons to pay ... Then, like a flash, it came to her.
Her diamond star!  Yes--that must go.

Anything--to keep Stephen!

She felt like a man who for many months has moved on crutches and finds
himself suddenly bereft of them, helpless, without support ...

But was it fair?--fair to Jill.  The star had been her husband's
gift--she had meant to leave it to her child.

The fight began.  In reality, it resolved itself into a choice between
the pair--Stephen, her friend, and Jill ... that "independent" daughter.

The adjective betrayed her mood.

For, proud as she was in her mother's heart of the bright young girl
with her clever brain, the rankling fact was hidden there--her
offspring had outgrown the nest.

She could not realize that the age was mainly responsible for the lack
of what she called "proper respect"--that mid-Victorian subservience.

She held that what _she_ considered fit was the natural guidance for
the girl; that the latter should shape her every thought in the mould
of the past generation.

Yet she, herself, had broken loose.  It did not occur to her to weigh
the question of militant suffrage in the same scales her own mother had
used...

Marriage had given her the right to an independent judgment, she
thought--the full authority of the woman.

She did not see that life had changed.  That the youth of to-day
asserted their claim to a freedom of thought unknown in her time,
upheld by a sounder education.

She hated in secret the very word.  It had been sufficient in her day
for a girl to possess a smattering of surface knowledge from
old-fashioned primers.  A little French, history, grammar, needlework
and "good manners": of music enough to produce "pieces" when required
for home consumption.  But no training for the brain--little logic or
reasoning power--the arts neglected for fear they should bring an
alarming hint of Bohemianism.  And "what mother says is right."  This
was an axiom, weighty, approved; stifling all further argument, the
Alpha and Omega of the question.

Jill's intensely modern attitude, fostered by her college life, her
alarming tendency to revoke old standards of convention--even her
religious doubts, honestly faced, shocked her mother and threatened her
authority.  She mourned in secret over her child.

Stephen, now--her face relaxed--was always attentive, glad to learn ...
With a charming courtesy he bent to her will, respecting her every
opinion.

With her delicate purity of intention it never occurred to her to see
that the fact of sex was involved here, Nature at work in her hidden
ways.

She would have shrunk from the suggestion that it flattered her woman's
heart to find that a man, much younger than herself, could turn to her
for inspiration.

And then there was the link between them--'the Cause'--daily growing
stronger, and Jill's open scepticism, that cut her mother to the quick.
Roddy, of course, was only a boy!  Mrs. Uniacke smiled faintly.  You
expected your son to break away early or later from "home" opinions.

Never once in this tangled maze did she see the weakness of her
position: a champion of woman's rights--refusing the same to her only
daughter.

Again she read Stephen's letter.  Then, with a determined hand, she
drew her cheque book nearer to her.  The parasite had gained the day.
She told herself it was for the Cause.  The faint suspicion of
dishonesty she thrust rigidly from her mind, realizing subconsciously
that to place her action on other grounds was to open up a dangerous
question.

But, for the first time in her life, sentiment stole into the
friendship.  The fault--if it were--was an error of love; she could not
bear to part from Stephen.

Then she raised her head and listened, hearing the front door open and
shut, and Jill's voice, happy, young:

"Mother!--Mother ... Where are you, Mother?"

She slipped the cheque book in the drawer with the open letter and
turned the key, her cheeks flushed, her head high.  She did not need
Jill's advice!

"Here I am----" she went to the stairs and the girl raced up, two steps
at a time.

"Oh, Mother--I've got such a lot to tell you--it's been such a lovely
day!"

Impulsively her arms went out, seizing the slight, waiting figure in a
childish hug, her fresh mouth pressed upon her mother's cheek.

"There!--I'm feeling so happy.  I got 'Excellent' for Ancient History
and I'm top at Algebra this week.  And Judy Severn's giving a
party--and she wants me to come and bring a man.  Peter's away, but I
thought, perhaps, I'd ask Mr. Bethune--what do you think?  It's on the
9th.  A real dance."  Madly she waltzed her mother round.

"Stop, Jill!"  Mrs. Uniacke laughed--the girl's gaiety was infectious.
She dropped breathless into a chair, Jill on her knees by her side.

"Isn't it ripping?"  She pulled off her cap and threw it neatly on the
bed, her dark, ruffled hair like a cloud round her excited, pretty face.

"Jill--your hat!"  Her mother frowned.

"Well, it's so old--it can't hurt--and rabbit skin!"

Her happy laugh took the sting out of the words.

"But that reminds me--about my frock...?  I've not a single thing to
wear."

"And what about your white muslin?"  An anxious look crept into Jill's
eyes at the note in Mrs. Uniacke's voice.

"Oh--Mother--I _can't_ ... not to Judy's party!  And it's _so_
short--up to my knees."  She sighed.  "I wish I'd stop growing.  I let
it down, with a false hem, you remember--when Aunt Elizabeth came here?"

"It will have to do."  Unconsciously, her mother glanced across the
room to the locked drawer where the cheque lay, signed and payable to
Stephen.

Jill drew away slightly.  She clasped her hands round her knees, with a
sombre face, staring down at her mended shoes and a darn in her
stocking.

"Then I can't go."  Her voice was hard.  "I won't wear that old frock.
It's so tight over the chest I can hardly breathe."  She bit her lips.

Mrs. Uniacke, watching her, wavered.  "You could make a fichu, couldn't
you?  I could find you a piece of lace, perhaps--and add a frill?"

Jill scowled.

"Sounds like an early Victorian picture."  She rose to her feet.  "With
a crinoline and black mittens--thanks, awfully.  I'll tell Judy the
party's off."

This was the mood her mother disliked--slangy and impertinent.  So she
summed it up to herself, resenting her daughter's manner.

"It's entirely your own fault if you do.  I am quite prepared to help
you, Jill.  We could easily alter the frock between us.  It isn't as if
you were really 'out.'"

Jill gave her a quick glance.

"I could make one myself for thirty shillings--I know I could.  And it
isn't much.  I haven't had a new dress this year..."  Her grey eyes
were wistful.

"It can't be done."  At this fresh attack Mrs. Uniacke's mouth
tightened--"there's Roddy to think of beside yourself..."

"To say nothing of Stephen's expenses?"

The words escaped Jill against her will.  Little she guessed their
significance, but Mrs. Uniacke flushed crimson.  For a moment she could
have boxed Jill's ears.

"That will do."  She turned away and, with hands that shook, took up
her work, leaning over the torn skirt, her back turned to her daughter.

Jill closed the door behind her.  She stood for a moment on the stairs,
her dark brows drawn together, her mouth a narrow scarlet line.

"Oh!" she said--"I'd like ... I'd like----" she stamped her foot--"to
_murder_ Stephen!"




PART III

  "Flower o' the peach
  Death for us all and his own life for each."




CHAPTER XIX

McTaggart lay on the golden sands of Viareggio, warming himself,
lazily, like a lizard, in the sun.

Before him stretched the broad, unbroken curve of the bay, a dazzling
sheet of sapphire blue, save where the white "Molo," like a slender
finger pointed from the basin of the docks, where the shipping yards
lay, and masts and spars went up in a cluster of spear points, dark
against the sky.

His eyes followed the line of the pier to the lighthouse at the end and
wandered off through the haze to the distant shore, where a group of
cypresses clustered, sombre and grim, like sentinels stationed,
guarding the land.  The dark, tapering trees in the brilliance of the
sunshine held a hint of sadness like the presence of a grave;
appropriate to the scene where that spirit of fire and air, the poet
Shelley, had been sacrificed to the waves.

McTaggart rolled over, the sun too hot on his face, and, digging his
elbows into the sand, his chin propped on his hands, felt the warm rays
play on his bare, brown shoulders, above his scanty bathing dress.

Now he could see the other point of the silver crescent of shore.  Here
were noble heights as well as the sense of space.  For the Carrara
mountains rose against the sky, white and peaked and holy, with soft,
curded wings like Delia Robbia angels against a blue font.

Below them came slopes in delicate silver point: olive trees quivering
in the dazzling light, and, in the foreground, a low belt of pines,
straggling out like a fringe round the sandy race course.

McTaggart's own bathing shed was one of the last of the hundreds that
had sprung up, like mushrooms, on the beach; for, in the summer months,
Viareggio was packed with a gay and fashionable Italian crowd.

Close to him, hand in hand, a circle of merry bathers, in brightly
striped dresses of every shape and hue, were revelling in the water,
with shrill bursts of laughter, splashing up and down, like children at
play.

The men with their dark hair and wet olive skins, the women in bathing
caps of gay knotted silk, with bare arms and necks and that flashing
smile which seems the heritage of the white-toothed Southern race,
suggested a frieze of laughing fauns and nymphs, gathered from the
dusty walls of far Pompeii.

McTaggart himself was burnt the color of bronze.  He looked the picture
of health with his sinewy, well built frame and clean-cut face in which
his blue eyes struck a curious Northern note, vivid and arresting.

He loved this out-door life, with the hot, dry days and the clear
nights, pine scented, cooled by the breeze that blew across the
mountains but lately cleared from snow.

It was more than a year now since the memorable day when he had bidden
his aunt farewell in the villa at Fiesole, mistrustful of the web of
intrigue drawing round his feet and Bianca, that dark-eyed, demure
convent maiden.

For the memory of Cydonia had stood him in good stead.  Although little
by little his bitterness had waned, it left him mistrustful both of
himself and others, tinged with the easy cynicism of youth.

He had spent the whole winter at his apartment in Rome, finding a warm
welcome in that gay city, as he quickly mastered his mother's tongue
and took his place in the social world that opened wide its doors to
him.

With the naivete of his years he clung to the theory that his heart
still lay broken at Cydonia's feet, but this did not prevent him, as
the days passed on, from various flirtations in the gay Roman crowd.

He avoided, however, a serious liaison.

The touch of Scottish puritanism in his nature guarded him from the
advances of married women; certain high born ladies of easy morals,
charmed by his manner and striking face.

He learned quickly, too, the perils of such a tie: that in Rome an
erring husband is frequently forgiven, but an unfaithful lover placed
beyond the pale.  There seemed to be a curious reverence shown to these
love affairs, illegally cemented, whereas mere marriage was lightly
shelved as an arrangement made by parents in the interests of property
and to ensure a lawful heir.

Altogether, Rome was amusing and instructive, especially in his own
favoured case.  With a fine old title and certain wealth, young,
handsome and popular, the new Marquis threw himself into the social
whirl with a cool head, a guarded heart and the flair of an ardent
explorer.

England, that island in the North, foggy and grey, inhabited by
"Cadells," seemed a dream of another world as he lay on the sunny
Italian sands.

And yet...

He stirred, drawing up his knees, his hands clasped round them, his
eyes far away.  For there stung through his complacency a sudden shaft
of desire--that haunting love of home which grips a man unawares, with
a sense of exile in a foreign land.

The mountains, where the marble lay in cool jagged quarries, vanished
from his sight and in their place came a picture of London: her busy,
grimy streets with the ceaseless throb of her beating heart, as the
fight went on, obstinate, merciless, the struggle for success--for
money and power...

And that other London: the crowded Park, Hurlingham, Ascot--he drew a
deep breath!

And London by night with the cries of the newsboys--the block of taxis
in the long line theatreward, the lights of that Circus where the
Criterion leers at his gaily lit neighbour, the Pavilion.

A sudden nostalgia seized McTaggart.  The shrill laughter of the merry
bathing group, the cloudless glare of sea and sky grew wearisome.  He
rose quickly to his feet.

"Mario!"  He called to his man who was seated in the shade thrown by
the osier fence, studying tips for the coming races.

"Mario--I shall dress now."  The olive face flashed into a smile as the
man sprang nimbly to his feet.  For Mario adored his young master, a
welcome change from the elderly Marquis with his fads and fancies and
uncertain temper.

"Sissignore--at once! signore."  Still he lingered, deferential.

"A thousand excuses, but does he remember the Princess Doria lunches
with us to-day?  The Signore has but his grey suit in the shed.  It
would be better to dress at the villa."

"Va bene--I had forgotten her!  _And_ the new Poet----" he added,
aside, "I can't stand that effeminate ass, but she never goes two steps
without him!"

He slipped on a long bath towel garment, screening his scanty bathing
gown, and drew the hood down over his head while Mario produced
slippers with soles of twisted hemp, and tied them on to his master's
feet.

Now, not unlike a Dominican friar, in this primitive costume, he
crossed the beach and turned along the country road until he came to
the first pines, Mario in the rear, carrying his clothes.

Here they took a sandy foot path where scanty patches of coarse grass
and clusters of wild pansy marked the borders of the straggling wood.

It led to a clearing in the trees and a villa, painted strawberry pink,
with a tiled terrace and veranda, wreathed about with Bourgainvillia.

McTaggart paused on the threshold and rang a bell, answered quickly by
a servant.

"Bring me a vermouth--di Torino--and the time-table."  He sat down in a
wicker chair, his face thoughtful--"and--Stefano!--" he called him
back--"Asti for the Principessa.  Lunch at twelve-thirty to-day--we
shall be five instead of three--you can add an 'omelette au surprise.'
And see that the quails aren't overdone."

"Very good, sir.  There are letters come since the Signore left."

He returned with a silver tray on which lay his master's correspondence.

McTaggart took them, with a yawn, turning them over indifferently.

From somewhere through the drowsy heat came a distant sound of chopping
wood and a man's voice raised musically, singing over his morning work.
McTaggart drank his glass of vermouth, then choosing an envelope
directed in a round hand, broke it open with a smile.

It was long since he had heard from Jill.  He glanced at the date.  The
letter had lain at his London rooms and was now sent on to Italy by the
faithful Bethune.


"Dear Peter," it began.

"I wonder where you are now? and if you're _ever_ coming home!  It's
ages since you last wrote, and I've been meaning to reply--only I've
been _so_ worried.  You'll understand when I tell you my news--about
Mother.  She's gone to prison."

McTaggart jumped.  The very word seemed sinister in the heart of that
peaceful drowsy wood, lapped by the indolent Southern sea.

"Poor old Jill!"  He read on, his face growing steadily graver.

"I daresay you saw in the papers of the latest Suffragette
attempt!--that bomb in Downing Street, I mean.  Well, Mother was in it,
with Stephen.  And now she's gone to Holloway--isn't it _dreadful_?
She's refused bail and declares she means to hunger strike!--I've been
nearly off my head about it.

"For she'll never stand it--she hasn't the strength.  It will simply
kill her----" a smudged word suggested to the reader a tear, hastily
blotted off the paper.

Before McTaggart a vision rose of the grey eyes with their frank gaze,
fringed by lashes, dark and curled, and the eager face of his school
girl friend.

"Mr. Bethune's been awfully kind.  He actually arranged for bail, but
Mother wouldn't hear of it and there she is--in Holloway Prison.

"Roddy's home.  He went to the Head and asked leave to come back to me.
He's simply furious about it all--wants to have it out with Stephen.
Needless to say, _he's_ free!  You bet Stephen looks after himself.  I
suppose he thinks that _one_ martyr (in the Bible, I mean) is good
enough!"

McTaggart laughed grimly aloud at the typical line as he thought of
Jill.  He could almost see her saying the words, the delicate nostrils
curled with scorn.

"Well--that settles it!"  He finished the letter and picked up the
time-table with a frown.

"I might be able to help the child----"  He turned the pages
thoughtfully.

"I can catch the express at Genoa and go straight through next
Friday--I think.  I shall get back in time for Henley.  It ought to be
jolly in London now."

This settled, he dressed for lunch and informed Mario of his departure,
somewhat to the latter's chagrin, who had various ties at Viareggio.

"The Signore will not be here for the races?"

The man's voice was so doleful that McTaggart hesitated, remembering
they were fixed for Sunday.

"Well--we might stay over the week-end, and go on Monday--perhaps
that's better."

The man blessed him audibly with the gentle familiarity that seems to
exist in that old land between the nobility and their servants.

"You can take a holiday on Sunday--so long as you get my packing
done--and say good-bye to Lucia?"  He laughed at the man's guilty face.

"Ahi!--_That_ for the women!"  Mario, recovering himself, gave an
expressive, scornful shrug--"But the races are a different matter!--and
I hear 'La Luna' is sure to win."

McTaggart smiled, cutting short the man's chatter, and went down to
receive his guests, a little bored by the coming lunch.

His fears were amply justified.

The poet was in a sombre mood, the Principessa plainly anxious.

"It's his new Tragedy," she whispered as they settled themselves at the
table--"he is so sensitive, my dear--the penalty of genius."

McTaggart, with a solemn face, received these subtle confidences,
somewhat relieved by the presence of his other neighbour, graceful and
young.

But the Countess Marco Viviani was not in her usual high spirits.  A
slim brunette, with a wonderful figure, and much admired in the Roman
set, she could not brook in any form opposition to her will.

She explained in an audible aside her quarrel--a new-born affair--with
her husband, who faced McTaggart and watched the pair with insolent
eyes.

It seemed that he had required of her an alteration in the days,
arranged between them, when they should appear side by side at the
Casino.

Wednesdays and Saturdays had been fixed in order to allow the Count
Tuesdays and Fridays to himself to parade there his latest theatrical
fancy.

Now "La Carlotta" was making trouble.  She wanted to interfere with the
rule.  But the Countess was adamant.  She would not bend before the
actress.

"It will make a scandal," she announced.  "Everyone knows those are
_my_ days!  I would prefer to leave the place and go to Bagni di Luca."

But the villa at Viareggio belonged to the Count and he clearly saw
that economy forbade a rupture which would mean a second establishment.
So he sulked, undecided still, hating his handsome, captious wife--who
had known the existence of many "Carlottas" and was plainly
unreasonable!

McTaggart felt that the atmosphere was charged with electricity.  The
poet never opened his mouth, the Principessa was openly troubled.  The
only person who seemed unmoved by the depression in the air was Don
Cesare, her youngest son, who made an unexpected sixth.  A handsome
youth of seventeen with a black moustache and charming manner--already
that of a man of the world--he chattered gaily, enjoying his lunch.

"I wish you would come with me this evening," he said to his host
eagerly--"into the marshes and bring your gun--I'm going out after
'beccaccini.'  I've had a special punt made for the narrow waterways to
the lake.  It's a beauty--I want to try it--I'm sure we should have
some capital sport."

"All right--what time?"  McTaggart liked his youngest guest.

"About five.  If we find it's hot we can lie up somewhere in the dykes."

He referred to the curious intricate scheme of irrigation in the plain
that lies between the hills and sea--the famous draining of the marshes.

For the low land looks like a chequer board, crossed and recrossed by
narrow streams that widen into two big lakes--a favorite haunt for wild
fowl.

"I've always wanted to explore those long ditches in a boat.  I tried
once and was nearly poisoned--my keel kept sticking in the mud."

"Exactly--that's the trouble--the smell!"  Don Cesare nodded gaily.
"That's why I've had this punt made flat bottomed and very narrow.  In
the deep parts you can use a paddle and where it's shallow a long
pole--against the bank--_not_ in the water!"

He turned to the Countess with a smile.

"Do come and see us off--and we'll take you a little way to try it.
Further on there are low boughs, not designed to suit ladies' hats."

The pretty woman smiled back, looking at him with her wide, dark eyes.

"I'm so sorry--but I can't--it's my evening with Marco for the Casino."

She flung the challenge across the table.  The Count wearily shrugged
his shoulders while the Poet, with saturnine face, seemed to enjoy the
situation.

The Principessa, stirring herself, broke the pregnant silence that
followed.

"Cara Emilia," she said, "have you heard of Bellanti's misfortune?"

"No----" the Countess turned quickly--"what has happened?"  Don Cesare
watched her, a mischievous light in his black eyes, as she went on
languidly.  "His sister is my dearest friend and she hasn't written to
me for weeks!  I was really beginning to wonder if she were ill.  What
is the matter?"

"He's ruined."  The Princess turned up her hands with an eloquent
gesture of finality.  "He was always gambling, as you know, and then he
took to borrowing money--enormous sums, I am told--on the strength of
his Aunt's fortune--Donna Teresa Bellanti."

"Did you ever meet her?"  She paused in her story to open her fan and,
lazily, wafted it backward and forward before her pale middle-aged face.

"I don't think so."  The Countess smiled, feeling across the narrow
table her husband's persistent glance and the silence of the rest of
the party.

"She did not care for society--she was always very religious, you
know--and has never married--so everyone thought she would leave her
money to her nephew."

"Well!"  The Countess was impatient.  McTaggart felt a shade of pity.
He guessed the Princess was amusing herself by prolonging the other's
anxiety.

"She's taken the veil," said the older woman.  "You know she's stayed
for the last two years at her favourite convent--Our Lady of
Loretto--and it seems she was finishing her novitiate.  And all her
wealth is to go to the Church."

She folded her fan carefully.  "It's a fearful blow for Bellanti--I
hear he's quite at his wits' end."

The pretty Countess bit her lip; under the table her hands were
clenched.

"I can't pity him," said the Poet.  He spoke with an air of authority.
"'A fool and his money' ... you know the proverb?"  His eyes sparkled
vindictively.

"Oh--Gabriele!"  The Princess was shocked.  "And you so 'simpatico,'
too!"

"He has no brains," the Poet declared--"and he lives a base, material
life."

"I'm _awfully_ sorry," McTaggart frowned.  "He's the best rider to
hounds I know.  I'll never forget a run I had with him last winter in
the Campagna.  And a jolly nice fellow too."

He glanced across at Don Cesare, who was eyeing the Poet with disgust.

"We shall miss Bellanti," said the Countess.  Her voice was calm.  "I
must write to his sister.  Poor Bice!  She was always so fond of him.
I don't say he was intellectual"--she looked at the Poet
thoughtfully--at his ugly, weak little face--"but so good looking--a
thorough _man_."

The Principessa followed her gaze.

Don Cesare laughed aloud.  "Well--give me good looks any day--and a
good seat.  I'm for Bellanti."

The Countess gave him a grateful nod.

"And so's Emilia----" he kissed the tips of his fingers to her across
the table--"and so's Marco."  Wickedly he turned his head toward the
Count.

"Exactly--" that worthy watched his wife, moved by a subtle idea.  "I
was thinking, my dear," he addressed the latter--"We might ask the poor
fellow here?"

"Pourquoi pas?"  A shade of impertinence lay in the quick French
response, and between the pair of dark eyes a silent, menacing
challenge passed.

For the Count knew that his wife knew that he ... knew!

It was a bribe to settle the strained situation vis-a-vis with "La
Carlotta."

And watching this matrimonial by-play McTaggart felt a growing scorn
for the shallowness of the social life in which he found himself
involved.

This Princess with her puny poet, who ruled her with a rod of iron, and
Cesare, a mere school boy, eager for the latest scandal.  The pretty
woman by his side, playing her lover against her husband, and the
Count, deliberately sacrificing his wife's morals to his own intrigues.

England might be dull, he thought, but at least the men and women there
held a sterner code of honour.  A glow stole through him at the
contrast.  People might talk of the laxity of conduct in the upper
classes, but the latter had the decency to veil their occasional lapses
from virtue.

And, as a whole, the national standard took a lot of beating, he
decided.  Love was still reverenced and marriage more than a legal tie
to cover innumerable intrigues!

He watched his noble guests depart without regret, then sat down to
write a hurried line to Jill, full of heart-felt sympathy.  He
wondered--not without a smile--if Countess Marco Viviani would go to
prison for Bellanti--like Mrs. Uniacke for the Cause!

He signed the page "Peter McTaggart," with an amused breath of relief.
He liked it better than "Maramonte" for all its air of high romance.

And, as he drew a steady line under the purely British name,
unconsciously he made his choice and ran up the Union Jack!




CHAPTER XX

But as he neared the mist-wreathed cliffs of Dover McTaggart's
patriotism was put to the test by the captious weather and the
hopeless, sea-sick crowd around him.  Rain and hail and distant thunder
were his portion, a choppy sea and a boat packed with a draggled party
from the Polytechnic, returning home.

He said to himself he had never seen his countrymen to worse advantage.
Beside them, Mario, chilled to the bone but still cheerful, inured to
the motion by many a past yachting trip, looked a perfect aristocrat
from his well-poised head to his slender feet.

A woman, their neighbour on the boat, lost her hat, then her rug,
wailing aloud, and Mario, at his master's nod, retrieved them
imperturbably from the skittish antics of the wind.

The sufferer never even thanked him, but clutched her belongings with a
glance full of mistrust, recognizing a foreigner--or, in other words--a
doubtful character!

At last they bumped against the pier; ropes whirled out, gangways
creaked; a mad herd of humans crushed after porters, charging with
hoisted bags.

The train looked absurdly small.  McTaggart thought the station shrunk
and his first English cup of tea was cold and strong, in a leaking pot.

Even the fields, as they left the Downs, seemed to have dwindled to
half their size.  The rain lashed against the glass.  Between the
streams trickling down he began to catch green vistas of hops with
their quaint, peaked oast-houses like the caps worn by hob-goblins from
the pages of a fairy book.

Rochester!--under leaden skies, smoky, blurred.  The train rocked on,
the shorter gauge oddly aggressive in the low-built, narrow carriage.

Then, at last, Charing Cross; the endless wait for the luggage and the
final crowning disenchantment--no taxis!--due to "the strike."

After a dismal half hour a "runner" returned with a four wheeler and
they both got in, hampered by baggage, neither of them in the best of
tempers.

Mario was plainly aghast.  "This--London?" he seemed to say.

"Yes--confound it!" thought McTaggart.  He began to wish he had stayed
abroad.

They crawled along, past Trafalgar Square and its dripping lions, past
Hampton's, then, before the block of carriages outside the Carlton,
swerved to the right.

Half way up the Haymarket hill McTaggart thrust his head out and
shouted.

"Hi!  Cabby--stop a minute."  His face brightened as he spoke.  He
opened the door and splashed across the muddy pavement into a shop with
a quaint old fashioned bow-window and asked for a box of cigarettes.

"Good evening, sir."  The man smiled across the counter with an air of
pleased recognition.  "We haven't seen you lately, sir."  Here was his
first welcome home.

"I've been abroad for eighteen months.  I'll take a cigarette now."  He
lighted it with an English match, free from sulphur, and picked up the
box.

"You can put it down to the old address."  He drew in the fragrant
smoke with joy.  "Good-night--I'll take these matches."  His hand
closed on them lovingly.  He retraced his steps and dived once more
into the stuffy, waiting cab.

"Well--that's one thing you can't beat--our baccy," he said to himself
as they jolted round against the curb into the full glare of the Circus.

The wet streets mirrored back the thousand lights from above ...
McTaggart felt, suddenly, something grip him by the throat.

_London_!  The magic of the word rushed up like a warm tide, round his
heart, into his head.

"Good old London!"--he caught his breath.

"Mario!"--he touched the man.  "Look out, quick! it's Piccadilly."

A burly policeman waved them on.

"Now, then--Hurry up!--four-wheeler."

Dodging like a human eel between the buses, a ragged boy slipped past
and paused at the window, his shrill voice raised in a cry:

"Star!--'h _Ev'ning News_--Speshul!  'Ere you are, sir--h'all the
winners..." jerked the paper into the cab, and was off, clutching
McTaggart's penny.

Like a silver ribbon streaked with light, Piccadilly stretched ahead,
buses skidding, and near at hand rang the gay tootle of a horn.

Then, into the congested space, rattling harness, clanking bits, a
private coach, with four bays, wet and shining, splashed with froth,
picked its way like a dainty dame, disdainful of the lesser traffic.

Mario's dark face brightened.  He loved horses and knew their points.
This was a picture after his heart, dissipating his sense of gloom.

For he could not see with McTaggart's eyes.  At his master's quick,
impulsive cry, he had peered out eagerly, pleased by the word
"Piccadilly" with its familiar foreign ring.

He saw a small open space, between a square and a circle, with shops
and lights and a feeble statue--like a lost infant--in the centre.

He stared at it with inward contempt.

"Not half as fine," he said to himself, "as the fountain in our Sienese
palace!  And as for the rest of the 'piazza' ... why, there isn't a
single public building--not even a decent Church!  And the rain ... Is
this the English summer?  No wonder it's a cold race!"

He looked covertly at his master, amazed by his obvious touch of
excitement.

For McTaggart was taking a deep breath of the foggy air that reeked
with petrol.

"It's good to be back again," he thought; "I wonder if Bethune will be
there?  I sent him a wire, but he's such a beggar for work, one never
knows.  By Jove, I must see about a car--useful during the present
strike..."  He peered out at the Berkeley steps where a lady in evening
dress, her light wrap drawn about her, filmy skirts wound close,
crossed, dainty, over the pavement beside her attendant cavalier.

They turned into a side street, splashing and lumbering along, until,
at last, they halted before the old familiar, narrow house.

The door was open.  McTaggart ran up the steep stairs like a boy.

"Hullo!  Mrs. Frost--how are you?  Yes, I'm back.  Rather late.  Hope
you got my letter all right?"

"Yessir.  Your rooms are ready."  The sour faced woman was actually
smiling.

"My man's below--but he can't speak English--Will you see to him and
pay the cab?  _Hullo_! there you are, old man."

He was shaking hands wildly with Bethune.

"Steady on--what a grip!  Confound you, you've broken my wrist..."
Bethune's honest face was beaming.  He dealt him a playful blow on the
chest.

"Hard as a rock!--you do look fit.  I prepared to receive a languid
foreigner.  Come inside, Monsieur le Marquis..."

"Oh--shut up!  You ... dear old fool!"

McTaggart glanced around at his rooms, the worn carpet and furniture
that had seen service in College days--each scratch and dent a memory.

Above the glass, still littered with cards and photographs, there hung
an oar and underneath, on either side, stood a pair of battered silver
cups.

He drew a deep sigh of content.

"Get me a drink--there's a dear chap!  Hullo--that window's still
smashed.  What a rag it was! d'you remember that night?"  For the
topmost pane of glass was cracked from side to side beneath the blind.

"Let's look at you"--he took the glass that Bethune filled for him and
drank.  "That's good.  Why!--the 'Round Man's' growing a figure..."

Bethune scowled.

"Shut up!  I got in whiskey--thought you'd want it.  Here's luck----"
he tossed it off--"What are you going to do about dinner?  It's getting
pretty late, you know."

"Yes--we had a rotten crossing--the boat an hour over time.  Have you
dined yourself--no?--that's right.  I thought we'd go down to
Simpson's.  I feel like a good cut off the joint..."

Bethune laughed.  "The illustrious Marquis is tired of his native
macaroni?"

"A bottle of beer--and some Welsh rabbit"--the other ran on, ignoring
the taunt.  "I'm fed up with Chianti."

He stopped on the word with a little start.

For the first time for many weeks a memory returned to him of his visit
to Harley Street and the problem of his "double" heart.

What was it he had laughingly said?  (How long ago that day seemed ...
The era of Fantine and Cydonia.)

Yes--"porridge" it was, and "Chianti!"

He glanced up at the mantelpiece as Bethune, hearing steps outside,
trundled away to give instructions to the bewildered Mario.

"No change?" he heard him say.  "All right--I'll see to it."

A face smiled down at McTaggart out of a tarnished silver frame.
Cydonia in a big black hat, white furs around her throat--with her
childish mouth and wide eyes.  He took it down and gazed at it.

Cydonia!--the girl he had loved.

Deliberately he placed the verb in the past tense.  For it was true.
Nothing of his passion remained, but a mild, wondering affection!
Absence and time had achieved the cure.  _One_ broken heart at least
was mended!  And Fantine...?  At the name he felt a sudden stab of
regret.

How strange were life and life's emotions!  Although her picture was
destroyed--(he had done it in anger that fatal night) her image rose
clear in his mind.

Of the two women he missed her most--in the flood-tide of his return.
Her stronger personality, the power of wit and imagination that blent
with her careless scorn of men, her nameless, utterly feminine charm,
had survived that other disillusion.

He put Cydonia's portrait back quickly as Bethune re-entered the room.
Then, conscious that his hasty action had not escaped his friend's
eyes, in an indifferent voice, he asked:

"Ever hear anything of the Cadells?"

"Yes--no!"  Bethune turned to the sideboard, horribly at a loss.  He
coughed, then started with a plunge to get his unwelcome news over.

"Met 'Jinks' the other day--remember 'Jinks' of Trinity?--got his blue
for Rugger--Well, he knows Miss Cadell--that was."

"What?"  McTaggart's voice was sharp.

Bethune, fidgeting with the syphon, his back turned to his friend,
received a sudden baptism, stinging and cold, of soda water.

"Oh, damn!--now I've spilled it.  Yes, that's it--She's married, you
know.  A chap called Euan Flemming--an M.P. for ... God knows where!"

"Well--I'm blessed!"  McTaggart laughed; a little sourly, truth to
tell.  Despite the conclusion arrived at earlier he felt somewhat taken
aback.

"Cheer up," he addressed the broad shoulders of his still perturbed
friend.  "You mixed the news with soda water but I could have stood it
neat."

Bethune wheeled round, his face red.  "I'm jolly glad--I've been
funking it."  He met McTaggart's amused eyes and beamed all over his
honest face.

"That's over," said McTaggart--"long ago.  What about dinner?--I'll
just go and have a wash and be with you--if you're ready."

"I should think I am!--half famished--I've been down at Brooklands with
a new car.  Hurry up!"

He dropped into a chair as McTaggart called through the folding doors.

"D'you ever see Jill now?  It's a bad business about her mother."

"I was there yesterday--to inquire.  They let her out at the end of the
week--but she's been awfully ill since.  It was pretty nearly touch and
go..."

There came a sound of splashing water; then McTaggart's voice again:

"I'm glad she's home at any rate.  What's become of the priceless
Stephen?"

"Dont's ask me.  I bar the chap.  D'you remember old Charlie Mason?
Well, he managed at last to get a billet with Hensley and Benton, the
big wine people.  He dropped in to see me, last night, full of trouble.
It seems that Somerfield had let him in for a big order for himself and
several pals of his.  And now they say they can't stump up--it sounds
like a regular plant!  Awfully hard lines on Charlie--the firm have
given him the sack."

"You don't say so.  Bad luck!  I always thought Stephen a wrong 'un.
How's Jill herself?"

A pause.

"Oh--all right," but Bethune frowned.  "Jolly plucky about it all.  I
fancy they're rather in low water.  It's between ourselves, you
understand.  But she's left College for good now and it seems to me
she's taken on most of the house work at home.  They only keep one
servant."

"What a shame!" came from McTaggart, busily brushing back his hair.
"It's a thousand pities her mother gives up all her time to Suffrage
work.  She might consider her family.  I can't understand the
attraction.  Seems to me it's like drink--when a woman really takes to
it there's no earthly stopping her!"

"I quite agree," said Bethune, "I'm sorry for Jill.  And the boy, too,"
he added somewhat hastily.  His pale face was slightly flushed.  "You
ready?"

He picked up his hat as his friend reappeared.  "It's stopped
raining----" he glanced at the window.  "We've had an awfully wet
season--nothing like it since the Flood.  I nearly started a motor
boat--cheap trips in Piccadilly!"

They clattered downstairs together and out on to the shining pavement.

"We'd better take a bus, I suppose," said McTaggart--"how long has this
strike been on?"

"About a fortnight----" Bethune laughed.  "I expect you're glad to get
back to England?"

But the other answered seriously.  "Well--I _am_.  It's an odd
thing----" he sniffed up the air, damp and smoky, and smiled to
himself, his eyes bright.  "But there's something about London, you
know..."

He left the sentence incomplete




CHAPTER XXI

Jill crept downstairs on tiptoe.

Inside the dining-room Roddy was leaning over the table, a sketch-block
and paints before him.  He looked up as his sister appeared with an
anxious, inquiring glance that seemed oddly out of place on his round,
boyish face.

"Well?"

"She's asleep.  At last!"  Jill sighed--"Lizzie's sitting in the room,
so I stole away to you."

She flung herself into the armchair and curled her feet up under her,
arms clasped behind her head, dark shadows round her eyes.

"Tired, old girl?"  Roddy's voice was tender.  He saw that the long
nights of vigil were leaving their mark on the fresh young face that
began to look white and strained.

"Just a bit----"  Jill smiled bravely.  "But I think she's improving.
She's more like herself.  If only she'd stay in bed for a month and
give it a chance--get really strong before she begins to think of work."

Roddy nodded and turned to his task.  A silence fell in the bare room,
broken by the buzz of a blue-bottle blundering round the chandelier and
the sound of water stirred in the glass as the boy washed his paint
brushes.

"What are you doing, Roddy?" Jill asked lazily.

"Oh--a ship.  It's _rotten_!" his voice was full of despair.  "I can't
get the sea--it looks thick and flat--like a blooming table-cloth!
Think I shall tear it up..." he paused gloomily, sucking his brush.

"No--don't."  With a quick movement Jill rose to her feet.  She bent
over her brother, an arm thrown round his shoulder.

"It's jolly good.  Really, old boy--the ship, I mean.  Though the sea's
all wrong," she added honestly.  "But there's something I like--most
awfully--" her grey eyes narrowed, criticizing.

"What?"  Roddy lifted a wistful face, with that longing for praise
peculiar to the artist, which has nothing to do with vanity but the
deeper need for encouragement in the long up-hill fight of creative
work.

"It's the way the ship's moving before the wind.  It's alive, somehow,
and one feels the struggle.  It isn't just chased along--it's up
against the strong tide--and the slap of the waves..."

"Of course it is."  He smiled.  "It's getting the full swell round the
headland.  The drawing's all right--it's the colour that's wrong.  I
_do_ want some painting lessons!"

"Well, perhaps we'll manage it by-and-bye--next summer holidays.  You'd
like to go in for Art, wouldn't you, Roddy?"

"Yes."  The boy's voice was gruff.  He felt too deeply for easy speech.

Jill looked anxious.  Long since she had guessed the secret hope in the
schoolboy's heart.  But she knew it was not a paying profession and
where was the money to come from for it?

Her mother--a typical soldier's wife--held a curious contempt for the
artist class.  She wanted Roddy to go to Sandhurst, if means permitted,
with the idea of the Indian Army in the future.

How would she take this new departure?

"D'you remember," said Roddy suddenly, "that old fellow up at Whitby we
used to see painting near the harbour?"

"Who took you up with him on the moors, that moonlight night, to the
Abbey?--Yes--why?"  She sat down, leaning her elbows on the table.

"Well--he taught me an awful lot.  Not exactly painting, you know, but
to use my eyes.  I can't explain!  Values of light and shade--such as
the sea, with its colour merely a question of depth and reflection ...
not dyed water!  I showed him, at last, some of my sketches
and--Jill----" the boy looked up wistfully, struggling with a sudden
shyness--"he said ... he thought--well, I'd got it in me."

"I _know_ you have."  Jill nodded.  Into her thoughtful eyes there came
a look of strong determination.  "And I'll do all I can--you know that,
Roddy."

"You always were a brick," said the boy.

He stared ahead through the open window.

"There's such an awful lot to learn--and I want to begin--you _must_
start young.  I remember he said to me one day--I've never forgotten
it, somehow--'I've been painting now for fifty years--and I'm just
beginning to master my art.  I know that my hand is one with my brain
and the long apprenticeship is past.  And now'--he looked so awfully
sad--'there are just a few years left and then I shall die--and it's
all over'!"

"But he'd had the keen joy of the fight."  Jill had a horror of
morbidity.  "And he'd won through--that must feel fine!"  A warm colour
flushed her cheek.

"Yes--but it seemed so awfully hard, that just as life was worth
living, all that labour and knowledge must go, with everything else ...
I call it rotten!"

"I don't believe it does," said Jill.  "Peter doesn't, either," she
added.  "We were talking of that the day we drove to Henley and stopped
at the Fair.  I think all real effort
survives--somehow--somewhere--that nothing's lost.  Or else the
struggle--to say nothing of failure!--would be too cruel--just sheer
waste!  Think of all the pioneers--Cecil Rhodes--Gordon--Scott?  I
can't believe that their energy and heroism doesn't go on...  You
remember Moses and his death?  How he only _looked_ on the promised
land.  It always seemed to me so unfair until one day when I was
reading of the Transfiguration on the Mount--when Moses and Elijah
appeared--(in their earthly forms, remember that!--) and there he
was--_in_ the promised land.  Moses, I mean--centuries later.  He'd got
there, you see, _after_ death."

"That's jolly fine," said the schoolboy--"I never thought of it that
way."

The speech sank into his memory.  Years ahead, in his hour of need--one
of those moods of black despair which creative art brings to a man who
strains up to a high ideal--he would see before him Jill's clear eyes,
the oval face, slightly flushed, and illumined by an inner light which
seemed to rise from her brave young soul.

She glanced now up at the clock.  "I must go, Roddy--there's Mother's
soup--and in half an hour we'll have tea.  Down in the kitchen, it's
easier."

"All right.  I'll make some toast.  I'll just finish this and come.
Have you got any anchovy paste, old girl?  If so, I'll do you some
'devilled biscuits.'"

"I'm afraid not."  Jill laughed.  It sounded a hot entertainment for
the sultry summer afternoon.  "You might keep an eye on the front door.
Lizzie's upstairs, sewing, by Mother."

"I'll answer it--don't you worry."

He flung an arm about the girl and gave her a sudden boisterous kiss.
Jill responded eagerly.  Roddy was not demonstrative and she knew the
value of the caress, hungry herself for a little love.  Then, with a
bright face, she departed into the depths of the basement, picking her
way with careful feet and a keen look-out for black beetles.

Roddy sat where she had left him.  Through the window he saw the
scattered trees on Primrose Hill and the grass still green on account
of the long wet season.  A heavy bank of thunder clouds, lined with a
pale coppery light, hung suspended against the blue and the boy was
lost in a dream of colour.

Suddenly he gave a start.  An angry look came into his eyes.  He got up
hurriedly, left the room and on noiseless feet crossed the hall.

Carefully he opened the door.

"Don't ring!" he checked the caller.  "What do you want?  Mother's
asleep."  He looked back with defiance at Stephen.

"I've come round to inquire for her."

Somerfield coolly passed the boy, hung up his hat on the stand,
straightening his tie in the glass, with a smile at his languid
reflexion.

"Don't make a row then," Roddy whispered.  "I suppose you'd better come
into the dining-room----"  He closed the door softly behind them.

"How is Mrs. Uniacke?"

Stephen sauntered to the sideboard, opened a box standing there and
helped himself to a cigarette.

Roddy watched him with a scowl.

"Anything else you'd like?" he asked.

"Thanks--a small whiskey and soda."  Stephen's smile was insolent.

"Help yourself."  Roddy saw too late the loop-hole that he had offered.
"Mother's just about the same.  The doctor came again this morning."

"What did he say?"  Stephen filled his glass and lolled back in the
armchair.

"Nothing good--her heart's weak and she's all nerves--doesn't sleep.
Of course, she can't touch solids yet--that forcible feeding nearly
killed her."  The boy winced as he spoke.

"I'm awfully sorry," said Stephen.  For once a ring of genuine feeling
sounded in his high voice.  "I'd like to see this government--_wiped
out_!----" he clenched his hands.

"Not much good--there'd be another."  Roddy was practical--"you see, if
you go and break laws you've got to pay--whoever you are!  It's the
fault of the Suffrage leaders themselves--they're just 'agitators'----"
he paused--"I'd have my knife into _them_!  They don't care _who_
suffers."

"Well--you seem to take it pretty coolly considering your Mother is the
victim?"

The boy shot him an angry glance.

"She wouldn't be--except for you!"

A stormy silence followed the words.

Stephen was preparing for battle when Roddy suddenly raised his head,
malice in his hazel eyes.

"Oh, by the way, I quite forgot.  There's been a young woman here
to-day asking for you--awfully keen.  There's no accounting for
people's tastes!"

Stephen sat up with a start.

"A young woman?--what name?  And why on earth does she come here?"

"Thought it was your house, perhaps--(One back"--he smiled to himself.)
"She wouldn't give any name--Said you'd know----" the schoolboy
grinned.  "A short girl--rather fat--with a touzled mop of fair hair."

Somerfield's face went a shade pale.

("It's Letty----" he thought--"oh! confound it!") but out aloud----

"I think I know.  She works for our branch of the League."

"That's all right, then----" Roddy was cheerful--"I gave her your new
address, you see.  I wrote it down to make sure and she went away quite
jolly."

Stephen looked venomous.

"I wish you'd mind your own affairs and leave me to settle mine."

The schoolboy was hugging himself.  Here was a rise out of his foe!  He
was not as simple as he looked, and although the full tragedy of
Letty's desperate hunt for Stephen had quite escaped his young eyes, he
was charmed to put a spoke in the wheel of the flirtation he
suspicioned.

"I'm sorry if I've done wrong----" his mischievous face belied the
words--"but you say she's working for the Cause, so hasn't she a right
to see you?"

Stephen silently rose to his feet.  He thought of Letty at his lodgings
and of his carefully covered tracks since he left the ones near
Primrose Hill.  And now this interfering schoolboy had undone the work
of weeks.  He could hardly restrain himself.

"I'm off."  He made for the door.

"Wait a second.  I'll see you out--I don't want the Mater disturbed."

"Please tell her that I called."

"I will--when she's well enough.  And, look here, it's no good
writing--the doctor won't allow her letters.  Unless you'd like Jill to
read them and give her an occasional message?"

But this kindly thought was lost.  Stephen vouchsafed no answer.

Roddy stood there for a moment--the door held back with his
foot--watching his visitor walk away, his coat clipped in to his
figure, his boots new, and the latest hat.

"What a rotter the fellow is!  I'm rather sorry for that young
woman--but what _does_ she see in him?"  He turned it over in his mind.

"Silly fools, girls," he said.  He spoke the verdict out aloud, with
the conscious superiority of a man in the making.

"Why, Roddy--you've grown a cynic!"

He turned with a sudden cry of joy.

"Peter!"

McTaggart's smiling face, bronzed and handsome, met his eyes.

"May I come in?--I just called round to ask how Mrs. Uniacke was."

"_Rather_!  My hat!--it's jolly fine to see you back," he danced on the
steps.  "I say--we'll have to go quiet----" (the boy
remembered)--"Mother's asleep."

They stole through the dingy hall and into the dining-room beyond.
McTaggart glanced round with a smile at the bare, familiar place.

"You've grown, Roddy.  Where's Jill?  Hope she can spare me a minute.
I suppose she's busy nursing your Mother?"

"Yes."  Roddy's smile faded--"she's getting done up, I'm afraid.
Sitting up all night, you know.  The Mater can't be left alone."

"As bad as that?  I'm awfully grieved.  Poor old Jill!--and it's rough
on you ... Never mind--we must cheer her up.  Do tell her that I'm
here."

"I'll go now."  Roddy paused--"Look here, Peter, I shan't let on that
it's you--what a lark!  Won't it be a surprise for her."  He was off,
his eyes shining with fun.

He found Jill in the kitchen, sleeves rolled up, her face flushed,
leaning over the hot fire, patiently skimming mutton broth.

"You'll have to leave that for a minute.  There's someone called and
wants to see you.  On business, I think," he choked back a laugh.

"Bother," said Jill, "I can't come now."

"Sorry--but I'm no earthly use.  Hurry up, there's a good girl."

Jill, with an impatient sigh, pushed the soup to the side of the stove.

"It won't hurt to simmer there."  She wiped her hands on a cloth and
with her rounded arms bare, an apron over her drill skirt, followed
Roddy up the stairs, a frown on her pretty face.

After the gloom of the basement the light dazed her for a second as she
walked into the dining-room and saw a tall man standing there.

"Well, Jill?"

At Peter's voice she gave a sadden breathless cry.  She caught at the
back of a chair and swayed...

"Good Lord!  I've startled you."

His arm went out, supporting her.  "I'm awfully sorry."  He felt her
stiffen.  For Jill had recovered herself.

"You made me jump--How are you, Peter?"  She forced a shaky little
laugh.  "I'm all right--it's nothing ... really."  She drew back, her
face red--"it's the hot kitchen.  I'm rather tired--but awfully glad to
see you again."

"You do look a bit played out."  His blue eyes ran over her, conscious
of a subtle change.  This was not his schoolgirl friend of the short
skirts and swinging plait.

Her hair was wound round her head in glossy coils, from beneath which
little tendrils curled away, dark against her white forehead.

Her throat and arms, bare and dimpled, were softly curved and the low
bosom that rose and fell with her quick breath had lost its narrow,
boyish look.

But the grey eyes were the same, pure and fearless, though shadowed now
with faint circles of violet that added to their natural size; and the
pretty face, flushed from the fire, had the clear skin of the child he
loved, the rather large and humorous mouth.

Her long skirt, tightly bound with the narrow apron, showed the curve
of her slender hips and beneath he saw her high-arched, supple feet.

She looked a thoroughbred--he thought--with a sudden thrill of friendly
pride--from the poise of her well-shaped head to the smooth, pointed
finger tips.

"It's _so_ nice to see you again--I'm awfully glad."  He beamed at her.

"I, too----" she laughed back--"we thought you had really gone for
good.  And you never said in your letter you were coming home, not a
word!"

"I wanted it to be a surprise."

"It was!"  She caught her brother's arm.  "Roddy--you little
wretch!"--for she guessed his share in the trick--"just run down and
put on the kettle--and then we'll have tea together.  D'you mind a
picnic in the kitchen?"--she turned to the visitor, "Lizzie's upstairs
with the invalid."

"I'd love it," McTaggart declared.  "I've got such lots of things to
tell you.  But first of all--how's your Mother?"

"Better."  Jill smiled bravely.  "But it's been _dread_ful!  Poor
darling--she came home an utter wreck----"  Her lips quivered as she
spoke.

"Well--you'll soon get her right, my dear--good nursing and perfect
rest."  Peter's voice was soothing now; he was inwardly shocked at the
strain he guessed.  "And then we'll take her out for drives--I've
ordered a car from Tommy Bethune."

"Oh!--I'm so glad.  He's _such_ a dear!  You don't know how good he's
been.  He arranged everything for Mother--even to the ambulance."

Peter's face was very grave.  It was all very well, he said to himself
to read of these things in the papers, but the thought of Mrs.
Uniacke--that delicate, frail little creature--in a prison, forcibly
fed!  This was bringing it home with a vengeance.  And a new respect
seized the man.  Whatever his views on the Suffrage question might be,
he marvelled in his heart at the courage displayed by those thousands
of women banded together to fight or die.

"She's asleep now," went on Jill--"that's been the most serious
trouble--that and her heart, which is very weak.  And, of course, her
digestion's all to pieces--and she's suffered frightfully in her throat
... Well, we won't talk any more about it.  Come down and have some
tea."

They crossed the hall with bated breath, Jill's finger to her lips.  As
they went down the dark stairs Peter slipped a hand through her arm.

"Steady, Jill.  Don't take a header ... 'Steep is the descent to' ...
Tea!  Here we are.  Any black beetles?"

Jill shivered involuntarily.

"It's cowardly--but I hate them, Peter!  Sometimes when I come down at
night the floor's simply black with them.  I'd far sooner find
burglars!"

McTaggart's laugh steadied her nerves.  He checked her in the narrow
passage and lowered his voice, with a glance at Roddy beyond them, busy
in the kitchen.

"Look here, Jill--now I'm back--I hope you're going to make use of me?
I don't want to cut out Bethune----" he smiled, watching her thoughtful
face---"but he's busy and I'm not--I'm game for any odd job.  And I
want to help--_awfully_.  You see, I came home for that."

"Did you?"  The girl looked at him.  Her eyes in the gloom shone like
stars under their heavy curling lashes.

"Honour bright!  Your letter did it.  I couldn't bear to think of you
in all this trouble without a man.  Although I knew you'd the pluck to
face it.  So it's a bargain--settled between us--I'm to be a sort of
handy ... brother?"

"That's it," said Jill steadily.  "I won't forget.  Thank you, Peter."




CHAPTER XXII

McTaggart walked to St. John's Wood station absorbed in thought, his
face grave.

For the memory of his little friend with the tired circles round her
eyes haunted each step of the lonely road, shadowed by its belt of
trees.

He saw that Jill was worn out with nursing and anxiety, that the long
nights of vigil were bought at the expense of her nerves.  He guessed,
moreover, the strained resources of the shabby house he had left.  He
would have given much for the right to ease the position with a cheque!

But this was plainly impossible.  He smiled to himself at the bare
idea, striding along oblivious of the heavy thunder drops that fell.

At last a scheme presented itself.  When he reached the Underground,
after a moment's hesitation, he took a ticket for Kensington and, in
due course, with two changes, alighted at the High Street station.
Here, with an anxious glance at the clock, he turned to the left and,
winding about, arrived at last at a large block of flats in a quiet
street.

He studied the list of names in the hall, entered the lift and was
carried up to the fourth floor and Flat G, where he rang the bell,
feeling a shade nervous.

Miss Elizabeth Uniacke was "at home."  He handed the maid his card--a
neat elderly woman in an old-fashioned cap and apron--and followed her
into a small drawing-room, crowded with little tables and chairs and
occupied by a large black cat, asleep on a cushion, and a grey parrot.

The door closed and he looked around him.  Early Victorian furniture,
bright chintzes, modern china, photo frames, frilled cushions and a
quantity of Benares work.

Over the draped chimney-piece a rosewood overmantel obtruded with
carved cubicles, enclosing each a simpering statuette.  The walls, buff
with knots of roses, were dotted with plates, plush brackets and
amateurish water colours, but the room was airy and spotlessly clean,
with a certain homelike sense of comfort.

The parrot eyed him wickedly, his grey head on one side, and the black
cat yawned in his face, red tongue curled, with sleepy disdain.

McTaggart's nervousness increased.  Then he heard a brisk step, the
door opened and in there came a trim, upright little figure in a blue
"foulard" dress.

He gathered his wits and advanced to meet her.  "I'm afraid you won't
remember me--I must really apologize for coming..."

"Oh, yes, I do----" she cut him short--"_quite_ well"--and held out her
hand.

"I met you at my sister-in-law's--Won't you sit down?"  He found
himself on the chintz-covered sofa facing his hostess.

Clear eyes, grey like Jill's, met his gaze, beneath a fringe, plainly
false, of a brownish hue, safely secured by a band of black velvet.
Beyond this line her natural hair, pepper and salt, seemed to proclaim,
with emphasis, the honesty of the subterfuge and her intentions.

Her nose was sharp, her lips tight, her figure angular and spare, but
he noticed she had beautiful hands on which gleamed some fine old rings.

"I was staying there when you lunched one day and took the children for
a drive."  She seemed to guess that he was nervous and set him at ease
with well-bred tact.

"It's really about your niece I've called--I hope you will forgive the
intrusion."  He hesitated, finding it harder even than he had guessed
it would be.

"Mrs. Uniacke's frightfully ill--but, of course, you know all about it?"

Her smile faded instantly; she drew herself up, very erect.  "I haven't
the slightest pity for her."  Her voice was cold and definite.  "Her
conduct is inexcusable!"

McTaggart saw how the land lay and decided to be diplomatic.

"I rather agree with you," he said, "my sympathy is all for Jill."

"Disgraceful," the little lady continued, "my brother's name dragged in
the dust.  I think Mary must be mad!--And I hope this illness will be a
lesson."

"You haven't seen her, I suppose?"

"And I don't intend to!"  Her mouth snapped.  "It's quite bad enough to
think of Edward's wife in a common prison."

"I understand how you feel," McTaggart nodded his head gravely--"but
the worst of it is it's killing Jill."

The little old maid started at this.

"Jill?  What's that child got to do with it?"

"Everything"--McTaggart frowned--"nurse her mother, help with the
cooking, and sit up, besides, night after night.  She can't go
on--she's bound to break down--and nobody seems to care in the least."
He saw a shade of anxiety settle on the thin face.  ("It's all
right"--he said to himself--"she's fond of her niece.")  His courage
rose.  "That's why I've come to you, I feel so awfully sorry for
Jill--and Mrs. Uniacke's no good--I really thought you ought to know."

"You did quite right.  I'd no idea."  Her grey eyes flashed as she
spoke.  "Mary's not fit to have children!"

The scorn of the unmarried sounded.

"I'm so relieved."  McTaggart smiled.  "I felt it was no business of
mine and wondered how you would receive me.  But now--since you're so
kind--I want to make a certain suggestion.  It seems they won't hear of
a nurse----" the young man went a trifle red--"Of course--they must
have a lot of expenses--education and all that, and I want to be
allowed to help.

"As it happens I've been left ... rather a large fortune lately and I
don't know what to do with the money--it's a fact, I assure you..." he
hurried on--"and if you agree to it, I thought I'd see about a good
trained nurse--for night work--to relieve Jill.  We're such old
friends----" his voice pleaded--"only you see she's awfully proud, so I
thought if I might use your name Jill need never know about it.  I
suppose you'll think it awful cheek," boyishly he added the
clause--"for a stranger to come and suggest this--but I've known Jill
all my life."

There followed an embarrassing pause.  He could feel the keen grey eyes
upon him and looked away, his gaze fixed on a goblet of Bohemian glass
with "Gruess!" inscribed in gilt upon it.

Over Miss Uniacke's wrinkled face a grim smile began to steal.

"Hm ... I see.  You want to indulge in philanthropy--at the expense of
my conscience?"

McTaggart, glancing up, caught a twinkle in her eyes.

"Exactly--we can both afford it!--I knew, somehow, you'd be kind."

"Did you?"  She chuckled, inwardly pleased.  "You seem to take a lot
for granted.  May I ask the reason why?"

"Well--if you want to know..." he smiled.  "No--I'd better not."  He
checked himself mischievously, studying her face.

"Jill, I suppose, or, perhaps, Roddy?--I sent that young rascal a
hamper lately--I expect he's been deceiving you!  I only do it because,
as it happens, Mrs. Belsey likes cooking.  And I don't eat cakes
myself--so it pleases her--and I hate waste!"

"No.  Roddy's been most discreet!"  He paused, then risked it, laughing.

"I guessed it from your beautiful hands!  There's such a lot of
character to be learnt from hands----" he went on calmly, enjoying her
indignant surprise.  "I always judge people by them, and I'm never very
far wrong!"

"You're a very impertinent young man!"

The smile she could no longer repress robbed the words of their
sting--"Now before I answer your ... rigmarole--I want to think."

McTaggart nodded.  He was well pleased with his mission and he felt a
personal interest in this singular new acquaintance, with her sharp
tongue and kind eyes.

Absently, from a black silk bag, Miss Uniacke drew a bundle of wool and
began to knit rapidly, thinking aloud, between the stitches.

"Three, four, five, purl--the woman's an utter fool--always told Edward
so!--seven, eight, drop one.  But there's the girl to consider--twelve,
thirteen, fourteen, fifteen--dirty house, no management--nineteen,
twenty, knit one, turn..."

Silence fell in the darkening room.

Then from behind the sofa came the startling sound of a noisy kiss.

McTaggart wheeled round in wonder.

"Pret-ty Polly--give-us-a-kiss!" followed by a grave "A-men."  The grey
parrot, upside down, clinging to his narrow perch, let out a mocking
laugh.  Miss Uniacke knitted on.

"Seven, eight--strong soup--nine, purl--some good old port--ridiculous!
a child of that age--ten, eleven, wants air--drop one--and nine hours
sleep.  Pity they let her out of prison--fourteen, fifteen, sixteen,
turn--If I had my way I'd shave their heads.  Soon cure this Suffrage
nonsense--Three, four----"

McTaggart felt a wild desire to laugh aloud, as from the window the
parrot indulged in a hoarse and fervent "Damn!"

"Oh!"  Miss Uniacke rose to her feet.  "You _bad_ bird.  You shall go
to bed----"  She seized a green baize cloth and threw it nimbly over
the cage.  "I can't _think_ where he learns these words."

At the shocked note in her voice McTaggart straightened his face.

"I expect he lived with a Suffragette before he came to you," he
suggested--"and once they get the fever, you know, it's all up with
their morals.  He'll be out breaking windows next!"

Miss Uniacke chuckled grimly.

"Well----" she laid her knitting down and folded her slim white hands.
"I've made up my mind, Mr. McTaggart.  I can't allow Jill to suffer.
I'm much obliged for your kind offer but there's a better way by far.
I shall go and look after Mary myself."

She said it with an air of triumph.

"It will be an excellent opportunity to break her of this Suffrage
nonsense."  She caught McTaggart's look of alarm.  "Don't be
afraid--I'm a capital nurse--I mean, of course, when she's
convalescent.  What she wants now is rest and sleep--and good food.
Did you say they hadn't a cook?"

"I don't think so--I understand she left, furious, on the day Mrs.
Uniacke went to prison."

"I don't blame her."  The silk dress rustled.  "Then there's only that
slatternly housemaid left to help Jill?"

"So I gather--unless Stephen condescends to black the boots!"

"Ha!"  The little lady snorted--"So _he's_ about still, is he?"

McTaggart was conscious of a slip.  He wished he hadn't mentioned the
man.

"I can't say.  I know he's at large.  I don't fancy prison fare appeals
to him--he's rather dainty."

"Not a friend of yours, I see."

Miss Uniacke's bright eyes surveyed him almost lovingly--"Well--he
won't enter that house while I'm there," she decided tartly.

"Now, to business"--she went on, after a pause, "I'll shut up the flat
as soon as I can.  I always do for the Summer months and it's only a
few weeks earlier--and take both my maids with me.  Anyhow, until I can
get the house in order and find a cook for Mary.  Maria's a good nurse.
She's been with me eighteen years and Mrs. Belsey understands invalid
soups--she's an excellent woman and a strict teetotaller.  So you can
set your mind at rest--about Jill, I mean."  She smiled as McTaggart
rose to his feet.  "Come and see us when you like.  I'm very much
obliged to you.  It's not often nowadays you find young men with any
sense.  The world's all upside down, with feeble boys and manly women!"

McTaggart held her pretty hand in his beyond the orthodox time.

"Perhaps," he asked, "you'd come for a spin now and then in my car?"

"And chaperone my niece--eh?"

The speech was not without malice.  She saw his slightly guilty look
and laughed outright.

"I understand--I was young once myself, you see."

"Aunt Elizabeth--you're a brick!"  He dared the familiarity with his
charming smile.

"Well--of all the impertinence!" her thin cheeks flushed a little.
"We'll see.  I make no rash promises.  I shall try and get to Mary on
Friday."

Her face suddenly clouded over.

"I'm glad now poor Edward's gone.  It's a bad business for the
children."

McTaggart felt immensely sorry.  He saw she took it keenly to heart.

"I suppose"--his voice was very gentle--"you wouldn't care..." he
hesitated--"to come and dine with me to-night--if you're
disengaged--have nothing better?  I'm only just back from abroad and
find so many friends away.  Won't you take pity on my loneliness?"

The little lady was inwardly flattered, but she laughed aside the
invitation.

"Nonsense!--it's very kind, I'm sure ... but you don't want an old
woman like me!"

"I do"--he smiled back at her.  "Say you will?"  He saw her glance
furtively at the clock beyond.  "There's loads of time--I'll change and
return to fetch you.  What about a theatre?"

Aunt Elizabeth was tempted.

"Well ... then--some quiet place without a band.  As it happens I have
a good ear for music and I won't risk my digestion by swallowing to
Tango time!  And--Marie Tempest, for choice--there's no nonsense about
her!"

Her voice was brisk.  "I'm tired of having sermons preached at me from
the stage, or so-called 'Comedies'--which are nothing but an excuse for
extravagant dress.  I want to be amused, you see, not stunned by mere
colour and light, and rows of common, simpering girls advertising for a
husband."

With a characteristic gesture she straightened the wayward brown fringe.

"In _my_ young days we went to the play to see people really _act_.
But now everyone's attention is riveted on the production!  A sort of
marionette show in which the performers seem to count as auxiliaries to
the epigrams parcelled out by the author.  You don't hear people praise
the art of the actor.  Oh, dear, no.  It's: 'Isn't it well put on?' or
'Aren't the dresses simply _sweet_?'"

McTaggart laughed heartily.

"There's a great deal in what you say.  Well, I'll be back within the
hour.  I'm so glad you can come."  He foresaw that the evening might
prove a quaint experience in the company of his new friend with her
sharp eyes and caustic tongue.

The little old maid smiled at him.

"You'll find me quite ready," she replied, "and looking forward to my
treat."

But in her heart she was saying: "I believe the boy's fond of Jill.
And Mary's such an utter fool!  I must see into this myself.  Edward, I
know, would thank me for it.  He seems a nice, manly fellow..."

Little McTaggart guessed her thoughts, nor the impulse prompting her to
accept.

As he left the room he heard the parrot, shrouded and sulky, drawing
corks!




CHAPTER XXIII

A month passed quickly away.  Almost every day McTaggart's car drew up
at the house near Primrose Hill, and Jill and Roddy joyfully mounted in
it, with an occasional fourth in the shape of Aunt Elizabeth.  Then off
they went out of London into the cooler country air, a trio of gay
explorers armed with maps and a pic-nic hamper.

_Such_ cakes!  For Mrs. Belsey had fallen a victim to Roddy's charms,
his wheedling voice and jolly laugh and "Cookie--just _one_ jam-puff?"

Miss Uniacke, too, had thoroughly enjoyed what she was pleased to call
her "bounden duty."

From attic to cellar the musty old house had been turned literally
inside out.  For the invalid had improved at a surprisingly quick rate.
No longer the household moved on tiptoe.  Good food and the sense of
all responsibility shelved on to the shoulders of the capable little
old maid; her careful nursing and cheerful common sense had gone far to
hasten the cure.

With her two devoted well-trained servants and a charwoman (forbidden
"chatter!") Aunt Elizabeth had probed into every hole and corner.

The episode of the dead mouse (in a disused cupboard under the stairs)
had proved the culminating point in her campaign against disorder.

Jill had been summoned to find her Aunt, rigid, holding between finger
and thumb the tail of the moral offender: not unlike a small rodent
herself, with her sharp nose and pointed chin framed in a grey check
duster.

Her brown fringe was frankly awry, her grey eyes had steely points.

"Look at _that_!--I've a great mind to take it straight to your Mother.
I wonder you haven't all had typhoid!  That's what comes of a dirty
house!"--she scoffed--"she really _ought_ to know."

"Oh, Aunt Elizabeth, _don't_!" cried Jill.  "Mother's afraid of mice."

"Hm..."  Miss Uniacke snorted at this--"and calls herself a militant
suffragette!  I'm really ashamed for the servants to see it.  Take it
away and bury it--and I only hope it will be a lesson!"

Inwardly she was rejoicing.  Jill, obediently, received the corpse and
departed toward the garden.  On the way she met Roddy--who promptly
proposed to skin it!--but the gruesome project was abandoned and a
small grave dug instead, with an ornamental tombstone.

As soon as the house was thoroughly cleaned the reformer turned her
attention to the domestic education of her niece.  For Mrs. Uniacke was
up, on a long chair in her room, and required but little nursing now.

Every morning after breakfast Aunt Elizabeth donned a hat of plaited
straw, tied with a ribbon under her pointed chin, not unlike the kind
worn by a careful horse during a heat wave--so Jill thought--and only
needing two holes and a pair of ears!

She and Jill would adjourn to the garden, where a pantry table and
chairs were arranged on the swept path under a sycamore.

Here they mended the long-neglected household linen and the older woman
preached; taking for her text the decadence of the present age, as
compared to that of her early youth.

"In _my_ young days"--she would start with a sniff--"we took a pride in
our homes.  We hadn't time for discontent and to dabble in men's
affairs.  Look at this darn..." she held it out.  "I'd like to see a
_man_ do that!"

Contempt was in her shrill voice.  She went on, more gently:

"I remember we used once a week to meet at my Mother's house--your
Grandmamma, Jill, my dear, but you don't remember her--my two cousins
and my sister and a girl friend, and have a Sewing Bee.  You think it
sounds dull?--I assure you it wasn't!  We took it in turns to read
aloud--Wilkie Collins was coming out in a weekly journal--most
exciting!  We fixed the day on which it appeared, and no one was
allowed to peep inside.  Edward used to take it in.  He was always so
full of fun--and one afternoon he pretended it hadn't come.  We were so
vexed and then my cousin Jean found it pushed carefully into a stocking
ready to darn!  How we laughed!"  She glanced up, smiling, at
Jill--"You're very like your Father, my dear, his hair and eyes--and
dark brows."

"Am I?--I'm so glad."  The girl checked a sudden sigh.  "You can't
think how we missed him!"--her voice was low--"it seemed, somehow ...
like the end of everything."

For a space silence fell between them, charged with memories, sweet and
sad.  Then Aunt Elizabeth stirred, took off her glasses, wiped them
aggressively, and in a sharp, business-like voice:

"Now--let me see."  She held out her hand--"Algebra and Euclid and
Greek and she can't hem a tablecloth!  That's the modern education ...
Look at that line--d'you call that straight?  Girls brought up to think
of nothing but dress and pleasure--pampered by maids!--And they proceed
to fall in love!--(an eloquent sniff) with some young fool without a
penny to his name--marry in haste--and can't even teach the cook to
make a milk pudding!

"Then you pick up the newspaper one day and find--'What to Do with Our
Girls?'" she sneered, "and 'Is Marriage Really a Failure?'--'Should
Mother Dance the Tango?'  I've no patience with the women--empty dolls
or else unsexed!"

She bit her cotton with sharp teeth and went on with her homily.

"In _my_ young days"--Jill dared to smile--"we were not ashamed of
women's work--we took a pride in it, my dear.  Why, your Grandmother
Uniacke lived in the depths of the country, fifteen miles from a town
and no railway station either!  No shops--no chemist.  She had her own
store-room of drugs and dispensed them as well as any doctor.  Once a
week the villagers came and explained their ailments and Mamma used to
prescribe--in all but the most dangerous cases.  She was the squire's
wife, you see, and this was expected then.  We made our own butter and
cheese--bread, of course--and home-brewed ale and cured our own bacon
too.  Everywhere my mother presided.  She was like a little queen; in a
kingdom of her own!  There was no time, I can tell you, to discuss
Woman's Rights--we took that for granted in _my_ young days.  And if a
girl couldn't sew it was considered a disgrace!  She very soon had to
learn--and dairy work and plain cooking."

She broke off abruptly--with a sharp glance at Jill.

"Now--measure it with your card.  Don't you get that hem too wide.  I
sometimes think sewing machines were the invention of the Devil!  God
knew when He made woman the soothing effect of needlework.  And
directly Eve ate the apple and filled her brain with education she had
to set about an apron!  Not only as a covering but to occupy her idle
hands.  There's nothing beats it, to my mind, as a sedative for the
nerves.  When you're worried with puzzling questions, take a bit of
plain sewing and you'll find the 'stitch ... stitch' brings its own
peace.  With no noise and clatter like working a machine or that other
abomination--a typewriter.  I'd as soon be in a factory, and I verily
believe we've never had the same health since the advent of machinery.

"It's changed even the social side.  In _my_ young days the people with
means were the landed gentry and the nobility.  But now all the fine
old places are being sold up to the rich manufacturers"--she sighed
with real chagrin.  "Everywhere, instead of good work and durability,
it's cheap clothes trimmed with imitation lace.  And women with idle
hands, discontented and neurotic.

"If every woman did the work she leaves to her lady's maid and saw to
good old-fashioned food and unadulterated bread, we shouldn't hear of
these cases of 'nervous breakdown' everywhere.  It's the unnatural life
we lead, turning night into day, eating unwholesome kickshaws and
poisoning ourselves with doctored wines!"

"But don't you think..."  Jill got her chance at last as Aunt Elizabeth
paused for breath--"that the present education is broadening women's
minds?  Think of the frightful superstition--the narrow moral point of
view--the bigoted creeds of the centuries past.  When girls talked of
nothing but sentiment and fainted and screamed..."

"Hm...." Miss Uniacke interrupted.  "I don't see very much improvement.
They shriek now on public platforms--instead of in their own parlours.
It's a less decent form of hysteria, to _my_ mind!"

Jill laughed aloud.

"All the same--I think they've more self-respect nowadays.  They don't
go running after men..."

"_Don't_ they?" snapped her Aunt.  "Just read a few cases of breach of
promise and divorce!  That will show you how far the modern woman
respects herself!

"Nine times out of ten it's idleness breeds sin.  If they tubbed their
own babies they'd have less leisure for such mischief.  But babies are
out of fashion now..." the intrepid old maid stole a glance at Jill's
calm face and proceeded--"Mind you, I don't say I consider it's right
to bring a lot of children into the world if you haven't the means to
support them.  But you'll notice if you look around it's the people who
could well afford it who generally shirk that duty!  A baby's a
handicap, you see, in a life of pleasure.--It means self-denial--and
besides this, the young generation shrink from any form of pain!...

"When you marry, Jill, my dear," her thoughts swerved to
McTaggart--"make up your mind to be wife and mother--instead of a
well-dressed, idle doll!  You'll be far happier--mark my words--it's
what the Almighty planned for women."

"I shan't marry."  Jill's dark head was bent in shadow over her work.

"All young girls _say_ that."  Aunt Elizabeth smiled to herself.  "And
some of us stick to it," she added with a touch of grim honesty.

"There you are!" cried Jill.  But the moment the words had passed her
lips she regretted them.  For the thin old face was a trifle wistful.
She went on quickly.

"I'd far rather be like you, with all your liberty, Aunt Elizabeth.
For, after all, though one _does_ hear of happy marriages"--she
paused--"they're rather rare, aren't they?  And if one marries for love
... it's that--or _nothing_!"  Her face was grave.  "How can one tell
it's going to last?"

For once her Aunt found no reply.

So the mornings would pass away in work and argument, strangely happy,
followed by long afternoons in the open air with McTaggart.

Jill looked the picture of health, with sunburnt cheeks and healthy
nerves.

For the summer had triumphed over the rain and a long spell of drought
succeeded.

London was clearing fast of its smart crowd, and the streets and parks
seemed to draw a breath of relief, freed from the daily whirl.  Few
people lingered in town, save the workers, and, here and there, a
scattered fragment of society detained by some passing need.

Among the bright birds of passage was Lady Leason.  McTaggart met her
one July morning coming briskly forth from her tailor's.

"Well--this _is_ nice!"  He stopped and shook hands.  "I thought you
and Dick had gone to Cowes?"

"No--I'm a lone widow"--she smiled.  "I'm off next week to join him in
Scotland.  I've been trying on some shooting clothes"--she produced a
pattern--"How d'you like it?"

"Heather mixture--nice stuff," he fingered it with approval.  "It's
simply ages since I've seen you--I've only been back a little time and
meant to call, but heard you had gone.  Shall you be at home next
Sunday?"

"What are you doing this evening?  Come and dine--that would be better.
I've got Bertram staying with me--my cousin.  He's up for the Church
Congress."

"I'd love to.  Is that the Bishop?" and as she nodded--"at eight
o'clock?"

"Yes--as usual.  We'll have a chat--just ourselves--that will be nice.
You haven't missed much this season--everything spoilt by rain.  Ascot
was like the Flood and I didn't get a single winner!"

"Hard luck!" said McTaggart.  He saw her into a taxi and stood for a
moment leaning on the door.

"I don't know what you'll get to eat"--the pretty grey-haired woman
smiled--"half the servants have gone to Scotland--Bertram and I lead
the simple life!"

"I'm not particular"--he laughed--"so long as you don't give me rabbit!"

This was an old joke between them.  Once they had stayed in a country
house where the hostess was noted for frugality and rabbit had figured
on the menu to an alarming extent.  Beginning with cold pie at
breakfast, a curry (with suspicious bones) had proved the hot dish at
lunch and a "chicken cream" figured at dinner in which McTaggart had
found a shot!

So he declared.  And ever after the hostess in private had been named
"Bunny" in Lady Leason's set.  McTaggart smiled at the recollection.

He was going that afternoon to take Miss Uniacke for a final drive,
with Jill and Roddy; for on the morrow she was leaving her
sister-in-law.

With the quick recuperative power that many nervous women possess the
invalid had cast off the yoke of her recent illness rapidly.

Already keen to return to work, despite Aunt Elizabeth's many lectures,
the very fact of her late ordeal had fired her vivid imagination.

She held that her public demonstration had given her at last the right
to consider herself not only a martyr but a worthy Champion of the
Cause.

But behind her desire for active work lay dormant the thought of
Stephen's friendship.  She had suffered from the enforced estrangement,
yet was shrewdly aware of the reason.

She knew that Miss Uniacke did not approve of the intimacy, but
imagined too that the little old maid was no lover of the opposite sex.
She had been honestly amazed at her attitude toward McTaggart.  It
never occurred to her that Jill was the link between the curious pair.
Nor could she realize in the girl a charm that would warrant the
supposition.

Although she loved her only daughter and was secretly proud of her own
offspring, she would have been greatly surprised had an outsider
pointed out the fact of Jill's attraction to men.

The girl was so unlike herself!

It is a curious human trait that a mother can rarely appreciate a
different type in her daughter.  And yet some hidden law of Nature
presiding at the children's birth most frequently endows a girl with
the characteristics of the father.  Jill was the picture of Colonel
Uniacke.  Roddy, with his bright colour, high cheek bones, and
bird-like glance, was far more like the mother, though a stronger
edition, in miniature.

But Jill, tall, gracefully formed, was rounded too; with wide grey eyes
and her father's well-shaped hands and feet.  Her mouth was a shade too
large for beauty, but full of character, fresh and curved, with the
deep corners that spell humour, and her chin held a note of obstinacy.

She had her father's clear judgment, sense of proportion and of
balance, his strong vitality, warm heart and an almost passionate love
of justice.  Her greatest stumbling block was pride.

Many a time as a tiny child had she wept in secret over a fault, but
refused to apologize.  She was 'sent to Coventry' once for a week for
some unwise rebellious speech, but at the end of the punishment the
little girl was still stubborn.

"I'm sorry that I hurt you, Mother--I _am_ sorry"--the tears rolled
down--"but I meant every word I said--and I do still--I can't help it!"

Colonel Uniacke was called, prompted by his indignant wife.

He took Jill on his knee.

"Now, then, child--out with it!"

"I said"--her arms went round his neck--"I simply hated Miss Bellew"
... (she referred to the new governess).  "She's a perfect sneak and
she hit Roddy--I know I'm naughty"--she wailed aloud--"but I _do_ hate
her--she's a beast! and I won't 'kiss and make friends'--not to please
anybody!..."

"All right, then, you needn't."  The child stared with wide eyes.  "But
while she's in authority you'll treat her with a proper respect.  If
she's a foe you're still bound--more than ever bound in honour--to show
her every courtesy.  And now go and kiss your mother."

Jill slid down, her sobs checked.  This was a new point of view.  Her
father watched her thoughtfully.

"Of course," he said, "it's rather hard on Miss Bellew, when you think
of it.  She's paid to teach you--it's her living--she doesn't do it out
of pleasure.  You are the daughter of the house.  She's my guest..."
He shrugged his shoulders.

Jill turned without a word, and went back into the schoolroom.

From the passage outside, her parents heard her explain the matter.

"Miss Bellew"--she stood there in her crumpled pinafore, stiff and
forlorn, tears still on her cheeks.  "I'm sorry I was rude to you.  I'm
sorry I said you were a beast.  But you hit Roddy--that finished
it--and I don't like you--I never shall!  But I won't call you names
again.  No--I don't _want_ to be kissed ... but I'm going to be a good
girl ... as long (sniff) ... as you're Father's guest."

She kept her word.  Weeks later she explained the truce to Colonel
Uniacke.

"We're 'honourable foes,' you see--like Coeur de Lion and Saladin."

The story had become a classic, and in the quiet garden one evening
Aunt Elizabeth repeated it to the much-amused McTaggart.

"It's just like Jill"--he commented--"she's got a man's code of honour.
I've never met a girl like her ... it's a character in a thousand."

Aunt Elizabeth looked up slyly--and caught the light in the blue eyes.

"I think we're both of us fond of Jill," she said, letting the words
sink in.  Then started briskly to talk of Mrs. Uniacke's improvement,
drifting off into her pet aversion--Woman's Suffrage and Militant ways.

But her stray shot had missed the mark.  The purely brotherly terms on
which McTaggart met his girl friend were still untouched by sentiment.

He hardly knew how much he cared; content with a sense of friendship so
totally distinct from all his other dealings with her sex.

He knew that Jill liked him.  Not for a moment did he guess the
presence of a deeper feeling.  She supplied the want he had keenly felt
in his own lack of home life.  It was good to know that in one house he
was always a welcome guest without the fear of intrigue or wearisome
social convention.

For during the long months abroad many traps had been laid for him, and
it bred a shrewd distrust of girls, based on more than vanity.

Now as he strolled slowly along toward his club through the Mayfair
streets his thoughts ran back to Cydonia.

He walked past the Cadells' door.  The blinds were down, the shutters
fixed.  Obedient to the decree of fashion they had moved on with the
social tide.

But a feeling of thankfulness possessed him.  He knew well that he had
escaped a life with a woman who would have bored him, chained to the
"obvious orthodox"!

And he wondered...

Was there a way of love that could survive monotony?  Could he ever
rely on himself to recognize the "one woman"?

Had his "double heart" been the cause of the indecision that beset
him?--these swift passions that burned out like straw.  Would he ever
know the sacred flame?

And suddenly the gypsy's words rose up into his mind.

"Between two fires you shall burn and burn." ... He felt a thrill of
superstition.

She had foretold his "golden crown," the fortune "coming over-seas" ...
What was it she had prophesied later?  He knit his brows, searching his
memory.

Like a head on a coin, clear and raised, he saw again the swarthy face;
he heard the strange pattering voice, felt her warm touch on his hand.

"When the light fades ... on the turn of the tide ... there's the Lucky
Moon and the Dream of your life...!"

The "Dream of his life"?  He shook himself as though to break the
uncanny spell.

"What nonsense it is!  I expect she tells the same tale to every man."
But he knew in his heart he was not unmoved.  There was magic in the
chosen words.

The Dream of his life...?

With wistful eyes he tried in vain to pierce the veil, knowing behind a
vision lay, sweet--unguessed--the face of Love.




CHAPTER XXIV

"Now--what do you think of my Roof Garden?"

Lady Leason turned to McTaggart with a conscious air of triumph.

"Isn't it nice?--and I planned it myself!"  She was like a child with a
new toy, her still young face eager and bright under her soft gray hair.

"I think it _perfect_," said McTaggart, warmly.  He glanced around him
as he spoke at the awning, striped with green, the basket chairs, gay
red cushions, and the coarse rush matting beneath his feet.

For the leaded roof of the smoking-room, that was built out into the
garden, had been transformed, with the help of green lattice work and
great tubs filled with geraniums and daisies, into a sort of lounge,
protected by the striped tent cloth.

"I'm growing golden hops in this box at the edge to twine up the
supports and along the lattices, and in the Spring I'm going to have no
end of bulbs and turn that horrid bank down there into a rockery."

She pointed to the patch of discolored grass below them, where a dingy
wall completed her small domain.  Above it one caught a glimpse of the
trees, in the distant Park, and the evening sky, where stars already
were beginning to steal out, one by one.

"Sit down--both of you"--she turned to her guests.  "And talk while I
make you some Turkish coffee.  Here are some cigarettes--those are
cigars..."

They settled themselves in the basket chairs, watching their hostess
turn up the flame, under the bright copper pan, and measure out the
coffee, which filled the air with its fragrance, delicate and
refreshing.

"Have you seen Mrs. Fleming lately?"  The Bishop addressed McTaggart.
"I think the last time I met you was at the Cadells' house."

"Not for many months," the other replied--"I've been abroad, travelling
about.  What sort of man is Euan Fleming?"

Lady Leason looked up quickly.

"Take care what you say, Bertram.  Don't make Peter jealous!  I
thought"--she added mischievously--"that it was a case _there_..."

At her merry gesture toward him McTaggart laughed.

"Only a mild calf-love affair!  But I always imagined she'd marry a
title."

"Well," said the Bishop, "I rather believe it will come to that in the
end.  I _hear_--but it's quite between ourselves--that he's down on the
next list of Birthday honours."

"Indeed?  A useful man to the party?"

McTaggart saw a twinkle come into the prominent short-sighted eyes.

"Hardly as a speaker perhaps.  But he has a valuable gift--of silence!
Very necessary on occasions."

Lady Leason smiled subtly.  "And, of course," proceeded the Bishop
hurriedly--"the Cadells are very wealthy people.  With his
father-in-law to finance him, and a beautiful wife, he stands a chance
of being Lord Fleming some day--of a mythical Castle like Laura's
friends ... I forget the name."

"D'you mean 'the Crumpets?'"

The hostess laughed, mischief in her hazel eyes.

"Peter--haven't you heard?----it's too quaint!--I must tell you."  She
stirred the coffee again, then started with her story.

"I don't know if you ever met a dark, excitable little woman, the wife
of a big engineer called Crumpe?  She always came to my parties,
frightfully overdressed and hung round with pearls like a Tecla
advertisement.  You surely must remember her?  Well, this year he was
made a peer.  He'd given a park somewhere to the people and was a large
subscriber to party funds.

"Little Mrs. Crumpe was in her glory!  She cut all her old friends,
drawing a strict line round Belgravia and Mayfair.  And what d'you
imagine they took for a name?  We'd always called them 'the Crumpets,'
you know--it seemed to suit them.  He had such a 'buttery' manner!  And
now they're Lord and Lady Quinningborough of Castle Normantayne"--she
choked.

Tears of mirth stood in her eyes as she leaned, still laughing, toward
McTaggart.

"It sounds like feudal towers, and a moat, and a drawbridge.  But it
_isn't_--that's the pure joy!  It's not a house at all, it seems, but
the name of a tiny village where Crumpet's father owned a farm!"

McTaggart roared, and the Bishop's charity was not proof against the
infection of her mirth.

"Really, it is remarkable, the modern mania for a title."  He took off
his glasses and wiped them, still faintly shaken with laughter.

McTaggart inwardly congratulated himself (and not for the first time)
on his determination to drop his foreign honours on landing in England.

("A fine ass I should look now, posing as an Italian Marquis among
friends who have known me since college days as Peter McTaggart"--he
smiled at the thought.)

His principal trouble had been with Mario, but the latter's ignorance
of the English tongue and the knowledge that if he talked it would mean
his dismissal had made him obedient, albeit sulkily.

The fear of a slip had dissuaded McTaggart himself from much talk with
Jill on his Sienese inheritance.  She knew he had some property there,
but, beyond this, very little.  Bethune was the only man wholly in the
secret.  Luckily for McTaggart, it had escaped the papers, filled at
that period with a royal marriage.  The Scotch side of his character,
cautious and reserved, stood him in good stead, and besides this he had
a horror of snobism, somewhat rare in these days.

"It seems a pity," he said now, "that honours are so frequent--or
rather, I should say, so easily earned.  So many splendid men in the
past have won them by deeds of heroism, for fine administration and
solid work done in the interests of the Empire.  Men _worthy_ I mean,
without any question of L_s.d_.

"Of course one knows lots of people--dear people too--who deserve them,
every inch--like the Cheltenhams...  But when a title's frankly bought,
it seems to take away from the dignity of those others and the men to
come.  There should be a special kind of distinction to mean money--We
talk of 'Law Lords'--for instance--why not Finance Lords?  And Lords of
Silence"--he smiled--"like Fleming.  Not the 'Golden Fleece' but the
'Golden Tongue'!"

Lady Leason nodded her head approvingly, engrossed just then with the
final process of the coffee.

McTaggart turned to the Bishop.

"By the way," he said, "talking of money, how's that company of yours?
I looked up Schliff's record as far as I could, and--as I wrote you--it
was hardly reassuring, though I didn't care to say too much in my
letter."

"I quite understood"--the Bishop sighed--"in these days it doesn't do.
But I was _most_ grateful.  I'm afraid the matter is going from bad to
worse.  I hear privately they're contemplating a call on the
shares--five shillings; despite an optimistic speech packed with
promises made by Schliff at the General Meeting.  And--would you
believe it?--only yesterday I came across an old friend I hadn't seen
for years--up for this Congress from the North of England--and he'd
been buying shares at _two pounds apiece_!  Why, it's simply infamous!
Of course he'd taken them from Schliff himself on _his_ advice and
they're selling now on the Stock Exchange for nine and sixpence!"

"I can quite believe it."  McTaggart smiled.  "After all, it's in the
interests of the company.  You've got to raise money somehow to save
it--so the new shareholders are sacrificed for the old."

"Robbing Peter to pay Paul?" the Bishop suggested.  "I heartily
disapprove of it, and I warned my friend.  He's going to see Schliff
this afternoon, and I don't envy the latter.  He'll meet his match."

"I doubt it--he's pretty thick-skinned!  This isn't the first of his
financial ventures."

"What are you two talking about?" Lady Leason broke in.  "Here's your
coffee."  She handed the dainty cups in their egg-shell china and
filigree stands.  "And now, Peter"--she leaned back with a sigh--"I
want to hear all about your year in Italy."

"Rather a tall order!--Where shall I start?"

"At the beginning."  She looked at him curiously.  "Tell us first why
you deserted London?"

"To nurse my broken heart, of course.  You seem to forget Cydonia."

"My dear Peter!"--she laughed back.  "I don't believe that.  I knew you
were only flirting.  She's pretty of course, but oh! so _dull_--and
think of Cadell!  What a father-in-law."

The Bishop frowned.

"I assure you they're excellent people, Laura.  I've the greatest
respect for Mrs. Cadell."

"She's got a good cook," said his cousin wickedly.

McTaggart threw himself into the pause that followed.

"Well--I went the usual round--Rome, Florence, Siena"--he laughed--"and
Venice of course--and Naples."  Here he paused, checked by some memory,
evidently funny, smiling to himself.

"Out with it!"  Lady Leason was watching his handsome face.  "I feel a
distinct 'pricking in my thumbs.'  Oh, Bertram won't mind"--as she saw
him glance at the Bishop--"I'll answer for him--he's never shocked!"

"Really, Laura!" her cousin protested.

"Man of the world--and a darling too."  She gave him a look of real
affection.

The Bishop blinked--"Well, Mr. McTaggart?"

"I was thinking of an adventure there"--Peter admitted--"nothing 'tres
moutarde' ... but perhaps ... I'd better not."

"_Do_."  Lady Leason drew the liqueurs nearer.  "Some old brandy might
give you courage?"

McTaggart was tempted.  He saw in his mind a way of wrapping up the
weak point in the story.

"Well--I'll risk it!"  He emptied the glass, crossed his long legs and
faced his audience.

"It happened on my first visit to Naples--I was yachting with some
Roman friends, the Vivianis.  The party consisted of my host and
hostess and a man called Bellanti, his sister and myself.  We touched
there one evening to get supplies on our way back from Sicily, about
nine o'clock.  I remember Scirocco had blown all day--it was
frightfully hot--we were all pretty limp.  Viviani wouldn't stir and
the Countess wanted bridge.  They were four with Bellanti, so I thought
I'd go ashore.

"I must say they did their best to dissuade me, and, of course, I'd
heard no end of yarns about Naples at night, but I thought they were
just travellers' stories!  We lay a good way out in the Bay.  It's
awfully smelly right in the harbour.  But I rowed in with four of the
crew, who were to wait and bring me back.

"Well, I wandered about until I was tired.  The town didn't much appeal
to me, and then suddenly I remembered an address a naval friend had
given me--of a sort of dancing-place--rather like the 'Bal Tabarin,'
you know."

"Bertram doesn't know," said Lady Leason gravely.

"Yes, I do, my dear," said the Bishop unexpectedly.  "Warleigh's
youngest son mentioned it one day.  He told me it was a Dancing
Academy."

"Well ... something like it"--McTaggart chuckled.  "Anyway, I went
there.  But it wasn't up to much.  Just a bare hall, with a crowd of
men and women and the usual 'Tarantella,' which I'd grown heartily sick
of!  But there was one girl who danced beautifully--pretty as
paint--very dark, you know.  I never saw such eyes in my life..."

"Oh, Peter!" Lady Leason laughed--"was this how you set about curing
your broken heart?"

"Perhaps."  His smile was enigmatic.  "We danced together several
times--the room was as hot as an oven and the wine the worst I ever
have tasted.  So when she suggested we should go outside and hunt up a
cousin of hers who kept a bar--somewhere quite near--with decent
drinks, like a fool, I forgot Viviani's warnings, she fetched a wrap
and we started out.

"Well--it seemed a bit further than she thought.  We passed through a
lot of narrow streets, up some steps and into an alley and came at last
to a sort of tavern, where some sailors were drinking and playing cards.

"We crossed the room and went up some stairs, and I was beginning to
feel doubtful when she opened a door into a dingy room, almost dark,
with a flickering wick burning in a saucer of oil.  'I'll fetch the
wine,' said my little friend--'and a lamp--sit down.'  She
disappeared--I heard the door close, then the click of a key being
turned in the lock from outside.

"I sprang toward it, caught the handle, and the next thing I knew the
light was extinguished and a man's voice said in English:

"'Hands up!'" ... He glanced at his audience.

"Good Heavens!" Lady Leason gasped.  The Bishop's round, short-sighted
eyes were still more prominent, his mouth open.

"How very unpleasant!" he observed.

"It _was_."  McTaggart's voice was emphatic.  "I saw at once it was a
trap.  Nobody knew where I was, and I hadn't the faintest idea myself.
I stood there with my back to the door, trying to keep my wits about me.

"Then from the other side of the room came a second voice, also a
man's.  He said slowly, in Italian:

"'If you move an inch--you're a dead man.'  So there were two of
them!--That settled it.  I guessed that both of them were armed, and
there I was, in evening dress without so much as a pocket knife!

"'Take off your clothes, one by one,' said the first voice in broken
English--'and lay them before you on the floor--together with your
money and watch.'

"Well--I did it!"  McTaggart scowled--the memory still had power to
rouse him.  "No earthly good showing fight--it was pitch dark and they
knew where I stood.

"'You can keep your boots'--the speaker laughed--'and here's a
paper'--he pitched it across--'it's a warm night--you won't catch cold!'

"Hope returned to me at that.  For I didn't expect to get out alive.
Well--after a minute a match flared, and was promptly blown out.  I
caught a glimpse of dark figures to right and left and then I felt a
hand grip my arm.

"'Straight ahead'--We crossed the room, and this was the hardest part
of all!  I was simply dying to go for the brute, but the odds were more
than two to one.  So I set my teeth and swore to
myself--feeling--well--_rather_ a fool!  He opened a door--not the one
we had come by--and said:

"'Ten steps--count them--down--You'll find the handle on your left.
Good night 'e buon' riposo!' and I heard their steps receding behind
me.  Well--I stumbled down those confounded stairs, fumbled about,
found the door and was outside in the night--thanking my stars for such
an escape.  I didn't waste much time, you can guess--but crossed the
court yard at the double, found an alley and bolted down it and out
into an empty street.  It led into a wider one, and there, by luck, was
a passing cab.  Mercifully, it was dark and not another soul about.
You should have seen the driver's face!  I was clad in a torn newspaper
with, far below, my patent shoes and a pair of violet silk socks."

He glanced at the Bishop guiltily, and was relieved to see his broad
smile and hear Lady Leason's laugh ring out merrily at the picture.

"I bolted into that cab like a hare, crouched down and found a rug--it
was open, you see--the usual 'vettura'--and offered the driver untold
wealth to gallop straight to the landing stage.  Of course, once I
reached the boat, the crew paid him and found me some clothes--a coat
and a tarpaulin, and in this costume I reached the yacht.  My one hope
now was to get to my cabin before my friends were aware of my plight.
Luckily they were playing bridge under an awning on the deck.

"We were very quiet and all went well.  I dressed quickly and rejoined
them, having bought the silence of the crew, who happened to be decent
fellows."

"But didn't you tell them?"  The Bishop stared.  "I'd have gone
straight to the British Consul.  A most disgraceful state of things!"

"Not I!" McTaggart laughed.  "What was the use?  To begin with, I'd no
idea of the address.  Naples is like a rabbit-warren--and besides
they'd have chaffed me out of my life."

"What an adventure!"  His hostess shuddered.  She thought for a moment.

"What became of the girl?  You never saw her again, I suppose.  She
must have been a paid decoy?"

"Looks like it."  McTaggart agreed.  He lit up a cigarette.  "That's
how I mended my broken heart.  But promise you won't tell Mrs. Fleming!"

"I shouldn't dream of it," said the Bishop in a shocked voice.  The
others laughed.

"The luckiest part to my mind was getting past the Vivianis'--I can see
them now, very absorbed.  Bellanti had doubled 'no trumps.'  That saved
it, I believe--and the story from getting all over Rome."

They talked for a little longer, then McTaggart rose to his feet.

"It's getting late, I'm afraid."  He shook hands with Lady Leason.
"Thank you so much for a happy evening"--and turned to the Bishop, who
detained him.

"I'm going back to Oxton to-morrow," he blinked for a moment,
hesitating.

"I wonder now--would you care to come and spend a quiet week-end with
us?  Do you know that part of the country at all?  It's very pleasant
in the summer."

"It's awfully kind of you," said McTaggart.  He thought quickly through
his engagements--"d'you mean _this_ week-end?" he asked--"if so, I
shall be delighted."

"Then that's settled"--the Bishop smiled--"we might travel down
together to-morrow--I'm going by the three-fifteen.  Would that suit
you?"

"Splendidly."

Lady Leason watched the pair, a twinkle in her hazel eyes.

"Well--no Neapolitan adventures."  Mischievously she shook a finger at
the younger man standing there.  For no reason, apparently, McTaggart
went a trifle red.

"Oh--I've turned over a new leaf."

The Bishop beamed at his cousin.

"It wasn't his fault, Laura, my dear."

"Of course not."  She caught McTaggart's eye.  "Though I don't _quite_
understand ... Oh, never mind!" She laughed aloud.  "But don't
demoralize Bertram."

"I couldn't," said McTaggart, smiling.




CHAPTER XXV

McTaggart's week-end visit prolonged itself.  For on Monday the Bishop
drove him over to lunch at Rustall, Lord Warleigh's fine old Tudor
mansion near Oxton.  Here he found again a friend of college days,
Gilbert Crewkerne, a nephew of the house, and received an unexpected
invitation to move on to Rustall and take part in a cricket match fixed
for the following Saturday.

The Territorials, camping in the neighborhood, were sending an eleven
to play against the house party.  Unfortunately one of Lord Warleigh's
guests had sprained his ankle and Crewkerne saw in McTaggart's visit to
Oxton the kindly finger of Providence.

Mario was delighted with the change of plans, approving this beautiful
country house, with its vast rooms and fine old park.  He had been
dismayed by his London quarters, so poor a setting for his young
master's rank, and the only flaw in the present scheme was the fact of
McTaggart's strict prohibition.  He would have liked to proclaim aloud
the secret of the former's inheritance, and was not a little pained to
find how little McTaggart valued his title.

It lowered too his own sense of importance in the servants' hall, where
each man took rank according to his master.  He resented the butler's
distant patronage, but his loyalty was proof against the strong
temptation that beset him.

A chance remark of his disclosed the fact to McTaggart one evening as
he dressed for dinner.

"Never mind, Mario.  We'll go back to Rome for the winter months."  He
saw the olive face brighten and felt a sudden touch of pity.

"You'd like that, wouldn't you?  I expect you find it lonely in
England--though you're picking up the language fast.  Have you heard
lately from Lucia?"

He added the question with a smile.  Lucia was the Principessa's maid
and lived in a fine old Roman palace not far from his own flat.

"Sissignore--a letter last week.  They are still at Viareggio.  The
Poet was taken very ill and Don Cesare has fought a duel."

"Never!--who with?" McTaggart laughed--"And why?"

Mario spread out his hands.  "Chi lo sa?--They talk of a lady ... it
was with the young Count Guido Chigi."

"He's starting young," McTaggart decided.  "Lucia must have had her
hands full.  I shouldn't care to nurse the Poet.  I should think he
would keep her pretty busy!"

"And a good thing too," said Mario shrewdly.  He did not approve of
idleness for his betrothed during his absence.

McTaggart smiled at his valet's voice.  He took an interest in his
servants, and was not one of those modern masters who consider good
wages their only duty toward the men they employ.

Without reasoning out the matter his quick intuition showed him the
cause of much of the present-day trouble in domestic service in this
country.  He realized that a good servant will rarely take a base
advantage of his master's kindness if he respects him, and without
being socialistic he broke through conventional barriers, appreciating
the fact that money alone will not buy fidelity.

His utter lack of snobism showed him there could be no loss of dignity
in quiet friendship with a man whose very dependence upon himself arose
from an accident of birth, and whose inobtrusive, steady attention
formed one of the luxuries of life.

Possibly his Italian blood had something to do with his convictions;
for in that old land there is more freedom of intercourse between
master and man.  It is less swayed by the rule of wealth.

In England, at present, a new type has quickly swung into power,
without a material alteration in the status of those it employs.  Hence
confusion.  For inherited prejudice points out the weakness of
brand-new dignity to men and women accustomed for centuries to respect
good breeding above money.

And there is no class on earth so shrewd as the servant class to
appreciate Caste.

Although one hears endless complaints showered upon it nowadays, one
meets constantly with cases of faithful and devoted service, where
gentle folk of reduced means, living on their slender incomes and
debarred from offering adequate wages, find loyal friends in their
servants.  Old traditions die hard, and although estates pass away,
squires are ruined by taxation and money seems the only god, in the
heart of the people lingers yet a deep-set love for the old stock.

Had McTaggart lost his wealth or been debarred by a sorry chance of his
title and Italian property, Mario would have openly grumbled but stayed
on through adverse fortune, using his nimble wits to find a means of
serving his young master.

It was, however, with deep regret that he packed up the latter's
clothes and left Rustall for the train that carried them back to the
London rooms.

Long ago he had decided that marriage would solve the present
difficulties.  He could not picture a young Marchesa in anything but
fitting surroundings.

Unaware of the thoughts of his man, and that Mario himself had joined
in the general conspiracy against him, McTaggart at last reached home.

London was stuffy, white with dust, after the green countryside, and as
they drove through deserted streets he was planning already his next
departure.  Lord Warleigh had asked him up to Scotland to shoot for the
last week in August, and this would fit in well with his plans to spend
a few days with the Leasons.  The Uniackes, he knew, were off shortly
for a month at Worthing, and McTaggart had a hazy idea of a motor trip
in his new car on the south coast to fill the gap before he should
start for the North.

He wondered if Bethune would care to join him; conscious, with a touch
of remorse, that of late he had neglected the latter, absorbed in his
own friendship with Jill.

And as if in answer to the question he found Bethune awaiting him.

But the first glance at his visitor's face drove away all minor
thoughts.

For trouble was plainly written there.

"That you, McTaggart?"  His voice was curt, without its usual hearty
ring.

"I want to speak to you a moment."  He closed the door carefully.

"Hullo--Bethune--you're quite a stranger!  What's up?" said McTaggart
lightly.  He did not quite like his reception, feeling an odd
premonition.  "Nothing wrong, I hope?" he added.

"Everything.  I've bad news.  Trouble again--at the Uniackes--I've been
waiting for you over an hour."

"Not Jill?" said McTaggart quickly.  He stared at his friend's changed
face, the brown eyes deeply shadowed, strong jawbone prominent.

"Yes."  Bethune dragged up a chair and sat down, facing the other
across the narrow dining table, with a certain studied deliberation.

"It's like this.  I'll tell you quickly.  It's this damnable Suffrage
business and Mrs. Uniacke again--just when we thought it all over! ...
It seems there's to be a political meeting in Wales to-morrow--some big
guns airing their views on Home Rule--and the Suffragettes mean
mischief.  The leaders are already there.  They burned down a house
last night--by way of endearing themselves to the natives!--and
to-morrow they mean to gather in force and upset all the speech-making.
Mrs. Uniacke planned to go--secretly," his face darkened--"without
telling Jill a word--but Roddy got it out of Stephen.  I think that
woman's really mad!--She's hardly out of bed, you know, and Jill was
nearly worried to death--begged and implored her to give it up."

"I never heard such damned nonsense!" McTaggart broke out at this--"she
ought to be put in an asylum.  No wonder Jill never wrote..."

Bethune gave him an odd glance.

"It was only found out yesterday.  But that's not the worst of it.
Jill's gone in her place."

"_What?_"  McTaggart sprang to his feet.

"Sit down," said Bethune grimly.  "You've got another couple of hours."
He glanced up at the clock.  "I went there this afternoon--to enquire
for Mrs. Uniacke.  Lucky I did!--I found Roddy and he poured out the
whole story.  It seems that Jill, to save her mother, offered at last
to go instead.  She's only to yell 'Votes for Women'--or some such
infernal nonsense.  But think of her in that mob--already savage about
the fire.  Welsh miners--you know what they are?"

"Good Lord!"  McTaggart looked stunned.  "And you mean her mother let
her go?--a child like that..."

"She's hardly a child."  Bethune took him up sharply.  "I suppose she
thought it would force her to join--become a suffragette herself.
Anyhow it's a dirty trick."

He pushed the open time-table across.  "There's a train at midnight.
You get to D---- in time for breakfast--two hours to wait--and then by
a branch line to L----.  The meeting's a few miles out.  It's fixed for
twelve o'clock sharp.  You can _just_ do it--that's all.  Will you go?"
He stared across at McTaggart, his pale face twitching a little.

"Of course!  Why?  What d'you think?"  He paused for a moment,
digesting the news, then glanced up at Bethune with a puzzled look
after a quick survey of the time-table.  "I wonder you didn't go
yourself--follow at once by the five train.  You might have stopped her
before the meeting.  Why on earth did you wait for me?"

There came a curious little silence.  Then Bethune rose to his feet,
with a restless movement, and walked across to the open window.  He
pulled up the blind and stared out, his back to McTaggart.

"I couldn't."  His voice was hoarse and strained.  "She wouldn't have
thanked me for coming."

"Nonsense!--Jill isn't like that.  Besides--she likes you
awfully--she's told me so, heaps of times, and the way you helped in
that prison business."

But Bethune made no reply.

Something about the man's attitude struck a note of discouragement, and
McTaggart--full of impatience--let fall a vexed:

"Well?"

"If you want to know," said Bethune at last, "I suppose you'd better
... anyhow!  I asked Jill to marry me--some days ago.  That's why."

Sheer amazement seized McTaggart.  Then, from no apparent cause, anger
stirred: a faint disgust, tempered by a grim amusement.

"You asked ... Jill ... to marry you?"

"Why not?" ... At the sound of his voice the other wheeled round
suddenly--"What's it got to do with _you_?"

And in a flash the friendship of years crumbled up--here were rivals!
They faced each other, primitive men, ready to fight for the sake of a
woman.

"Look here--McTaggart"--Bethune came back to where the former still
sat, elbows resting on the table, one hand gripping the
"A.B.C."--"There's no need to speak like that!  I've played fair.  By
God--I have!"

His square face was livid with passion.  A steady accumulation of
wrath--the slow and deadly anger that lurks under strong control in a
man of his type--was surging up and breaking bounds.  "You've got to
listen.  It's my turn now.  By heavens, I've been patient enough..."

"Go on."  McTaggart was watching him, his mouth hard.  It was a
challenge.

Bethune's stormy eyes flashed at the faint contempt in the words.

"I will."  He stood there, very erect, a curious dignity about him that
added to the suggestion of power in the strong, heavily built figure.

"You went away, out of England--an engaged man--so I
understood--intending to marry Miss Cadell."  His gaze never left
McTaggart.

"Well--it's no earthly business of mine whether you meant it--you
_said_ you did.  But you never gave a thought to Jill--or any of us
left behind.  For months and months--save a few cards to tell me where
to forward your letters!  And I got--somehow--into the way of seeing a
lot of ... the Uniackes.  They were--all of them--awfully kind.  And
when this last trouble came--this Suffrage business with the Mother--it
was to me Jill turned--and I helped her ... well, all I could.  I was
up there most evenings while Mrs. Uniacke was in prison"--he paused for
a second and went on huskily--"I thought ... Jill ... liked me a bit....

"Then _you_ turned up ... and took it over ... got Miss Uniacke to
help.  Yes--I know all about that--The old lady told me herself.

"Jill was your friend before mine--and don't you think I ever forgot
it!" his voice rose threateningly.  "I stood aside and gave you your
chance.

"You can't say that I've troubled you with much of my company these
last weeks ... (McTaggart stirred impatiently).  But I thought you
meant the straight game."

"What the devil d'you mean by that?"  The other's blue eyes were
ablaze--"you'd better look out what you're saying..."  He caught
himself in hand again.

"Go on ... It's ... interesting."

Bethune needed no second bidding.  Whipped by the sneer in McTaggart's
voice, he turned on him savagely.

"That's just it--the difference!  I'm not a Society man, thank God! and
I don't understand Society ways--nor the lies they act all day long.
But I _do_ know what's fair to a woman.  Any fool could have understood
what your return meant to Jill..."

To his surprise McTaggart started.  "I saw at once I hadn't a
chance--not the ghost of one!" he caught his breath--"but I wanted--to
see--Jill happy.  Where I was wrong was I didn't know _you_..."  He
struck his fist on the table.  "I thought you really meant business.  I
might have learned from the past"--his voice was full of grim
disgust--"I _ought_ to know your way with women!  And it's not fair on
a girl like Jill--she's out and away too fine for you--to _marry_ a man
like you, I mean--let alone mere flirtation.  Why--what d'you suppose
that Aunt thought? with you hanging around all day long.  She fairly
played into your hands--any ass could have seen that!"

"Have you _quite_ finished?" said McTaggart.  "Because, if so, I've a
question to ask."

He spoke slowly, for his anger, past a certain phase, touched the
danger mark at freezing point.  He had reached it now.

"We will set aside _your_ idea of _my_ conduct," he smiled grimly--"or
the reason you choose to set yourself up as a judge.  What I can't
quite gather from your talk is why--if you were so damned sure"--a
slight flush rose to his face--"that Jill was ... well, fond of me--you
promptly asked her to marry _you_?  It's a little confused--your
argument."

Bethune drew back sharply.  Across his white, angry face a look of pain
and perplexity shot.  He saw that McTaggart's nimble mind had caught at
the first obvious excuse, and yet with all his honest heart he knew the
purity of his intentions.

"I didn't mean to," he blurted it out.  "But I found her crying--and
lost my head.  The servant showed me in by mistake.  She was sitting
there in that back room, her head buried in her hands--and I couldn't
stand it--damn it all!"  At the memory, unconsciously, the tears rose
in his brown eyes.  "You'd gone away, without a word--and--loving her
... I understood.

"I knew she thought she had lost you again--that you'd gone back to
your London life.  She's pretty plucky--but, after all, she's only a
girl!" his voice softened.  "It must be precious lonely there--boxed up
with that Suffragette mother--and so"--the colour flooded his face,
creeping up to the roots of his hair--"I thought perhaps--it might ...
comfort a bit--to know what one man thought of her."

A short silence fell between them.

"And she refused you?"  McTaggart, white and tight-lipped, thrust aside
a momentary twinge of shame that cut across his secret triumph.

Cruelly he went on:

"Women generally know what they want.  You can take that--from _my_
experience!"

Bethune winced at the stab.  But his anger had spent itself.  Now he
felt old and tired, oddly ashamed for his friend.

"Yes," he answered quietly.  "Jill's not a girl to love twice."  And in
this simple sentence he showed the depth of his respect for her.

But the words, unintentionally uttered, stung McTaggart to the quick.

"Unlike myself!" he said with a sneer.

Bethune moved toward the door.  On the threshold he turned and passed a
hand wearily over his brow.

"You're going to her?"  He jerked his head with a warning gesture to
the clock.

"Yes."

McTaggart never turned, but Bethune still hesitated.

He was fighting hard against himself--a bitter battle of wounded pride;
the picture of Jill in his mind, her grey eyes wet with tears.

Suddenly he wheeled round.

"For God's sake, Peter," he cried--(the old familiar name slipped out,
for habit is hard to break)--"if you care for her--tell her so!"

The door slammed behind his back.  McTaggart sat as if turned to stone,
elbows propped upon the table, staring out into space.

His blue eyes were hard and bright; bitter resentment was in his heart.
He could not see through the veil of anger that clear flame of
sacrifice.  For Bethune had gained those lonely heights where human
love meets the divine.  He had offered Jill his greatest
gift--voluntary renunciation.




CHAPTER XXVI

The sun was shining high in the heavens as McTaggart crossed the
station yard to the Railway Inn of the little town that lay in the
trough of the crumpled hills.

The straggling street, with its poor shops, curving away to the left,
was void of life.  Not a soul stirred; it might have been a deserted
village.

He walked briskly into the bar, where a man in shirt sleeves dozed on a
stool behind the counter and woke up with a sudden start at the sight
of a stranger.

"Are you the landlord?" asked McTaggart.

"No"--the man stared at him--"he's away, gone to the meeting."

"Well--I want a conveyance at once.  I see you keep a livery stable."

"Can't be done," said the man slowly--"there's no carriages left,
whatever."

McTaggart frowned.  "Where can I get one?"

"Nowheres"--the other smiled sourly.  He seemed to enjoy the stranger's
plight.  "Everything's gone over to Cluar--even the carts--you'd best
walk.  It's only a mile or two, whatever."

He relapsed again, his arms on the counter, with an air of dismissing
the visitor.

McTaggart glanced up at the clock and saw there was no time to lose.
He decided to take the barman's advice, but had yet to learn by
experience the elastic properties of a mile in Wales by local
measurement.

"Which is the nearest way?" he asked, drawing a shilling out of his
pocket.

The man sprang up as if worked by a spring.  "I'll show you, sir"--his
manner had changed.  "Indeed to goodness I'm sorry, sir, we've got no
carriage in just now, but you'll cut off a corner across the fields if
you'll come through here..." he led McTaggart down a grimy passage that
smelt of beer out on to greasy cobblestones where they were faced by a
tumble-down building advertising "Excellent Garage."

But as they crossed the stable yard McTaggart heard the note of a horn,
and turned to see a motor car, covered with dust, pass through the arch
and draw up throbbing in their rear.

"Morning, David"--the chauffeur called out.  He sprang down.  "I've
come for the petrol."

"Whose car?" asked McTaggart quickly.

"Mister Llewellyn's," the barman replied, "from Cluarside.  That's your
way sir"--he opened the gate--"keep straight on, down that path, until
you come to the cross roads.  Then to the right and up the hill.  Thank
you, sir."  He clutched the coin.  "Coming, Charlie..." and was off to
the visibly impatient chauffeur.

A sudden thought struck McTaggart.  As the barman vanished into the
house, he turned back into the yard, with a quick glance at the
powerful car.

"Look here..." he addressed the driver.  "Could you give me a lift to
the meeting?"  He felt in his pocket and drew out a sovereign--"I'd
make it well worth your while."

The man stared at him, surprised.

"D'you know Mr. Llewellyn, sir?"

McTaggart smiled.

"I'm afraid not.  But I've got to get at once to Cluar--and I can't
find any other conveyance."  He saw the chauffeur's greedy eyes fixed
on his hand, and lowering his voice:

"If you can take me there, _now_," he added, "wait a few minutes and
get me back to the station, it's ... five pounds in your pocket."

The man gave a little gasp.  McTaggart went on steadily.  "I've got to
deliver a certain message"--(it seemed the best excuse on the
moment)--"then catch the London train (with Jill"--he said to
himself--"but that can come later.")

"Mr. Llewellyn's gone to town"--the chauffeur was thinking aloud--"I
_must_ get this petrol first..." he glanced back over his shoulder
nervously at the barman, who reappeared dragging two tins from under
the low stone archway.

"I daren't take you in here, sir," he stooped down as he spoke,
pretending to examine a tyre, "but if you'd go across the fields, I'd
pick you up at the cross roads."

"All right--that's settled."  McTaggart again raised his voice.  "A
nice car--I wasn't sure who the maker was.  Thanks.  Good day."

Off he went with a careless nod.  The sun poured down on his head,
which ached from his long night journey.  The stony path felt hot to
his feet, adding to his sense of fatigue.

For sleep had been impossible.  With every throb of the rocking train
he had seemed to hear Bethune's voice and recall scattered, angry
phrases.

"I thought ... you meant ... the straight ... game!"  This was one of
the refrains.  The wheels had pounded out the words with the scanded
beat of a Greek chorus.  Well?--so he did--Bethune was mad!  He tried
to thrust the thought aside that blame could be attached to him: that,
through any carelessness of his, Jill might have suffered.  But still
it rankled.

"She's only a child..." he said to himself.  "She understands.
Bethune's an ass! ... And as to 'Aunt Elizabeth'..."

Back it came with hammering force:

"I thought ... you meant ... the straight ... game! ... I thought ...
you meant..."  He swore aloud.

As the dawn stole in through the windows, wan over the misty hills, the
words suddenly changed to these:

"Jill's--not the girl--to love--twice."

They brought a new throb of pain and the man stirred restlessly.

If, after all, Bethune were right?  What then...?

He shrank from the thought.  Jill to suffer because of him!--Little
Jill ... the child he loved....

"Hardly a child!" Bethune had said.  On went the wheels, merciless.

"Jill's--not the girl--to love--twice..."

McTaggart remembered suddenly how she had looked on his return when
Roddy had played his innocent trick.  He could see her sway and clutch
the chair.

"Peter!"  He heard again the note, strange and emotional in her voice.

And then at the Fair, two years ago, her face when he offered his
tawdry gift--the double heart--and the way she had left him, driving
home in front with Bethune.

Had he been blind?  _Did_ she care?

If so--his face was white and grave--the only decent thing to do was to
go away out of her life.

And at the thought he stopped aghast, his whole world upside down.

"I can't do it!"--the words broke from him with a ring of genuine
consternation, echoing in the empty carriage that penned him in like a
prison cell.  For a space he sat, his head bowed down between his
hands, blotting out the light, rosy now on a dewy land, heralding in
the newborn day.

Then, slowly he looked up, a great wonder on his face.

The rays of the sun were dim beside the white truth that poured in on
him.

"Jill ... little Jill..." he whispered her name, conjuring up the grey
eyes under their dark curling lashes, and the frank gaze that met his
own.

Jill, with her courage and endurance, clever brain and heart of a
child.  For a moment he held her in his arms--his to teach the meaning
of love...

Then--with a sigh--he put her away.  For the first time for long years
he placed another's happiness before his own.  Was it fair to her?

Was he _fit_ to marry Jill?  A new-born sense of unworthiness swept
aside his desire.

His past life rose up, his old mistrust of himself, the mystery of his
"double heart" ... his light and pleasure-loving nature.

He thought of Fantine and Cydonia, of many a pretty woman's face; of
this last year in Italy with its careless sequence of adventures.

Could he be faithful to the end?

"Yes!" cried his heart.  "Wait," said his brain.

Reason warred with emotion; he stood at the crossroads of his life.

And the stronger, cleaner side of the man rose up in his soul's defence.

He must prove himself, _know_ himself before Jill could become his wife.

He took a vow then and there to pass through a period of probation.
But Jill was worth waiting for.

If she cared? ... A doubt stabbed him and he set his teeth, his face
dogged.

He _would_ win her--come what may!  His thoughts forged fast ahead, he
felt the keen thrill of pursuit.

And then the figure of his friend, square set, with honest eyes--that
other lover of Jill's--flashed up into the foreground of the picture.

He felt ashamed.  He thought of Bethune with a sudden new
understanding; the deep sincerity of the man, the meaning of his last
words...

Here was love at its highest, purged from all mere passion--a love
based on unselfishness, its one object Jill's happiness.

He saw a hard fight ahead, not only with his own desire, but to keep
his vow in the knowledge that the girl might suffer through his silence.

Nevertheless, a few hours later, as he crossed the fields, impatience
stirred, a longing he had never known for the sight of a loved woman's
face.  And as he climbed the last stile and found at the meeting of the
roads the powerful car awaiting him he hailed the chauffeur with
delight.

"There you are!"--he clambered up, seating himself by the driver--"let
her go."  They were off, the dust in a whirling cloud behind them.

They wound between high rocks, jutting out over the road, through a
barren land--it seemed to McTaggart--of lonely hills and sombre
valleys; crossed a bridge of crumbling stone over a river shallow and
brown, turned a corner, sharp as a knife, and heard the roar of rushing
water.

"Falls of Ghyll," said the chauffeur.

Far above them, out of the crags that seemed to pierce the sapphire
sky, poured a stream dazzling white, wreathed in spray, mad to escape;
leaping down like a storm spirit to kiss the river, that laughed below,
with a rippling note of sheer delight, under the golden shafts of
sunshine.

McTaggart's blue eyes drank it in.  The picture blent with his own
mood.  So, he would carry Jill away, borne on the flood tide of his
love.

"Over that hill, sir," said the chauffeur--"is where the fire was--Miss
Morgan's house--the Suffragettes, at it again--I expect you saw it in
the papers?"

"Yes--confound them!" said McTaggart.

The man nodded, approving the sentiment.

"They say, sir, they're up to mischief to-day--going to upset the
speech-making.  I don't envy them if they does!"

The note in his voice spurred McTaggart's fears.

"A rough lot about here?"

"There'll be murder done," said the man grimly.  "They don't stop at
much when they're roused."

"Are we nearly there?"

The chauffeur nodded.  "In five minutes.  Just over the rise and down
to the valley.  The meeting's held on the football ground in Cluar
itself.  I passed it as I came along.  When we get there, sir, I'd best
drop you, a bit before, and then run by, turn and come back and wait
for you at the foot of the hill, if that will do?"

"Sounds all right--keep the engine going.  I shan't be long if I can
help it."  He swallowed down his anxiety as they started to mount the
incline.

Up and up ... Then, with a sense of open space 'neath the roof of
heaven, a panorama spread before them like a vast sea of green and gray.

The swelling curves of the mighty Earth, patched with woods and
blackened crags, rolled up in giant waves that broke on the sky line,
blurred with heat.

Purple mountains, silvery vales; and above, like a scroll of parchment
drawn to an endless length across the world and worked on by some
long-dead monk in azure and gold illumination, the veil of the sky was
stretched, superb, shutting out the face of God.

"What a view!"  McTaggart sighed.

Below in the valley he saw grey roofs, like stones carelessly pitched
downhill, tiny fields and a gleam of blue where the river glided in and
out.

Now they were hovering like a bird over the village; then, as the road,
steep and winding, swept them down, the cottages rose all about them.
They passed a church, a school, a bridge, and slackened speed.

"Here we are.  It's through that gate on the right, sir," the chauffeur
pointed down the road.

They could see a field packed with people about an erection of wooden
planks, and as the engine ceased to throb McTaggart caught another
sound--once heard, never forgotten--the snarling note of an angry crowd.

"Up to mischief," said the chauffeur.

But McTaggart was out, cutting along as hard as his long legs would go,
a sick fear in his heart.  Where was Jill in this turmoil?

He sprang through a torn gap in the hedge and pushed his way
determinedly through the loose fringe of the crowd that surged round
the high platform.  All around him people were shouting; the mob moved
in little rushes, swaying forward, beaten back from the moving centre
of disturbance.

Then above the angry hum a shriek rose, shrill with fear.  McTaggart
saw, for a moment, a figure raised above the heads.  A young girl with
a bleeding face, hair streaming on the breeze, one shoulder bare and
white where the tattered dress had fallen away.

"Down her!" "Duck her!" "To the river..."  Wild cries in uncouth Welsh.

McTaggart swore out aloud.  He was fighting his way, using his fists,
forcing a path mercilessly.

Again he caught a glimpse of the girl.  Thank God! it was _not_ Jill.

As he paused to get his breath, an old hag with an evil face sprang up
toward the victim and clutched at a streaming lock of hair.  With a
coarse laugh she tore at it, the claw-like fingers with their trophy
waved aloft, as again a scream rent the air and the crowd cheered.

McTaggart's blood went cold at the sight.  It was horrible enough for
men to lay their rough hands on a girl, but a fellow-woman, a mother,
perhaps?  He felt physically sick.

For a moment, wedged in and powerless, his brain flashed up another
picture, that of the French Revolution and the foul women of the
Halles, pressing round the guillotine to dip their hands in the blood
of the victims.  Was this what Woman's Rights involved?--this civil war
among themselves?

And then above the angry hum a clear and brave young voice rang out:

"Votes for Women!"

McTaggart groaned, pride and agony in his heart.

"Jill!"--he shouted with all his strength--"Jill! where are you?"

He felt the serried ranks slacken as the crowd swung back to this new
offender.

"Votes for Women!"

Again it rang.

"Votes for..." the voice choked on the word.

McTaggart went fighting mad.  He was in the thick of it, charging
through, giving and taking blow for blow.  Men and women scattered
before him.

"Jill! ... Jill!"  It was a war cry.

High above them on the platform a puppet of Government waved his arms
like an excited marionette, in a shrill voice, urging more "moderation"!

Just as McTaggart reached Jill's side a burly miner caught the girl by
the frail collar of her blouse.  The thin stuff ripped down to her
waist.

"Out you go, you ---- ----!"  But the last foul word went down his
throat under McTaggart's clenched fist, and the man fell back, stunned
and bleeding.

"Now--Jill--get behind--quick!  Hold onto my coat."

He heard her breathless "Peter!--_You_!" as they started the perilous
retreat.

Once again she cried his name, and, wheeling round, he rescued her from
the clutches of two angry women and on again, fighting his way.

Once too he laughed aloud and stepped across a fallen body.

"Look out, Jill!" he shouted back and felt her stumble, dragging his
coat.

So at last they cleared the crowd.  As he swung her through the hedge
something sharp struck his brow.  He felt no pain, but a warm, wet
stream that ran down, and he brushed it aside impatiently out of his
eyes.

More stones whizzed about them.  With one arm through Jill's, he
started to run, but she gasped:

"I can't ... _You_ go!"

He laughed, happy.

"Now, then..." stooping down, he picked her up in his arms.  Her
loosened hair fell about him, her bruised hands clasped his neck.

He felt then he could have started and fought the battle through again.
He sheltered her, as best he could, striding along toward the car.

The chauffeur, with a white face, helped her in and sprang to his place.

"Now drive like Hell!" said McTaggart.

The man needed no second bidding.

Off they swept, past the church, up and up towards the sky.

McTaggart leaned back with a sigh as the shouts died away behind them.
Jill was there--safe--beside him.  He thanked God for the fact.  Also
for a good fight, as he looked down at his bleeding knuckles.

"Well--Jill?" he turned to her.  "You all right?"

But she started up, with a shrill cry:

"Peter--your _face_!..."

Her grey eyes were wide with fear.  She gave a little gasp, relaxed,
and fell back in a dead faint.  For her brave spirit had failed her at
last.  The sight of the blood still trickling down from the open cut on
his smeared cheek had finished the strain on her overwrought nerves.
Nature, outraged, had claimed her due, sending oblivion to the spirit
in the interest of the taxed flesh.

"Jill--what is it?"  McTaggart, frightened, bent over her white face.
Mechanically he wiped his own, conscious at last of his injury.

The chauffeur turned his head at the cry.

"The lady ill?  I don't wonder!  I expect she's only fainted, sir.  A
nasty business for any man, let alone a woman, sir."

He felt somewhat a hero himself for the part he had played, true to
promise.

"Another chap would 'ave driven off"--he soliloquized--"but there ... I
couldn't!

"A deep one?--that 'e is!--never a word about 'is girl.  But Lor'--'e
can use 'is fists.  'E gave Ap Jones a fair knock-out--Serve 'im right
too for mauling a lady--not that I hold with this Suffrage business,
still"--he switched on the brake--"a lady's a lady, when all's said."

Then out aloud, as the car shot down into sight of the rock-bound
valley:

"We'll be coming soon to the Falls of Ghyll.  Some water may revive
'er, sir."

Meanwhile McTaggart propped her up, an arm around the limp shoulders.
Never had she seemed so dear ... He felt a lump rise in his throat.

"Jill?"  He whispered the appeal, but the girl was out of the reach of
his voice, far away in those dark lands, whereof no man knows the
boundary.

Tenderly he drew together the torn folds of her blouse which showed
beneath it a white slip threaded with a narrow ribbon.

He felt a chivalrous pity to see the disorder of her simple dress, and,
drawing the pin out of his tie, he tried clumsily, to repair it.

But as he did so he gave a start, a new fear gripping him.

For something red gleamed beneath the thin and tattered material.  It
looked like a great drop of blood against the fairness of her skin!

He set his teeth.  Deliberately, but with unconscious reverence, he
drew down the frill of lace where the ribbon held the folds together.

Then he gave a gasp of relief.  Into his blue eyes came the light of
love victorious; infinite wonder flooded his soul with tenderness.

For there it lay, in the soft hollow between the delicate curves of her
breast, in ruby glass with its lover's knot, his "fairing"--the little
"double heart"!




CHAPTER XXVII

The night was close and sultry.  A sudden longing for air drove
McTaggart into the deserted Park.  His luggage was packed, and early
next day he would start for the North and his round of visits there.

The Uniackes were at Worthing, and McTaggart's thoughts instinctively
turned to Jill as he left the path and took a chair in an empty row
beyond the Achilles Statue.

The girl's initial venture as a Militant Suffragette had left no
lasting trace physically.  But mentally it had marked a definite
turning point in her views on the subject that engrossed her home.

She had gone to Cluar expecting resistance from the law and possible
rough treatment at the hands of men; but the sight of fellow-women,
losing all control, violently turning against their own sex, and the
utter absence of that esprit de corps--so strong a feature of her
college life--had astounded and revolted her to the depths of her soul.

She argued thus: If a movement that held as its primary cause the
advancement of women produced not only a breach with the opposite sex
but civil war among themselves, what would be the state of a government
where the rival factions _each_ held the vote and in which the fighting
element despised the prevailing laws of the land?

Was Arson a slight weapon of offence?  Or Assassination, risked by
bombs?

It was Anarchy none the less, the offenders being mere women.

The present scheme of government might be open to various abuses, but
at least it was a rule of order, upholding the laws it sought to
enforce and the safety of the citizen.

In the long journey home, Jill had threshed out in this fashion the
pros and cons of Woman's Suffrage with McTaggart; and needless to say
the man had approved the conclusion she reached at last.  She turned
her back on the "Cause."

Now as he sat in the shadows thrown by the high trees over the grass,
hearing the leaves, already falling, rustle faintly overhead, he smiled
as he conjured up her face with its indignant wide gray eyes.

They had reached her home late that night, and, for the first time,
McTaggart had realized that Mrs. Uniacke cared deeply for her child.
The instincts of motherhood had risen supreme over her ardour for the
Cause.  She had cried aloud at the sight of Jill with her bruised arms
and tattered clothes.

Bitterly, too, she had blamed Stephen for deserting the girl in the
hour of danger.

She had placed her daughter in his care and the story, tersely told by
McTaggart, of their meeting with that prudent person in the coffee-room
of the Commercial Hotel, placidly eating an excellent lunch, had roused
her genuine indignation.

For Stephen had been "caught out"!  The sight of McTaggart, dusty,
blood-stained, the cut on his forehead hastily plastered by the local
chemist, escorting Jill, herself still white, bruised and shaken, her
dress in ribbons, without a hat, standing in the narrow doorway, had
shattered that young man's calm assurance.

Utterly ignoring him and his hasty, incoherent excuses, McTaggart had
induced Jill to take some food, collected her luggage and hurried her
out and up to the station, without a word to the inwardly scared object
of his deep contempt.

One good thing had resulted from Jill's painful adventure in Wales; a
distinct rupture between her mother and the weak and unscrupulous young
man.

In a long letter to McTaggart, Jill had conveyed the glad news.

"Isn't it splendid?"--she wrote gayly.  "Roddy's off his head with joy!
He's painted a picture of Saint Stephen being stoned by the
Suffragettes; with mauve socks and a mauve tie--it really is _exactly_
like him!--and a big bottle of champagne with 'Mumm's the word!' on a
banner.

"I do hope your head's all right?--that cut, I mean?  I'm very fit and
I can't think why I caved in.  You were a _brick_ to fly to the rescue!
We're off on Thursday for a month at Worthing.  Can't you come and say
good-bye?  I want to thank you properly--and Roddy too--so do turn up.

"It's lovely to feel free of Stephen and have Mother to ourselves.
She's coming to the Zoo to-day and she's promised Roddy some painting
lessons--think of that!  He's so happy.  Stephen used to laugh at him
and call him the 'Infant Raphael' ... I'd like to see _Stephen_ do some
of Roddy's clever sketches!..."

So the simple letter ran.  Full of slang, but, to the lover, a
priceless pearl of composition.  He read her nature between the lines:
that strong loving heart of hers, scorning all hypocrisy, protective
toward the weak, breathing a sweet unselfishness.

Nevertheless he stayed away, faithful to his secret vow.  He sent the
girl a book she craved and a big box of sweets for Roddy.  Then, as an
afterthought, he added a neat little painter's outfit.  He smiled at
his own craftiness, knowing the road to Jill's heart.  And a plan rose
in his mind--if all went as he hoped--to arrange that this much beloved
brother should study abroad at his expense and enter the Art schools at
Rome.

Now, in the dim light of the Park, he was lost in a day-dream of the
future.  His cigarette, smouldering unheeded, scorched his fingers and,
with a start, he came back to his surroundings.

A young couple passed, arm in arm, and somewhere behind him, out of the
dark, rose a whispering, and a girl's laugh that told its own simple
story.

For even in the deserted town the Summer night was filled with love;
like a brimming cup held to the lips of youth by the wise old hand of
Nature.

The lonely figure of a woman emerged from under the long white arch at
Hyde Park Corner and moved across the dusty road toward the trees.

McTaggart watched her absently.  Something about her graceful walk, the
assured carriage of her head, stirred his latent speculation.

"I wouldn't mind betting that she's French."  He lit another cigarette
and pondered upon the distinctive touch that sets the Gallic race apart.

The object of his scrutiny reached at last the slight incline beneath
the Achilles statue and paused, shaken by a fit of coughing.

McTaggart's face went suddenly grave as he watched the slender,
graceful figure struggling with the sudden spasm.

"Poor soul!" he said to himself.  For he guessed that the scourge of
civilization, Consumption, had marked her for a victim.  And suddenly
the thought of Death, in a world renewed for him by love, sent a shiver
down his spine.  Some day he and Jill must part....

The woman passed her handkerchief across her lips, lowered her veil and
breasted the slope wearily.  Arrived at the edge of the grass, with a
neat movement of her skirt, she stepped over the low rail, avoiding the
dusty gravel path.

When she came to the chair where he sat, she glanced sideways at
McTaggart, who stiffened a little at her approach, and the odour of
scent wafted from her.

To his further annoyance she hesitated, peering down into his face
through the lace veil that obscured her features.

"Pierrot!--Is it really you?"  He was on his feet with a sudden start.
The memory of dead days rose up, bewildering him.

"Fantine!"  He stared at her, amazed.

"Mais oui!"  She held out her hand--"You do not remember me?--And
I----?  Ma foi!--I thought you must be dead!" ...

"Au contraire!" he tried to collect his thoughts.  "Very much in the
flesh, as you see."

He remembered quickly there had been no scene, no definite break in
their friendship; only his silence since that night when he had probed
her treachery.  He felt at a loss to find, now, an excuse for avoiding
her company.

"I've been abroad," he explained lamely, "for two years.  I'm off
to-morrow to shoot in Scotland.  London's beastly.  Even my Club's shut
against me!"

Fantine smiled, then she sighed.

"Lucky Pierrot!"  She sank down on the nearest chair and with a gesture
invited him to the one beside it.  "You will like that--to shoot,
hein?"  Again a fit of coughing seized her.

She looked thin, McTaggart thought.  He could not harden his heart
against her, with that shadow of death that seemed to hang like a cloud
over her old brilliancy.

"How's the world been treating you?"  He spoke gently.  It seemed to
him a page torn from a past life, this unexpected meeting with her; the
whole hateful episode a story skimmed through and forgotten.

"The world, mon cher?"--she shrugged her shoulders, "Why, mon Dieu--as
it always treats those whose luck has turned against them!"  She gave a
light and mocking laugh.

"I'm sorry."  He paused.  "Would you care to tell me?"

She gave him a quick grateful glance.  Then with a gesture,
unconsciously tinged with a touch of drama, threw back her veil.

McTaggart stared, taken aback.

"Ah! ... you see?" she nodded her head.  "I am getting old"--her voice
shook--"and so tired..." the painted lips twisted themselves into a
smile more pitiful than any tears in the thin but still piquante face.

"It's the life, mon cher--this ... gay life!  I have burnt the candle
in the middle.  No!--you say 'at both wicks'"--her words ended in a
cough.

"You've got a frightful cold, Fantine.  Do you think it's prudent
sitting here?"

"Yes--the fresh air does me good--and it can't hurt me ... now,
Pierrot.  It's not a cold--it's my chest.  I had pneumonia in the
Spring and the wet season completed the trouble.  The doctor says I
ought to live in a dry climate--but," she laughed--"I have to earn the
money first--and London is the easiest place."

A silence fell between the pair.  McTaggart saw that her neat dress was
shabby, that the hat she wore owed its smartness to the veil and the
way it was posed at the right angle.  But, faithful to her ancient
creed, her boots and gloves were immaculate, her dark hair glossy and
waved, and her face delicately painted.

Yet something was gone: the note of youth, the joyous, half-defiant
charm.  This was a woman, middle-aged, broken in health but still proud.

"Per'aps you did not learn my trouble?  No?"--she glanced up at
him--"The flat was raided by the police.  I had to pay a heavy fine.
It was not mine to keep or let; it belonged to a certain ... Monsieur.
But in my name, you understan'?  I to take all the risk.  And when it
failed he vanished--pouf!" she threw out her hands mockingly--"into
thin air, as you say.  And I was left ... dans le potage!

"It was not soup you could drink, Pierrot, like Monsieur Auguste's
'pot-au-feu'--and ... one eats to live--or at least those do who can't
afford to live to eat!  An' so I had to start again, with a very slim
capital--the furniture ... a few jewels..."

She stared moodily before her.

"That's where the devil comes in, Pierrot,--and mocks at all the saints
in Heaven! ... Not that I wish to become a saint"--she shot him an
amused glance with one of her old mocking smiles--"Dieu merci!  I love
life--an' pretty frocks and a good cuisine.  You remember our last
evening together?  The--music? ... ah!" she clasped her hands and a
curious look came into her eyes.  "I am glad," she added beneath her
breath--"that nothing spoilt that memory."

Little she guessed that the man beside her caught the full meaning of
the words: that his last rancour vanished with it as he guessed the
truth underlying the speech.

The face in the photograph rose up, with its evil eyes and its ruthless
mouth; that "certain ... Monsieur" called "Gustave"--the treacherous
master-mind.

Poor little woman!--In such bad hands--deserted too in her hour of
need...

"What did you do?" he asked gently.  "I'd no idea of all this worry.
I'm really awfully sorry, Fantine," he laid a hand over hers.

She gave him a sudden brilliant smile.

"The same Pierrot..." her voice was tender.  Then she drew herself
together, her fingers lightly clasped in his, a faint colour in her
thin cheeks.

"You remember Archie Thesiger?"

"Yes."  He knew what was coming.

"He offered me his ... protection."  Fantine's eyes were enigmatic.
"It seemed ... the best thing to do.  I was very happy--for a time.  He
took a little flat in Brighton and--you will laugh!"--she smiled
herself--"I am domestic in my tastes--But yes!--and excellent manager.
I made Archie quite content.  You think because I love my clothes I
should be helpless in a kitchen?  There you are wrong.  One day I will
come and make you," she paused--"_such_ an omelette! ... But of course
I knew it couldn't last.  That is the drawback to ... ce metier.  He
fell in love--with a young girl.  Il faut se ranger--I understood.  And
there it was!--to begin again.  The next time I was not so lucky.
Rich, yes.  But a 'mauvais sujet.'  And then I find that he is married!
Madame arrives ... Dieu, quelle scene!  She seem to think I love her
Reuben!  Yes--a Jew ... _that too_!  But I tell her, smiling, to her
face, that it was purely business with me.  My faith, she did not care
for it.  I agreed it was not suitable--ce menage--lowering for a woman
such as I am, with brains and looks--that money is not everything!  He
drank too--and she knew that!"

At her mischievous sidelong glance McTaggart gave a grim laugh,
conjuring up the unequal duel between this strange, dissimilar pair.

"I give her then some good advice,"--Fantine was enjoying her story,
the topaz eyes keen and bright, lips curved in a mocking smile.  "I
say: 'You are a good woman, with babies, per'aps, and a linen press.
But that is not all a man wants.  Learn to talk ... and walk ... an'
dress!  Marriage--what is it?  A legal tie.  But a clever wife must
_charm_ to hold ... You catch my point?--I am ver' glad.  I could teach
you ... yes, many things.  But my cab waits--Adieu, Madame!'" ...

"Good Lord!--So you went.  And then?"

Fantine made a wry grimace.

"I became companion to a lady.  (Of men, you see, I had had enough!)
Also rich, mais une femme du peuple!  Archie gave me a written
reference.  His uncle is a baronet and that was quite sufficient to
her.  I learned there how to wash a dog and make petticoats for the
poor.  Not flannel--you understan'?--but flannelette--most
dangerous--but good enough for _Charity_!  (McTaggart chuckled,
watching her.)  And what a 'real lady' could do and what a 'real lady'
could not!

"It's a ... sale metier!--to my mind--hardly as moral as the other--so
uncharitable"--she frowned.

"Have you ever lived in the suburbs?--No?--Then don't, my dear Pierrot.
It's to ... exist in hourly fear of gossip, one eye on each neighbour.
To call and flatter, peer and pry and pick their characters to ribbons.
What a life!" she shrugged her shoulders.  "One of my duties was to
teach my new employer a little French.  That amused me enormously!  She
was as stupid as a goose--so I stuffed her"--Fantine laughed--"with
some good spicy words.  When she travels to Paris, mon Dieu!--she will
surprise the chambermaid!  Unluckily"--she ran on--"there was a
nephew."  Her cough stopped her.  She battled with it for a moment,
caught her breath and smiled bravely.  "Un horreur de petit
bonhomme!--dressed like a little groom.  'Tres sporting.'  That is chic
in the suburbs--always gaiters, pique necktie and no horse!  You know
the type, hein, Pierrot?

"'Bertie'--that was the youth's name--took a fancy to poor
me!--Condescended to express it--even helped to wash the dog.  That was
fun--he _did_ get wet!"  She laughed at the recollection.  "Then, one
day, Madame guessed.  Actually she accused me of a wish to marry him!"
Up went Fantine's hands in horror.  "Moi, Fantine!"

McTaggart roared.

"I said I had no use for 'Bertie.'  It was not my fault if he cared for
me!--That it nearly gave me 'mal au coeur' to sit facing him at dinner!
That I boxed his ears at many times--and that was true!--but she would
not believe.  She said: 'One can see you are no lady.'  So I replied
that she could not tell.  Impossible!  I knew, mon cher, she had
started life as a kitchen maid and married her master through a trick
and I added: 'I am quite ready to learn any hint regarding cooking, but
of my birth you are no judge--I go to my equals to decide.'  The
servants were all in the hall and Bertie as red as a turkey-cock--and
they laughed!  I heard them.  Then I packed and got away as soon as I
could, with all the neighbours' noses glued to the windows.

"Virtue did not seem a success--it hides, you see, so much meanness.  I
tried in vain to find Gustave"--(the name slipped out
unconsciously)--"but all my letters were returned--'not known' at the
old address.

"Then I thought of the Stage.  Chorus per'aps?--I sing a little.  That
began and ended too with a heavy fee to an agent.  I got a cold one
snowy day and fell ill.  Then doctor's bills and the little money I had
saved melted away--and so, you see ... here I am!"  She finished
gaily--"Open--how do you make the phrase?--to any pleasant salaried
post!"

She glanced sideways at the man, noting the pity on his face.

"You wouldn't like...?"  Her meaning was plain.

"No," said McTaggart, very gently.

"Tant pis!  You cared once..."  She sighed, then coughed.  "I can
live," she whispered, "on ve-ry little ... also cook..."

"Don't!" he quivered on the word.  "It's horrible!--to think that
_you_..."  He swallowed hard, remembering the pretty flat, with the
Fantine of old, proud and brilliant--and now ... this!

"I'm going to be married," he said quickly--"At least I hope so.  But
that's no reason why I shouldn't help an old friend."

Fantine drew herself up erect.

"If I choose to _take_----" her voice was sharp--"I _give_ too!  That
is honest, I think.  I have never asked for charity.  But ... oh, mon
Dieu!" she broke down under McTaggart's pitiful glance.  "Life is hard.
C'est un sale metier!  And I can't sink--I can't ... I can't ..." a sob
broke from the painted lips--"not to ... _that_!"

She pointed straight to the lights beyond the silvery arch, to
Piccadilly, broad and smooth.

McTaggart felt suddenly humbled.  He thought for a moment painfully of
the lives of those other women, placed for ever outside the pale,
sacrificed to man's desire...

Then he spoke.

"Look here, Fantine.  I think you're a splendid little woman!  I'd feel
proud to be your friend.  The pluck of you!"--(he meant it, too).  "I
wouldn't dream of insulting you by--well--by offering financial help
without any equivalent.  But there's something you can do for me--if
you will?--and it's not too dull?"

She stared at him wonderingly.  A faint glimmer of hope shone in the
tragic depths of her topaz eyes.  The reddened lips parted a little.
"Eh bien?"

He felt the strain in her voice and hurried on, full of compassion.

"It's like this.  I've been left a villa--a wee place abroad near the
sea.  I stayed there for a few weeks before my return--and was bored to
death!  I don't want to shut it up and I have a dislike to letting it.
It occurred to me to find some one, as a sort of caretaker," he paused,
his eyes fixed on the grass at his feet.  "It's in Italy, not far from
Spezzia--a pretty place with lovely air and fairly gay in the Summer
time--but in the Winter months----" he laughed--"about as lonely as the
Pole.  So that's what I am up against--to find someone I can trust to
live there and keep it aired.  There's an old woman who does odd
jobs--I daresay she could cook a bit--and her son who gardens, cleans
windows and all that--but it's not enough.  I want some one--a
different class--to keep an eye on the pair.  But I warn you--it's
awfully dull--but healthy--the air comes over the snows.  Now as you're
feeling a bit run down, would you like to try it?"  He broke off
sharply.

"Fantine, my dear!  Oh, you poor little soul!..."

She was sobbing sharply, her head in her hands.  The breeze rustled
through the trees and far away, in wave on wave, came the noise of the
traffic, London's voice, not unlike the swell of the sea.

Beside him, cast up on the tide, this wreck and flotsam of life's
storms, battered and broken, but still lit by the flickering lamp of
the human soul.

"Fantine--don't feel hurt, my dear.  I mean what I say--it's give and
take--fair play, I give you my word."

She raised a streaming, haggard face.

"You don't know ... oh, mon Dieu!  Listen----"

she caught him by the arm.  "I tried to ruin you," she cried--"that
last evening--at the flat!"

"Nonsense!--it's all ... part of the game----" his voice was rough
through sheer discomfort.  "If you had, I deserved it, Fantine--a young
ass--that's all right.  I'd have ruined _you_ without a thought--in
another way, but it's just as bad.  There isn't a penny to choose
between us.  Besides, I _knew_--when I left you that night.  I saw your
husband come up the stairs--and--afterwards--I guessed the truth.  You
were driven to it--it wasn't your fault."

He paused a moment, his face grim.

"A jolly good lesson," he said slowly, "it taught me to be ... less of
a fool.  So don't let that worry you, but help me now--with this damned
villa!"

The very depth of his pity for her made him brusque and he ran on
jerkily.

"So that's settled.  I want your answer.  D'you think you could stand
it?  It's jolly dull--but with no pet dogs or flannel petticoats!
Could a 'real lady' become a caretaker?"

She nodded her head, unable to speak, shaken by a fit of coughing.  A
chilliness was in the air.  McTaggart rose to his feet.

"Come along--it's getting damp.  We'll go back to my rooms--I'd like to
fix this up to-night as I'm off to Scotland early to-morrow."

He held out his hand with a boyish laugh.  "Like old times, eh,
Fantine?" and helped her up on to her feet, his own eyes suspiciously
bright.

With trembling fingers she lowered her veil and shook out the folds of
her shabby dress as McTaggart still rattled on, giving her time to
recover.

"I want you to travel to Viareggio as soon as you can.  It's a long
journey--d'you mind that?"

"No"--she laughed shakily--"one goes through France?"  Her voice was
wistful.

"Yes--I'll write to-night to Cook's--get you a berth.  Would you like
to stay for a night in Paris on your way? that would be wiser----" he
guessed her thought.

"I'm awfully glad you like the idea--it's really luck my meeting you.
I've got a place in Siena, you know, and a flat in Rome, so I daresay I
shall look in sometimes--break my journey to see that you're behaving
yourself."

They walked along the narrow strip of grass that fringed the row of
chairs.  But when they came out on to the path Fantine glanced to the
right and paused, looking up at the huge statue, its shield aloft
against the sky.

"Well--are you making a fresh conquest?"

"Yes--and no!" she laughed softly.  "I say good-bye to my friend,
Achille--it's just a politeness of mine, Pierrot."

For a moment she stood there, eyes raised.

McTaggart, pitiful, guessed her thought.  He saw that the post,
invented for her, was not for long as he watched her face.

And something of the old glamour, the memory of the days that were,
brought a sharp pain to his heart.  He tried in vain to conceal his
fear.

But Fantine knew.  She nodded her head.

"In case," she murmured, "I don't return."

Then, gaily, to the statue.

"Au revoir, cher Monsieur!"




CHAPTER XXVIII

A month had flown by on the swift wings of Summer.  Already a crispness
in the air heralded in Dame Autumn; with her rainbow-hued cloak
trailing golds and reds, glittering with the diamonds strewn by the
first hoar frost, as she passed.

At Worthing the beach marked the change of seasons.  The bathing tents
were folded up, the deck chairs had departed.  Loving couples no longer
lay stretched out on the warm pebbles, their faces hidden by
handkerchiefs or the folds of a comic paper, in the fond belief--like
the proverbial ostrich--that the rest of them (hands locked together or
arms clinging around waists) was invisible to the critical public.  The
motor char-a-bancs ceased running, all save one that still plied on
that straight white road that leads to Brighton, over the long bridge
guarded by lions and past the little settlements of clustering
bungalows.

In the back of that conveyance, on this particular sunny day, a single
occupant was exposed to the keen breeze, protected by a motor veil of
dark blue chiffon that obscured the outline of her face.  The wide
inviting stretch of sea with its curling waves, ivory tipped, was lost
to her, and the silvery gleam of gulls dipping to the water.  In the
blue arch of the sky above, clouds of dazzling white were driven by the
east wind, massed together to salute the great golden sun.

It was not only the heavy veil that shut the vision from her sight.
For Mrs. Uniacke was not, in any sense, an observant woman.  Beauty as
beauty left her untouched or filled her with a faint distress.  There
was so much "to be done in life"--this was her strenuous daily
creed--that to pause by the way and enjoy God's gifts became a sinful
waste of the fleeting moments, destined to work.

Her restlessness of body and mind forbade that pleasant state in which
the spirit frees itself from more material cares to absorb Nature's
picture, utterly soothed by a sense of colour or light or of exquisite
proportion.

Yet, for all her unconsciousness of the birth of a new season on Earth,
a similar awakening stirred in the depths of her woman's heart.  For
the object of her journey was a meeting with Stephen Somerfield; her
thoughts were full of that young man to the exclusion of all else.

The delicate flush on her bird-like face and the soft excitement in her
eyes betrayed the emotions that warred within, self-accusing, yet
triumphant.  At the end of a long spell of silence Stephen had written
a clever letter explaining away his neglect of Jill and throwing
himself on the mother's mercy.

He had placed the blame on the girl's shoulders with a brief account of
her attitude vis-a-vis to himself, her rebellious disregard of his
wishes, her flat refusal to take his advice.

"I can quite understand how you feel"--he wrote with apparent
candour--"I can find no excuse for my conduct.  But you must see how
difficult it was for me to force myself on such a plainly unwilling
companion--one, moreover, who had not scrupled to openly show her
dislike to me.

"I was there in a semi-official position.  I had my own work to do--not
militant, it is true, but important in its lesser way.  On my arrival
the night before I found a mass of correspondence--the trouble incident
to the fire, police reports, etc., etc.--and had I not known your keen
desire that Jill should be left in my charge, I should not have gone to
the meeting at all, but acted as I eventually did.

"I see now that I was wrong to stay away, but--to speak plainly--Jill
had been _so_ rude to me that my pride at last rose in arms.

"I knew she was with some excellent women, two of whom were your
personal friends, and, of course, I hadn't the faintest idea there was
likely to be serious trouble.

"Believe me, dear Mrs. Uniacke, I am more grieved than I can
express..." the letter became personal, dealing with the break in their
friendship, begged humbly for forgiveness and craved a "final
interview" at Brighton, where he awaited her answer.

Luckily for the young man's object, his apology had been well timed,
arriving at Worthing late one evening at the close of a stormy family
scene.

Mrs. Uniacke's displeasure had fallen heavily on Jill.  For Roddy, at
last, had summoned courage to approach his mother on the subject of the
profession to which he aspired; to be met with immediate opposition,
rendered more galling by contempt.  "Become an Artist!"  The soldier's
widow stared at the boy's excited face.  "Whoever heard of such
nonsense?  You'll go to Sandhurst if I can afford it--that was what
your father planned."

Jill had plunged into the fray, backing up the youthful rebel, had lost
her temper and spoken strongly, stirred by her own College traditions,
on the liberty due to the new generation.

Mrs. Uniacke, whose strength did not lie in argument, claimed that
until he came of age Roddy owed her unswerving obedience.

Jill had actually laughed at this.

"You can't expect it--not on a subject as serious as his whole future.
He's a human being--just like you!--Why can't he have a voice in the
matter?  He's not fitted for a soldier--he's an artist to his finger
tips.  Well!--you can try and send him to Sandhurst but you can't
_make_ him pass his Exams!"

Roddy, white lipped and deeply hurt, had caught his sister's eye and
chuckled.

"That's a sound idea," he said.  "Thank you, Jill--I won't forget."

At this point Mrs. Uniacke had fallen back on her last resource--tears;
and, her handkerchief to her eyes, had ordered her children up to bed.

"Just as if we still wore socks!" Jill, rebellious, had whispered as
they climbed up the dingy stairs of the tiny furnished house by the
sea.  "Never mind, old boy--you _shan't_ be a soldier.  I'll see to
that.  In a few years' time I'll have my money that Father left me.
She can't touch that!  I believe Aunt Elizabeth would help if it came
to a pinch..." she broke off as "Rat-tat"--down below came the
postman's knock.

She leaned over the banisters and called to the servant in the hall.

"Anything for me, Ada?"

"No, miss--one for your mother."

A shadow fell across Jill's face.  She longed for a letter from
McTaggart, now staying with the Leasons.  Then she smiled back at her
brother.

"Let's hope it's not from Stephen!"

"Pity she doesn't make _him_ a soldier.  He'd get the V.C.----" said
the boy.  At this they both laughed aloud.

Mrs. Uniacke, in the drawing-room, heard the sound and hardened her
heart.  With trembling fingers she tore the envelope open and hastily
read the contents.

She had quarrelled with Stephen on Jill's behalf ... The simple fact in
her present mood was magnified into sacrifice of her own happiness for
her daughter.

A lonely woman--so she judged herself, plaintively--she had severed the
link that bound her to her truest friend ... Her thoughts ran on
tumultuously.

Obeying a sudden powerful impulse, she sat down, then and there, and
wrote an answer to the man, agreeing to an interview.

The next morning she had a wire begging her to come to lunch at the
little hotel where he stayed.  Defiance of her children's opinion had
spurred her into a prompt acceptance and here she was, embarked on
adventure, without their faintest suspicion of it.

She had advanced, as her excuse for the journey, a day's shopping at
Brighton, salving her conscience with the thought of several
commissions she might do.  Jill, still in heavy disgrace, had breathed
an inward sigh of relief, little guessing the real cause for the outing
was the hated Stephen.

Now, as the heavy char-a-banc churned along the dusty road, Mrs.
Uniacke's mind was bent on the approaching interview.  She would not
acknowledge to herself how much the man meant in her life.  With
resolutely blind-fold eyes she called herself his "Second Mother."

But, in truth, a new feeling had crept into their intercourse of late,
a hint of sentiment veiled in respect, that held no trace of maternal
love.  He ruled her under the smiling mask of a fellow worker--a
willing slave!  And for this delicate, middle-aged lady an Indian
Summer tide of love had dawned unrealized: a love that was none the
less perilous for its comfortable cloak of friendship.

For little Mrs. Uniacke, that ardent champion of Woman's Rights, was a
slave herself--to convention.  She knew to an inch what was "proper"
and appropriate to "her dignity."  He was young enough to be her son.
That placed the intimacy to her simple mind on a decorous footing.  She
could exert a motherly "influence" over his life.

The char-a-banc put her down opposite the Aquarium.  She had but a few
steps to walk up the Old Steine to find the Hotel facing the narrow
side street and advertising "superb sea view."

A German waiter greeted her, struggling into his tail-coat.

"Ach yes!  By hier, Madame.  Mizter Zomerfield, 'e waits..."

He threw open a dingy door marked "Private."  For the first time Mrs.
Uniacke felt a slight sense of embarrassment--the shrinking that a
stranger knows on landing in an unknown country.

But the next moment she stood inside a small sitting-room, neatly
furnished, with a luncheon table, gay with flowers, laid for two.  She
was alone.

As the door closed she turned to the glass and threw back her veil with
a sigh of relief.

In the gray light filtering through the somewhat heavily curtained
window her face looked surprisingly youthful.  The delicate colour in
her cheeks, the bright eyes and soft hair were framed by the floating
folds of chiffon; her figure, still slender, was almost girlish in the
coat and skirt of navy serge that opened over a white silk blouse, with
its narrow tie of mauve ribbon.

And, for a moment, she felt startled.  What was she doing in this
place?  She thrust away the faint scruple, conscious of its absurdity.
Many a time had she and Stephen stayed together in hotels, engaged on
their suffrage work, without the slightest self-consciousness.

Yet this was different...

Her colour heightened as she asked herself the reason why?  Then she
heard his step in the hall and turned quickly away from the glass.

Stephen, slim and elegant, in his grey flannels, stood before her, hand
outstretched, a welcoming light in the long lashed green eyes.

"H'are you?"  He held in his clasp her fingers that, despite her will,
trembled slightly, and gazed down at the pretty flushed face.

"This is good of you, dear lady,"--his voice was low and sentimental.
"More than I deserve, you know."

Carefully he closed the door as she murmured something in reply and
came back to her side.

"I never saw you look so well!  It's just too ... nice to have you
here--and I'm goin' to ask a further favour----" he gave her a
beseeching glance--"Just to postpone our ... business talk--and lunch
first--without a word of all that painful Cluar affair.  _Do_ be kind
and say you will?  I promise to listen afterwards----" boyishly he
added the words--"to all that you have to say to me.  I know you feel
awfully vexed--but just--for a little--let's forget it."

Inwardly Mrs. Uniacke felt relieved at the postponement of the lecture
she had prepared.

Still--there was her "dignity."  She must uphold that at any cost.

"I should prefer to discuss it first.  That was my object in coming
here, as I wrote in my letter, Stephen."

"Ah--don't be hard on me," he broke in quickly, seeing her waver.
"I've been through such a bad time."  He gave a sigh that was genuine,
aware of a new financial crisis.  To quarrel with the woman before him
was the last thing he desired.  He owed her now a considerable sum of
money, far more than he could repay.  As friends this state of
indebtedness could drift on indefinitely, but if it came to a real
rupture?  He shrank from the thought of a settlement.

Far better, he said to himself, to plunge deeper and make her his wife.
And why not?  It would mean a home and a certain settled future for
him.  He could lead his own life as before, with a little care for
"appearances."  The very fact of the years between them should make her
indulgent to the faults of youth.

This was at the back of his mind, as he went on in a pleading voice:
"And I'm not _altogether_ to blame ... so do grant me this last
favour."  He glanced sideways at the table and his face brightened.  In
its pail of ice stood a large bottle, the neck wreathed in gold foil.
This would help!

"Well--it's a bargain?"--he smiled at her--"no real business till after
lunch--it will be like old times!--And then--you shall scold me as much
as you wish!"

Mrs. Uniacke gave way, conscious of the familiar charm.  Stephen,
inwardly amused, rang the bell and they sat down.

The meal had been ordered with special care.  Few women, accustomed
daily to study the tastes of their men at home before their own choice
of dishes, can resist the subtle appeal of a menu, ordered by one of
the opposite sex, in which each item shows an unselfish effort to
please the invited guest.

Mrs. Uniacke ate lobster and crisp salad (which she loved)--grouse
(sternly forbidden at home on the score of extravagance) and confessed
gaily to greediness when a chocolate souffle was laid before her
followed up by hothouse peaches and a fragrant cup of coffee.  Even her
favourite "marrons glaces" graced the narrow luncheon table and the air
was sweet with the scent of roses in their last glory of second bloom.

"What a banquet!  My dear boy--I'm afraid you've ruined yourself for
me.  But I really have enjoyed it so!"  (The champagne had done its
work.  Like all women who suffer from nerves alcohol took immediate
effect, to be followed, however, by a reaction almost as quick, and
lachrymose.)

Stephen knew this and decided to burn his boats without delay.

"Nothing's good enough for you!"  He left his seat and handed her a
cigarette with a smile.

But she laughed it away, her eyes bright.

"I never smoke--you know that, Stephen."

"Try one.  I think you'd look prettier still..." he checked himself.
"Sorry--it slipped out!--I forgot you always hated compliments."

"You forget I'm an old woman!"  She caught at the phrase in
self-defence.  "Old enough to be your mother."

"_You_...?"--he stooped over her--"I ... sometimes ... almost wish you
were!"

"Stephen!"--she drew away, startled.  "You mustn't talk like that!"
But she felt a curious exultation, a sudden throb of fear and pride.
For oh!  Youth is sweet to hold and sad to lose; and a woman clings to
the delusion for long years after grey hairs appear.

"Well--I do.  You're too ... sweet!  Don't you know what it means to
me?  Have you never _even_ guessed?"  He broke off, his eyes dilated.

Mrs. Uniacke shrank back.

"Don't--you mustn't.  Stephen!--you're mad!" ... For the man was on his
knees by her side; her hands were caught, she could feel his lips,
smooth and young, pressed upon them.

"I can't help it!--You know _now_.  Of course you'll send me out of
your life.  But, this once, I've got to tell you--I love you so!"--the
words were out.

And, indeed, a spark of truth lay in the declaration.  This lover's
scene, carefully rehearsed by him, found him amazed at the strength of
his own desire.  He stood upon the brink of passion.  For habit plays
queer tricks, and the daily intercourse of years had flowered unseen.
This was the fruit.

All that was good in Somerfield went out toward the loving woman who
had played the part of mother to him, a lonely man through his own
folly.  And all that was base prompted him to take this chance that
life still offered: a home, the tender care of a wife in the midst of
financial ruin.

He had staked on the last deal of the cards.  The costly lunch, the
private room, the wine, the flowers ... his own youth ... thrown down
with a gambler's hand.

But to the woman sitting there no such sordid picture rose.  She was
lost in a glory that dazzled her--this wonderful new gift of love!

Tears stole into her eyes over the bent head pressed to her hands--the
thick, fair hair with its youthful gloss, the supple shoulders that
breathed of strength.  Could she--dare she live out the dream?  For she
knew, at last, that she loved Stephen; that this Indian Summer of life
could be hers, a swift thrusting away of age.

No more need she face the lonely years.

Jill would marry.  Roddy go forth to fight his battle with the
world--to disappoint her cherished hopes.  What was left her?  The
tears ran down.

"Stephen..."

He raised his eyes to hers, bewildered himself by his own emotion.

"I know----" a sudden despair gripped him.  "Your children?"  He
watched her moodily, trying to define her thoughts.  Then, as across
some silent pool, a mischievous breeze sends an answering ripple, he
saw a wave of resentment pass over her tense and delicate face.

"Jill!"  The name slipped from her lips.  The old rancour against the
child who had outgrown her, forming views on life apart from the
mother's standard and held to them, strong, rebellious, rose up,
flooding her with a painful sense of helplessness.

She did not see that her Suffrage work had interfered with that of her
home, that her own involuntary neglect of her children had sapped her
influence.

"I should not ask for _Jill's_ advice!--What does she ever care for
mine?  She will go her own way--to the end!--And so shall I."--Her
voice rang with a new imperious note.  Stephen saw he had gained the
day.

"Mary!"--his arms were around her.  "You will...?  You _do_ ... care a
little?"

Triumph flamed in his face but the fond woman saw only love.

"Wait----" she drew back, timid again.  "I must think first.  It's too
serious.  I can't answer you like this..."  But the man held her still
closer.

"You can--you _shall_!"  He knew his power--"I want you.  You shan't go
from here--except as my promised wife!  It's either _that_--or
good-bye."  He felt her quiver at the word.  "I can't stand it any
more--this playing at friendship--it's not fair!  Say you love me--say
it, Mary?"  There came a desperate little pause.

Mrs. Uniacke felt the room spinning round before her eyes.  In a mist
she saw her lover's face, heard the ardent, pleading voice...

And the sense of a dream returned to her--a dream too sweet to
relinquish.  She must not--_could_ not wake again!

With a stifled cry she kissed Stephen.




CHAPTER XXIX

McTaggart, when he left the Leasons, broke his long journey home by a
week's stay at North Berwick with a college friend, addicted to golf.

From thence he drifted down to Rugby, visiting his old school with the
somewhat wistful pleasure that lies in conjuring up boyhood's days.

But all the time he was keenly aware of the magnet that drew him to the
South.  Each careless, friendly letter of Jill's increased his desire
to see her.  In Scotland he had met Cydonia, through a mischievous
trick of Lady Leason's.  But his old infatuation was dead.  He could
find no lingering charm about her.

Marriage had changed her whole outlook.  For, with it, ambition seemed
to have flowered, a late but very vigorous plant, to the absorption of
her nature.  More serious, more composed, she had that solid wedded
look which marks a certain type of blonde, even in girlhood statuesque.

She ordered her little husband about with a regal calm, and entertained
loftily her numerous guests, among whom the clergy were freely
sprinkled.  McTaggart found her heavy and dull and refused her pressing
invitation to a week-end party, with a smile, realizing that he owed it
alone to the change in his fortunes.

In the background of the historic Castle that the Flemmings had taken
for the Summer Mrs. Cadell hovered, restless; superintending domestic
details with a stern eye on her husband, when he turned up from time to
time, a social trial to the guests.

Euan Flemming reminded McTaggart of the White Rabbit in Alice in
Wonderland.

With his nervous manner and neat dress he seemed to exist in perpetual
fear of offending those useful political props whom Cydonia collected
on his behalf.

"Euan," she told her mother one day, "always talks to the wrong people.
So now I have invented a sign which he understands and when I use it he
moves on to another guest.  It's really very tiresome of him!  At the
party I gave for the Premier he was lost to view for over an hour and I
found him in the library showing his books to a struggling author and
discussing a new method of binding!"

When he compared Cydonia with Jill at the luncheon party to which Lady
Leason had invited the Flemmings during his visit, McTaggart wondered
not a little at this love affair of his youth.

Even during the dinner that followed at the Castle, in all the
magnificence of her surroundings, Cydonia left him shrewdly amused and
indifferent.

He told himself that here again was a proof of the depths of his love
for Jill.

Neither Fantine nor Mrs. Flemming could add a beat to his steady pulse.

At North Berwick a new temptation awaited him in his host's sister, one
of the most beautiful girls he had seen for many a long year.

But, although daily opportunities for flirtation offered themselves to
the pair, McTaggart reaped no advantage from them.  They parted in firm
but simple friendship.

Surely he knew his heart at last?--that vagrant double heart of his!
No other woman could reign in it, side by side with his little Jill.

He loved her.  And he felt afraid--a new experience for McTaggart!  He
began to fear that the sunny weeks by the sea might hold some dangerous
rival; procrastination prove his undoing.

Jill herself, young, impulsive, might weary of such a tardy wooing; and
he searched her letters anxiously, striving in vain to find some sign
that the girl's heart was indeed his.

For they corresponded regularly.  But the simple, almost boyish
epistles rang with no note but friendliness, showed no desire for his
return.

When he learned in a hurried line that Bethune had reappeared on the
scene with his motor, taking the girl for a drive, it scattered his
last remaining scruple.  He left for London one bright day in late
September, resolute to put an end to his "probation," seek out Jill and
learn his fate.

On his way from St. Pancras he called at the Club on the chance of a
letter, and a sudden memory assailed him of that other message found
there, summoning him to Italy.  It had changed the whole course of his
life.

He recalled to mind his arrival at Siena; his interview with his new
Aunt and his first faint doubts regarding a marriage with Cydonia.

Once more, in imagination, he stood in the long gallery lined with
pictures--those faces of his ancestors which seemed to frown at the
thought of Cadell!

A sudden wave of exultation went to his heart as he thought of Jill
taking her place in that noble throng.  Surely they would welcome her?
Jill, with her frank simplicity--that truest mark of good descent--with
her clean-cut, proud young face, her clever brain and fine courage.

As he turned over the pile of letters handed him by the Club porter,
his thoughts were anxious.  Yes--here it was!  Bless the child!  He
hastened back to his waiting taxi with a feeling that no profane eyes
must watch his face as he read her letter.

But at the first opening lines he frowned with an exclamation of
disgust, aware that here was grave trouble, that the girl he loved
faced despair.

"Damn the chap!"

He could hardly believe the astounding news.  He bit his lip.  Mrs.
Uniacke had married Stephen!  Why--it was incredible!

Secretly--at a Registry--in Brighton--the day before.  No wonder Jill
had always held such deep distrust of the "parasite!"

Mrs. Uniacke--and Stephen...

This was the end of the long "platonic" friendship between the curious
pair, the "motherly interest" of the woman!--McTaggart sneered, his
face hard.

"I don't know what to do with Roddy."  Jill wrote from the depths of
her heart.  "I never saw him so cut up.  Oh, Peter--isn't it
_dreadful_?  They've gone off on their honeymoon--for a fortnight, so
Mother writes--and then Stephen's coming back--to _live_ with us ... in
_Father's_ place!"

McTaggart could hardly restrain his wrath.

"What a fool the woman must be!  A dirty trick too--this secrecy--with
her own children.  Oh--damn the man.  He's feathered his nest--you bet
he has!  Well----" he read the letter through--"that settles it--my
affair!  Jill shan't live for a day with Stephen as a stepfather.  I'll
see to that!--Hurry up!" he called to the driver and went on, forming
his plans.  "I'll go down to Worthing to-night.  Those poor
children--all alone! ... I call it a most cruel trick--suddenly
springing her marriage upon them."

Mario was already there when he reached his rooms, busy unpacking.

McTaggart checked him.

"Look here--leave all that and throw some things into a bag.  Enough
for the night--I'm off in another hour to Worthing."

"Sissignore."  The man's quick eyes fell on the letter McTaggart still
held and he smiled to himself.  He knew the writing well by now and the
eager look it brought to his young master's face.

Here was "l'amore..."--(postmark Worthing!)  The sooner the marriage
came off the better.  This was the valet's private thought.  He hated
these dingy, narrow rooms and longed for a better establishment.  But
out aloud he merely asked if McTaggart would need his services.

"No--I'll wire if I want you, Mario.  Hurry, now--And put in that suit
the tailor sent before we left.  The blue serge--and some decent
shirts.  I haven't time to change now."

He picked up the A.B.C.--studied it and his face cleared.

"You'll have to meet me at Victoria--the Brighton line--seven-forty.
Get me a first-class return--here's some money.  I'm off to dine.  You
understand?  And don't be late."

"The Signore can count on me."  Mario's black eyes flashed.  He
revelled in this love affair.

"And good fortune go with you--long life--and many children!" he added
softly to himself as the door closed with a bang.  Then, with his
quick, careful hands, he folded a pale grey tie that appealed to
him--it looked bridal!--and thought tenderly of Lucia...

McTaggart bolted a hurried meal at Victoria, one eye on the clock.  He
caught up a _Globe_ as he passed the book stall and found his man in
the front part of the long train, cool and collected, keeping the seat
with his suit-case.

"Change at Brighton," said the guard.  "You'll have twenty minutes to
wait.  Thank you, sir--there's no stop."  He waved his arms--they were
off.

The carriage held another man.  McTaggart gave him a careless glance as
they puffed out of the dark station and leaned back in his corner.

The stranger opened a narrow bag beside him and hunted for a cap.
Unconsciously watching him, McTaggart saw that a stethoscope lay on the
top of the littered contents.

"A doctor," he decided as his companion rose to his feet, and carefully
placed his top-hat on the rack, then turned to McTaggart.

"D'you mind this window down?" he asked.

"Not at all--I should prefer it.  It's close to-night."

The stranger nodded.

"I generally find it so in town--after Brighton, where I live."

McTaggart drew a breath of relief as the air circulated freely.  His
face was flushed from his hurried meal, his blue eyes bright with
excitement.

"I expect you do."  He opened his paper, not in the mood for
conversation, carelessly skimming down the news, his mind partially
abstracted.

But suddenly an exclamation broke, unconsciously, from his lips.  He
bent forward so that the light fell full on the sheet before him.

For a paragraph had caught his attention.

"_Tragic Fate of a Harley Street Doctor_."  The headline was in leaded
type.  He read it through with amazement.

It could not be...?  Yes--it was!  The specialist he had consulted
about his heart four years ago.  The great man was insane!  The paper
danced before his eyes...

He steadied it and read on.  The tragic scene was given in full where
his confreres, hastily called in, had borne him off to an Asylum, their
suspicions roused for some time past.

A series of grave mistakes, of "strange and eccentric diagnoses," had
led up to the final lapse of self-control.

They had found him surrounded by his flowers, the room littered with
fresh plants, playing like a little child--planning a garden on the
floor.

Beyond, in the dingy dining-room, were patients waiting and wondering.
The horrible pathos of the affair shocked McTaggart as he read.

But the memory of the doctor's words and his own curious case rose up,
blotting out all other thoughts, as a strange conviction grew upon him.

His "double heart"...?  Was it possible that this was one of the "grave
mistakes?"--a fantastic theory born of that diseased, already failing
brain.

He felt suddenly overcome.  Tired from his earlier journey, with the
bad news concerning Jill, and the hurry of the last hour, this fresh
excitement was the climax.  The colour faded from his cheeks.  He
leaned back and closed his eyes, unaware that the stranger opposite was
watching him with grave attention.

Roused by his sharp exclamation, the doctor's professional interest was
stirred by the sudden pallor following the feverish flush on the young
man's face.  He had marked the brilliance of the eyes and the strained
air of excitement about him, the attentive care of his valet, and now
this sudden look of prostration.

A wave of telepathy must have warned McTaggart of his scrutiny.  He
roused himself and glanced up, fired with an instantaneous resolve.

"Are you a doctor?" he asked abruptly.

So carried away was he by his thoughts that the strangeness of the
sudden question did not occur to him at the moment.

The other showed no sign of surprise.  "Yes."  He moved quickly nearer.

"D'you feel seedy?"  His voice was soothing.

"Good Lord, no!"  McTaggart laughed, slightly ashamed, collecting his
wits.  "You must forgive me--the fact is I've just read some astounding
news that bowled me over--in this paper--perhaps you've seen it?"----

He handed the _Globe_ across, a finger that trembled slightly marking
the famous paragraph.

"About the specialist?  Yes--that's it," as the doctor gave it his
attention.  "It's an odd thing--I consulted the man a few years since
about my heart.  I'm wondering now if his verdict was wrong?"

The doctor's face went graver still.  He guessed that the young man
before him had suffered the dread of all heart patients and now this
further anxiety had been added, with a sense of shock.

"They say there," went on McTaggart, "that his brain has been failing
for some years--that he made mistakes--you see the line--'_strange and
eccentric diagnoses_'--I wonder ... do you mind if I tell you?"

He hesitated, but the other answered: "Please do"--realizing that the
strain might be lessened by a confidence.

"He said I had a double heart."  McTaggart laughed nervously, as he saw
the doctor's incredulous face, that went quickly blank again.  "He said
my circulation was good--that it didn't affect my health in the least.
But there it was--a double heart--a separate organ on either side!  It
sounds mad--I'll admit that.  But I never dreamed he could be
mistaken--a man with a reputation like his!"

"Of course."  The doctor nodded his head.  "I believe there _have_ been
cases on record.  But I've never met anyone who had come across
it--professionally or otherwise.  It's quite unique."

"No?"  McTaggart smiled back, relieved anew by the words.  "I didn't
bother much about it.  There was no danger, so he said.  But it's been
... I can't exactly explain--a sort of perpetual discomfort to me."

"I can quite understand that," said the other and his voice was full of
sympathy.  He had seen, at ambulance lectures, strong men faint at the
sight of diagrams explaining the dangers that menaced the heart.

He knew the fear that underlay any weakness of that organ and he felt,
too, a curious interest in the living case before his eyes.

McTaggart liked his new friend's face and the quiet courtesy of the
man.  He was urged anew by the first impulse that had moved him to
confide in a stranger.

"Look here----" his voice was abrupt out of sheer nervousness.  "I'm
going to make an odd suggestion--I hope you won't be offended by it?
The fact is--just now--it's rather important that I should know where I
stand--and get to the bottom of this!  I want to marry----" his colour
rose under the bronze of his skin, but he went on doggedly, "I'd like
to be quite sure--first.  That I'm sound, you know--and all that ...
I'm going down--to see her--to-night..."

The doctor's eyes began to twinkle as McTaggart laughed boyishly; then,
gravely, he answered him.

"You're quite right--I wish more men would take that view of marriage!
It's the sane one, the _only_ one that's going to do any good to the
race."

Quite unconsciously McTaggart had started him on his hobby, Eugenics.
He felt drawn to the young fellow, with his frank speech and handsome
face.

"I want you now, if you'll be so kind," McTaggart persisted--"to
examine my heart.  We're alone--it's a non-stop train--as private as
any consulting room.  But, of course, I know it's an odd request..." he
stammered a little, hunting for words--"unprofessional, perhaps..." he
broke off, finding it impossible to suggest a fee in the way he wished.

"Certainly," said his new friend, "if you really wish it.  The only
thing against it is the noise of the train.  I should have preferred to
wait until we reached Brighton.  We shall get there very shortly and
then if you would come back home with me I could make a thorough
examination."

"I'm afraid that's impossible," said McTaggart.  "I'm going straight on
to Worthing.  There wouldn't be time..." his face had dropped and the
doctor, seeing it, made up his mind.

"Very well--we'll do it now.  Luckily I've my stethoscope with me----"
he opened his bag as he spoke.  "I've been up to town to see a patient."

McTaggart stood up and took off his coat, then his waistcoat.

"It's awfully good of you--I'm really tremendously obliged..." he went
on with his undressing.

But the doctor was almost as keen as himself to investigate this
curious case.  He said so--tactfully--to set his new patient at ease.

In a few minutes it was over.

"I can't find anything wrong with you.  Your heart seems perfectly
sound to me.  The beat is a little fast just now, probably through
excitement--but steady and strong.  It ought to take you comfortably
into your nineties!"

He smiled as he spoke, holding out his hand.

"I congratulate you--sound as a rock!"

McTaggart wrung it in speechless gratitude.  Then he struggled into his
clothes.

"Well--I'm glad that nightmare's over!  My double heart--Good Lord!"
His laugh hid more than the doctor guessed--those long years of
indecision, of weakness in the hands of women...

What a fool he had been!  He saw now how often he had excused himself
in the past on the score of his physical peculiarity for what was
merely lack of control.

They chatted for a little time.  Then McTaggart, rather red, drew out
his sovereign purse, but the doctor checked him with a gesture.

"No--I won't hear of it!  It's been a pleasure--honestly.  If you feel
at all indebted to me--you might ask me to your wedding."

"I will.  But I wish ... Look here, sir--there must be some Hospital
you're interested in at Brighton.  Perhaps you would give it ...
this--from me?"

His new friend laughed.

"Well ... all right----" the coins changed hands.  "You're a loser any
way, you know.  You've just got rid of an extra heart."

"Thank goodness!"  McTaggart laughed--"I find one quite sufficient."
His mind swerved aside to Jill, his face softening as he spoke.

The doctor guessed the trend of his thoughts and picked up the fallen
paper.

"Will you lend me this for a few minutes?"  He settled himself behind
the folds, a smile on his rather stern face as the lover gazed out of
the window.

They had come to that picturesque bridge of stone spanning the valley
below the Downs and already the air was sharp and sweet with the first
breath of the sea beyond.

Over the smooth curve of the hills a crescent moon was shining clear.
The hushed Earth lay beneath, bathed in the silvery light ...

And, suddenly, a memory stirred in the young man's heart, filled with
tender dreams of the girl he loved--the echo of long forgotten words.

"It's under the heavy cloud you stand ... the cloud of a lie ... but it
clears ... it clears..."

McTaggart started at the thought.  Why--by Heaven! she had been right.
His "double heart?"

It _was_ a lie.  He tried to recall the gypsy's speech, the end of the
curious prophecy.  What was it she had said of the Moon? and the
Tide...?  He stared out into the night and slowly it returned to him,
with the jingle of bangles, the noise of the Fair.

"Between two fires you will burn and burn--And then ... the light fades
... on the turn of the Tide ... there's the Lucky Moon and the Dream of
your life...!"

The dream of his life?--Why, that meant Jill!



At Worthing he found a single cab, with a driver, elderly, garrulous.
He sat sideways on the box in order to point out local features of
interest; the reins loose in his hands, throwing remarks back to
McTaggart.

"Town 'All!" he waved his whip, a worn-out stump without a lash, toward
that imposing structure.  "The Picture Palace!--'Old up, me lass!"  The
ancient mare between the shafts responded coquettishly to the call,
aware of the subtle compliment, tossing her venerable head.

"The Pier, sir--as was washed in 'alf in the big gale--a crool
business.  Cost the Corporation no end--This 'ere's the Promenade..."

McTaggart woke from his dream of Jill to gaze at the wide stretch of
water.

The beach, white under the moon, shelved down to the smooth sand,
dove-grey and broken by rocks low and black, where silver pools lay
fringed with sea weed and emerald samphire.

It crept out, like an endless scroll, till it touched the dark line of
sea and was met by a single crested wave that broke upon it,
noiselessly.

"The tide is very low to-night?" McTaggart spoke at last to the driver.

"Yessir----" the man followed his gaze.  "It 'ud be now just on the
turn.  Woodford Road, I think you said?"

"Yes.  There's no number--it's called 'Rose Mount'!"

"Right, sir--I know the 'ouse."  They turned abruptly from the sea, up
a narrow road in the old town, passed a Terrace and came to a gate,
open, that showed a curving alley between hedges, neatly clipped, of
Euonymus, thick with dust.

The cab drew up and the man descended.

"An orkard place," he said, "with luggage.  There's two cottages up
there--'Sea-view' and 'Rose Mount.'  The one you want is the last, on
the right.  Shall I carry yer bag, sir?  The 'orse won't move."

"No--I'm not staying here," McTaggart hastily explained--"just going in
to see some friends.  I shall want you to wait--perhaps some time..."
He glanced up the road as he spoke and saw that a little public house
stood at the end of the empty street.

"You'd better go and have a drink.  But keep an eye on my suit-case."
He handed the smiling driver a shilling.

"Right, sir--thank ye.  I'll be 'ere."

He took the coin, pocketed it, gazing up at the sky.

"Turning my money," he explained.  "A new moon, sir--it brings luck."

"I hope so," said McTaggart.  He felt oddly nervous now as he passed
down the dusty path with its clipped hedge on either side.

A green door ended it, with a gaping crack, through which he peered and
he saw a sun dried little garden where a few nasturtiums still
straggled in a bed bordered with cockle shells.

He lifted the latch and walked in.

A cottage with a French window, wide open on the scrap of lawn, was
before him, rendered picturesque by the magic light of the moon.  Over
the porch the last white rose of September hung, already withered but
triumphant witness to the fact that the little dwelling had earned its
name.

Someone was singing.  The clear young voice reached McTaggart where he
stood and a sudden rush of blood to his heart testified to its being
Jill.

How he loved her!  The very sound of her voice brought his secret home
to him and he stole nearer to the house, tip-toe across the grass.

  "My brown boy is hiding away,
  For he stole a horse, so they say.
  The county's men after him ride.
  My boy mocks them, safe by my side..."


The lawless words of the old Folk Song brought a smile to his lips.
The beautiful chords of the Hungarian composer rippled smoothly under
Jill's touch and again her voice rang out, filled with the youthful
pride of the verse:

  "My brown boy is mighty and strong.
  Nine armed sheriffs can't hold him long!
  But when my voice, so soft he hears
  His proud head droops, bowed down with tears..."


Now he stood under the shadow of the wall.  Through the open window he
could see the girl, her clear profile, and the slim moving hands.  He
dared not yet break in upon her--he leaned back, holding his breath.

  "Then I whisper, softly and low
  'Give me thy love, 'ere thou dost go....
  Pretty am I, faithful am I
  Only wayward, wayward am I...!'"


A note of defiance rang through the words, typical of her independent
nature.

It stirred in McTaggart an answering throb of youth.  Here was no easy
conquest before him.  Sweet would be the mastery to hold her in his
arms--this young rebel, tamed at last...

"Jill!" he stepped forward out of the shadows, tall and eager, in the
clear white light.

He saw wonder and swift joy pass across her face as she wheeled round;
then a curious look of repression.

"Hullo, Peter!" she answered him coolly.  "What a surprise!--Have you
dropped from the moon?"




CHAPTER XXX

"I found your letter at my Club," McTaggart explained, "on my way home.
So I thought I'd just run down and see how you and Roddy were getting
on."

He avoided a more direct allusion to Mrs. Uniacke's crowning folly,
though he longed to express his sympathy.  He knew, of old, Jill's
pride.

"Roddy's out," said the girl, "he's gone to the theatre with a school
friend.  He didn't _want_ to, but I told him he must!  He's awfully cut
up about it all.  But it's no good crying over spilt milk"--she smiled
bravely--"is it, Peter?  It's _done_ now.  That's the worst of
marriage--it's for always."  She checked a sigh.

As his eyes drank in the pretty face McTaggart decided to himself it
might be also "the best of it!"  But out aloud he responded quickly,
glad she had broken the ice herself.

"I'm _awfully_ sorry.  I can't tell you how I feel about the whole
affair.  It's ... the limit!" his face was wrathful.  "I'd like to have
Stephen to myself for a little ... active argument.  Gloves off--you
understand?"

"Rather!" her face warmed at the thought.  "It's odd you should say
that, though.  I once dreamed I saw you both fighting a duel.  I
believe I told you--that day in the car--how I woke up before the end,
not knowing which side had won."

McTaggart smiled somewhat grimly.

"It's going to happen.  In real life," he watched the girl.  "But I
can't win, Jill, without your help--that's certain!"

She looked up, surprised at his words.

"Of course I'll help--if I possibly can.  But what do you mean?  Have
you really something against Stephen?"  A shadow fell on her eager face
as she went on, in a burst of confidence.

"It's so awful, Peter, to think that he is, legally, you know, our
stepfather.  It's all right for me because I'm grown up and can hold my
own--but there's poor old Roddy!  He's only a boy--that's where Stephen
gets the pull.  And just now----" she broke off--"I don't think I told
you--in my letters, I mean--but there's been a thundering row at home.

"Roddy's told Mother he wants to be an artist and she's simply furious!
She's set her heart on his going into the Army.  She doesn't see that,
without private means, it's frightfully hard on any man.  It would be,
of course, the Indian Service, and I can't bear to think of Roddy going
abroad for the rest of his life.  For it comes to that, practically.
Besides, he hates the whole idea.  He's not fitted for a soldier.  I'm
sure if Father were alive he'd agree with me.  I _know_ he would!"

She leaned back on the music stool, her hands clasped around her knees.
The moonlight fell full on her face, showing the shadows under her eyes
and the traces of recent suffering.

McTaggart longed to gather her up in his arms and comfort her like a
child.

Never, he thought, had she looked so sweet!  To him her faded gown of
blue--bound about the slender waist with a narrow ribbon of black
velvet, and cut open at her throat, showing, too, the rounded arms bare
to the elbow--so plainly shabby, was the prettiest dress in all the
world.

In her dark hair, forgotten, there lay a single pale nasturtium,
gathered earlier in the garden, and it shone among the ruffled curls
like a star in the shadow of a cloud.

"Roddy _is_ an artist--now."  Jill went on defiantly, unconscious of
the admiration in McTaggart's blue eyes.  "And I don't see why his
whole life should be ruined--just to please Mother!  I told her so.
And I tried, too, to show her that boys nowadays are allowed to choose
their own professions.  That it's prehistoric to say that until he's
twenty-one _she_ 'knows best'--He's a human being, like herself--and
he's only got one life to live!

"Supposing Granny had said to Mother: 'My dear child, you _must_ be an
active Anti-Suffragette--that's my wish.  _I_ know best--I'm older than
you,' d'you think she'd have stood it?  Rather not!  But, of course,
Stephen will take her part--unless----" she laughed, a sudden mischief
breaking through the gravity of her young face--"he thinks Sandhurst
too expensive!  That might save it--happy thought!  I'll find out
exactly what it costs and talk to Stephen--you do, too, whenever you
see him, won't you, Peter?"

"I'll do any mortal thing you ask!"

Something in his earnest voice startled Jill.  She glanced sharply in
his direction through the shadows that were filling the corners of the
room.

"Then that's settled," she said coolly.  "I think, perhaps, I'll light
the lamp.  It's getting almost dark in here."

But he checked her.

"Don't!--The moon's so lovely.  It would be a shame to shut it out."

In the low chair where he sat, half hidden, his back to the light, he
felt he had a certain advantage over the girl facing the window.  He
could watch her to his heart's content, gaze up into those fearless
eyes, with their long and curving sweep of lashes.

"I've got a plan of my own, Jill.  I came down to talk it over."  He
drew his chair a shade nearer, at her feet now--lightly crossed, the
slender ankles visible under the shrunk washing frock.

"I think we can get a rise out of Stephen--if we work together, you and
I."

"How?"  She was watching him doubtfully.  Again he felt that hint of
repression, as though she stood upon her guard.

"I'll tell you about Roddy first--a scheme I have for his future.  To
take him right away from Stephen--kidnap him!" he laughed at her--"and
give him a thorough training abroad.  I thought of the Art schools at
Rome.  Let him have the best masters from the beginning.  If he likes
it he's in the right atmosphere.  It's a wonderful place, to my mind,
Rome ... It's not like a Public School, of course.  At one time I used
to think that ... _everything_!  But now that I've knocked about a bit
I believe that there's nothing half so good as travel for an
Englishman--we're too insular by far!

"He's jolly clever--those sketches of his show he has talent--if not
genius.  I honestly think--with a proper chance--he'll make a name for
himself one day."

"_Do_ you?"  She beamed whole-heartedly on the speaker, self-forgetful
again.  "I think it sounds _too_ lovely!--If only----" she sighed--"it
could be done.  But Mother would never hear of it.  Besides, if she
did, we're not rich.  Think of what it means, Peter.  Why, the journeys
alone, from here to Italy and back again for the holidays, would cost a
perfect little fortune--let alone his other expenses."

"He needn't return to England at all--once he's there," said McTaggart
quickly--"that is, not if you agree to the _whole_ plan."  His voice
changed.  A pleading note crept into it, his eyes watched her anxiously.

"He could come--for the holidays ... to _us_!"

There came a pause, silent, but full.

"Jill--little Jill--don't you understand?  Don't you know what I
_want_--what I'm trying to say?"

From the low chair where he sat he reached up and tried to capture the
hands clasped round her knees.  But, with a swift movement, she drew
them away, her head high, her face proud.

"To _us_!..." she repeated his words slowly.  "Are you asking me to ...
_marry_ you, Peter?"

The words were jerky.  Her gray eyes were fixed still on the garden
ahead as though she dared not look at him.

"Yes," he said simply--"I love you, Jill."

But she sat like a maiden turned to stone, untouched, unresponsive.

The cold hand of fear crept round his heart as he watched her face.

Was she going to refuse him?  Could it be--after all--Bethune!

"Jill--" his voice was very low--"Aren't you going to answer me?"  He
bent closer--"Don't you ... care?"

She stirred restlessly under his eyes, her own averted.  Then she spoke.

"Why should you think ... I cared for you?"  Unconsciously her hand
stole to her throat, feeling for the chain that hung concealed by the
lace of her collar; and, noting the gesture, McTaggart divined her
secret thought.

Light poured in, dispelling his fears.  That scene at Cluar ... the
"double heart!" that lay upon her girlish breast.

"I don't!" he caught her up quickly.  "I only wish to Heaven I did.
You've never given the slightest sign--I know myself ... but not _you_."

He saw her face clear at his words.  She threw him a furtive, sidelong
glance and the long lashes trembled and fell, casting a shadow on her
cheek.

Then she raised her head again with a faintly malicious smile.

"I don't understand yet, Peter.  I always thought we were just friends!
Don't you remember when you returned home from abroad, only this
Summer--you said you wanted me to feel that you were ... well--an
'elder brother.'"  (McTaggart winced at the memory.  It was true: those
were his words.)  "And now--you're going back on that.  Isn't it a
pity, rather--to spoil it all by this new idea?"

"It's not a new idea to me!" his voice was hot, faintly indignant.
"I've loved you for ages past..."  She turned on him with a sudden
gesture that checked the rest of his ardent speech.

"Then why do you tell me this to-night--for the first time?  Why not
before?"  She was on her feet facing him, her face defiant, her eyes
ablaze.

"I know.  You needn't answer me.  It's because of Stephen and
Mother--there!  You think that I shall have a rotten life at home--and
you're _sorry_--that's all!  If you _had_ cared all this time there was
nothing to stop your telling me.  And I don't choose," she stamped her
foot, carried away by a gust of pride, "to be married from a sense of
pity!  I can make my own life for myself.  I've got Roddy ... and heaps
of friends.  I daresay you think it's very kind..."

But McTaggart was at the end of his patience.  "How _dare_ you say that
to me?"  He caught her firmly by the shoulders, his blue eyes full of
anger.  "Look at me!" he compelled her gaze.  "Now--don't you know that
I'm in earnest?"

He could feel her, rigid, under his touch, but the very warmth of her
young body, through the thin summer dress she wore, fired his blood and
he went on, with an ominous break in his voice.

"I see what it is!--I've left it too late.  I ought to have spoken
weeks ago!  But I did it, Jill--for _your_ sake..."

"Did what?"  She bit her lip, fighting against the magnetism of his
youth and her own answering passion.

"Held my tongue," said Peter grimly.

His hands fell away from her.  He turned and stared out of the window.

"Some other fellow, I suppose?"  He addressed the moon-lit patch of
garden.

"No."  Rather quickly, Jill sat down.  She felt her limbs trembling
beneath her.

Deeply annoyed at this sudden weakness, she went on, in a careful voice.

"Don't let's quarrel over it, Peter.  It's ... just a mistake.  Let's
forget it."

To this he deigned no reply, still silent by the window.

She could see his profile against the sky--the well remembered set of
his head on his broad shoulders; his hands were clasped in a hard grip
behind his back.

"Peter?" a faint appeal sounded, against her will.

McTaggart turned, hesitated, then threw himself into his old seat
facing her.

"I'm going to tell you ... everything.  It's not a very pretty
story--in parts, you know.  It's just life--a man's life."  His voice
was hard.

Jill stirred restlessly.  She nodded her head, reclasping her hands in
her old attitude round her knees as though it, somehow, nerved her to
listen.

So he began.  At the very beginning; with his interview in Harley
Street and the mystery of his "double heart."

Jill's grey eyes went wide with wonder.

But he went on without a break.  He told her of Fantine and Cydonia; of
his brief engagement with the latter, and his subsequent disillusion.

For a certain reason of his own he cut out both the time and place,
avoiding mention of his inheritance, merely stating that he had been
jilted.

Had he been watching Jill's face and seen her indignation rise,
flooding the clear skin with colour, his story might have been abridged.

But he still stared out of the window, far from the girl's secret
thought.  ("How dared this creature throw him over! a silly,
brainless..."  Jill choked.)

For now he came to a harder part: that year of light adventures abroad.
But he forged through it ruthlessly, hurting himself and her.  This
threatened Jill's ideals, dragging him out of his secret shrine.
Peter, no longer her childish idol, but a man, made of baser metal.

Still, she sat without movement, rather white, her lips compressed.
She did him the justice in her heart to respect him for his honesty.
But it made a difference even then; though later it strengthened the
reason why, loving her, he had bound himself to silence for a term of
probation.

It accounted, too, for his withdrawal from her society since the day he
had rescued her and brought her from Cluar.  And her secret fear was
slain for good.  The fear that had haunted her proud spirit that,
during her brief unconsciousness, the disarray of her torn dress had
betrayed the little "double heart!"  That gift of his, carelessly
offered, lightly accepted, which had lain, day after day, and night
after night, on the faithful living heart beneath...

So at last he came to the end; his strange experience in the train and
the doctor's verdict; the second one, that had overthrown its shadowy
rival.  That bogey was dead for good.  Jill breathed a sigh of relief.
It was like a page from a Fairy book, the curse some malignant witch
had laid.

"So I haven't a double heart at all..."  McTaggart smiled wearily, "not
even one I can call my own.  It's yours, now--what's left of it!"

He stole a glance at the girl before him.  Her face was pale; her
hands, still clasped, suggested that she held herself, by a strong
effort, cool and apart.

"That's what seems so hard," said Jill.  "We give ... _all_ to the man
we love--and he gives us ... 'what's left.'"

McTaggart was stung by the truth of the words.  "Don't!" there was real
pain in his voice.  "It hurts awfully," he paused.  "If only you
understood men," he went on miserably--"if you knew...!  We're rotters
I'll own.  Young and old--but until a fellow's _really_ in love it
doesn't seem to matter much.  It's just ... well, ordinary life.  And,
Jill----" his eyes were beseeching now--"I think, all the time, it's
been really _you_--though I didn't guess it at the first!

"I've always come back to you--to that dear child's face of
yours--those grey eyes..." he stopped, stung by the fear of the years
ahead without her.

Jill's dark lashes were lowered now.  He tried in vain to probe her
thought, to catch some faint sign of hope.

"I've always come back," he said again, "I always shall.  It's _love_
this time.  It's the woman a man returns to, you know, who holds his
heart in her hands.  Those other ... affairs were mere passion.  I see
it now--now it's too late!  What a fool I've been...!" his head sank
down for a moment on his clenched fists.

Then he raised it and faced Jill, a new light in the blue eyes.

"I love you so," his voice rang, "that, if I thought it were better for
you to go away right out of your life, I believe _now_ I could do it,
Jill.  But I don't.  I _know_ I'd make you happy!"

He saw a quiver cross her face, and breathlessly he leaned toward her.

"_Don't_ you care?  Tell me, Jill.  Couldn't you learn to care ... a
little?"

Slowly the girl raised her eyes.  He saw that they were wet with tears.

"I've loved you all my life," she said.

A cry broke from him.  He slipped down on his knees before her, arms
outstretched.

"Jill! ... My darling!  What do you mean?"

Into the beautiful childish face came a tenderness he had never
known--the dream come true ... the "dream of his life."

"I suppose--I must marry you," said Jill.




CHAPTER XXXI

Miss Elizabeth Uniacke wore an aggressive air.

She stood in front of the mirror, her gray eyes critical, studying the
effect of her newly made gown.

On her knees beside her a stout dressmaker waited, in mute suspense,
her mouth full of pins.  Her attitude was that of profound admiration,
but in her heart she quailed, foreseeing the verdict.

"Too tight round the ankles," said Aunt Elizabeth.

Mrs. Crouch, between the pins, bleated her dismay.  She assured
"Meddam" it was the latest fashion: that to alter it by a
"hair-breadth" was to "ruin the cut!"

"I can't help that----" Miss Uniacke scowled--"I've told you before--I
won't be trussed like a fowl.  I don't care what frights other women
make of themselves!  I've my own style, and I shall keep to it."

She placed her pretty hands to either side of her waist, tightly
confined by a broad Petersham belt, and with a little wriggle of her
angular body seemed to shoot up like a crocus on its stem.

Mrs. Crouch swallowed a heavy sigh--a somewhat difficult and precarious
performance!

Pins still sprouted from between her lips and she gathered up the
scissors with a tragic gesture.  Slowly she unpicked the two side seams.

"That's better!"  Miss Uniacke gave an unexpected movement, followed by
an ominous rending sound.

"Ha!" she cried triumphantly.  "You see for yourself!--I can't walk a
step.  It's ridiculous!"

Mrs. Crouch sighed.

"We _might_..."  she suggested, "leave one side open.  With--perhaps--a
button?"

"And show my legs!"  At the wrath in her client's voice the dressmaker
breathed a hurried:

"Oh, Meddam!--Indeed, Meddam, I had no intention--I was going to
suggest a fold ... underneath..."

"Not at all!"  The irate lady snapped.  "You've plenty of turnings.
Let it out.  That's better ... Now, pin it ... There!----"  Again she
took a step forward.  "I can move at last.  I'm sure I don't know what
we're coming to!  You'll be asking me next to dye my hair blue!  In
_my_ young days..."

There came a low tap at the door, breaking through the current of her
memories.

"Come in!--What is it?" She wheeled round, displeased.

"If you please, Mum."  The parlour maid stood there, gaunt and prim.

"It's Mr. McTaggart asking to see you."

"Shut that door!--Now, what do you mean, Maria?  You know I'm engaged.
Tell him I'm out."

But the elderly servant stood her ground.  "He's in the drawing-room,
if you please, Mum.  I told him you was h'occupied--but he said he
could wait."  She cast an openly inquisitive glance at her mistress'
dress.  The new Autumn gown was an "event" in that quiet household.

"Indeed."  Aunt Elizabeth's voice was acid.  "Well, he _can_ wait,
then!  You'd no business, Maria, to let him in at all.  You take too
much on yourself."

"I'm sorry, Mum.  But the card in the hall said 'h'_In_,' not
'h'_Out_,' so 'ow was I to tell?"  She tossed her head with an air of
injured innocence.

"That will do."  Miss Uniacke's eyes had wandered back to the mirror,
irresistibly attracted.

It certainly _was_ smart ... The colour suited her.

"Perhaps I'd better go and get it over," she said.  "If these pins will
hold?"  She addressed the kneeling figure.

"I'll make sure, Meddam."  Mrs. Crouch smiled.  She came to work "by
the day" and was not at all averse to a spell of idleness reaped from
the occasion.

But Aunt Elizabeth guessed her secret thought.  "You can have your tea
now, instead of later on.  That will save time."  Mrs. Crouch sighed.

"Yes, Meddam."  She drove a pin upward with the amiable desire that
Miss Uniacke should risk, when she sat down, a reminder of the fact!

The unconscious victim rustled through the hall.  That, she decided,
was the best of taffetas.  It had a distinctive and aristocratic note.
Her temper was soothed by the gentle frou-frou.

McTaggart was standing talking to the parrot who, after the manner of
those wayward birds, received his advances with a stony silence, and
sharpened, at intervals, his beak on the perch.

"How do you do?"  Her guest wheeled round quickly at Miss Uniacke's
voice, his face eager.  "This is good of you!  I heard you were engaged
and was prepared to wait for hours!  Polly refused to take pity upon
me," he added as they shook hands.

"Silly fool!" said the parrot explosively, the moment McTaggart turned
his back.

Aunt Elizabeth, fearing that worse might follow, picked up the baize
cover and blotted the bird out effectually.

"He gets so tiresome," she explained.  "Won't you sit here?" and was
settling herself on the sofa facing her visitor when she rose with a
startled look of pain.

"Silly fool!" came from the cage in muffled accents.  "Ha ... ha ...
ha!"

"A pin!" said Aunt Elizabeth, gingerly sinking down again.  "The fact
is I was being fitted on with a new dress when you arrived.  I didn't
like to keep you waiting, so I came as I was--pins and all!"

"It's a very pretty one," said McTaggart--"suits you, too.  Such a
jolly colour."

"You think so?"  The little old lady was pleased and a slight flush
warmed her face.

"I suppose," said McTaggart as the pause prolonged itself and he felt
she was waiting to gather the object of his visit; "I suppose you've
heard about ... Mrs. Uniacke?"

The moment the words had passed his lips he knew he had made a tactless
start.

For his hostess bristled visibly.

"If you've called to plead for Mary," she said and her voice was
short--"I had better tell you that I wash my hands of that affair!
I've finished with them--the whole family!"

"Jill?" ...

"Yes----" she caught him up.  "Jill, _and_ Roddy--They might have
guessed.  They ought to have warned me long ago!  It's their own
fault--and I've done with them."

"Oh, no!"  McTaggart's blue eyes were eloquent.  "You don't _mean_ it?
You couldn't just now when they want you so."  He saw a slight quiver
cross her face.  "And _I_ want you--all your help!  We can't get on
without it, you know--Jill and I..."

She gave a start at the coupling together of the names.

"I don't understand," she said drily.

"No?--I'm afraid I'm explaining myself rather badly.  I thought you'd
guess ... The fact is, Aunt Elizabeth," he smiled at her
affectionately, "I'm hoping you'll let me become, you know, a _real_
nephew of yours, one day."

The little old lady gave a gasp.  "I _knew_ it!" she cried
triumphantly.  "You and Jill?--Ha!" she laughed.  "You can't deceive an
old woman like me!"

"I don't want to!"  McTaggart sprang up, his hand outstretched to meet
her own, his face so radiant with happiness that her old heart softened
at the sight.

"But I must have _your_ permission first.  I don't care a hang what her
mother says!--She's placed herself outside the affair.  Gone off and
left those two children..." he checked himself, his voice indignant.
"But you're her father's sister, you see--his favourite one.  And we
both think you've as good a right as any one ... to give her away."

He stopped abruptly.

"Give her away?  _Jill_, you mean?" she stared at him, obviously
amazed.  "What are you talking about, young man?  You're not going to
marry her _to-morrow_?"

"No," he amended, "to-morrow week."

He laughed at her startled exclamation, and went on, still holding her
hand--unconsciously abandoned to him--with subtle persuasion in his
voice.

"I don't want you--exactly--to 'give her away.'  In any sense!----" he
laughed again--"but you simply _must_ come to the wedding.  We've both
of us set our hearts on that."

"I never heard such utter nonsense in all my life!" she protested
stoutly--"and don't imagine I shall allow it!"  But, as she looked at
his resolute face, inwardly she commended his spirit.

"Of all the ridiculous notions..." she fumed; but McTaggart guessed she
was wavering.

"Tell me, first, you're pleased about it?  _Do_ say you think I'll make
Jill happy?"

"Well----" she paused--"I'll admit you'll _try_!  She's a bit of a
handful--that young woman."

Her grey eyes began to twinkle.  Jill, she thought, had found her
master.

"Yes--I'm glad.  Though I shan't hear..."

He checked the protest audaciously.  Before she could gather his
intention he had stooped and kissed her faded cheek.

"Thank you, Aunt Elizabeth.  On Tuesday week I'll take another--In the
vestry!"

He chuckled gaily.

"Well--I never...!" Miss Uniacke gasped.  For once her sharp tongue was
silenced.  Her face was flushed and, helplessly, she straightened the
crooked brown fringe.

"Now----"  McTaggart sat down, uninvited, by her side ... "I think we
ought to talk business and fix up a few plans.  I've got the
license--that's all right.  And to-night I'm going down to Oxton.  The
Bishop is my friend, you know, and I want him to come and marry us.
Mrs. Uniacke's honeymoon--I mean Mrs. Somerfield----" her sister-in-law
winced slightly and he went on hurriedly--"Well, she doesn't get back
to Worthing till Wednesday.  So, if you could manage to run down and
stay with Jill until we're married ... You see my idea?" his face went
red--"It would stop any silly talk, you know.  But, perhaps, you could
come to the lawyers first and fix up the settlements?  I want to make
that all square; for Jill's sake, you understand?"

Miss Uniacke caught him up sharply.  "I hope you're not under the
delusion that my niece has anything of her own?"  Purposely she
withheld from him the knowledge of the modest sum left the girl by her
Father.

"My dear Aunt Elizabeth!"  McTaggart looked taken aback.  "I meant _my_
money, of course.  I'd better tell you all about it."

He proceeded forthwith to enlighten her on the subject of his
inheritance.

Miss Uniacke's gray eyes slowly widened with amazement.

"You mean to say," she said at last, "that Jill will be a marchioness?"

"Well, that's thrown in!"  McTaggart laughed--"Won't she make a pretty
one!  I think she'll just love Siena--and Rome too--it's a ripping
place!  You'll have to come and stay with us.  Oh, I forgot--about
Roddy."  He went on with his plans for the latter, his handsome face
alight with pleasure.  Miss Uniacke guessed in every word the depths of
his love for the boy's sister.

"It's like a fairy tale!" she said.

"It is a fairy tale----" his voice was lowered now with a touch of awe.

"All true love is that, I think.  It's outside this work-a-day world.
Something too fine to be measured--like a beautiful vision seen in a
dream..."

He glanced up shyly at his listener and in her worn and serious face
caught a look of longing, oddly pathetic, but full of genuine sympathy.
For a moment their thoughtful eyes met--the old, saddened ones, knowing
life, and those of youth, bright with hope: met and wondered, across
the gulf.

Then McTaggart broke the silence.

"I don't want Jill to know yet.  About my inheritance, I mean.  I want
it to come as a huge surprise!--on our arrival in Siena.  She knows
I've got some property there--I fancy she thinks it's just a farm!--but
I've always kept it rather dark from everybody.  It's like this----" he
fidgeted, under the gaze of her shrewd grey eyes, hunting for words.

"Although my mother was Italian I've always _felt_ an Englishman.
Really, deep down in myself, I'd sooner be English, any day.  But, on
the other hand, you see, I admit a certain responsibility.  My mother
was treated abominably"--a hard look came into his face--"just because
she married my father!  They practically cut her adrift.

"Now, by an odd stroke of luck, I have come into all that my mother
lost.  And I feel it's up to me to show that she was right, after all.
She married for love, and so shall I.  An English wife ... my little
Jill!  But we'll have to live in Italy half the year--be Maramonte as
well as McTaggart--not for ourselves but because I believe that _she_
would have wished it."

His eyes had a curious far away look.  Then he seemed to come back to
the present.

"All the same I've felt, somehow, that a foreign title, over here,
wouldn't do--rather snobbish..."  He laughed with a shade of
nervousness.

"Quite right."  Miss Uniacke nodded.  She liked the man more and more.
But, despite her careless attitude toward the secret he shared with
her, her old heart warmed at the thought of this splendid match for the
girl she loved.

"You won't tell her?  You'll keep it dark!"

"Of course--it's your affair, not mine."

She smiled the harshness out of the words.

"All the same," she went on, "I think you ought to tell her mother.  I
don't approve of Mary myself--I think her conduct to her children
simply shocking----" she frowned again--"the secrecy--and this sudden
marriage!  Still, she brought Jill into the world--it's _her_ daughter,
not mine.  It's paying her back in her own coin ... but I _know_ I
ought to stop this folly!"

"But you won't?"  His voice was very earnest.  "Look here, Miss
Uniacke.  She's never given a thought to Jill--or Roddy either,
latterly.  She's bringing a penniless, idle chap into her home to live
with her children.  She'll have to support him--you know that?  At
their expense!  For, after all, it's Colonel Uniacke's money, you know,
that she holds in trust for the next generation.  It means a cruel time
for them under the thumb of that rotter, Stephen.  On a slender income,
deprived of their rights and shadowed by this Suffrage nonsense.

"Think of Jill, living with Stephen?--and Roddy--a schoolboy, in _his_
hands...!

"Instead of which, here am I--luckily a rich man; able to give the boy
a chance, and Jill ... pretty well all she wants!

"I'd just like you to see some pearls I've got for her in the Roman
bank"--he threw his head back and laughed boyishly, with a note of
triumph--"They'd make Stephen's mouth water--damn the chap!--I beg your
pardon!"

But Miss Uniacke smiled grimly; forgetful of the listening parrot.

McTaggart, encouraged, started again.

"I can't bear to think of Jill for a day in the house with that man.
That's why I'm doing this, entirely, to get her away before he returns.
Can't you guess what it will save her?  The bitterness of seeing him
there, ruling in her father's place, in the old home, where he lived..."

"Stop!"  Miss Uniacke grasped his arm--"I can't stand it!--It's not
fair.  Edward..."  She choked on the name.

McTaggart took her hands in his.

"Tell me now, honestly"--his blue eyes were keen and anxious as he
gazed into her moved face.  "D'you think, if your brother were alive,
he'd give me Jill?"

There came a pause.  It seemed to them both that, somewhere near, a
shadow hovered, watching them, with a love that had survived the grave.

Then, at last, Miss Uniacke spoke.

"Yes," she answered solemnly--"I think he would.  And so will I."




CHAPTER XXXII

"Wave, Peter--oh, _do_ wave!  Poor little Roddy!..."

Jill leaned over the steamer rail, watching the pier slowly recede,
and, far away, a tiny figure against the sky, arm aloft.  Then, as it
grew to a black speck and blurred into the distant view, she turned
sharply, tears in her eyes.

"I can't _bear_ leaving him!" she cried.

"It's not for long," said McTaggart gently.  He ran a hand through the
girl's arm.  "Won't it be jolly after a bit to have him in Rome, living
with us?"

"Yes."  Jill swallowed hard.  "You think we shall work it?--I'm rather
doubtful."

"I'm not," said McTaggart stoutly.  "I know Stephen.  He's 'no proud!'
The economy's sure to appeal to him.  And Aunt Elizabeth's sworn to
help.  She's a brick, that old lady!  Oh, by the bye, I'm to give you
this."

He handed his wife an envelope, directed to her and carefully sealed.

"She said you were not to lose it, Jill."  Then he laughed suddenly.

"Guess what her last words to me were?"

"Can't."  Jill was beginning to smile, a rather wan little attempt,
half her mind still with Roddy.

"I thought she was going to reveal to me some awful secret in your
past.  She led me aside on the pier with an air of mystery and
whispered--

"'I've put some galoshes in the Hold-all--a new pair.  I know Jill.
She'll be marching about in those thin shoes from sheer
vanity--catching cold--and I'm sure _you're_ not fit to nurse her.  A
pair of babies!'  Here she snorted.  'You look after her, young man.'
This was her parting benediction!"

Jill laughed.  "Just like her!  I wonder what she's written here."

"Come along into the cabin and read it in peace.  Oh, by the way--my
servant's there--Mario.  You must say something nice to him.  He's off
his head with excitement.  He's been with me the last three years--an
awfully decent chap, you know.  He understands English all
right--speaks it a little.  Here we are..."

He led her into the deck cabin where Mario was unstrapping some rugs.
He stood up, tall and eager, as the young couple crossed the threshold.

"This is my wife, Mario."

No mistaking the proud note in his master's voice!  The dark eyes
glowed, the white teeth flashed into a smile as Jill greeted him rather
shyly.

Mario had prepared his speech.

"My felicitations to her.  And to him.  Blessed be the day!  Long life
and happiness--And many children," he concluded.

The colour flamed in her cheeks.

"Grazie tante," she responded...

Up went Mario's hands, surprised, full of joy and admiration.  But
McTaggart broke in on the flow of Italian that followed the gesture.

"Basta!  Basta!"--he drove him out.  "You can come back when we get
near land."

Mario carefully closed the door.  He smiled to himself rapturously.

"Ahi!--l'amore..."  He kissed the tips of his fingers to the sky above.
Then he glanced down at the waves.

"You stay quiet!" he said to them.

Meanwhile, Jill, in the cabin, was looking round, with curious eyes.

"Isn't it snug?  I'm _so_ excited!  You know, I've never travelled
before.  Oh!--_Peter_...."

For McTaggart had caught her eagerly in his arms.  "Take off that
veil--for goodness' sake! ... Ah! ... I've been simply dying for that!"

Jill, breathless, escaped from him, cheeks flushed, her eyes brilliant.

"Peter--you brute!" she straightened her hat.

"That's a nice thing to say"--he laughed back--"to your lord and
master."

"You're not!" she mocked, teasing him, "I never said 'obey,' you know."

"No wonder the Bishop looked so grave.  We'll have to be married over
again..."  He broke off, his hand to his collar, wriggling his neck.
"Confound that boy!  I've got rice all down my back."

"Good old Roddy--I saw him do it!  In the car, coming over the Downs.
No ... no!" she stamped her foot....  "Be quiet now, I want to read."

She tore open the envelope directed by Aunt Elizabeth.  It held
another, tightly sealed, and a letter in the pointed hand.

"My dear Jill," so it ran, "I've asked Peter to give you this, and I
only hope you won't lose it, with your usual carelessness.  I'd better
tell you at once, there's money enclosed--in five-pound notes.  I
understand that even in Italy English notes are respected.

"You needn't trouble to thank me for it.  You'd have had it some day
anyhow.  Also the cheque I've placed with Cook's--in Rome--to your
account there.

"Your husband may be all you think.  Time alone will prove this--('Oh,
Peter--isn't she lovely?'--Jill chuckled with delight.)  But I don't
like to think of you in a foreign land, without credit.  It's lowering
for a woman, too, to go to her husband for every penny.  Besides,
though I've done all I could, your trousseau is an utter farce.  You
ought to have twelve of everything.  And _marked_, don't forget that!
..."

"Not twelve husbands, let us hope!"  McTaggart leaned over her
shoulder, as they sat on the narrow berth, side by side, in the dim-lit
cabin, reading the letter.

"How shall I be 'marked,' Jill?  I hope it doesn't mean hot irons?"

"Like this!"  Jill pinched him.  "Be quiet now--Listen, Peter.  Isn't
she an old _dear_?

"You'll find notes for fifty pounds.  Don't go and spend it all at once
in a present for your worthless husband! ... And _don't spoil him_.
From the start, hold your own.  I know men!"

"Oh! Aunt Elizabeth!"  McTaggart rocked with mirth.  "It's hardly
respectable, is it, Jill?  I'm afraid she's had a shocking 'Past.'"

"Anyhow, her Present's all right!" said Jill neatly, folding the
letter.  "She is good"--her face went grave.  "D'you think I really
ought to take it?"

"You must.  She'd be most awfully hurt."

He nodded his head wisely at Jill.  "We'll make it up to her one
day--give her a topping good time and ... oh, I say?"  He shifted a
little in order to see his wife's face.

"I've got to confess something, Jill.  Something I did before I left.
Promise you won't be cross with me?"

"So have I," said Jill quickly.  "I quite forgot ... Let's get it over.
You first."  Absently, she handed across the wad of notes.

McTaggart smiled.

"No--they're yours.  You must guard them from the 'worthless husband.'"

"I daren't.  I shall lose them," she declared.  "Do take them, Peter
dear."

"All right."  He placed them away in his pocketbook, with secret
amusement.

"It's about your mother," he went on.  Jill gave a little start.  "I
felt so bothered last night--I suppose you'll think me a thorough
turn-coat--but I couldn't sleep, thinking of it.  She's been so awfully
kind to me.  And at last I got up and wrote a letter--a nice one"--he
glanced at Jill nervously, but she simply nodded.  "I tried to show her
why we'd done this.  And then ... I added"--he broke off--"I hope you
won't be angry, Jill, I ought to have told you--discussed it first.
But I went out and posted it--on the impulse.  To Worthing, you know.
She'll find it when she returns to-morrow..."

"_What_ did you add?" Jill was impatient.  "Do go on."  She shook his
arm.

"Well.  I said..." he began to stammer a little.  "I s-said I hoped
she'd stay with us--our first vi-visitor, you know.  _Don't_ be
cross..."

But Jill's answer swiftly dispelled the man's doubts.  For she flung
her arms round his neck and kissed him, her face radiant.

"So have I!  I mean I wrote to Mother myself yesterday.  Isn't it
funny?  I gave it to Roddy to hand to her the moment she gets home
to-morrow!  That's my secret"--she drew back, her eyes thoughtful--"You
see, I felt ... it was rather mean--I was so happy--to leave her out.
D'you understand?"

"Same here."  McTaggart nodded.  "I'm glad you have.  It will pave the
way to better relations bye and bye.  She must come to us whenever she
can."

There fell a little pause between them.  Jill's thoughts had turned
back to her old life and her brother.  Her grey eyes grew wistful.

McTaggart saw this.  He rose to his feet.

"Look here, Jill--come outside.  We'll have a turn up and down the
deck.  It will do you good before the train."

"All right.  Where's my ulster?"

"Here."  McTaggart reached up, unhooked a pale grey coat beside his own
and handed it with a mischievous smile to his wife.

"That's not mine."  Jill stared.

"Yes, it is.  Try it on."

"_Peter!_"  Jill passed a hand lovingly over the rich fur, the
beautiful collar of chinchilla and sumptuous lining--warm and soft.

"It's a little present.  I had it made.  Aunt Elizabeth got the
measures.  D'you like it?"

Jill's face answered him.  She could not speak, for very wonder.

"Really mine?" she said at last.  "I never saw such lovely fur!  Oh,
Peter! how extravagant.  You mustn't spoil me like this..."

"I expect payment--of a kind!"  He took it--(with interest.)  "Now,
slip it on.  There--that's fine!  You look like a little Teddy bear."
He opened the door and the bright light swept in, dazzling them.  Blue
sky and blue sea and a fresh wind, salt and keen.

Far behind them lay the coast, the broad waves rolling along to the
French shore and that new life they faced with the confidence of youth.

"The first time," said McTaggart--"that I really knew how pretty you
were, you had on a little grey fur cap.  That's why I chose chinchilla
for you."

"But that was Rabbit!" Jill laughed.  "I've never had any _good_
clothes.  Until my trousseau," she said proudly and glanced down at her
simple dress.

McTaggart smiled in his heart, as, following up the train of thought,
Jill proceeded, somewhat gravely, to hold forth on economy.

"I shan't cost you very much.  I can make lots of things myself.  And I
expect, in a place like Siena, it doesn't matter what one wears.  Oh,
do tell me about your house?--or is it a flat?"

"Not exactly.  I hope you won't be disappointed.  It's rather a
cheerless sort of place."

"I don't care if it's a barn!"  The breeze had brought a bright colour
into her cheeks, as they paced along, arm in arm, and she laughed
aloud.  "I don't care about anything!  I'm just too glad to be alive.
I'm awfully strong--I can learn to cook..."  McTaggart hugged himself
for joy.

"Oh, I hope it won't come to that.  Mario might object."

Jill stopped suddenly, overwhelmed by a new thought.

"I say, Peter--what is he?  Exactly, I mean.  Is he ... your valet?"

"Yes--you know--over there---wages are a mere trifle.  And he's handy,
in all sorts of ways."

"I see.  Would he clean the windows?"

"Knives and boots?..."  McTaggart choked.  "I dare say--if you asked
him."

"Hm...."  Jill looked a little doubtful.  The fur coat had made her
think.  She mustn't let Peter ruin himself--even on their honeymoon.

In her practical mind she decided to say nothing more till they reached
Siena and then take up the reins of the house, with a careful eye on
the exchequer.

But all these thoughts were swept aside by the novelty of her arrival
on the French coast, the foreign tongue, the stir and bustle of the
Customs.

Then came dinner in the train, with strange wine, strange dishes, and
their "doll's house" quarters for the night.  She revelled in the
unexpected.

Slowly the dark swept down, blotting out the sleeping earth, as they
rocked along, happily tired, in the warm coup, side by side.

"Time for bed..." said McTaggart at last.  "I'm not going to let you
chatter all through the night, old lady.  It's close upon eleven
o'clock!"

"I'm not sleepy a bit," said Jill.

Something in her quick glance roused McTaggart's chivalry--a childish
touch of helplessness.

"Look here..." he leaned closer and whispered softly in her ear.  For a
moment Jill clung to him, her face hidden from his eyes.

"You've got a long journey before you," he went on in a careless voice.
"So just turn in and get to sleep.  I'm going outside for a last smoke.
Pull that shade over the lamp when you're ready.  I shan't want the
light.  I'll be as quiet as a mouse.  We'll say good
night--here--_now_."

"Peter ... you _are_ a darling!"  The whisper barely reached his ears.
He held her closely for a moment--kissed her quickly and stood up.

"Happy dreams!  And take your time.  I shan't turn in for another
hour."  He opened the door and went out, his face rather white and set.
"Another test..." he said to himself.  "Hang it all!  She's such a
child!  It's the straight game."  And at the words he thought
instinctively of Bethune.  "I'm glad I've had it out with him."

For the two men had parted friends.  Perhaps, in the long years ahead,
Jill would no longer stand between them.

McTaggart hoped so fervently.  He paced up and down the corridor;
steady action that soothed his nerves, smoking, with an absent mind,
cigarette after cigarette.

The stars came out in the heavens, and he thought once more of that
other night, when he stood and watched them, three years back, and
pondered on his "double heart."

What a blind fool he had been!  He realized how well the excuse had
served to screen the follies due to the hot impulses of youth.  His
"double heart"...!  He smiled grimly, as the truth slowly dawned on
him: the dual nature of all men: the daily battle waged between human
weakness and spiritual strength.

The night air blew in, sharp with an early Autumn frost, cooling his
brow and bringing peace, the hushed silence that Nature loves.

And at last he paused before his door, opened it, inch by inch, and
stole through, with a quick glance at the lower berth.  Jill was asleep!

In the dim light of the shaded lamp he could see the dark cloud of her
hair, her childish profile, pure and sweet, and the long lashes on her
cheek.

For a moment he stood and gazed at her, a great longing in his heart.

"Only ... to kiss her!" he said to himself, then, sternly, turned away.

And with the action, all unknown, he broke the insidious habit of
years; the indecision of boyhood days changed to the firm control of
the man.

The train rocked on....

In his berth above, McTaggart, restless, watched till the dawn filtered
in between the blinds, pale shafts of primrose light.

He had only to lean and call her name to see those grey eyes open wide,
filled with love--the love of a wife!  But he fought it out, hour by
hour.  And as the sun stole over the edge of the long plains, white
with frost, he turned on his pillow with a smile and was gathered in
the arms of sleep.




CHAPTER XXXIII

McTaggart glanced at his watch.

"Ten minutes more.  Are you very tired?"

"Not a bit."  Jill turned with a bright face from the window in the
corridor where she stood, gazing out.  "It's all so lovely.  Look at
that hill rising up like a fir cone, against the sky.  And _isn't_ it
blue!  I never saw such colouring.  Those silvery trees!--Olives, did
you say they were?  Fancy seeing olives grow!--and oranges and lemons
too.  It sounds like the game we used to play in our nursery days."

In a low voice, sweet as a thrush:

  "Oranges and lemons
  Said the bells of St. Clement's,
  I owe you four farthings
  Said the bells of St. Martin's..."

Jill sang happily.

"Can't say much for the rhymes."  McTaggart smiled.

But the girl had turned to the window again.  "It's beautiful."  She
slipped a hand through his arm.  "As long as I live I'll never forget
those vines with their early Autumn tints--blood red; and the little
towns perched on the hills like Robber Castles ... Peter!--what's
that?"  She broke off excitedly, pointing out.

McTaggart followed the line of her hand.

"Siena, I think--I can't be sure.  You know, it was dark when I got
here before.  Why, Jill!--Whatever's the matter?"

For the girl's face had suddenly changed.  Fear and amazement were
written there.  She could not take her eyes away, as, on the steep hill
to the south, a cluster of slender towers rose up, ivory-white, against
the sky.

"My dream!" she gasped.  The hand on his arm clutched him.  "It can't
be! ... Yes, it _is_.  The 'dream city' I told you about.  Peter!  It's
all coming true.  There--don't you see?  _Do_ look, darling!  With one
tower taller than the rest ... and a little cap..."

Speech failed her.  She leaned out, breathlessly.

A memory returned to McTaggart.  "By Jove!--the 'Torre del Mangia.'  Is
that really your old dream, Jill?  And you said it felt like 'coming
home!'"  He was almost as moved as herself.

Jill drew back with dazzled eyes.  Her hair, disordered by the wind,
framed her excited, awe-struck face.

"Isn't it wonderful!" she cried--"my dream city ... my very own!  D'you
think we've lived there before, Peter?  You and I--in another life?"

"I hope so.  But, anyhow, it can't be half as good as this!"

He drew her gently through the door of their coupe.  "There's a tunnel
coming.  We're nearly there.  Sit down a minute.  I'll roll up the
rugs.  You'd better get into your coat, ready."

"I shan't want it.  It's so hot."  Mechanically, she straightened her
hat, her gray eyes still wide with wonder.  She caught sight of herself
in the glass.  "I am untidy!  Won't it be nice to have a bath and feel
clean again."

A "toob"--Peter smiled to himself as the train bolted into the dark.
He reached up for his hat on the peg.

"Now then!--we're coming out.  Give me a kiss, quick!--There's a dear."

Sudden dazzling light again; the grind of brakes; the toot of a horn.
Then a deep voice, shouting clearly:

"Siena ... Si-e-na!"  The train had stopped.

Mario came running up.  McTaggart hurried Jill out and into a cab.
Purposely, he had "forgotten" to order the carriage.

They wound up the dusty road, glaring white in the morning sun, and
through the great frowning wall that clips the city like a girdle.

Jill was too excited to talk, her eyes darting right and left as the
high houses closed about them with the menace of their ancient strength.

McTaggart pointed out to her the Grey Wolf on its column, suckling the
fabulous Twins.

"Romulus and Remus!" she gasped, with a clutch at Ancient History.

"That's it!  The Son of Remus founded the place--so the legend
runs--'Senius.'  He gave his name to the city--hence 'Siena.'"

Down the one-time "Strada Romana," past the Palezzo Tolomei, they
clattered, to the crack of the whip.

"See those lions?" he touched her arm.  "Thirteenth Century."  She
stared--"That's the 'Balzana,' the shield of the Commune, black and
white.  I'll tell you why.  When Senius offered sacrifice to his gods,
on his arrival here, from the altar of Diana rose a pure white smoke,
and from that of Apollo a dense black one--and ever since it's been on
the shields of the city.  Makes one think, doesn't it?  All those
centuries ago."

"It's wonderful!"

On they went, through shadowy streets, the deep blue sky overhead cut
by castellated walls and pierced by towers, dark with age.

Then, with a final "Ee ... ah!" from the driver, a last flourish of
whip, they swerved aside through the frowning arch of the palace into
the vast courtyard.

Here the sun had found its way, bathing one side in golden light.  The
fountain leaped in a dazzling cloud; the delicate marble stairs curved
up, fairy-like, to the gallery; and about them was the beat of wings...

"_Look_ at the pigeons!"--Jill cried.  "Where are we?"

The carriage stopped.  He helped her down and hurried her on, up the
shining silvery steps.

"Peter!  What is this?" Jill asked.  But McTaggart only smiled to
himself.

"Come along"--he grasped her arm--"this way..."  Narrow shafts of light
through the twisted columns made a path, like striped satin under their
feet.

Dark doors were swung wide, and they stood in the dim tapestried hall,
the inquisitive sunshine following them and playing among the crystal
lustres.

Jill, dazed, saw servants stand, bowing before her, heard a hum of
respectful greetings rise and fall as McTaggart swept her, ever on,
down a corridor lined with statues, and into a room, endlessly long,
with a painted ceiling and polished floor.

"Now!" said Peter.  He laughed aloud, throwing a challenge to the
walls, where on every side faces peered, measuring them with liquid
eyes.

"Here we are, Jill--at home."  He closed the doors as he spoke.

"Home?"  Jill stared at him.  "Peter--I _don't_ understand."

A shade of temper was in her voice as she looked up in his laughing
eyes.

"It's the Maramonte palace"--he cried--"Mine!--and yours now, my
darling.  Where my mother lived ... And all these"--he waved his
hand--"are my people."

Jill suddenly caught her breath.

"D'you mean to say"--her voice was tense--"You _live_ here?--that it's
... the house?"

"Yes..." he caught her in his arms.  "Aren't you pleased?--It's my
'surprise!'"

But she pushed him away nervously.  Wide-eyed she gazed around her.
Then, still silent, she crossed the floor, and gazed out of the nearest
window.

He followed her, a shade anxious.  Surely, she could not be upset?

"Forgive me, Jill ... I ought to have thought..."

But suddenly her face changed.

"The tower"--she whispered--"the tower of my dream ... Peter, tell
me--it _is_ true?  It won't go ... fade away..."  She clung to him like
a frightened child.

"No--I swear it."  A swift remorse moved him as he saw the tears well
up in the eyes he loved.  "Jill!--don't cry--for Heaven's sake.  I
meant it to be such a lovely surprise!--Why, my darling..."

She buried her face in his coat, struggling for control.

"It is!"--she sobbed--"it's _too_ lovely!  What a baby I am...!" she
broke away--"It's ... the _beauty_--can't you understand?"  She wiped
her eyes defiantly.

"But--who are _you_?" she added slowly--"I don't see yet why it's
yours."

"I'm the Marquis Maramonte," he said, "and you are my very dear liege
lady."

For a moment she stared at him, amazed.  Then, like a sunlit April
shower, laughter stole into her eyes, still shining with her tears.

She clapped her hands.  She danced for joy.

"Oh! what a gorgeous sell for Stephen!"

McTaggart caught her outstretched hands, laughing aloud.

"Isn't it?"  Relief at her change of mood, delight at the way she took
her new honours: her simple child-like fearlessness, made him exult in
his bride.

"He'll have to 'kow-tow' to you now, old lady.  He won't like
that--Master Stephen!--I expect he will, though"--he veered
round--"he'll be trying to borrow no end of money!"

"He won't get it," Jill cried gayly.  "He can come and smash my windows
first."  She hardly knew what she was saying, for the reaction had set
in, the excitement of this great adventure.

"He'd find it hard..." said McTaggart grimly.  "This place has stood
many a siege.  They had a playful way, you know, of slinging donkeys in
by catapults!"

"Well"--Jill giggled--"why not Stephen?"  Then her face grew thoughtful
again.  "It's wonderful!..."  She glanced down the long walls hung with
pictures.  Men in armour, half concealed by sumptuous cloaks; red-robed
prelates; court beauties, smiling proudly; stern old age, reckless
youth!

"These made history," said Jill and paused, sobered by the thought...

"_Your_ people."  She looked at her husband, full of honest pride for
him.

"Yes."  McTaggart smiled back.  "Splendid chaps, some of them.  That's
the hero of Montaperti, Giordano Maramonte.  And that frivolous-looking
boy charged through and broke the Standard--the great white lilies of
Florence--off from the famous 'Carroccio.'

"I don't fancy any of these won their honours our way--the modern way
in old England--a fat subscription to 'Secret Funds'!  They were rather
a bad lot, all the same..."

"I don't doubt it," Jill laughed, mischief in her mocking glance.
"Perhaps they all had 'double hearts'--it seems to lead to a lot of
trouble!  Look at those lovely pearls there--on the lady in the satin
gown--and the single drop on her forehead!  You could pick it up--it
looks so real."

"So you shall.  We've got it still.  Safe in my Roman bank--for
_you_!--And all sorts of other jewels--an emerald ring that belonged to
a Pope.  You're going to be a little queen!--have every mortal thing
you want.  And you're worth it, you dearest child.  You're the
loveliest woman in the world!"

"Hush!" she smiled--"I want to think..."

But a new idea had struck McTaggart.

Absently she let him lead her to where two great gilded chairs stood on
a dais, under a canopy.

"Sit there," he commanded.

She settled herself easily, her slim shape swallowed up between the
great carved arms, beneath the shield of the Maramonte.  He stood back
to look at her, as she went on, thoughtfully:

"We're rich, then, Peter?--ever so rich."

"Yes," he nodded his head gravely.  "What are you puzzling out now?"

"I was thinking of Roddy," she confessed--"Of all that this may
mean--to him."

"He's to be your Court Painter, my queen"--McTaggart's eyes never left
her--"Won't he love Italy?  And Aunt Elizabeth?--She knows!--I told her
the whole story, Jill.  She's been a brick to keep the secret."

Then he mounted the dais--impatiently--as she still dreamed on.

"I say, Jill.  You've never thanked me!  This is my wedding present,
you see."

Jill gave a little start.  Impulsively she opened her arms.

"Oh, Peter!--do forgive me."  But he slipped down at her feet.

For a moment he knelt there, arms about her, his face pressed against
her knees.

She could feel, through her dress, his burning cheeks, the wave of
longing that swept across him ... Then, slowly, he lifted his head.
His eyes, blue as the heavens beyond, drank their fill.  He whispered
her name.

"Jill ... my darling little wife!"




THE END





NOVELS BY MURIEL HINE


APRIL PANHASARD

"As delightful a love-story as summer readers can pray for."--_New York
World_.

"An excellent novel with a delightful atmosphere and a plot that the
reader will follow with interest."--_New York Herald_.


EARTH

"A sincere and clever piece of work that should find an appreciative
public."--_Westminster Gazette_.

"An admirably written story which will take high rank in contemporary
fiction."--_Rochester Post-Express_.


HALF IN EARNEST

"The author knows and sees much and can write it both intelligently and
pleasantly."--_Sketch_ (_London_).

"A well-built, well-written tale."--_Washington Evening Star_.



LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD

NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY