"Ihren Freund
Beethoven"]

An incident of his visit at Töplitz, showing Beethoven's humility and
kindliness will bear narrating, as it was characteristic of the
man. It relates to a stern parent, a lovely daughter, an ardent wooer.
The first two characters of the _dramatis personæ_, were the innkeeper,
at whose house Beethoven dined, and his daughter. The part of lover was
taken by Ludwig Löwe, an actor, while Beethoven's part in the little
drama is not much more important than that of scene-shifter. Löwe was a
man in good standing, and came from a family of some prominence, but the
father objected to him and forbade the daughter speaking to him. It
appears that Beethoven was in the habit of coming late for dinner, so
the plan was hit upon that Löwe was to take dinner late also, at which
hour, the other guests having eaten and gone, and business being over
for the time, the father was not apt to be around to interfere. "All the
world loves a lover." Beethoven was an interested spectator of the
little comedy, no doubt casting occasional friendly glances in the
direction of the young couple. The father finally appeared on the scene,
ordered the actor to leave the house, and forbade him coming there any
more. At this crisis the lovers were in despair, that is for a while.
Love laughs at locksmiths, as we know, and it had not got so far as that
yet. Löwe, with the resources of a true lover, managed to meet Beethoven
accidentally away from the inn, and looked at him so intently that he
was rewarded by an answering nod of recognition from the master. The ice
being broken, the actor disclosed his troubles. Meeting with sympathy,
he was emboldened to ask him to deliver a letter to Fräulein Therese. To
this Beethoven agreed, and, taking the letter, started to go, thus
closing the interview. But Löwe was not so easily gotten rid of. With an
embarrassed manner, he managed to convey to Beethoven the fact that
there would be an answer. "So! And you wish me to deliver it? Well, meet
me here to-morrow;" and so Beethoven became the go-between for the
lovers during the remainder of his stay in Töplitz.

Allusion has already been made to the acquaintance which he formed with
Goethe this summer. That Beethoven had the highest esteem for the poet,
there is no doubt. In speaking of him in after years, he said, "Who can
thank sufficiently a great poet? He is the most precious jewel of the
nation" (kostbarste Kleinod einer Nation), which is much like Carlyle's
remark on the great poet. "The appearance of such a man (Goethe) at any
given era, is in my opinion the greatest thing that can happen in it. A
man who has the soul to think and be the moral guide of his own nation
and of the whole world." Goethe and Beethoven were on friendly terms and
saw a good deal of one another during this summer. The acquaintance must
have made a powerful impression on Beethoven. Goethe, the senior by many
years, whose transcendent intellect had won him a world-wide reputation,
was no doubt the cynosure of all eyes. Töplitz was full of notabilities.
Thayer gives a long list of prominent persons, from royalty down, who
sojourned there this summer. It must have been a very agreeable
experience to the younger genius, whose fame had not yet penetrated much
beyond Germany, this friendship. Had he possessed a tithe of the worldly
wisdom of the elder man, and had regulated his conduct in accordance
with the prejudices of the other, the friendship might have continued.
Much as he desired this, it does not seem to have occurred to him to
even try to make a good impression. Utterly lacking in self-control, he
remained the same headstrong impulsive creature, while in Goethe's
company, that he had always been. Whether or not the story is true of
his meeting the Imperial family while with Goethe and disdaining even to
answer their salutations, walking on and compelling the party to divide
so as to give him the middle of the walk, while Goethe stood aside
bowing low with uncovered head,--it is nevertheless more than probable
that Beethoven showed his scorn for conventionality in numerous ways,
thereby calling down on himself Goethe's disapproval. Born courtier that
he was, it must have been mortifying in the extreme to him to be with
Beethoven and witness his rudeness and contempt for appearances.

So far as known, Goethe never had anything more to do with him after
this summer. On leaving Töplitz he writes to Zelter, Director of the
Berlin Singakademie, mentioning Beethoven casually or as an
afterthought, and alludes to him as an "entirely untamed (_ungebändigt_)
person." From this time on, he seems to have excluded him from his
thoughts. Beethoven's music was frequently performed at Goethe's house
at Weimar. We read in "Eckermann's Conversations" that on such occasions
the company would relate incidents from Beethoven's life, but Goethe
never mentioned him.

Poet and musician were utterly dissimilar; it is not likely that either
influenced the other to any appreciable degree. "It is a great folly,"
said Goethe in 1824 (Conversations with Eckermann) "to hope that other
men will harmonize with us. I have never hoped this. I have always
regarded each man as an independent individual, whom I endeavored to
study, and to understand with all his peculiarities, but from whom I
desired no further sympathy. In this way have I been enabled to converse
with every man, and thus alone is produced the knowledge of various
characters, and the dexterity necessary for the conduct of life." It was
probably in this coldly analytical frame of mind, that the great
councillor viewed the composer. But it was a momentous event to the
latter to know Goethe. He had before this set to music a number of his
ballads and had only recently composed the music to his Egmont. Many
years afterward, in 1822, in an interview with Rochlitz who made a
pilgrimage from Leipzig to make his acquaintance, he reverts to this
time. "Since the Carlsbad summer when I met Goethe, I read him every
day, that is when I do read. He has killed Klopstock for me, but Goethe
he lives and he wants us all to live. This is why it is so easy to make
music to his words."




CHAPTER IX

OPTIMISTIC TREND

     Thus, with what has hitherto been effected, the clue to the
     labyrinth of what is yet to be done is given us.
                                     --HERDER: _Apotheosis of Humanity_.


Beethoven visited quite a number of places during the summer of 1812 in
quest of health. While at Carlsbad he gave a concert in aid of the
people of Baden, who had lost heavily through a disastrous fire there,
on which occasion he extemporized. It seems to have been a success
financially, but not artistically. In a letter to the Archduke he cites
it as being "a poor concert for the poor." "Es war eigentlich ein armes
Koncert für die Armen." This was owing to lack of time for rehearsals,
and to the fact that only one other person, Herr Polledro, a violinist
of Turin, took part in it. The concert was given within twelve hours
from its inception, because many noteworthy guests were on the point of
leaving town, and their presence was desired to insure a good
attendance. The necessity must have been great to induce him to
undertake it at all. His dislike for improvising for others was
deep-seated, and was increased by his deafness.

In the fall we find him visiting his brother Johann at Linz, where he
made quite a long stay. It was not alone Johann whom he was visiting; he
had good friends there, among them Kapellmeister Glöggl, whom he saw
nearly every day. At the latter's request the master composed three
equali for trombones for All Souls' Day, then near at hand. These
equali, as it turned out, were eventually used for Beethoven's funeral.
The Kapellmeister's son, then a lad of fourteen, relates an incident of
this time with Beethoven as the central figure. A resident of Linz, a
certain Herr Graf von Dönhoff, who was a great admirer of Beethoven,
gave an entertainment in his honor. After some of his music had been
rendered by others, Beethoven was asked to extemporize, which he
declined absolutely to do. Shortly after he disappeared. Supper being
ready a search for him was instituted, but he was not to be found, so
the company, after some delay, repaired to the adjoining room. They had
hardly seated themselves at the table, when they heard some one at the
piano. Gradually, one by one, they found themselves in the other room,
where Beethoven was extemporizing. This he kept up for nearly an hour,
when, suddenly coming to a realization of the circumstances, and looking
around, he saw the entire company listening in rapt attention. He at
once got up from the instrument and hastily left the room, either
through anger or embarrassment. Such was his haste that he ran against a
table containing fine porcelain bric-a-brac, which, of course, was
shattered. The Count, with easy good nature, made some reassuring
remark, upon which they all made another essay at the supper.

His object in going to Linz was not altogether for the purpose of making
visits. A disagreeable duty had to be performed; Johann's relations
with a young woman, whom he had taken as housekeeper, had become a
scandal; the good repute of the family was at stake, and Beethoven went
there with the express design of putting an end to the matter. Johann
was not at all amenable to argument, and contested the elder brother's
right to interfere. The dispute became so bitter that a personal combat
between the brothers occurred. It finally required the combined
ecclesiastical and secular authority of Linz (bishop, magistrate and
police), to effect the expulsion of the lady from town. At this turn of
affairs, Johann, bound to have his own way, married her.

This year saw the completion of the Seventh and Eighth Symphonies
besides other important compositions; not so bad an achievement for a
sick man, this record of two years' work. Sick or well, at home or
abroad, his work went on; it was a part of his life, as necessary,
apparently, as eating or sleeping. In size the Seventh Symphony exceeds
any of the preceding ones. "Eine meiner vorzüglichsten" (one of my
best), is Beethoven's statement in regard to it. Here the composer's
meaning is not so readily elucidated as in the Pastoral, for instance.
It means all things to all people. He usually had a clearly defined
purpose or idea before him when composing, particularly in the case of
his large orchestral works. Of the creations of such a man, it was to be
expected that they would increase in grandeur with each succeeding one.
Every great thing achieved is only an earnest of still greater in
reserve. The fertility of his mind was exhaustless. As he penetrated
deeper into this new world of the imagination, wider vistas were
constantly being opened before his mental vision. "What I have in my
heart must come out when I write," he stated to Czerny. "I never thought
of writing for fame and honor." Grandeur and simplicity are prominent
traits in Beethoven's character and these are exemplified in the Seventh
Symphony. Wagner calls it the Apotheosis of the dance. "Der in Tönen
idealisch verkörperten Leibesbewegung," [an ideal embodiment in tones of
the movements of the human form]. This dance element is the
characteristic trait of the symphony; the dance element on a colossal
scale. Listen to Wagner's summary: "But one Hungarian peasant dance in
the final movement of his Symphony in A (the Seventh) he played for the
whole of nature; so played that who could see her dancing to it in
orbital gyrations must deem he saw a planet brought to birth before his
very eyes." In these later symphonies we see the beginnings of the
mysticism which so profoundly influenced Beethoven in his last years,
reaching its consummation in the Mass in D, the last Quartets, and the
Ninth Symphony. From this period on, the picture to be drawn of him is
of a man retiring more and more into himself as his growing experience
with the world shows him his unfitness for it. Only in his work did he
have any real reason for living. His every-day life became, for the most
part, a phantasmagoria, wherein persons and events continually changed
from grotesque to sublime, where nothing was stable or to be depended
upon. The only reality was in his art. The consciousness that he was
composing works that would go down the ages and delight many generations
to come, was probably satisfaction enough to him to compensate him for
anything he was called on to endure. With the progress of his deafness
his inability to cope with even the ordinary affairs of life increased,
and this also had the effect of withdrawing him from the world. The
spiritual insight gained by years of introspection, of communion with
the higher part of his nature enabled him to discover truths hidden to
the consciousness of the ordinary man. "That power of shaping the
incomprehensible now grows with him; the joy in exercising this power
becomes humor. All the pain of existence is wrecked upon the immense
pleasure derived from the play with it; the creator of worlds, Brahma,
laughs to himself as he perceives the illusion with reference to
himself; regained innocence plays jestingly with the thorns of expiated
guilt; the emancipated conscience banters itself with the torments it
has undergone. And all his seeing and his fashioning is steeped in that
marvellous gayety (_Heiterkeit_) which music first acquired through
him." (Wagner.)

A peculiarity of Beethoven's work often commented on, is the extreme
simplicity of his themes as they first appear in his sketch-books. These
are usually elaborated, thus changing their character, taking on new
meaning with the growth and development of the idea in the composer's
mind; when through with it, however, the thought appears fresh and
spontaneous, such was his consummate art, as if it had never undergone
any elaboration. But sometimes the theme maintains its original
simplicity, and the masterwork appears in the orchestration which
surrounds it; at times even this maintains an archaic simplicity. Thus
in the coda of the vivace of the Seventh Symphony, a simple melody is
reiterated eleven times in succession, with no other orchestration than
the pedal-point on E by the rest of the instruments.

The symphonies in general are the language of a buoyant, gay, blithesome
mood, as befits their design for concert use. In them, for the most
part, he addresses people in their holiday humor. His experience with
Fidelio may have impressed the fact upon his mind that sorrow and pain
should be sparingly portrayed on festive occasions. Not so with the
piano sonatas, which can be heard and studied in the privacy of one's
home. Even the quartets may be placed in the category since they do not
require an elaborate equipment and preparation for their production.

Take him all in all optimism prevails with him, or rather, in true
philosophic spirit, he demonstrates that the sorrow, the inevitable
trouble and misery of life, is more than offset by the good things the
gods have provided. Life, after all, is a precious gift, which should be
duly appreciated. A period of enjoyment, gayety, strengthens and
fortifies the mind, and enables it better to bear the burdens when they
come. The great creative genius, must perforce, in the very nature of
things, be optimistic in his chosen work. He is more alive, more
possessed with the belief that life with its opportunities is worth
while, than is the case with the ordinary man going about his petty
concerns. In common life, the busiest man is the happiest man, that is
the most satisfied; and this contentment springs from the consciousness
of doing something worth doing, the advantage of which will remain. With
the man of genius, the feeling rises to elation, to rapture, when he
considers the transcendent, imperishable nature of his work. "Dass
Hervorbringen selbst ein Vergnügen und sein eigner Lohn ist."

The Eighth Symphony which was brought out at the same time as the
Seventh is the shortest by a few bars, of the nine. It was completed in
about four months from the date of its inception. Here as in the
Seventh, the dance element is in the ascendant, commanding, swaying
everything, thus coming back to first principles, almost to the origin
of the art, as an art. The dance is the primordial, autochthonic form of
music; its foundation so to speak. The song had its origin in the dance
as indicated by its name "ballad." It is a comparatively simple matter
to trace its upward course in instrumental music, as such. It is
conceivable that people from remote times on, had the faculty of
originating tunes, and of humming and singing them, and dancing to them
long before such things as scales and notation were conceived of. Song
and dance must have come into being at the same time, and the earliest
dancing was done with a singing accompaniment. As people advanced in the
art and became able to manufacture instruments with which to produce
music to dance by, it is readily apparent that those persons who did not
dance, derived pleasure from listening to it. The next step was to play
these dance tunes without dancing. This naturally led to a collection of
dance tunes. By playing three or four in succession it was soon found
that a more agreeable effect was produced by selecting those differing
in rhythm. Here we have the suite, the earliest orchestral form. After a
while it was found that a change of key heightened the effect, and, when
composing purely orchestral music not intended for actual use in
dancing, the more original of the composers at times allowed the strict
dance form to fall into abeyance in one or two movements to enable them
to try their hand in another style, and also for contrast. A broadening
and augmenting of the different forms and we have the sonata. The
symphony is an enlargement of the sonata. All our intellectual progress
is an unfolding, like a flower from the bud. We have first an
impression, then an opinion, then demonstration.

Many years were to elapse before the next and last symphony was to
appear; years in which the ripening process was to go on, and which were
to culminate in the Mass in D, the Choral Symphony and the last
quartets,--works that are in a class by themselves in the same sense
that the works from the Third Symphony on, up to, and including the
Eighth, are in a class apart from the others. His compositions prior to
the Third Symphony are in the style of Mozart and Haydn. They are the
naïve utterances of the young musician who does not yet realize that he
has a mission to perform; whose ambition was to be ranked with his great
predecessors. Of the works of the second period, it can be said that
their most prominent characteristic is gayety (_Heiterkeit_). They are
not all in this mood, and but rarely is the mood maintained throughout a
single work, but it exists to the extent that it dominates it, just as
the key-note to his later works is to be found in his mysticism. The
works of the second period are coincident with his best years physically
and when his mental powers had reached their highest maturity. When he
found out what manner of man he was and realized the place he was
destined to occupy among the great ones of earth; when he had accepted
his destiny and had made his peace with himself it is easy to understand
how a certain gayety and serenity should have spread itself over his
life and have communicated itself to his works; and though this serenity
was alternated by periods of despair, he allowed no more of this to
appear in his work than his esthetic sense approved of. Like all highly
organized people he sounded the gamut of joy and sorrow. His journal
entries tell the story. One day, exulting in life and its possibilities
he writes, "Oh, it would be glorious to live life over a thousand
times." At another time he calls upon his God in abject despair to help
him through the passing hour. At one time life is so difficult a problem
that he sees not how it can be continued at all. Then he loses himself
in his creations and soars into regions where his troubles cannot
follow. This joyousness is the portion of many extraordinary people.
Haydn and Mozart had it. "He has among other qualities that of great
joyousness," says Carlyle, in speaking of Richter. "Goethe has it to
some extent and Schiller too. It is a deep laughter, a wild laughter,
and connected with it, there is the deepest seriousness."




CHAPTER X

AT THE ZENITH OF HIS FAME

     Fate bestoweth no gift which it taketh not back. Ask not aught of
     sordid humanity; the trifle it bestoweth is a nothing.
                                                                --HAFIZ.


Napoleon's star, hitherto so uniformly in the ascendant, was now on the
wane. His victories at the battles of Lützen and Bautzen in May of 1813,
could not atone for the disaster of Moscow in the previous year. The
crushing defeat encountered by the French at the battle of Vittoria by
the English under Wellington, and the battle of Leipzig in October of
the same year showed the world that here was only a man after all; a man
subject to the usual limitations and mutations of mankind. The demigod
was dethroned, the pedestal knocked from under, and all Europe rejoiced.
The nightmare of fear which had so long pervaded all classes, was after
all only a bad dream; the incubus could be shaken off, and mankind again
resume its normal mode of living. Waterloo was already foreshadowed in
the events of this year, and the people were wild with joy.

The alliance which followed Napoleon's marriage to the Austrian
Archduchess did not have the good political results which Metternich
expected from it. The war indemnity of fifteen millions of dollars, the
cession of provinces whereby three and one half millions of people were
lost to Austria, the reduction of the army to 150,000 men, exactions
made by Napoleon at the time of the marriage, did not tend to make him
popular. The alliance existed in name, not in sentiment. He was still
regarded as the conqueror, not the ally. Austria had been lukewarm all
along, and when she changed front in 1813, and joined the coalition
against him, acting in concert with England, Russia and Prussia, the
measure had the moral support of the nation. This was three years after
his marriage to the Archduchess.

The news of the battle of Vittoria reached Vienna on July 13. Beethoven
was importuned by a clever friend, M. Maelzel, a musician, to write a
symphony in commemoration of it, and to call it "Wellington's Victory."
Maelzel was a man of remarkable mechanical ingenuity. He had before this
won his way into Beethoven's good graces by making him an ear-trumpet,
which he used for several years. He was the inventor of the metronome
and a man of considerable intelligence. He had invented a Panharmonicon,
an automaton instrument containing most of the instruments found in full
orchestra, on the principle of the modern orchestrion. Allied to his
talents as musician and inventor were those of good business ability and
a knowledge of human nature. The Battle Symphony appears to have been
written originally for the Panharmonicon. "I witnessed," says Moscheles,
"the origin and progress of this work, and remember that not only did
Maelzel induce Beethoven to write it, but even laid before him the whole
design of it; writing the drum marches and trumpet flourishes of the
French and English armies himself, giving Beethoven hints how he should
herald the English army by the tune of 'Rule Brittania;' how he should
introduce 'Malbrook' in a dismal strain; depict the horrors of the
battle, and arrange 'God Save the King,' with effects representing the
huzzas of the multitude. Even the idea of converting the melody of 'God
Save the King' into a subject of a fugue in quick movement emanates from
Maelzel." It is hardly conceivable that Beethoven, if left to himself,
would have produced anything of this sort. But it exactly suited the
popular feeling, and was such a success that Beethoven was induced to
arrange it for full orchestra. This work is never classed among his
symphonies, although it served to make him very popular with the Vienna
public.

The presence in their midst of the composer of the Eroica Symphony in
these stirring times, was a significant fact, which was bound to be duly
exploited by the Viennese. The Battle Symphony confirmed and emphasized
Beethoven's stand as a patriot. He was consequently greatly looked up to
by the young men of the time, in particular by the student element,
already of considerable importance in Vienna, who made an idol of him.
He was now everywhere in demand, his music of necessity being a part of
the programme of every concert or important event in the City.

It is a national characteristic with the Germans to celebrate every
issue with music. A great occasion called for a great demonstration.
When therefore, it was proposed to give a concert in aid of the Austrian
and Bavarian soldiers disabled at the battle of Hanau, where the French
were intercepted after their retreat from Leipzig on October 30, the
matter was intrusted to Beethoven as being the man best fitted for the
work. It was stipulated that Beethoven's music was to occupy the
programme exclusively, which gave him a good opportunity to produce the
Seventh Symphony, still in manuscript.

An aggregation of eminent musicians volunteered their services for the
occasion, sinking their differences in patriotic elation. Moscheles,
already then a great pianist, played the cymbals. Meyerbeer presided at
the big drum. Spohr took a prominent part, together with Salieri,
Romberg and Hümmel. The fact that Beethoven conducted it indicates that
his deafness could not have been so bad at this time. The concert took
place on December 8, and, as may be supposed, was a brilliant success.
It was repeated four days later. At each performance, the principal
event, was, not the Seventh Symphony, but rather the Battle-piece,
which, performed by full orchestra for the first time, won loud and
frequent applause.

After the second performance Beethoven gave a letter to the public in
which he says, "The concert was a rare assemblage of eminent performers,
each glad to contribute by his presence and talents something towards
the benefit of the country, even to the extent of taking subordinate
places in the orchestra where required. On me devolved the conduct of
the whole, because the music was composed by me. Had it been written by
any one else, I would as cheerfully have taken my place at the big drum,
for we were all actuated by the feeling of patriotism and the desire to
benefit those who had sacrificed so much for us."

The concert had to be repeated in January and in February following, as
patriotism was still the ruling idea with the populace. At the February
concert the Eighth Symphony was on the programme, but in each case the
_pièce de résistance_ was the Battle Symphony. It was produced again in
March, when Beethoven conducted it, together with the Egmont Overture,
at the annual concert for the Theatre-Armenfonds. The symphony soon
found its way to England and enjoyed great popularity there from its
connection with Wellington. It frequently appeared on the programmes
under the name of Wellington's Victory.

The general esteem in which Beethoven was held by the Viennese led to a
demand for another hearing of Fidelio, which had been out of sight and
mind for eight years. The libretto was again worked over (this time by
Treitschke), and submitted to Beethoven. The revised form seems to have
pleased him at once, although very important changes were made which
imposed on him a herculean task. New music had to be written for certain
portions, and the whole rearranged and adapted to the new conditions.
Everything was going Beethoven's way in these years, which may explain
his good-natured acquiescence in these demands. "Your revision suits me
so well," he wrote Treitschke, "that I have decided once more to rebuild
the desolate ruins of an ancient fortress." This time the opera was a
pronounced success, although alterations and emendations were in order
more or less during the entire season. On July 18, it was performed for
Beethoven's benefit. Moscheles made a piano arrangement of the score,
and must have considered it a great task, as he wrote at the end.

FINIS.
WITH GOD'S HELP.

When Beethoven saw this he wrote underneath, "Oh man, help thyself!" The
piano arrangement was dedicated to the Archduke and published in August.

The year 1814 was a memorable one for Beethoven. Important events
crowded fast on his horizon, chief of which were those proceeding from
the meeting of the Congress of Sovereigns in Vienna in the autumn of
this year. Napoleon was in the toils; he had been forced to abdicate and
was now a prisoner on the island of Elba. When the treaty of peace was
signed at Paris on May 30, 1814, between France and the allies, it was
agreed that all the powers which had been engaged in the war on either
side, should send plenipotentiaries to Vienna in general Congress to
arrange for the conclusion of the provisions of the treaty of peace.

The Congress met in November of the same year, and was characterized by
a degree of magnificence which renders it unique of its kind. The
Emperor and Empress of Russia, the kings of Prussia, Bavaria, Denmark
and Würtemburg were present in person. England and France were
represented by their highest nobles. Spain, Sweden and Portugal sent
representatives. The advent of a hundred great personages in Vienna
naturally brought other distinguished visitors there and the gayeties
that supervened, now that the wars were a thing of the past, occupied
the time and attention of the visitors to such an extent that for three
months nothing of a business nature was attempted by the Congress. These
were halcyon days for Vienna. Peace was restored after twenty years of
such warfare as only a Napoleon could inflict, the nervous tension
became a thing of the past, and sovereign and noble could again take up
the chief occupation of life, enjoyment.

The city fathers, on learning that the Congress was to be convened in
Vienna, commissioned Beethoven to write a cantata of welcome to honor
the visitors. The poem "Der glorreiche Augenblick" (The Glorious
Moment), was chosen, which Beethoven set to music. As may be supposed
the new cantata served to increase his fame, although as a work of art
it is about on a par with the Battle Symphony.

Beethoven occupied a prominent part in the many notable gatherings which
were a feature of this winter. Associated in people's minds as a
harbinger of the new era, his popularity increased in line with the ever
brightening political horizon. The Archduke enjoyed having him at his
receptions, introducing him to the sovereigns, and made much of him
generally. It was at the Archduke's apartments that Beethoven was
introduced to the Empress of Russia, who showed him much attention, both
here and when meeting him elsewhere. He met her frequently at Count
Rasoumowsky's, who as Russian Ambassador entertained lavishly in honor
of his distinguished guests. He afterward related humorously how the
crowned heads paid court to him, referring to the urbanity and courtesy
which the Empress in particular, used toward him. Beethoven is on record
as saying that he liked being with the aristocracy. He seems to have had
no difficulty in impressing on the Empress the right concept of his
importance as man and artist. In acknowledgment of the courtesies which
he received from her, the master composed for her a Grand Polonaise (in
C, opus 89) which, in company with the pianoforte arrangement of the
Seventh Symphony he dedicated to her.

Shortly after the assembling of the Congress Beethoven gave a concert
for his own benefit, at which the new Cantata as well as the Battle
Symphony and the Seventh Symphony were performed. The Riding Hall, an
immense structure, capable of seating six thousand persons was placed at
his disposal, for which, however, a large price, one-half the receipts,
was exacted, so Frimmel states. With sublime confidence Beethoven sent
out invitations in his own name to the visiting sovereigns and other
notabilities, all of whom responded, with the result that the hall was
crowded and the concert proved to be a great success.

As a result of the winter's activities, Beethoven's finances were
greatly improved. He displayed a degree of business ability during this
year, which was not to have been expected from a man of his temperament.
His profits from one source or another were such that he invested money
to the extent of ten thousand florins, in shares of the Bank of Austria.
It was his first and only investment, undertaken as a provision for the
future.

That Beethoven kept his head in the face of all this adulation is
evident from a letter written at this time to a friend at Prague in
which he says, "I write nothing about our monarchs and monarchies. The
intellectual realm is the most precious in my eyes, and far above all
temporal and spiritual kingdoms."

It was indeed a brilliant winter, but all this joy was suddenly changed
to something akin to terror by the news of Napoleon's escape from Elba
in March of 1815, and that he was assembling his forces for another
campaign. The gayeties had to be discontinued, the members of the
Congress confined themselves to the work for which it was convened, the
result being that the treaties were signed by the eight powers on June
7, upon which the Congress disbanded. This was just eleven days before
the battle of Waterloo.

In November of this year Beethoven's brother Karl died, leaving the
composer as an heritage his son Karl, then nine years of age. With the
clairvoyance which approaching dissolution often brings, the father saw
that the uncle would be a much better guardian for the boy, than the
mother, and consigned him to Beethoven's care almost with his last
breath. It was characteristic of such a man as was Beethoven, to accept
the charge without hesitation, from an exaggerated sense of duty; to
fight for its possession even, although it revolutionized his life and
brought him face to face with all sorts of difficult and untried
conditions.

As might have been expected, Karl's widow, who was the daughter of a
rich citizen, contested his right to the control of the boy, and began
legal proceedings to obtain possession of him. This was the
advance-guard of a series of troubles that began to close in on him at
this period, ending only with his life. Years of litigation followed,
the issue being at times in favor of one side, then of the other, the
boy meanwhile being in charge of the successful party. The new
responsibility, assumed with scarcely a thought as to consequences, not
only interfered with the bachelor habits of a lifetime, but the mental
disturbance occasioned by the lawsuits which ensued, seriously
interrupted his work, so that for some years very little was
accomplished in the way of new compositions. "The higher a man is,"
said Goethe (Conversations with Eckermann), "the more he is under the
influence of dæmons, and he must take heed lest his guiding will counsel
him to a wrong path." Could he have foreseen how this adoption of the
child would interfere with his cherished work, he might have paused to
consider the matter, before binding himself irrevocably by his promise
to his brother.

With never a fixed habitation, no sense of the value of money, giving it
away to those in need as readily as if it had no value, often enduring
privation himself in consequence; with a mode of life so simple that the
entire ménage was frequently transported elsewhere on slight
provocation, this ascetic was now to encounter housekeeping problems,
make money, save it (most difficult of all), employ servants, in short
undertake in middle-age and in impaired health, duties the nature of
which he could not even form an estimate.

The plan of adopting the boy might not have been such a visionary one,
could Beethoven have been in entire control from the start. While the
litigation went on, discipline was out of the question. There were
occasional victories for the mother, who then had the boy under her
absolute control until such time as Beethoven was able to get the
decision of the Court reversed. Even when the boy was under the uncle's
charge, the mother managed at times to gain access to him in order to
poison his mind against the uncle. Her influence whenever she was able
to exert it was naturally adverse. That there should be a stronger
affinity between mother and son, than between uncle and nephew is not
surprising. She had had entire control of him up to his tenth year. She
was lax in discipline and saw to it that the boy had a better time while
with her than he was likely to have when under his uncle's care. That
the boy began to show a preference for being with the mother can be
easily understood, and it was a bitter trial to the master.

It was not alone mother-love which actuated Madame Beethoven in her
extraordinary efforts to gain possession of the boy; money
considerations entered into the question to some extent, as some money
had been set aside for his support by the father, which she wanted to
get hold of. The simple straightforward Beethoven was no match for the
wiles of this woman of the world, who generally managed in one way or
another to circumvent him, even to the detriment of the child. The boy
was sharp enough to take advantage of the situation, and was spoiled
long before the uncle was privileged legally to adopt him.

During the proceedings the case was at one time in a high court on the
assumption that the "van" in Beethoven's name indicated nobility. The
widow contested this, and brought action requesting that the case be
tried in a lower court. When Beethoven was examined on this issue, he
pointed to his head and heart, saying, "my nobility is here and here."
"van" is not a sign of nobility like the German "von," and the case was
sent to the lower court.

Beethoven formed high hopes on the lad's account, thinking that he would
become a great musician or scholar. He had no prevision that here he was
to meet with the greatest disappointment of his life. The boy was
handsome and intelligent and soon won the affection of the master, who
became much occupied with the interesting task of guiding his mental
and spiritual development. "The heart is only for rare occasions," said
Thoreau, "the intellect affords us the most unfailing satisfaction."
This rather cynical observation was abundantly confirmed in Beethoven's
case by subsequent developments. He wasted precious years on account of
his nephew, and the anxiety occasioned by his waywardness, was no doubt
one of the factors which shortened his life.

With the advent of the nephew into his life he finally abandoned all
idea of marriage. In conversation with Giannatasio del Rio, who kept the
school at which the nephew was placed, he stated, "I will never be able
to form a closer tie than the one which now binds me to my nephew." He
took lodgings near the school and visited Giannatasio's family
frequently. The daughter, in her journal, published after her death,
makes frequent mention of Beethoven, giving interesting glimpses into
his character. She tells of his bringing violets to her on March 17,
which he found in his walks in the fields, also of his carrying with him
on his walks a pocket edition of Shakespeare. The sarcastic, satirical
mood, which frequently took possession of Beethoven is touched on in the
journal, and is illustrated in the following incident. The father on one
occasion had remarked as if in compliment to the master, "My daughter
plays your music," upon which Beethoven laughed outright. It is hardly
necessary to say that the young lady played no more of Beethoven's
music, while he was about. On one occasion, however, she was playing his
_Kennst Du das Land?_ when he came in unexpectedly. He recognized it,
and at once went to her and stood at the piano, marking time and making
suggestions in regard to the rendering of it, thus making amends for
his former rudeness.

His interest in his nephew led him to make friendly advances to the
father as well as to the daughters, and he spent many pleasant hours
with them. On rare occasions he assumed his old air of happy boisterous
humor, when young people were about. He greatly enjoyed singing Goethe's
"Song of the Flea," calling out as the flea is killed: "Now he'll be
smashed! Now he'll be smashed!" (_jetzt wird er gegnaxt!_) making a
crash on the instrument at the word "smashed."

He came to them once after Karl had been placed in another school and
wept as he told them that his nephew had left him and gone to his
mother. The lad was recovered by the assistance of the police, and was
then placed with this family again. He once wrote a sharp letter to the
father criticising his methods in the teaching of Karl, but, on
reconsidering the matter sent word to the daughter asking her not to
show it to her father, as it was written in a blind rage, which he now
regretted. All this shows how carefully he looked after the young man's
welfare. It was the same with his music, which was intrusted to Czerny.
The youth inherited some musical talent and under favoring conditions
might have achieved something as a musician. When the instruction began,
Beethoven was in the habit of calling at Czerny's house nearly every day
with his nephew. On these occasions the master would frequently
improvise on the piano, to Czerny's great enjoyment. Czerny, through his
devotion to Beethoven, paid particular attention to Karl, and the boy
made rapid progress. He accompanied his uncle on visits to other houses,
by the latter's desire, with the object of forming his taste and
stimulating his ambition for the art.

From the start Beethoven planned a fine career for his nephew. "The boy
must be an artist or a savant that he may lead a noble life," he said
once. On another occasion, when the youth was about eighteen years of
age, he said, on introducing him to a visitor, "you can ask him a riddle
in Greek if you like." "My wishes and efforts have no other aim than
that the boy may receive the best possible education," he wrote when
contending in the Court of Appeals for possession of the boy, "as his
capacity warrants the indulgence of the best hopes for his future, and
that the expectation, which his father built upon my fraternal love may
be fulfilled. The shoot is still flexible; but if more time be wasted it
will grow crooked for want of the training hand of the gardener, and
good conduct, intellect, and character, may be lost forever. I know no
more sacred duty than the superintendence of the education of a child.
The duty of guardianship can only consist in this--to appreciate what is
good, and to take such measures as are conformable with the object in
view."

The young man cared but little for this solicitude. In his uncle's home
he had to study, listen to many a lecture perhaps, and do many a thing
that he did not like to do. When with his mother it was different;
spending-money was to be had while there and in general an easy time. No
wonder that he preferred being with her. Later, when he entered the
university he absented himself as much as possible from his uncle's
house. Beethoven had centred his affections on the young man, and, when
he remained indifferent, irresponsive, it caused him the keenest
anguish. The master's letters to him from Baden are pathetic. "In what
part of me am I not injured and torn?" "My continued solitude only still
further enfeebles me, and really my weakness often amounts to a swoon.
Oh! do not further grieve me, for the man with the scythe (_Sensenman_)
will grant me no long delay." His journal entries on this account, are
the utterances of a creature at bay; of a being in the last extremity.
"O! höre stets Unaussprechlicher, höre mich deinen unglücklichen
unglücklichsten aller Sterblichen."

It was not alone the necessity for study and other restraints, which led
the young man to absent himself as much as possible from his uncle's
house when he grew older and had more liberty of action. Comfortable
living was not one of the factors in the Beethoven ménage. Beethoven's
requirements, so far as he himself was concerned, were simple almost to
asceticism. He believed in discipline in the rearing of youth, but his
belief in it did not extend to the point of inducing him to attempt it
with his servants. The explanation of this is not far to seek. He would
have had to conform to any rules made in the interest of discipline and
system in the household, which would have been out of the question for
him. He was wedded to an irregular mode of living and for the most part
desired nothing but to be left alone. It is not surprising that the
young man preferred his own quarters, to the haphazard mode of life,
which characterized the master's household.

Character is never a finished product. Always it is in process of
formation, of development, advancing or retrograding according to
environment. Beethoven's influence, powerless during his lifetime on
the mind of Karl may have been potent after death in the upbuilding of
the young man's character. On arriving at years of discretion he changed
his course entirely and became an exemplary citizen. As the last
survivor of the Beethoven family he inherited the means of his two
uncles, and settled down in Vienna living the life of a gentleman of
leisure. He gave his attention to music to which he was passionately
devoted, as well as to the rearing of his family, and was by all
accounts a model family man. Like his illustrious uncle, he was in the
habit of improvising at the piano for hours at a time.

To follow the fortunes of the posterity of great men is an interesting
subject. From the researches of Dr. Vansca of Vienna, published in _Die
Musik_ (Berlin, March, 1902), it transpires that Karl married on July
16, 1832, a Miss Karoline Naska. Five children were born to them, as
follows: Karoline, 1833; Marie, 1835; Ludwig, 1839 (named after his
famous grand-uncle); Gabrielle, 1844, and Hermine, 1852. Ludwig, the
only son, his military service over, married in 1865 Marie Nitche. To
them a son was born on May 8, 1870, at Munich, and baptized Karl. Father
and son, that is Ludwig and Karl 2d, were last heard from in 1889 in
London, when the father applied for a passport to travel in various
European countries. Ludwig's mother died in Vienna in 1891, at which
time it was announced that the whereabouts of Ludwig and the son Karl
were unknown. Efforts were then made to get news of the young Karl, who,
if living, would have been a youth of twenty, but without avail, and the
family are of the opinion that he died during his childhood. As far as
can be ascertained at this writing the family of Beethoven on the male
side is extinct.

Of the daughters of the master's nephew, Karoline and Marie married
brothers, namely: Franz and Paul Weidinger. Gabrielle married a bank
cashier named Robert Heimler. The youngest, Hermine, remained single.
She graduated in 1889 from the conservatory at Vienna in piano and
harmonium. Of the married daughters, only one, Marie, had children; a
son and daughter. The only descendants of the Beethovens known to be
living in 1891, are Karoline Weidinger, a widow, Gabrielle Heimler, and
the son and daughter of Marie Weidinger. All these persons were at last
accounts living in Vienna.




CHAPTER XI

METHODS OF COMPOSITION

     A good painter should paint two things; man, and the thoughts of
     man's soul.
                                                    --LEONARDO DA VINCI.


Beethoven usually had a definite idea before him when composing. The
work progressed rapidly under such conditions. Often, however, on
further consideration, a better idea would present itself in certain
places on reading the work over, and these portions would have to be
rewritten. He stated in this connection that he always had a picture in
his mind when composing, which he aimed to reproduce in his work. "Ich
habe immer ein Gemälde in meinen Gedanken wenn ich am componiren bin,
und arbeite nach demselben" (Thayer). Sometimes this picture was shadowy
and elusive, as his gropings in the sketch-books show. He would then
apply himself to the task of fixing the idea, writing and rewriting,
until it stood out clearly in accordance with the concept already formed
in his mind.

This picture, or idea, or representation, which exists in the brain of
the artist, and to which he seeks to give expression in a tangible form
so as to communicate it to others, is a miracle which is constantly
going on in his inner consciousness. He can at will call up impressions,
which immediately become objectified on the canvas of his mind, in the
form of pictures. This mental process is the same in every form of
creative work whether it be painting, sculpture, or any of the arts. The
architect, before putting pencil to paper, will have the splendid
cathedral before him as in a vision; the sculptor, the ideal form and
facial expression. The mind of the artist is a vast canvas on which
pictures appear, remaining a longer or shorter period at his will, and,
when no longer required, giving place to others. The idea once recorded
seems never to appear again. Nature is never so prodigal as with the man
of genius. Of all her children he is the favorite; these pictures are
given him in superfluity, out of all proportion to his ability to use
them. The harder he works in the effort to catch up with his material,
the more plentiful it becomes.

Mr. Chamberlain, in his Life of Wagner, calls attention to the curious
fact that Wagner produced his operas in pairs for the most part, up to
his fortieth year. This was true of Beethoven with his symphonies, to a
great extent. He became so fired with enthusiasm while on a great work,
his thoughts became so prolific, that another work must, perforce, come
into being to utilize the surplus material.

This prodigality with which the artist is supplied, explains his
absorption in his work. Once fairly started on a great work, this type
of man carries it through with the force of a torrent. Nothing but
physical exhaustion can stop him. Wagner, after completing a great work,
usually had to drop all composing or writing for some months in order to
recuperate. No slave-driver with a lash ever drove his victim so
mercilessly as Wagner did himself when in the stress of composition.
Being married he had some one to look after him, and this had an
important bearing on the preservation of his health. Beethoven, with the
strenuousness that came from his Rhenish ancestry, was more intractable,
impatient of interference. His domestics were often afraid to go near
him when engaged in composition. Usually when in deep thought he was
oblivious of the outer world. He once agreed to sit for an artist, and
maintained his pose for five minutes; then he forgot all about it and
went to the piano, where he began improvising. This just suited the
artist, who got a good position and worked along until he was tired,
finally leaving the room without the master's knowledge.

The Swedish poet, Atterbohm, and Dr. Jeitteles, distinguished literary
men of the period, called at Beethoven's house one hot afternoon. Their
knocking met with no response, although they knew the master was in, as
they heard him singing and occasionally striking a chord on the piano.
Finding the door unlocked, they entered and went in search of him,
finally discovering him in an inner room. He was in extreme dishabille,
busily noting down his thoughts on the plastered wall. He had probably
intended changing his clothes, and, while disrobing, these thoughts came
crowding in on him to the exclusion of everything else. Beethoven,
facing the wall with his back to the visitors, was unaware of their
proximity, and they left without being discovered by him, as they did
not wish to interfere with his work. This was probably in the year 1826,
as Beethoven remained in Vienna all that summer, actively engaged on the
great C sharp minor quartet. It may have been a part of this work which
was thus produced.

Friederich Stark relates an incident that illustrates his abstraction.
He called on Beethoven early one morning, and, being a friend, was given
the privilege of looking him up. He went from room to room, and finally
found him in his bedroom. He was just beginning to dress, his face
thickly lathered with soap that had been put on the previous evening and
had dried there; he had prepared to shave, but in the process had
forgotten to go on with it.

His sketch-books are interesting as showing his frame of mind and
temperament, while at work. In his abstraction he occasionally scribbled
beautiful thoughts on the margin of his manuscripts. Thus, in the
sketch-books of the Pastoral Symphony, we find this record of his joy in
nature, showing how thoroughly his mind was imbued with his subject.

"Almächtiger, im Walde ich bin selig, glücklig im Wald. Jeder Baum
spricht durch dich!"

"O Gott! Welche Herrlichkeit in einer solchen Waldgegend."

In summer he usually resorted to one of the beautiful villages in the
environs of Vienna, since absorbed by the city. Thus he repaired to
Heiligenstadt to write his first mass. "Oh, the charm of the woods, who
can express it!" he writes, and in many of his letters from the country,
he expresses his joy at being there. "No man on earth can love the
country as I do. Thickets, trees and rocks supply the echo man longs
for." His best ideas came to him while walking through the fields and
woods. At such times his mind became serene and he would attain that
degree of abstraction from the world which enabled him to develop his
musical ideas. He always carried note-books and would jot down a thought
as it came to him. When he got home he would elaborate it and work it
into shape. He would walk for hours in all sorts of weather. Like
Thoreau, he generally preferred to be alone in his walks, the presence
of a companion preventing him from working out his thoughts.

Very properly, he occupied himself but little with the music of other
composers. To a man of his individuality, inspiration from the outer
world was not to be had or desired. His own inner wealth was sufficient.
Curiously, he set a high value on Cherubini during the period of writing
Fidelio and the Third Symphony. His own creations however, were of
paramount interest to him. He was a slow worker, continually polishing
and improving his work up to the moment that it reached the engraver's
hands.

"The Andante" said Wagner "is the typical German style." It was not
Beethoven's best style. Essentially a man of extremes, he delighted in
swinging the pendulum to its furthest limit either way. He early in life
acquired the irrepressible joyousness in his compositions, which was
Haydn's distinguishing trait. It is the key-note to much of Beethoven's
work up to the time of composing the Grand Mass. It figures to some
extent in his subsequent work. It is a feature which Wagner never tires
of exploiting in Beethoven's work. Whenever he mentions Beethoven's name
the word _Heiterkeit_ (joyousness) is sure to follow. The two are almost
synonymous with him. Where Beethoven is unapproachable, however, is in
his slow movements, the Adagios, solemn and portentous, in which all of
world-sorrow finds expression. It is in these scenes of terror that his
powers stand out with supernatural clearness.

His infinitude impresses one. It is as if he had penetrated other
spheres and could speak in new tongues. He delighted in startling
contrasts. The Kyrie of the Mass in D has always presented itself to my
consciousness as a series of gigantic tone-pictures, in which the
omnipotence of God, and the impotence of humanity is brought into
juxtaposition. The Coriolanus overture is another instance among the
many at hand illustrating this point. Here we see how the forceful,
aggressive, bold, masterful genius, is subdued by the power of conjugal
and filial love, a power in this case as irresistible as that of a
glacier, which will make its way against any odds. Each side in striving
for the mastery, displays its own peculiar characteristics and mode. It
is the everlasting struggle between the evil principle and that which is
good. He ranges titanic forces in opposition and lets us see the battle.
By the magic of his art we are enabled to see these pictures as on a
canvas.

It is frequently stated that Beethoven's music shows a deficiency in
counterpoint. His originality, the wealth of his ideas, his versatility,
will explain this. The fugue, while it is ingenious and interesting, is
artificial and, indeed often arbitrary in musical composition, sometimes
introduced merely to stop gaps or for brilliancy of effect. It is not
surprising that Beethoven should have neglected it to some extent,
although he has used it with excellent effect in some of the sonatas and
in his two masses. His fertility of imagination was great and it was
hard for him to tie himself down to the formal style in composition,
after his powers had reached maturity. The fugue, in one form or
another, seems to be almost indispensable in musical composition, but it
is always characterized by learning instead of inspiration. It is
something which has to be worked out like a problem in mathematics.
Beethoven's thought in music is marked by something higher than the
disposition to divert one's attention to his talent or skill. A definite
meaning is there; he has something to reveal.

At the beginning of his career as composer, Beethoven was not above
taking advice on the subject of his compositions. He frequently
discussed them with Prince Lichnowsky, and adopted his suggestions when
it came to alterations. As he advanced in knowledge of his art, however,
he became reticent on the subject and would discuss them with no one. He
acted on Goethe's idea that "the greatest art after all is to limit and
isolate oneself." He did not like praise or applause. Knowing
intuitively that the character is endangered thereby, he sought by every
means to ward it off. His improvising was such that often on leaving the
instrument he would find his hearers in tears. This would embarrass him,
and he would affect anger, or would laugh at them. This does not imply
that he did not care for appreciation, which is quite a different
matter.

He was perfectly willing to listen to censure or adverse criticism.
Trifles might anger him, but this never did, and, be it said, it never
influenced him either. True artist that he was, he seldom wrote down to
his public. Like Wagner, he knew what was best in art, and if the public
did not, he gave the matter small concern. Not for one generation are
great masterpieces born. The artist lives in the future; he is always
in advance of his time.

Beethoven's character was a prism of many facets. Wagner views him
always as the mystic, the seer, at odds with the world. Side by side
with this characterization he constantly dwells, as just noted, on
Beethoven's uncontrollable tendency to humor, gayety (_Heiterkeit_)
which shows itself not only in his life, but still more in his works.
This may have been a device deliberately assumed to enable him to escape
mental suffering. At all events it was a prominent trait of his
character, but does not seem to have added to his enjoyment of life. No
circumstance, however painful, but that he is able to extract some jest
or pleasantry from it. The paradox is before us of a man world-weary at
the core, outwardly serene, gay. In the same ratio in which those things
which serve to make life enjoyable to the average man were diminished or
withdrawn, does his tendency to incessant humor increase.

The consciousness of being able to achieve great things, and the joy in
accomplishing them, is what gives the artist the exultant mood, the
feeling of gayety. To be sensible of such an heritage, to participate in
this God-given wealth, to run riot in it, to know that the more of it
that is used the more will be given, to be favored of the gods in a way
that the possessor of untold wealth cannot aspire to--this is what gives
the serene and joyous mood, which characterizes the man of genius for
the most part. When he comes out of this ideal world into the
commonplace every-day life, and realizes his unfitness for it, the other
side of the picture is presented to his consciousness, and then is
exhibited that strange melancholy, _Weltschmerz_, which constantly
comes to the fore in the journals and letters of men like Wagner, or
Beethoven, or Liszt.

The Sunday morning concerts, instituted by Czerny in the winter of 1816,
call for more than passing notice. A select company of professional
musicians and amateurs had banded themselves into an organization for
the purpose of performing and studying the best class of chamber-music
with special reference to Beethoven's compositions. Czerny was the
originator and moving spirit, as stated, and the performances were held
at his house. Beethoven attended them frequently. Czerny, whose
admiration for the master was unbounded, was brought into more intimate
relations with him through these concerts, as Beethoven was consulted in
regard to the programmes and occasionally rehearsed some of his new
compositions with him. Though a brilliant performer, Czerny did not like
public life or society, and retired from the concert stage at a time
when his powers were at their best, in order to give all his time to
composition. His ability in improvising was a marvel even for those
times. He was Beethoven's successor in Prince Lichnowsky's circle,
frequently playing at concerts at his house. He is credited with being
able to play from memory all of Beethoven's works. Like Schubert, his
one pleasure was to be with a few chosen spirits, and talk on the
subject of his art.

In these assemblages rank was ignored. Art was a leveller, or, rather,
the devotees of the art were raised to a common plane, where social
distinctions were for the time being obliterated. No special invitations
were required. Any one interested in the art was made welcome, and found
there a congenial atmosphere. Czerny, modest and retiring, had no
thought of making social capital out of these concerts. No one not
wholly devoted to the art was wanted, no matter what his social position
was, and want of social position was no bar when the artistic
qualifications were present. It was a band of chosen spirits, and the
attrition engendered by these meetings must have been advantageous to
each. They were true Concerts Spirituels, an audience of artists from
which the performers were drawn.

Second only to Czerny as a pianist among this company was Beethoven's
friend and pupil, the Baroness Ertmann, who frequently took part in
these concerts. Madame Ertmann's virtuosity has already been commented
on in these pages. She won new laurels at the Czerny concerts through
her admirable interpretation of Beethoven's music.

During this winter of 1816 the master composed the fine sonata in A,
opus 101, for her. It commemorates the spiritual kinship existing
between these two gifted persons. "My dear, valued Dorothea Cäcilia," he
writes in his letter of dedication, "receive now what has long been
intended for you, and may it serve as a proof of my appreciation of your
artistic talents and of yourself; I regret not having heard you recently
at Cz--(Czerny's). My absence was owing to illness, which at last
appears to be giving way to returning health." Some years previously,
when the Baroness had lost a son by death during her husband's absence
on his military duties, Beethoven asked the stricken woman to call, and
comforted her, not with words, but in the language which both best
understood. "'We will talk in music,' said Beethoven, who remained at
the piano over an hour in which he said everything and even gave me
consolation." The incident is obtained from one of Mendelssohn's
letters.

Among the important works produced in this period may be mentioned the
Sonata, opus 90, "A struggle between the head and the heart." It is
dedicated to Count M. Lichnowsky on the occasion of his marriage to a
singer. There was also the chorus set to Goethe's words, "A Calm Sea and
Prosperous Voyage." This was written in 1815 and seven years later
dedicated to Goethe. The two sonatas, opus 102, for piano and cello, one
of which is called the Free Sonata, are interesting, as in them is
foreshadowed the trend of Beethoven's mind toward religious music, which
controlled him almost entirely from this time on.

The idea of writing another oratorio seems now to have taken possession
of his mind. A preference for this mode appears in his journals and
letters and was probably the subject of conversation on his part. At all
events, the newly established Society of Friends of Music of Vienna
(which Beethoven, with his usual aptitude for punning, used to refer to
as the society of _Musikfeinde_, enemies of music) made him a
proposition to write an oratorio for them, which he accepted. No
stipulations were made as to subject or treatment, and the society
agreed to pay the handsome sum of three hundred gold ducats, merely for
the use of the work for one year. So far as known, this work was never
begun. The Archduke soon after obtained his appointment as
Cardinal-Archbishop, and the work on the mass for the Installation
occupied Beethoven to the exclusion of other works.

The loss by death of three of Beethoven's old friends must have been
greatly felt by him in these years. Prince Lichnowsky, who died in
1814, was the first, and was followed two years later by Prince
Lobkowitz. Hardest of all, however, for the master was the loss of his
friend, Wenzel Krumpholz, who died in 1817. His relations with the
latter were more intimate than with the noblemen, and had continued
without a break almost from the time of his advent in Vienna. Czerny, in
his autobiography, gives an interesting picture of the devotion of
Krumpholz, who attached himself to Beethoven much the same as did
Boswell to Dr. Johnson. He was somewhat older than Beethoven, and his
position as first violinist at the Court Theatre enabled him to be of
much practical service to Beethoven, as he was widely known among the
professional musicians, as well as the rich amateurs. He sounded
Beethoven's praises far and wide: he encouraged him to begin
composition, making propaganda for him among the wealthy dilettante, and
spent a good portion of each day in his company. Beethoven, who at a
later period said of himself that he was too strong for friendship, did
not take kindly to this intimacy at first, but Krumpholz's persistency
was not to be gainsaid. He gave him lessons on the violin, and
identified himself in many ways with Beethoven's advancement. Beethoven
finally became so accustomed to him, that the presence of the other did
not disturb him, and he would improvise before him as if he were alone.
Krumpholz though devoid of genius himself, intuitively recognized its
presence in Beethoven, and led the younger man to discuss his musical
plans and ideas with him. The compositions as they took form in the
young man's mind, were played to Krumpholz, who advised and encouraged
him. The extravagant admiration of the latter sometimes acted on
Beethoven's sense of humor to such an extent that he would make fun of
him, and call him his fool, but this did not deter Krumpholz, who seemed
to think he had a divinely appointed task set him, in aiding the
development of this young genius, and was willing to put up with some
vagaries from him.

In truth, Beethoven needed a champion, for, from the first, a certain
originality, a strenuousness, showed itself in his work, which put the
art on a new and different footing. That the young man was reaching out
for higher things his public may have been aware of, but only a few,
here and there, kindred spirits, cared for this. The average person was
unable to recognize any higher function in music than that of simple
enjoyment; anything aside from this was irrelevant, and could but lead
to deterioration. Although at the beginning of his career as composer,
he made Mozart and Haydn his models, this originality showed itself, and
when it was continued in subsequent works, it awoke the strongest
opposition in certain quarters. The strong partisanship which Krumpholz
brought to bear on the situation, was invaluable to the young man, whose
views needed confirmation and indorsement. Krumpholz seems to have had
an affinity for discovering talent in others. He brought Czerny, at the
age of ten years, to Beethoven, who immediately recognized his genius,
and offered to give him lessons. That Beethoven deeply felt the loss of
his old friend and teacher is evidenced by his writing music to the Song
of the monks,

    Rasch tritt der Tod den Menschen an,

from Schiller's Wilhelm Tell, in commemoration of him.




CHAPTER XII

SENSE OF HUMOR

     In tristitia hilaris, in hilaritate tristis.
                                              --MOTTO OF GIORDANO BRUNO.


Beethoven did not have much in the way of enjoyment, as the word is
generally understood, to compensate him for the pain of existence. The
resources vouchsafed others in this respect, family affection, love,
friendship, generally failed him when put to the test. Out of harmony
with the general order of things in the material world, the point in
which he could best come to an understanding with his fellow-creatures
was by the exercise of his sense of humor. The circumstances of his life
tended to make a pessimist of him. He did not understand the world and
was misunderstood in return. To counteract the tendency toward
pessimism, his resource was to develop his sense of humor, to create an
atmosphere of gayety, by which he was enabled to meet people on a common
plane. But not only in the ordinary affairs of life does it stand him in
good stead, this sense of humor. It comes out finely in his creative
work in the sonatas and the Scherzo movements of his symphonies. He
originated, invented the Scherzo, developing it from the simple minuet
of the earlier composers. The primary object of the Scherzo was
recreation pure and simple. It was introduced with the object of resting
the mind.

The evolution of humor in music is an interesting subject of study. It
is something foreign to it, an exotic, of slow growth, gaining but
little in the hands of the earlier composers from Bach on. Even with
Haydn it never advanced much beyond geniality. They had essayed it
chiefly in the minuet, but succeeded only in producing something
stately, in which the element of fun or humor, to modern ways of
thinking is hardly appreciable. It found a sudden and wonderful
expansion, an efflorescence in Beethoven, with whom every phase of the
art was developed to colossal proportions. He has made of the Scherzo a
movement of such importance that it lends a distinctive character to his
symphonies. In this form he is unapproachable. In the whole range of
music there is nothing like it elsewhere. It is peculiar to Beethoven,
and is another example of the many-sidedness of the great composer.
"Happiness is a new idea in Europe," said St. Just, speaking of the
period immediately following the French Revolution. Whether or not
Beethoven ever met with this remark, its significance at least was taken
to heart. The word Scherz--joke, sport, is sufficiently obvious. He goes
much farther at times than simply to play pranks, however. A wide range
of expression is possible in the Scherzo when manipulated by a
master-mind like that of Beethoven. The satirical, sarcastic humor which
escaped him in social intercourse at times, is vented on a colossal
scale in the Scherzo, in which he often makes sport of humanity itself,
making it the subject of his jest, his ridicule--its foibles being
shown up, its follies exposed. When projected in this mood, the movement
calls for intellectual co-operation, and is of equal importance with the
others.

Humor has been defined as the outcome of simplicity and philosophy in
the character. It can exist independently of genius we know, but genius
is never without humor. In other words, wherever there is a work of
genius, it transpires that the author has a fund of humor with which he
occasionally enriches his work. The profoundest philosophical treatises
have it. It is a part of the stock in trade of every great novelist;
Fielding, Thackeray, George Eliot, Walter Scott. It frequently comes to
the surface in Schopenhauer pessimist though he be; it pervades
Shakespeare. Few men regarded life with greater seriousness than
Thoreau, but humor sparkles all over his works. It is only where this is
in excess that it detracts from the value of the work. Not important in
itself when separated from the deeper work which it accompanies, it is
yet, all in all, one of the infallible tests, though a minor one, of the
work of any man of genius. A sense of humor exists in the man even
though he keep it out of his work, if he is good for anything.

Beethoven's humor was titanic, heroic, on a grand scale, always with
what might be called a certain seriousness about it like that of a lion
at play. Mozart gives many instances of humor in his compositions, but
with a great difference in the character. His disposition was all
gentleness and sweetness, and his humor is characterized by these
attributes. It is on a small scale, and though enjoyable, has nothing
commanding about it. The musician, more than any artist, reflects his
character and trend of life in his work.

This sense of humor, inherent in the mental equipment of Beethoven,
enabled him to enjoy a joke as well as give it, to perceive a ridiculous
situation and extract due amusement from it, to appropriate it wherever
he found it. But singularly enough, when the point of a joke was turned
against himself, his sense of humor failed him utterly. He would often
become angry in such cases and the perpetrator would come in for a round
of abuse which made him chary of attempting it again.

Very bad music of which there was a sufficiency already in those times,
gave him great amusement, which he manifested by roars of laughter, we
are informed by Seyfried, who saw more or less of him during a period
covering a quarter of a century. "All his friends," says Seyfried,
"recognized that in the art of laughter, Beethoven was a virtuoso of the
first rank." He often laughed aloud when nothing had occurred to excite
laughter, and would in such case ascribe his own thoughts and fancies as
the cause. Naïve and simple as a child himself, he could only see the
naïveté in the worthless compositions above referred to, and could not
understand the small ambition back of the pitiful effort. He often
unintentionally afforded equally great amusement to others by his own
naïveté. Thus he once told Stein, of the noted family of pianoforte
makers that some of the strings in his Broadwood were out of order or
lacking, and to illustrate it, caught up a bootjack and struck the keys
with it. Ries states that Beethoven several times in his awkwardness
emptied the contents of the ink-stand into the piano. On this same piano
the master was often begged to improvise. The instrument was a present
from the manufacturers, and when made, was probably the best example of
its kind extant. It later came into the possession of Liszt.

Beethoven's love of a joke was such that it appears in the title to one
of his works, the opus 129. It is a rondo a capriccio for piano, with
the title, Die Wuth über den verlorenen Groschen (fury over a lost
penny), of which Schumann says "it would be difficult to find anything
merrier than this whim. It is the most harmless amiable anger."

Beethoven was ready in repartee, and full of resources, with a wit that
was spontaneous and equal to any emergency. One New-year's day, as he
and Schindler were sitting down to dinner, a card was brought in

              JOHANN VAN BEETHOVEN
        _Gutsbesitzer_ (Landed proprietor).

Beethoven took the card and wrote on the back of it--

                L. VAN BEETHOVEN
         _Hirnbesitzer_ (Brain proprietor).

and sent it back to Johann. Cold-blooded, selfish, always ready to
profit by his talented brother, and never caring how he compromised him,
it was not to be expected that Johann would have the master's approval,
or that there could be any accord between them. In any encounter, the
composer generally managed to be master of the situation, through the
exercise of his wit, something which the duller Johann could neither
appreciate nor imitate. It may be said in passing, that the master
supplied the funds which enabled Johann to start in business. This was
in 1809. He made money rapidly in army contracts, a business for which
he was well qualified, and finally bought an estate and set up for a
landed proprietor.

Beethoven's waggishness was frequently vented on a young friend,
Zmeskall, who was court secretary. Zmeskall undertook the task of
keeping the master supplied with pens, which he cut from goose-quills.
Beethoven used up large quantities of them and was incessant in his
demands on him. A certain drollery characterizes all his letters to him.
He knew how to hit the vulnerable points in the other, and they were
often made the subject of attack. Zmeskall being a member of the
nobility, is often addressed by him, "Most high-born of men." He was
useful to Beethoven not alone on the subject of pens, but was appealed
to by him for advice and assistance on all sorts of matters. Zmeskall,
though a bachelor, lived in fine state, and maintained several servants.
He was thus in a position to procure the right sort of one for
Beethoven. Many of the letters are either on this theme or in regard to
securing him another lodging. Zmeskall is his resource in many of the
small matters of every-day life, perplexing to him, but simple enough to
the practical man. The master's helplessness is shown with pathos and
unconscious humor in the following note:

     LIEBER ZMESKALL,--

     Schicken sie mir doch ihrem spiegel, der nächts ihrem fenster hängt
     auf ein paar stunden der meinige ist gebrochen, haben sie zugleich
     die Güte haben wolten mir noch heute einen solchen zu kaufen so
     erzeigten sie mir einen grossen Gefallen. Ihre Auslage sollen sie
     sogleich zurük erhalten. Verzeien sie lieber Z meiner
     zudringlichkeit. Ich hoffe sie bald zu sehen.

                                                           Ihr,
                                                             BTHVN.

     DEAR ZMESKALL,--

     Won't you kindly send me the mirror that hangs next to your window
     for a few hours. Mine is broken. If you will at the same time have
     the goodness to buy me such another you will do me a great favor.
     Your outlay will be immediately returned to you.

     Pardon dear Z my importunity. I hope soon to see you.

                                                          Your,
                                                             BTHVN.

Beethoven's lapses from grammar (untranslatable into English), indicate
his impatience at the trivial wants and necessities which interrupt his
creative work and take his thoughts from his compositions. Instances of
bad grammar in his letters are frequent, when dealing with ordinary
topics. In no sense a polished man, he could, however, when the occasion
required it, assume in his grammar and diction the grace and elegance of
the scholar, but it does not often come to the front. He was too rugged,
too headstrong, to pay much attention to the little niceties of life.

In common with his contemporaries, Zmeskall found his principal
enjoyment in music. He gave musical parties at his quarters, playing the
cello himself, and gathered about him many of the most distinguished
artists and amateurs of the day. Beethoven was always interested in
feats of virtuosity, but he cared little for the compositions of
others. He occupied himself with his own work to the exclusion of that
of his contemporaries. His musical library was scant, consisting of a
small collection of the works of the early Italian masters, bound in one
volume, some of Mozart's sonatas--which must have seemed to him
curiously stunted and commonplace in comparison with his own--and a
portion of Don Giovanni. In addition, he possessed all of Clementi's
sonatas, which he greatly admired and which formed the basis of the
musical studies of his nephew for several years. Lastly there were a few
works of Bach, consisting of the Well-tempered Clavichord, some motets,
three volumes of exercises, some inventions, symphonies and a toccato.

In speaking of Weber he said that he began to learn too late, and makes
the curious criticism that Weber's only apparent effort was to attain
the reputation of geniality. In reading Freischutz, he said he could
hardly help smiling at certain parts, but afterward qualified this by
saying that he could judge it better if he could hear it. Schindler
says, that when Rossini came to Vienna in 1822, and endeavored to call
on Beethoven, the master succeeded in escaping his visits. His opinion
of Händel is high. He once remarked to a friend who called on him,
"Händel is the greatest composer that ever lived." Continuing the
narrative this friend, J.A. Stumpf of London, says, "I cannot describe
the pathos and sublimity with which he spoke of the Messiah of that
immortal genius. We all felt moved when he said, 'Ich würde mein Haupt
entblössen und auf seinem Grabe niederknieen.' (I would kneel at his
grave with uncovered head.)"

Of Mozart, he said, near the end of his life, in a letter to the Abbe
Stadler, "All my life I have been esteemed one of the greatest admirers
of Mozart's genius and will remain so until my latest breath." Czerny
said that he was at times inexhaustible in praise of Mozart, although he
cared nothing for his piano works and he makes a severe criticism on Don
Giovanni. "In this opera Mozart still retained the complete Italian cut
and style. Moreover, the sacred art should never be degraded to the
foolery of so scandalous a subject. The Zauberflöte will ever remain his
greatest work, for in this he showed himself the true German composer."
Of Cherubini's Requiem he said, "as regards his conception of it, my
ideas are in perfect accord with his and sometime I mean to compose a
Requiem in that style." (Later in life his opinion of Cherubini was
greatly modified). He seldom spoke of Haydn, and had nothing of that
master's compositions in his library.

Beethoven's collections in literature were far more extensive and
interesting than in music. He was essentially a student. His
predilections and thoughts all tended toward the acquisition of
knowledge. This was a veritable passion with him. His mind ranged
through almost every department of literature. In the intervals of his
work, worn by fatigue, he was in the habit of resting his mind by
reading the classics, or Persian literature. Schindler, who was near him
for the last ten years of his life says in relation to Beethoven's love
of the Greek classics. "He could recite long passages from them. If any
one asked him where this or that quotation was to be found he could find
it as readily as a motive from his own works." Elsewhere he says,
"Plato's Republic was transfused into his very flesh and blood." He was
an insatiable reader of history. As may be supposed Shakespeare was an
especial favorite with him. There is a curious little work published
called Beethoven's Brevier, made up of those portions of Shakespeare and
the classics for which he had a particular regard. Here, Shakespeare is
first on the list. There are also many selections from the Greek, and
from Schiller, Goethe, Herder and others.

Although a man of considerable culture, he was not an educated man, all
his available time and strength having been required for his musical
training. He was, however, the equal or superior in mental attainments
of any of the great musicians, with the exception of Wagner. He had the
strongest faith in his own powers. It was his belief that almost
anything could be accomplished by trying. Side by side with this belief
was the ineradicable conviction that intellectual culture was of more
importance than anything else in the universe. He stated his views
finely on this subject in a letter to a young girl, unknown to him, who
had sent him a present with a letter expressing her appreciation of his
music. "Do more than simply practice the art (of music), penetrate
rather, into the heart and soul of it. It will be found well worth
while, for art and knowledge alone have the power to elevate mankind up
to Deity itself. Should you want anything of me at any time, write me
with entire confidence. The true artist is never arrogant; rather he
sees with regret how illimitable all art is, and how far from the goal
he remains. While he may be admired, he only grieves that he cannot
reach the point toward which his better genius beckons him."

We read of his ordering complete sets of Schiller and Goethe in the
summer of 1809. The study of these authors carried on under most
unfavorable conditions, bore good fruit subsequently, as some good work
was inspired by them. The Egmont music, which appeared the following
year, the Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage, Bundeslied, the different
settings of Erlkönig, the four settings of Sehnsucht are instances,
although this does not by any means complete the list of his settings
from the works of the authors just named.




CHAPTER XIII

MISSA SOLEMNIS

     Christianity is the doctrine of the deep guilt of the human race
     through its existence alone, and the longing of the heart for
     deliverance from it.
                                                         --SCHOPENHAUER.


To Christianity and the spirit of religion in man we are indebted for
some of the finest arts which adorn our civilization. It was the
religious principle which brought into being the temples and statuary of
ancient Greece, as well as the splendid examples of Gothic architecture,
which have come down to us from the middle ages. It is this which has
given us those masterpieces in painting and sculpture, which have so
enriched the world; but above all it has given us music, highest of all
the arts. Here its influence has been most potent. Originating outside
the church, it found its best development within it. Religious fervor
had inspired some imperishable works of genius at a period when nothing
much had yet been done in secular music. The Masses of Palestrina, the
entire life-work of Sebastian Bach, the oratorios of Händel, are cases
in point. The old masters with hardly an exception gave their best
thought to sacred music. Bach has been mentioned. Haydn's important work
comes under this classification. Of the works of Händel, only those of
a religious nature have survived to the present day, although he
composed many operas.

The Masses and Passion-music of the old composers were often written
without hope of reward, entirely from love of the subject; they were
impelled to it, either through religious ardor, or from the force of
their artistic perceptions. The stateliness and solemnity of the Mass,
the tragic possibilities of the Passion, appealed to them, and satisfied
the tendency toward mysticism, which is so often a part of the artistic
nature.

As an art, music finds its best development when of a religious
character. While operatic and even orchestral music in general, is
written more for the sake of giving pleasure than with any clearly
defined ethical purpose, the music of the Mass and Passion, religious
ceremonies, entering into man's profoundest experiences, is given for
spiritual enlightenment, and, being a part of the soul's needs, demands
and receives higher treatment and more serious consideration than
secular music. The very frame of mind which takes possession of a person
while listening to music of a religious character, is favorable to a
true appreciation of it. The listener is more in earnest, and the
emotions called up by the subject impress him more strongly than when
listening to secular music. These considerations have their influence on
the composer also. We usually find in religious music of the best class,
depth and earnestness of purpose commensurate with the expectation of
the listener.

These few words are preliminary to a consideration of the Mass in D, the
work in which Beethoven reached his culmination as an artist. He himself
so regarded it, declaring it to be his greatest and best work. It is
certain that he spent more time on it, and gave it a larger share of his
attention than was devoted to any other of his works.

For several years prior to this, Beethoven's muse had been silent for
the most part. No important work since the completion of the Eighth
Symphony had been achieved, with the exception of the sonatas mentioned
in a previous chapter. This was owing to the various lawsuits in which
he found himself involved. His troubles had now been adjusted, however,
to such an extent as to enable him to again turn his attention to large
works. The pension which had been settled on him in 1809 had been
imperilled by the death of Prince Kinsky and the bankruptcy of Prince
Lobkowitz. The portion of it which had been pledged to him by these
gentlemen had been discontinued or greatly reduced, and Beethoven had to
have recourse to the law to protect his rights. A compromise was finally
effected, which resulted in the pension being paid in part. Although the
litigation, in regard to his nephew was still on, it was becoming more
and more apparent that the outcome of it would be in his favor. His mind
at rest on these points, we find him once more in good health and
spirits, with creative energy not only unimpaired but greater than ever.
"In general, every evil to which we do not succumb is a benefactor,"
said Emerson.

The announcement of the Archduke's appointment as Archbishop of Olmütz,
had been definitely made during the summer of 1818. It was well known
for years previously that he would receive this appointment, and it is
quite likely that Beethoven had always intended writing a mass to
commemorate it. Considering the close relations existing between master
and pupil for so many years, and Beethoven's obligations to Rudolph in
money matters, he could hardly have let so momentous an event go by,
without writing a mass for it. A mass was probably always intended, but
not such a one as eventually grew out of his original idea, which,
expanding, augmenting in force and grandeur as the significance of the
work took possession of his mind, finally became an apotheosis of
friendship, a message to the world.

That the Archduke appreciated Beethoven and valued his friendship is
plain. He carefully preserved the letters written him by the master and
dedicated to him some of his own compositions. He had as complete a
library of Beethoven's works as was attainable, and was thoroughly
familiar with the master's music. That Beethoven responded to this to an
equal degree is not likely. He lived too abstracted a life for that. He
valued this friendship as much as such a man could, considering the
disparity in rank and the difference in mode of thought of the two men.
In dedicating so many of his compositions to him, and in consenting to
teach him for so long a period, he showed the esteem in which he held
him. Probably no other person, man or woman received the deference and
consideration from Beethoven, which he accorded the Archduke. The
republican, socialistic Beethoven was not specially influenced by his
rank; rather, it was his personality and devotion to music, which won
the regard of the master and formed the bond between them.

In the composition of the mass, Beethoven was on familiar ground; the
work was congenial to him. The emotions called up by the subject swayed
him to such an extent that he had difficulty in keeping it within
bounds. The mass was a form of music with which he had been associated
from childhood. It will be remembered that he played the organ at the
age of twelve years at church services, a practice which was kept up for
some years. His earliest impressions on the subject of music were in
this style. He was, in addition, inclined to it by temperament.

The beautiful text appealed to him strongly. It is related that when the
German version of his first Mass (in C) was brought him, he quickly
opened the manuscript and ran over a few pages. When he came to the Qui
tollis, the tears trickled from his eyes and he was obliged to desist,
saying with the deepest emotion, "Yes, that was precisely my feeling
when I composed it."

His journal entries at the time of beginning work on the Mass in D show
how completely the subject had taken possession of him. "To compose true
religious music, consult the old chorals in use in monasteries," he
wrote, which gives the clew to his frequent lapses into the ancient
ecclesiastical modes, the Lydian and Dorian, in this mass, a practice
for which Bach furnished a precedent. "Drop operas and everything else,
write only in your own style," is another entry of this time, showing
his predilection for church music.

The summer of 1818 was spent at Mödling. He was in the best of health
and spirits as stated, and began the work with great energy and
enthusiasm. His whole nature seemed to change, Schindler states, when he
began the great work. His interest and absorption in it was
extraordinary, as is shown by the sketch-books from the beginning.
Enthusiasm carried him on to the consummation of a greater work than
any he had yet accomplished. Hitherto, every achievement was merely a
resting-place up the mountainside, the prospect acting as a spur to him
to go yet higher, well knowing what Emerson finely stated, and was
putting into practice at this very time, that new gifts will be supplied
in proportion as we make use of those we have. _Dem Muthigen hilft
Gott!_ said Schiller. Beethoven seemed to have some prevision that only
a few more years would be allotted him for work; when he began on the
mass his inspiration was like a river that had broken its bounds. Every
nerve and fibre of his being called him to his work. He was like a
war-horse that scents the battle. He now abandoned himself more than
ever to the impulse for creating. For the next few years he lived the
abstracted life of the enthusiast to whom every-day concerns are but
incidental and unimportant things, and his art the one great matter. The
gigantic tone-pictures which were constantly forming themselves in his
inner consciousness were of so much greater importance than the events
of his external life, that the latter were dwarfed by comparison and
lost their significance. He now made a greater surrender of the ties
connecting him with every-day life than ever before. His industry was
phenomenal, but it soon became apparent that the work would not be ready
for the Installation, the date of which was set for March 20, 1820. It
was in reality not completed until nearly two years after this event.

We have a good description of the master at this time by the artist
Klober, who had been commissioned by a wealthy relative who was forming
a gallery of famous Vienna artists, to paint a portrait of Beethoven.

"Beethoven had a very earnest look; his vivacious eyes were for the most
part turned upwards, with a thoughtful and rather a gloomy expression,
which I have tried to represent. His lips were closed, but the mouth was
not an unkindly one. He was ready enough to expatiate on the arrogant
vanity and depraved taste of the Viennese aristocracy, by whom he feels
himself neglected, or at least underrated."



"Beethoven sat to me for nearly an hour every morning. When he saw my
picture, he observed that the style of hair pleased him very much; other
painters had always dressed it up as if he were going to court, not at
all as he generally wore it."



"His house at Mödling was extremely simple; so, indeed, was his whole
manner of life. His dress consisted of a light-blue coat with yellow
buttons, white waistcoat and neckcloth, such as were then worn, but
everything about him was very negligee. His complexion was florid, the
skin rather pock-marked, his hair the color of blue steel, for the black
was already changing to grey. His eyes were a bluish-grey and
exceedingly vivacious. When his hair streamed in the breeze there was a
sort of Ossian-like dæmonism about him. But, when talking in a friendly
way, he would assume a good-natured, gentle expression, particularly if
the conversation was agreeable to him."

As we have seen, it had been a favorite project of Beethoven for years
to write a mass. When he started to carry out his ideas, one course only
seems to have been possible to him. This was, to project it on the
principle of his Symphonies, in which the orchestra should take the
commanding part in interpreting the emotional and dramatic possibilities
of the text. His experience with his first mass had confirmed him in the
belief that he could give the best expression to his ideas by the use of
the orchestra, on account of its greater range, its mobility, the
variety of its tones. The idea of making it of more importance than the
voice, upset all preconceived theories on the subject. The orchestra was
emphatically the tool best adapted to Beethoven's powers; he developed
it into something wholly different from what it was when he found it. He
put it to exquisite uses. His effects are the happiest imaginable and
they are introduced with a prodigality and lavishness suggesting a
reserve as of oceans from which to draw. Much of his vocal music is
dominated by the orchestra.

It took a long while to make people understand that music instead of
being the handmaid of poetry, whose function is merely to reflect the
ideas of our spoken language, has a language of its own, which can
convey ideas in itself, and that there are subtilties that can be
expressed in this manner, which evade one when we come to use our
coarser mode of expression. This is specially in evidence in Beethoven's
later work, particularly in the mass we are now considering. Wagner
frequently compares it to a symphony. In _Zukunftsmusik_, he says: "In
his Great Mass Beethoven has employed the choir and orchestra almost
exactly as in the symphony;" and elsewhere he cites it as being a
"strictly symphonic work of the truest Beethovenian spirit."

In this work, however, he reaches out toward the infinite to a degree
not attempted in the symphonies; his spirit takes a bolder flight; more
of the inner nature of the artist is revealed; for the limits which
bound him in the symphony were not operative in the mass. The very mode
of projecting the first movement, the Kyrie, shows the splendor of the
conception as it took form in his consciousness. The scheme of the
movement can be summed up by the antithesis being presented of humanity,
weak and sinful on the one side, and the overwhelming majesty of a just
God on the other. It is a prayer for mercy, the cry of the soul in its
extremity; the underlying thought being repentance. Here we have the
embodiment of prayer, of supplication. A devotional feeling of the most
exalted kind pervades it. The first of the three parts comprising the
movement is storm and stress, a knocking on the gates, a De Profundus,
an accusing conscience arraigning humanity. He works out of this vein to
some extent in the second part, the Christe eleison, in which the appeal
is made directly to the human element of the Godhead. In the third part,
the themes of the first are again taken up, but by modulation they are
made to take on a new significance, and bring peace in the end. Although
the movement is cast for double chorus as regards the vocal part, the
voices are given a subordinate place, the portrayal being carried on by
the orchestra in true symphonic style. Notable in this movement is the
rhythm. In all the storm and stress, a rhythmic motion, a systole and
diastole, a surging to and fro, as of vast masses of beings in the last
extremity of peril, is apparent.

To read meanings and design into the work of such a composer as
Beethoven is the inevitable result of the transcendent nature of it. It
was seldom that he vouchsafed any explanation of his musical intent in
his compositions. Schindler, who thoroughly appreciated his genius, and
who was eager for enlightenment on this phase of his art, was in the
habit of drawing Beethoven out, as occasion offered, but it was always a
difficult process. Simple and childlike in most matters, the master was
wary and suspicious to an incredible degree when the conversation
touched on the subject of his compositions. At times, however, this
reserve gave way to Schindler's persistency. When he asked him about the
opening bars of the C minor Symphony (the Fifth) it brought out the
well-known remark, "thus fate knocks at the door." At another time, he
asked him for an elucidation of the Sonatas in F minor (opus 57) and D
minor (opus 29), and received the answer "read Shakespeare's Tempest,"
which was only half an answer. More definite is his meaning in the two
Sonatas (opus 14), which represents the entreating and resisting
principle in the conversation of a pair of lovers.

[Musical notation.]

Men of genius seldom care to explain their utterances. "The spirit gives
it to me and I write it down" is a remark attributed to Beethoven, and
this stated the case sufficiently from his point of view.

Zelter, director of the Singakademie of Berlin wrote Beethoven on
completion of the Mass, asking him to arrange it for voices only, as
nothing but _a capella_ music was permitted by the institution. To this
Beethoven gave a favorable reply, saying that with some modifications
the project was feasible. It, however, was not carried out.

It is significant that Beethoven gives the German direction throughout
in this Mass. At the Kyrie the direction is Mit Andacht. At the soli of
the Agnus Dei he writes Aengstlich, denoting great agitation or anxiety.
It may have been done as a kind of protest to the Italian cult in music,
which had at this period taken complete possession of the Vienna public.
The more solid German music was neglected in favor of Rossini, and
Beethoven felt this change of front keenly, making it the subject of
remark to Rochlitz and to others.

It can readily be supposed that works like the Mass in D are not easily
produced. To get his materials for it Beethoven penetrated deeply the
mystery surrounding life. The ideas which he voices seem always to have
existed, like other great forces in the universe; he impresses one as
being the discoverer, rather than the creator of them.

Schindler, who saw much of him during these years, says of his
absorption in this work: "He actually seemed possessed, especially
during the composition of the Credo." It was while he was at work on
this portion of the Mass, notably the great fugue, et vitam venturi (the
life everlasting), that Schindler called on him one afternoon, but could
not gain admission. He knew the master was at home as he could hear him
stamping and shouting, singing the different parts as if mad. Finally
the door was opened and Beethoven appeared. He was faint from hunger and
overwork, having eaten nothing since the previous noon. His servants
had, indeed, prepared some food for him the previous day, but he was too
much interested in his work to think of it, and they were afraid to
urge it on him, or indeed, go near him, while in the stress of
composition. He had worked the previous night until overtaken by
exhaustion and on awaking in the morning had at once resumed his work,
continuing it until interrupted by Schindler's arrival.

A work so transcendental in character as is this, calls for close and
sympathetic study even to get an approximate understanding of its
marvels. It is a characteristic of works of this nature, that although
not easily comprehended, they are likewise not readily exhausted. Much
study, many renderings only serve to bring out new values. Only by
bringing to them of our best will they be revealed.

It must have been with a feeling of relief that he finally delivered a
copy of the Mass complete into the Archduke's hands in March of 1822,
just two years after the Installation.

Beethoven wrote the sovereigns of Russia, France, Prussia and Saxony,
proposing a subscription of fifty ducats, about $115 each, for the Mass.
The first acceptance came from Prussia. One of the minor officials in
Vienna was commissioned by Prince von Hatzfeld, the Prussian Ambassador,
to ask Beethoven if he would not prefer a royal order instead of the
fifty ducats. Beethoven's reply was characteristic. Without a moment's
hesitation he said with emphasis, "fifty ducats!" showing the slight
value he placed on distinctions of this kind. A reply that must have
gratified him very much was that received from the King of France. In
his letter to him, Beethoven refers to the Mass as "_L'oeuvre le plus
accompli_." Louis XVIII, not only forwarded his acceptance (and the
fifty ducats), but had also a gold medal struck off, containing his
portrait on one side, and on the other, the following inscription:
"_Donné par le Roi à monsieur Beethoven_." The King of Saxony delayed
his remittance for a long while, and Beethoven was greatly irritated
thereby.

But little other work was undertaken during the four years he was
occupied on the Mass unless we except the three grand piano sonatas,
opus 109, 110 and 111, which were composed during the intervals. A mere
by-product so to speak, undertaken with the object of resting his
faculties jaded by the strain of the greater work, his mind
notwithstanding was keyed up to a high pitch, while engaged on them. The
lofty imaginings which occupied his thoughts while on the Mass are
reflected in them, rendering them unapproachable as piano sonatas. The
master himself, set a great value on them.

Now that the Mass was completed he began to give his attention to other
works. To celebrate the opening of the rehabilitated Josephstadt theatre
which occurred in the autumn of 1822, Beethoven wrote a new overture,
Weihe des Hauses. He also worked over for this occasion his Ruins of
Athens, written in 1812, for which the text was altered to suit the new
conditions and several new numbers added. Another representation of the
almost forgotten Fidelio, which was selected by Fräulein
Schroeder-Devrient for her benefit, and which was a pronounced success
through the genius of this remarkable woman, led to a commission for a
new opera from a Vienna manager. This was followed shortly after by a
similar order from Berlin on his own terms. There had also been some
talk before this about an opera on an American subject, the Founding of
Pennsylvania. It was suggested by a minor poet and government official,
Johann Ruprecht, whose poem, Merkenstein, Beethoven had set to music
previous to 1816. In 1820 Beethoven had planned an Italian tour and had
intended taking Ruprecht with him. They must have quarrelled later, as
in a letter to Schindler in 1823 Beethoven refers to Ruprecht in the
most abusive terms.

A commission that must have gratified Beethoven exceedingly, but which,
however, was not acted upon, was that which emanated from Breitkopf and
Härtel, who sent the famous critic Friederich Rochlitz to Vienna in
July, 1822, with a proposition that he write some Faust music in the
style of the Egmont music. It is narrated that Beethoven received the
proposition with joy, but gave only a qualified assent. There is no
doubt that he would have found inspiration in the text, and that a noble
work would have resulted, but he feared the nervous strain of such an
undertaking. "I should enjoy it," he said to Rochlitz, "but I shudder at
the thought of beginning works of such magnitude. Once engaged on them,
however, I have no difficulty." His labors on the Mass aged him. In his
prime on its inception, he emerged from his seclusion on completing it,
infirm and broken in health. The idea of the Faust music attracted him,
as it would have been strictly symphonic in character. He occasionally
refers to it subsequently, but never got so far as to enter themes for
it in his note-books. Wagner essayed it, but went no further than to
write the overture. The subject of Faust still awaits a capable
interpreter.

His next commission was a simple one, consisting of an order early in
the spring of 1823 from Diabelli, composer and head of a large
publishing house in Vienna, for six variations on a waltz by him
(Diabelli). The dance was always a favorite musical form with Beethoven
in his lighter moments, and the variation form,--capable of a degree of
sprightliness, vivacity and originality in the right hands which give it
an entrancing effect, to which we come again and again with pleasure,
was something peculiarly his own at every stage of his artistic career.
His earliest essays in composition are in this form. Variations occupy a
prominent part in all his works, whether chamber-music, sonatas or
symphonies. They are introduced perhaps with best effect in the works of
his last years, in the Ninth Symphony, and in the last quartets.

He accepted the order with pleasure and began work on it at once on
reaching his summer quarters. This was congenial work, affording him
relief from the mental strain imposed on him by his labors on the Ninth
Symphony, which was then under way. A price of eighty ducats ($180) was
fixed by the publisher at the outset for the set, but the master enjoyed
his work so much, that the six, when completed, were increased to ten,
then to twenty, and twenty-five, and so on until the number grew to
thirty-three. These variations are extremely elaborate and difficult, a
characteristic of most of his work in these years.

Wagner never tired of exploiting the variation form in his operas,
particularly in the Tetralogy. He frequently refers to Beethoven's
masterly use of it. "Haydn first, Beethoven last, have conferred
artistic value on this form," he says in the article on conducting;
later on in the same work, he says, "the wondrous second movement of
Beethoven's great C minor Sonata" (opus 111), "and the last movement of
the Eroica Symphony should be grasped as an infinitely magnified
Variation section." Bach also excelled in it, the Variation form being
constantly met with throughout his works.

The summer of 1823 was spent at Hetzendorf, a village of which Beethoven
was always fond. He had secured large and comfortable quarters in the
house of a Baron Pronay, which, from Schindler's account was a fine old
mansion in the centre of a large park. It suited Beethoven admirably.
There was a fine view of the surrounding country from his windows, the
situation was healthful, and he delighted in walking about when not at
work. But he gave up this comfortable home before the summer was ended,
simply on account of the extravagant politeness of his landlord, who,
conscious of the value of so distinguished a tenant, always greeted him
with "profound obeisances" when they met. This opera bouffe deportment
though undertaken with the best of motives on the Baron's part, became
so embarrassing that Beethoven finally fled to Baden with all his
belongings, including the grand piano, although his rent had been paid
in advance for the entire summer. Schindler assisted in this migration,
joining him at five o'clock one morning.

The year 1823 in which Beethoven practically completed his life-work
(with the exception of the last quartets) is the dawn of a new musical
genius, versatile, accomplished, many-sided, who as performer was
qualified to rank with the older master. On New-year's day of this year,
Franz Liszt, who had been studying under Czerny for two years past,
made his first appearance in Vienna in concert, in which he took the
public by storm. Beethoven seems not to have been present, and
strangely, when we reflect on his intimacy with Czerny, seems to have
been unaware of the existence of this talented youth. During the autumn
of this year, the elder Liszt called on Beethoven, bringing with him the
young Franz. Beethoven held himself aloof at first, receiving his
visitors coldly. He unbent however, on hearing the youth perform, and
stooped and kissed him. During this autumn he also received a visit from
Weber and young Julius Benedict, his pupil. Weber was preparing his
recently completed opera Euryanthe, for a first production in Vienna. He
had produced Fidelio in the foregoing spring season at Dresden, where he
was officially stationed, and had made a success of it with Frau
Schroeder-Devrient. Considerable correspondence must have passed between
the two composers on this matter, and Weber could hardly have omitted
calling when coming to Vienna, although the memory of his former
strictures on Beethoven's music must have embarrassed him. Weber had
stated on hearing the Seventh Symphony for the first time that Beethoven
was now fit for the madhouse, and his criticisms in general had been
adverse. This, however, was something which Beethoven had never objected
to; moreover, time had amply vindicated him as to the symphonies, so he
could afford to be generous to his youthful critic. Beethoven was genial
and kindly, and the younger man was deeply impressed by the master's
reception of him. Euryanthe proved a failure and Weber called again to
ask Beethoven's advice as to remodelling the work.

The libretto Melusina, which was submitted to him by Grillparzer found
such favor in his eyes as to lead to its acceptance, but when he came
face to face with the project, his former experience with opera was
sufficient to deter him, and he abandoned the idea, giving as an excuse
the inferiority of the German singers. That this was only an excuse, is
plain, since only a short time afterward Mlle. Sontag was intrusted with
the exceedingly difficult soprano parts of the Mass in D and the Ninth
Symphony. He was hard at work on this Symphony at the time, which will
serve to explain and accentuate his reluctance to again attempt operatic
composition, a style of work diametrically opposed to that which had
engaged his attention for many years previously. It would too, have
necessitated shelving the Symphony indefinitely, and, although he needed
the money which the opera would have yielded, his interest in the
Symphony was paramount; he could not bring himself to abandon it. With
failing powers superinduced by his excessive labors on the Mass, it was
being borne in on him that he was nearing the end of his life-work.
Under such circumstances the Symphony was sure to have the preference.
The long cherished plans for another oratorio, and for a Requiem Mass
also insistently came up for consideration, crowding out all serious
intention of an opera.

The project of a Requiem Mass was of particular interest to him; it
comes to the fore frequently. He mentioned it shortly after the
completion of the Mass in C. Then, when his brother Karl died it is
again considered. It is also mentioned on the occasion of the tragic
death of Prince Kinsky, who had acted so liberally by him in the matter
of the pension. It is probable that the work of writing a Requiem Mass
would have proved congenial to him. He was in the right mood for it on
completion of the Mass in D, and it is rather singular that he did not
undertake it instead of the Symphony. Religious questions were occupying
his mind more and more in these years. It must be admitted that his
religion was as peculiar to himself as was his music. He affiliated with
no church, although baptized as a Catholic, and brought up in that
church; but the frequent appeals to the Divinity in his journals, show
his belief in, and reliance on, a higher power. He formulated his own
religion as did Thoreau. The man who could write, "Socrates and Jesus
were patterns to me" lived a correct life in its essentials. His
asceticism, his unselfishness, the sympathy which he continually showed
for others, his unworldliness,--what else is this but the gist of New
Testament teaching? Like a tree nourished on alien soil, which yet
produces fairer and better fruit than the native ones, and becomes the
parent of a new variety, this man achieved his high development of
character by being a law unto himself like the anchorites of old.




CHAPTER XIV

NINTH SYMPHONY

     We stand to-day before the Beethovenian Symphony as before the
     landmark of an entirely new period in the history of universal art,
     for through it there came into the world a phenomenon not even
     remotely approached by anything the art of any age or any people
     has to show us.
                                                               --WAGNER.


During the period of his work on the Mass, and for some time before,
Beethoven's thoughts were occupied more or less with that stupendous
work, the Ninth Symphony, sketches for which began to appear already in
1813, shortly after his meeting with Goethe. That Beethoven looked up to
Goethe ever after as to a spiritual mentor, studying his works,
absorbing his thought, is plain. In projecting this symphony he may very
well have designed it as a counterpart to Faust, as has been suggested.
Actually begun in 1817, it had to be laid aside before much had been
accomplished on it, in favor of the Mass in D. This gave him plenty of
time to mature his conception of the work; and this ripening process,
covering a period of ten years from its first inception, was one of the
factors which helped him achieve his wondrous result. His work on the
Mass was a good preparation for the psychological problems expounded in
the Symphony.

Here is a work so interwoven into Beethoven's very life and spirit, that
the mention of his name at once calls to mind the Ninth Symphony. It is
the work of the seer approaching the end of his life-drama, giving with
photographic clearness a résumé of it. Here are revelations of the inner
nature of a man who had delved deeply into the mysteries surrounding
life, learning this lesson in its fullest significance, that no great
spiritual height is ever attained without renunciation. The world must
be left behind. Asking and getting but little from it, giving it of his
best, counting as nothing its material advantages, realizing always that
contact with it had for him but little joy, the separation from it was
nevertheless a hard task. This mystery constantly confronted Beethoven,
that, even when obeying the finer behests of his nature, peace was not
readily attained thereby; often there was instead, an accession of
unhappiness for the time being. Paradoxically peace was made the
occasion for a struggle; it had to be wrested from life. No victory is
such unless well fought for and dearly bought.

This eternal struggle with fate, this conflict forever raging in the
heart, runs through all the Symphonies, but nowhere is it so strongly
depicted as in this, his last. We have here in new picturing, humanity
at bay, as in the recently completed Kyrie of the grand mass. The
apparently uneven battle of the individual with fate,--the plight of the
human being who finds himself a denizen of a world with which he is
entirely out of harmony, who, wrought up to despair, finds life
impossible yet fears to die,--is here portrayed in dramatic language. To
Wagner the first movement pictured to him "the idea of the world in its
most terrible of lights," something to recoil from. "Beethoven in the
Ninth Symphony," he says, "leads us through the torment of the world
relentlessly until the ode to joy is reached."

Great souls have always taught that the only relief for this
_Weltschmerz_ is through the power of love; that universal love alone
can transform and redeem the world. This is the central teaching of
Jesus, of Buddha, of all who have the welfare of humanity at heart. It
was Beethoven's solution of the problem of existence. Through this magic
power, sorrows are transmuted into gifts of peace and happiness.
Beethoven loved his kind. Love for humanity, pity for its misfortunes,
hope for its final deliverance, largely occupied his mind. With scarcely
an exception Beethoven's works end happily. Among the sketches of the
last movement of the Mass in D, he makes the memorandum, "Stärke der
Gesinnungen des innern Friedens. Über alles ... Sieg." (Strengthen the
conviction of inward peace. Above all--Victory). The effect of the
Choral Finale is that of an outburst of joy at deliverance, a
celebration of victory. It is as if Beethoven, with prophetic eye, had
been able to pierce the future and foresee a golden age for humanity, an
age where altruism was to bring about cessation from strife, and where
happiness was to be general. Such happiness as is here celebrated in the
Ode to Joy, can indeed, only exist in the world through altruism.
Pity,[B] that sentiment which allies man to the divine, comes first.
From this proceeds love, and through these and by these only is
happiness possible. This was the gist of Beethoven's thought. He had
occupied himself much with sociological questions all his life, always
taking the part of the oppressed.

[B] The German rendering _Mitleid_ has a higher significance than its
English equivalent. Literally it means sharing the sorrow of the
afflicted one. It may be said in passing that this sentiment is the
central idea in Parsifal.

Schindler, who was almost constantly with Beethoven at this time, tells
of the difficulty the master experienced in finding a suitable way of
introducing the choral part. He finally hit upon the naïve device of
adding words of his own in the form of a recitative, which first appears
in the sketch-book as, "Let us sing the immortal Schiller's Song,
'Freude schöner Götterfunken.'" This was afterward changed to the much
better form as now appears, "O Freunde, nicht diese Töne! sondern lasst
uns angenehmere anstimmen, und freudenvollere." (O friends, not these
tones. Let us sing a strain more cheerful, more joyous.)

The whole character and design of the Ode to Joy will be better
apprehended when it is stated that it is in reality an Ode to Freedom.
With its revolutionary spirit Beethoven was entirely in accord. Already
in his twenty-third year he contemplated setting it to music. Later, in
the note-book of 1812, the first line of the poem appears, in connection
with a scheme for an overture. It is worthy of remark that the Symphony
was well under way before he decided on incorporating the Ode in it.

The Ninth Symphony was first performed in this country in 1846 in Castle
Garden, by the New York Philharmonic Society, which had been organized
four years previously. George Loder conducted it. When we consider the
herculean efforts Wagner was obliged to make to get permission to
perform it in Dresden in this selfsame year, it speaks well for "North
America." Subsequent performances of it in New York by this Society are
as follows:

PERFORMANCE                            CONDUCTOR

Second       April 28, 1860           Theo. Eisfeld.
Third        April 29, 1865            "   "
Fourth       February 1, 1868         C. Bergmann.
Fifth        April 28, 1877           Dr. L. Damrosch.
Sixth        February 12, 1881        Theo. Thomas.
Seventh      April 10, 1886             "   "
Eighth       April 12, 1890             "   "
Ninth        April 23, 1892           Anton Seidl.
Tenth        April 11, 1896             "   "
Eleventh     April 2, 1898            Vander Stucken.
Twelfth      April 7, 1900            E. Paur.
Thirteenth   April 4, 1902              "   "

It was not performed in New York during the years 1903 and 1904.

Beethoven's correspondence with Count Brühl of the Berlin Theatre in the
matter of an opera for that city, led him, owing to the apathy of the
Vienna public at this time toward his works, to offer the new Symphony
and the Mass for a first hearing in Berlin. At this time, and for some
years previously, Rossini's music had captured the Vienna public so
completely that no other was desired. That this light evanescent work
should be preferred to his own, was resented by the master. He decided
to offer the new works to Count Brühl, the Italian craze not having yet
penetrated Berlin. As soon as this became known however, a reaction
followed, and a memorial was addressed to Beethoven by his friends,
begging him to reconsider the matter, and produce the new works in
Vienna, as well as write a new opera for them. The appeal was signed by
thirty of the most prominent men of affairs in the city. The list of
names is a noble one, each being prominently connected in some way with
music. Among composers and performers may be mentioned Czerny and the
Abbe Stadler. Artario & Co., Diabelli and Leidersdorf, were music
publishers. Count Palfy and Sonnleithner were operatic managers, while
counselor Kiesewetter and J.F. Costelli were authors of libretti and
songs. The others were prominent in court circles, and their devotion to
music was such as to give weight to the communication. The memorial
itself is discursive to a point which taxes one's patience, but the
expressions of appreciation and friendship are genuine, and must have
gratified Beethoven extremely. Naturally but one outcome was probable as
a result of this memorial. Shortly after receiving it, he announced to
his friends that the initial performance of these works would be held in
Vienna. Strangely, a difficulty at once arose, in the matter of
selecting a suitable place for the performance. Had Beethoven left the
management of the affair in the hands of his friends, and given his
attention to securing sufficient rehearsals for the new Symphony, which
finally had to be produced after being rehearsed twice only, it would
have been better all around. With the vacillating disposition which
characterized him in all business matters, he was not only of no aid,
but so complicated matters by his indecision on every point, that the
arrangements finally came to a standstill, his friends who were
assisting him being at their wits' end. These were Schindler, Count
Lichnowsky, and the violinist Schuppanzich. At this juncture, these old
and tried friends, thinking that strategy might succeed where diplomacy
had failed, hit upon the following plan to bring matters to a focus.
Schindler was at this time living at Beethoven's house, and the plan
decided on was to have Count Lichnowsky and Schuppanzich call there as
if by accident. The conversation would naturally turn to the approaching
concert and leading questions were to be asked Beethoven. His answers in
these years were usually in writing. The gist of these was to be written
out by one of the party, who would then carelessly, or as if in jest,
ask Beethoven to sign the paper, thus committing him to a definite
course. These praise-worthy intentions were carried out with so much
tact and skill that Beethoven not only saw through their innocent ruse,
but discovered in the whole proceeding a deep-laid plot on the part of
these arch-conspirators, whereof he was to be the victim of villainy and
treachery. This dawned on him shortly after the friends had taken their
departure, upon which he wrote the following notes, leaving them on the
piano as was his custom, for Schindler to deliver.

     TO THE COUNT MORITZ VON LICHNOWSKY,--
     I despise these artifices, visit me no more. Academy (the concert)
     will not take place.
                                                              BEETHOVEN.

     TO M. SCHINDLER,--
     Do not come near me again until I send for you. No Academy.
                                                              BEETHOVEN.

     TO M. SCHUPPANZICH,--
     Do not visit me again. No concert.
                                                              BEETHOVEN.

From the above it will readily be seen, as Schindler plaintively
asserts, that the office of friend to Beethoven was no sinecure. But he
appreciated the advantage of living in the reflected glory of the great
master, and such tact as he possessed was brought to bear, to continue
the relations of friend, counsellor and general factotum, which were
maintained to the end. Beethoven at times spoke slightingly in his
letters of his humble follower, but there is no doubt that Schindler was
of great service to him, and that this was appreciated by the master is
equally true. Schindler did not deliver the letters just quoted, and the
affair did not sever the relations of the parties concerned.

Beethoven's contention all along was for an advance in price of
admission to the concert, owing to the heavy expense for theatre hire,
copying, etc. As the works to be performed had not yet been published,
it was necessary to copy out the separate parts for the members of the
orchestra and chorus,--an immense task. The manager objected to any
advance in prices, and insisted also that the concert be held on a
subscription night--a good arrangement for the patrons of the theatre
who would thus have free admission, but a bad one for the master. He
finally had to submit, however. "After these six weeks' squabbling," he
writes to Schindler toward the end of April, "I feel absolutely boiled,
stewed and roasted," a state of mind brought about by his conflict with
copyists, managers and performers.

The concert which took place on May 7, 1824, was the occasion for great
enthusiasm. The programme consisted of the Overture Weihe des Hauses, as
well as the Kyrie, Credo and Agnus Dei of the Mass in D, and the Ninth
Symphony. The solo parts were taken by Madame Sontag and Fräulein Unger,
who protested more than once at the unsingable nature of some of the
parts in the Choral Finale when practising them at Beethoven's house.

The applause from the very beginning was phenomenal. The people became
vociferous on seeing him, and this enthusiasm was continued throughout
the evening. At the close of the performance the demonstrations became,
if possible, more forcible than before, owing, perhaps, to the fact that
Beethoven maintained his former position, facing the orchestra and with
his back to the audience, as if unaware of the applause. At last
Fräulein Unger turned him about so that he could see the demonstrations
of the audience. The picture is presented of excited masses of people
carried away by the emotions of the moment, rending the air with
boisterous applause, and in the midst this great one, unresponsive to
the homage showered on him, unconscious, seeing visions, perhaps
planning a Tenth Symphony.

Beethoven's deafness was not total. He was no doubt able to hear some of
this extraordinary applause, and, in any event, must have known that it
would be forthcoming. He had probably become wearied with it all, and
let his thoughts go far afield. The utter vanity of this kind of thing
must often occur to great minds at such a time. These frenzied people by
their very actions showed their inability to comprehend his work, and
could not confer honor in this manner.

But the enthusiasm of the audience had the practical effect of leading
the manager to make an offer to Beethoven for another concert,
guaranteeing him five hundred florins ($250). It was held on May 23, at
noon. On this occasion all of the Mass but the Kyrie was omitted, some
Italian music being substituted. The house was only half filled at the
second concert and the management lost money. Beethoven's apprehensions
as to the profits from the first concert were well founded. He made less
than two hundred dollars from the undertaking, and was so disappointed
with this pitiful result after all the work of preparation, that he
refused to eat any supper, and would not go to bed, but remained on a
couch with his clothes on for the night. When he learned that the
management lost eight hundred florins on the occasion of the second
concert, it was with difficulty that he could be prevailed on to accept
the amount guaranteed him. It is not likely that this reluctance was
owing to any consideration for the manager, but rather to umbrage at the
course of things in general. His temper was not improved by these
disappointments, and he even charged Schindler with having conspired
with the manager to cheat him. This led to a rupture between the two of
several months' duration. Beethoven at length called on Schindler and
apologized for the offence, begging him to forget it, upon which the old
relations were restored.

Notwithstanding that Beethoven had personally solicited the attendance
of the members of the Imperial family, and had promises from some of
them, not one came, the Emperor's box being the only empty space in the
theatre. The slight was no doubt intentional, and affords the last
instance of which there is record, of the lifelong contest waged between
Beethoven and the court. He was usually the aggressor, making it
impossible for the Imperial family to favor him, or even to show him
much attention. They could not have been insensible to the historical
importance of having in their midst such a man; they must have had the
prescience to know that Beethoven's achievements, if furthered by them,
would place them in the lime-light for the admiration of future ages;
but they were thwarted by the man himself, who went out of his way more
than once, most unjustifiably, to offend them.

There is a letter from Count Dietrichstein, court chamberlain, on the
subject of a mass which Beethoven was invited to write for the Emperor,
which is unintentionally humorous. In it, all sorts of suggestions are
made as to the style of the music, the length of the mass (it being
enjoined on him that the Emperor did not like long church services) and
other like stipulations. Beethoven's remarks in answer to this letter
are not recorded, but the mass was not written. Here was a case where
kingly prerogative did not avail.

Simultaneously with the appearance in the sketch-books of motives for
the Ninth Symphony, another is projected, as was the case when composing
his previous ones, which generally appeared in pairs, as already noted.
A wealth of ideas flowed in on him while engaged on any great work, much
of which, when not available for the one, could be utilized on the
other. While working on the Mass in D, he had in mind composing another
mass, as is evidenced by the following memorandum in the sketches of the
Agnus Dei: "Das Kyrie in der neuen Messe bloss mit blasenden
Instrumenten und Orgel." (The Kyrie in the new Mass only with wind
instruments and organ.) The new Symphony was to be religious in
character, and was projected on a broader scale even than the Ninth. A
memorandum on the subject of the Tenth Symphony appears in the
sketch-books of the latter part of the year 1818. It is as follows: "The
orchestra (violins, etc.) to be increased tenfold, for the last
movements, the voices to enter one by one. Or the Adagio to be in some
manner repeated in the last movements. In the Allegro, a Bacchic
festival."[C] His labors, however, on the Mass and Ninth Symphony had so
exhausted him that no strength was left for this great work, and no part
of it was even drafted. Later he thought to substitute a shorter work,
something which would not have taxed him so much physically. He then
makes the memorandum, "also instead of a new Symphony, an overture on
Bach." Sehr fugirt (greatly fugued.)

[C] Nottebohm's _Zweite Beethoveniana_.

Now that the concerts were over and summer approaching, Beethoven's
thoughts turned to the country. A comfortable house was secured for him
at Schoenbrun on the bank of the river, but his stay here was short. A
bridge near the house made it possible to obtain a good view of the
master, and it soon got to be the custom for people to station
themselves on it and watch for his appearance. He stood the ordeal for
three weeks, and then fled to his beloved Baden, where he appears to
have been safe from such annoyances.




CHAPTER XV

CAPACITY FOR FRIENDSHIP

     Genius lives essentially alone. It is too rare to find its like
     with ease, and too different from the rest of men to be their
     companion.
                                                         --SCHOPENHAUER.


For many years Beethoven had not been on speaking terms with the friend
of his youth, Stephen von Breuning. The year 1815, which had cost him
his brother Karl, also deprived him of Stephen's friendship. Two
versions are given as to the cause of the quarrel which estranged them.
One is that Stephen had warned him not to trust his brother Karl in
money matters. Another, and probably the correct one, is that Stephen
endeavored to dissuade the master from adopting the young Karl in event
of his brother's death. In either case Von Breuning acted entirely in
Beethoven's interest without considering the possible consequences to
himself; his disinterestedness was poorly rewarded however. Beethoven
was bound by every obligation of friendship to him, but, with his usual
want of tact, told his brother just what Stephen had said. Naturally
Karl resented this interference in their family affairs, and succeeded
in inflaming his brother's mind against Von Breuning. The estrangement
resulted. Karl died shortly after, and a mistaken sense of loyalty
toward his dead brother helped to keep alive Beethoven's anger against
his former friend. There is no record of his having so much as mentioned
the latter's name in the following ten years, although he and Von
Breuning lived in the same city and had many friends in common.

As time passed, and one after another of Beethoven's friends were lost
to him--through death or otherwise--his thoughts no doubt often reverted
to this old friend. It must often have occurred to him that Breuning's
companionship would be more enjoyable than that of some of the friends
of these years. An accidental meeting with him on the bastion one
evening in August of 1825, happily led to a reconciliation. Beethoven's
eyes were at last opened to the injustice done Von Breuning, upon which
he wrote him a letter, so imbued with penitence, so fraught with the
desire of obliterating his past unkindness, so filled with yearning and
tenderness, that it must have compensated Stephen for all the pain of
the past years.

Accompanying the letter was his portrait painted many years before. The
letter has been frequently published. It is so characteristic of the man
that it can hardly be omitted:

"Behind this portrait, dear, good Stephen, may all be forever buried
which has for so long kept us apart. I have torn your heart I know. The
agitation that you must constantly have noticed in me has punished me
enough. It was not malice that prompted my behavior toward you. No! I
should then be no longer worthy of your friendship. I was led to doubt
you by people who were unworthy of you and of me. My portrait has long
ago been intended for you. You know that I had always intended it for
some one. To whom could I give it so with warmest love as to you, true,
faithful, noble Stephen. Forgive me for causing you suffering. My own
sufferings have equaled yours. It was not until after our separation
that I realized how dear you are and always will be to my heart."

All this in English sounds cold and stunted when compared with the fire
of the original. Beethoven never spared himself when making amends for
past misconduct.

From this time on the name of Von Breuning appears again in his letters
and he found much comfort in intercourse with his family. He was always
a welcome guest at Breuning's house. A friendship was soon inaugurated
between the master and Stephen's son, a bright lad of twelve years. He
nicknamed him Ariel, when sending him on errands, probably with
reference to his agility.

Such incidents as the quarrels with Breuning, his dismissal of
Schindler, Schuppanzich, and Count Lichnowsky during the preliminary
work of the testimonial concert, his suspicions of his friends at the
second concert when he invited them to a dinner, and then charged them
with an attempt to defraud him,--these at first glance, especially if
considered apart, lead to the conclusion that Beethoven was not intended
for friendship. This was not the case however. His deafness and
preoccupation with his work, led him to keep aloof to some extent from
others, but it is undeniable that he greatly valued this sentiment and
actively fostered it. Perhaps, like Thoreau, he expected too much from
it, and could find no one to respond to the measure of his
anticipations. He was probably disappointed one way or another, with
every friend that came to him, but to the end kept alive his faith in
humankind, and managed always to maintain intimate and friendly
relations with one or more persons. There is no interval from his
twentieth year up to his death, of which this cannot be said. He was
essentially gregarious and recognized the need of friendship. That he
was unlike his fellow human beings--essentially different--he knew. He
often sought to bridge these differences, in order to make friendly
intercourse with others possible.

Among the friends of this period may be mentioned Hüttenbrenner,
Schubert's friend. Schubert himself would have prized Beethoven's
friendship in the highest degree, but he was too modest to bring it
about. The junior by twenty years, and in Beethoven's lifetime unknown
to fame, it devolved on him to take the initiative in this matter. A
meeting could easily have been arranged as both dined at the same
restaurant, and Hüttenbrenner could have managed to bring them together.
Beethoven was generally approachable when not at work, and was always
well disposed toward young musicians of talent, but the habitually
modest estimate which Schubert placed on himself, coupled with the
regard amounting to reverence which he entertained for Beethoven, was
sufficient to deter the younger man. He indeed attempted a meeting in
1822, but the result was a fiasco owing to his extreme diffidence.
Having composed some variations on a French air (opus 10) he desired to
dedicate them to Beethoven and prevailed on Diabelli to arrange a
meeting, as well as call with him on the master, since he feared to go
alone. Beethoven's demeanor toward him was genial and friendly. When
Schubert attempted conversation the master handed him a pencil and
paper. He was too nervous to write in reply, but managed to produce his
composition, which Beethoven examined with some appearance of interest.
The master finally came upon some incorrect harmonization (Schubert had
never received a proper technical training) and in mild terms called the
young composer's attention to it. This so disconcerted him that he fled
to the street, regardless of consequences. The incident is related by
Schindler, but is called into question by Kreissle, who wrote an
exhaustive biography of Schubert. Kreissle says that Beethoven was not
at home when Schubert called.

Excessive diffidence was not the distinguishing trait of another young
man, Karl Holz, who had ingratiated himself into the master's favor in
these years. Holz had a post under government, was of good social
position, possessed fine conversational powers, and was an all-round
entertaining and agreeable person. He was a musician of first-rate
attainments, a member of the Schuppanzich Quartet, and occasionally
acted as director of the Concert Spirituel of Vienna.

Holz's gayety and light-heartedness helped to dispel the melancholy
which had become habitual with Beethoven at this time. He had the
discernment to see that such an atmosphere was unsuited to a young man
of Karl's temperament, and may very well have encouraged Holz's visits
on his nephew's account. The situation had its defects however, as
Holz's convivial habits were communicated to Beethoven, who was led at
times to drink more wine than was good for him. Beethoven, in one of his
letters to his nephew, reproached him with being a thorough Viennese, to
which the young man retorted in kind, alluding to the master's
friendship with Holz. This was before the reconciliation with Von
Breuning had been effected. After that event he saw him less frequently.
The young man however, retained his hold on the master's regard and
maintained the footing of an intimate friend for the remainder of his
life. Flashes of the old humor constantly appear in his letters to Holz,
which, though tinctured somewhat with coarseness, make pleasanter
reading than his remark to Fanny del Rio--"My life is of no worth to
myself. I only wish to live for the boy's sake." Holz took him out of
this mood.

In the last year of his life Beethoven, at Holz's request appointed him
his biographer as follows:

                                                VIENNA, _Aug. 30, 1826_.
     I am happy to give my friend, Karl Holz, the testimonial he
     desires, namely,--that I consider him well qualified to write my
     biography if indeed, I may presume to think this will be desired. I
     place the utmost confidence in his faithfully transmitting to
     posterity what I have imparted to him for this purpose.
                                                   LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN.

Holz, however, was not equal to the requirements, and this duty was
relegated to Schindler.

A curious change affected Beethoven in his later years on the subject of
money. It was not avarice, that "good old-gentlemanly vice" of Byron's
which influenced him, but it resembled it at times. With his nephew as
the inciting cause, money, to which he had hitherto been indifferent,
now assumed a new value to him. This is evidenced by absurd economies
(alternated it is true by occasional extravagances), which are a feature
of this time. The diminution of his pension, the nature of the
compositions of these years from which for the most part no money was
available, the cessation of his teaching (Von Frimmel mentions a pupil,
Hirsch, who had a few lessons from him in 1817, which was probably the
last of Beethoven's sporadic attempts in this direction, as his deafness
must have made teaching extremely difficult), were all factors which
rendered money a scarce article with him. In the same ratio in which his
income had been diminished, his expenses were increased by the
maintenance and education of his nephew, which in large part was borne
by Beethoven.

This new estimate of the value of money was strengthened by the
conviction that Karl would never do anything for himself, and that
provision must be made for his future. To this must be attributed his
solicitude for money which is constantly in evidence in his letters to
his friends, as well as to his publishers, in which latter the
disposition to drive a good bargain comes to the fore now for the first
time. His letters to Ries are full of the subject of making money. "Wäre
ich nicht noch immer der arme Beethoven," he says with unconscious
humor, in one of the letters. "If I could but get to London, what would
I not write for the Philharmonic Society. If it please God to restore my
health, which is already improved, I may yet avail myself of the several
propositions made me, not only from Europe, but even North America, and
thus my finances might again prosper."

His naïve reference to this country[D] refers to the offer made him by
the Händel and Haydn Society of Boston for an oratorio, the text of
which was to be furnished by them. His work on the Ninth Symphony
prevented him from accepting it, but it is something that will always
redound to the credit of the society. That the critical faculty should,
already at that time, have been sufficiently well developed in this
country as to lead to such a commission, augurs well for its future
art-history. While one portion were engaged in subduing the wilderness,
fighting Indians, extending the frontier, others were already reaching
out for the highest and best in art and literature.[E] It is a pleasant
reflection that this country is no longer the terra incognita in musical
matters that it was in Beethoven's time. The ready recognition extended
Wagner from the first here, has, no doubt, helped to bring this about.

[D] When writing this letter Beethoven could have had no prevision that
in this aboriginal North America, in a little village called Natick,
there was then living a five-year-old boy, answering to the name of
Alexander W. Thayer, who was eventually to furnish a biography of the
master, so painstaking, exact and voluminous, that it is unique in its
class. The Beethoven biography was Thayer's life-work, to which he
gladly sacrificed his means as well, and was then only brought down to
the year 1816. Thayer's name will always be associated with that of
Beethoven, it is such a record-making work. It is published only in
German at this writing (1904), but an English translation is promised on
completion of the second edition, one volume of which has appeared in
1902. Mr. Thayer died in 1897.

[E] That Beethoven's genius had at an early date impressed itself on the
minds of Americans, was commented on by Margaret Fuller in 1841. She
says:

"It is observable as an earnest of the great future which opens for this
country, that such a genius (Beethoven) is so easily and so much
appreciated here, by those who have not gone through the steps that
prepared the way for him in Europe. He is felt because he expressed in
full tones the thoughts that lie at the heart of our own existence,
though we have not found means to stammer them as yet."

Meanwhile Ries, in London, was making active propaganda for him, with
the result that an offer had come to him from Charles Neate asking him
to come to London with a symphony and a concerto for the Philharmonic
Society. Neate was a great admirer of Beethoven. He had spent eight
months in Vienna some years previously, and the two became good friends
during this sojourn. Three hundred guineas, and a benefit concert in
which five hundred pounds more was to be guaranteed him, was the
inducement held out for coming. This large sum tempted him strongly,
placing him, so to speak, between two fires. The character of his nephew
was such that he could not be left behind, while his education would be
interrupted if he took him along. His entries in his journal show with
what dread and apprehension he faced the ordeal of going among
strangers. The project never would have been considered but for his
desire to provide for Karl's future. The journey was never undertaken,
but the project was never abandoned. It occupied his thoughts even in
his last illness.

The scores of the Mass and Symphony were sold to Messrs. Schott of
Mayence, one thousand florins having been obtained for the Mass, and six
hundred for the Symphony. This put him in easy circumstances for a
while, although the money question was a source of anxiety to him, more
or less, for the remainder of his life. The ten thousand florins
invested in Bank of Austria shares in 1815 was almost intact. He had
drawn on it once or twice when matters had come to an extremity with
him, but to touch it in any other case seemed to him like betraying a
trust, since it had been set aside as a provision for his nephew. Just
before the testimonial concert, he was at times absolutely without
funds, his housekeeper being occasionally required to advance money from
her savings to tide him over until a windfall should happen. The
proceeds from the seven subscriptions to the Mass in D, amounting to
three hundred and fifty ducats (about eight hundred dollars) helped him
out to some extent, and something must have been coming in all the while
from his previous publications. With good management there would have
been sufficient for a man of his simple requirements, but in nothing was
he so deficient as in business ability, or the faculty of looking after
his worldly concerns. He was probably cheated right and left in his
household matters.




CHAPTER XVI

THE DAY'S TRIALS

     Those who are furthest removed from us really believe that we are
     constituted just like themselves, for they understand exactly so
     much of us as we have in common with them, but they do not know how
     little, how infinitesimally little this is.
                                            --WAGNER: _Letter to Liszt_.


Beethoven was in no sense a hero to his servants. In their eyes he was
not the great artist, whose achievement was to go ringing down the ages;
he was simply a crank or madman, who did not know his own mind half the
time, from whom abuse was as likely to be predicated as gratuities, who
could be ridiculed, neglected, circumvented with impunity. When the
dereliction became glaring enough to arrest his attention, he would
deliver himself of a volley of abuse which sometimes had to be made good
by presents of money. At other times, he desired nothing so much as to
be left alone.

That he found the world a more difficult problem than ever in these
later years, goes without saying. "Have you been patient with every one
to-day?" he asks himself in one of the note-books of this period,
indicating the dawn of a perception that fate is too much for him, that
it can be defied no longer, but rather must be propitiated. Had he
answered his question, it would no doubt have been in the negative; but
this attitude, so new to him, is significant. It comes up also in his
letters to Zmeskall, in which he speaks of his patience in enduring the
insolence of a butler, who had been sent him by Zmeskall.

Complaints about servants appear frequently in his correspondence.
Peppe, the "elephant-footed," and Nanny, who seems to have had a
particular faculty for making trouble, are specially in evidence. "I
have endured much from N. (Nanny) to-day," he writes in a letter to his
good friend Madame Streicher, who was very helpful to him in his
domestic matters. On one occasion, when her conduct became unbearable,
he threw books at her head. Strangely, this method of disciplining the
refractory Nanny produced better results than could have been expected.
He reports soon after to Madame Streicher, "Miss Nanny is a changed
creature since I threw the half dozen books at her head. Possibly, by
chance some of their contents may have entered her brain, or her bad
heart. At all events we now have a repentant deceiver."

In another letter of this time he writes to the same lady, "Yesterday
morning the devilry began again, but I made short work of it, and threw
the heavy settle at B (another servant), after which we had peace for
the remainder of the day." "Come Friday or Sunday," he writes Holz.
"Better come on Friday, as Satanas in the kitchen is more endurable on
that day." This advice to come on Friday when purposing to dine with
him, is repeated in a subsequent letter to Holz. "If I could but rid
myself of these _canaille_," he writes to another person, when
complaining of the hostility and insolence of his servants.

That his own mode of life helped largely to bring about this state of
things, did not make it any easier to bear. As stated, system was out of
the question in this household. There was no regular time for meals,
often no meals were thought of by the master while occupied with his
work. When hungry, if nothing were forthcoming at home, he sought a
restaurant. Careless in general as regards his food, abstemious to a
degree in this respect, he was particular only on one matter, his
coffee. He delighted in making it himself, often counting the beans that
were required for each cup.

"My house resembles very much a shipwreck" is a remark attributed to him
by Nohl. Even under favoring conditions, discipline was not to be
expected, but matters were further complicated by Karl's mother, who
made a practice of bribing the servants to get information about the
young man. There is no doubt her influence tended to increase the
discomfort and disorder that would have existed in any event. "Some
devils of people have again played me such a trick that it is almost
impossible for me to mix with human beings any more," he said in a
letter to Madame Streicher, which remark Mr. Kalischer (_Neue
Beethovenbriefe_, Berlin, 1902), attributes to intrigues against him by
his sister-in-law.

To illustrate the slight regard his servants had for Beethoven and their
absolute ignorance of the value of his work, an incident related by
Schindler about the loss of the manuscript of the Kyrie of the Mass in D
is in point. On reaching Döbling in 1821 on his annual summer migration,
he missed this work and the most diligent search failed to bring it to
light. Finally the cook produced it; she had used the separate sheets
for wrapping kitchen utensils. Some of them were torn, but no part was
lost. No copy had yet been made, and its loss would have been
irreparable.

The difficulties which he experienced with the world in general existed
with his copyists and engravers to an exaggerated degree as may be
supposed, since proofreading was a matter on which he was extremely
particular. He was apt to make unreasonable demands on them, not
understanding human nature. He wanted them to work quickly and
accurately and they were very often slow and careless; they tried his
patience more than his servants did. A little deftness on his part when
in contact with them, would have made things easier all around. As it
was, they received little consideration from him, and gave but little in
return. He was so deeply interested in his compositions that he
frequently recalled them after they were in the engraver's hands, in
order to make alterations and additions. The Sonata, opus 111 was
withdrawn twice, after the engraver had actually begun work on it. It
had been sold to Diabelli, who finally refused to return it again, as
the engraver's work in each case was thrown away. This called out a
sarcastic letter from Beethoven to Schindler, in which he refers to
Diabelli as an arch-churl (_Erzflegel_), and threatens him (Diabelli),
if he is not more amenable.

"I have passed the forenoon to-day, and all yesterday afternoon in
correcting these two pieces and am actually hoarse with stamping and
swearing," he wrote the copyist in reference to the A minor Quartet.
Elsewhere he complains about the carelessness of the publishers of his
earlier quartets, which are "full of mistakes and errata great and
small. They swarm like fish in the sea, innumerable."

When referring to the testimonial concert, allusion was made to the
enormous labor involved in copying out all the parts required for the
occasion, in which over one hundred persons participated. To examine and
correct each copy before placing it in the hands of the performers was
in itself no slight task. The labor of making the seven subscription
copies of the Mass, was probably a still greater one. In these days of
cheap publications, one can hardly form an estimate of what it really
meant. Many months elapsed after the Mass was completed, before a clean
copy could be gotten for the Archduke even.

No doubt the copyists often misunderstood the master's instructions,
always given in writing in his later years. He was so careless with his
handwriting that some of his letters are undecipherable in part, to this
day. Schindler, with good common-sense made a practice of transcribing
Beethoven's words on the back of any letter received from him before
filing it away. The master's extraordinary carefulness in proof-reading
has already been mentioned. This was to him a matter of the utmost
importance, second to none. Press of work, illness even, was not allowed
to interfere with the careful revision of his work.

He might write about patience in his note book, but it was exercised
very little when dealing with his copyists. There were times in this
connection in which the situation became so strained that they refused
to work for him. In one such instance a man, Wolanck by name, returned
the manuscript which the master had sent him, writing him at the same
time an impertinent letter. This copyist was evidently of a literary
turn, with a talent for satire. He begins by begging to be permitted to
express his gratitude for the honor which Beethoven has done him in
being allowed to drudge for him, but states that he wants no more of it.
He then proceeds to philosophize on the situation, saying that the
dissonances which have marked their intercourse in the past have been
regarded by him with amused toleration. "Are there not" asks this
Junius, "in the ideal world of tones many dissonances? Why should these
not also exist in the actual world?" In conclusion he ventures the
opinion that if Mozart or Haydn had served as copyist for Beethoven, a
fate similar to his own would have befallen them.

A wild Berserker rage took possession of Beethoven on receipt of this
letter which he appeased characteristically by writing all sorts of
sarcastic comments over the sheet, and by inventing compound invectives
to suit the case. He heavily criss-crossed the whole letter, and across
it in heavy lines wrote, "Dummer Kerl" (foolish fellow), "Eselhafter
Kerl" (asinine fellow), "Schreibsudler" (slovenly writer). On the edges
at the right: "Mozart and Haydn you will do the honor not to mention";
at the left: "It was decided yesterday, and even before, that you were
not to write for me any more." On another spot he writes: "correct your
blunders that occur through your fatuity, presumption, ignorance and
foolishness." (Unwissenheit, Übermuth, Eigendünkel, und Dummheit). "That
will become you better than to try to teach me."

In better vein is a letter from Beethoven to the copyist Rampel, who had
worked for him during a period of many years. He had Beethoven's favor
more than any other copyist, on account of a peculiar faculty he
possessed for deciphering the master's handwriting.

     _Bestes Ramperl,--

     Komme um morgen früh. Gehe aber zum Teufel mit deinem Gnädiger
     Herr. Gott allein kann nur gnädig geheissen werden._

     BEST RAMPEL,--

     You can come to-morrow morning, but go to the devil with your
     "Gracious Sir," (Gnädiger Herr). God alone should be addressed as
     "Gracious Lord."

This letter was published in the Beethoven number of _Die Musik_,
February, 1902.




CHAPTER XVII

LAST QUARTETS

     Every extraordinary man has a certain mission, which he is called
     upon to accomplish. If he has fulfilled it he is no longer needed
     on earth, in the same form, and Providence uses him for something
     else. But as everything here below happens in a natural way, the
     dæmons keep tripping him up until he falls at last. Thus it was
     with Napoleon, and many others. Mozart died in his thirty-sixth
     year. Raphael at the same age. Byron a little older. But all these
     had perfectly fulfilled their missions, and it was time for them to
     depart that others might still have something to do in a world made
     to last a long while.
                               --GOETHE, _Conversations with Eckermann_.


In the midst of these ironies of fate, this satyr-play of the nether
forces with the master, in which he occupies at times so undignified a
position, it is gratifying to note that the artist-life goes on apace.
In the last quartets which now come up for consideration, the labors of
the tone-poet are brought to a close.

The quartet was a favorite musical form with the master. Here the more
intimate side of his nature is revealed. A more personal relation is
established between composer and audience than is the case in the other
forms in which he worked. As we have seen, the quartet, in the time of
which we write, was universally in use at informal gatherings for the
delectation of friends in the privacy of the home, and was not intended
for concert use. The stateliness which characterizes the large
symphonic forms is absent in chamber-music, but it has qualities of its
own which we value as much.

The last quartets owe their existence to Prince Galitzin, a Russian
nobleman, who had spent some time in Vienna in 1805, and became
acquainted with Beethoven at the house of the Russian Ambassador, Count
Rasoumowsky, for whom it will be remembered Beethoven composed three
quartets, opus 59. In November of 1822 the Prince wrote Beethoven in the
most flattering terms, asking him to compose three quartets at his own
price, which were to be dedicated to him. The master accepted the
commission gladly, fixing the modest sum of one hundred and fifty ducats
(about $330) for the three, reserving, however, the right to sell the
quartets to a publisher. Prince Galitzin was then living in state in St.
Petersburg. His wife was a fine pianist, he himself a first-rate
performer on the cello. They occupied a prominent position in the
musical life of the city. The Prince was one of the original subscribers
to the Mass in D, and has the credit of having brought about the first
complete performance of this colossal work ever given.

When we consider the enormous expense of this undertaking, the copying
of the many parts, as well as the sums paid for soloists, chorus and
orchestra, most of which was probably borne by the Prince, and reflect
that this is only an instance among many of his extravagant mode of
living, it is not surprising to find that he became financially
embarrassed, and was unable to carry out in full his obligation to
Beethoven as regards paying for these works.

The Oratorio, "The Victory of the Cross," which had already been begun,
was laid aside in favor of the quartets; it was never resumed.
Notwithstanding his enthusiasm, work on the new commission made but slow
progress. Ill health and preoccupation in his nephew's concerns took up
much of his attention. Occasional sketches were made, but it was more
than a year and a half before the first one was actually begun. It was
outlined at Baden in the autumn of 1824, and finished on his return to
Vienna. Mention is made of this quartet by the master in an interesting
letter to Messrs. Schott of Mayence, who had bought the mass and
symphony, and had also purchased the quartet, paying fifty ducats for
it. Cordial relations had been established with these gentlemen, dating
from the time of selling them the two great works just mentioned. Some
of Beethoven's best letters are those written to his publishers. An
extract from the letter above referred to follows:

"The quartet you shall also receive by the middle of October.
Overburdened by work, and suffering from bad health, I really have some
claim on the indulgence of others. I am here on account of my health, or
rather to the want of it, although I already feel better.

"Apollo and the Muses do not yet intend me to become the prey of the
bony scytheman, as I have yet much to do for you, and much to bequeath,
which my spirit dictates and calls on me to complete before I depart
hence for the Elysian Fields; I feel as if I had written scarcely more
than a few notes."

The initial performance of the first of the Galitzin Quartets took place
in the spring of 1825. Beethoven regarded the event as a momentous
occurrence and required the four performers, Schuppanzich, Weiss, Linke
and Holz, to sign a compact, each to "pledge his honor to do his best
to distinguish himself and vie with the other in zeal."

The quartets once begun were carried on with ardor in the midst of most
distressing occurrences, chief of which were ill health and its twin
demon, poverty, as well as the waywardness of his nephew, all of which
tended to draw him to the spiritual life. The character of Beethoven's
work changed from the period of the Mass in D. An altered condition, an
altogether new, different strain is apparent thenceforth. The deeply
religious, mystical character of the first movement of the Ninth
Symphony can be attributed to his previous absorption on the Mass. He
worked out of this vein somewhat in the other movements as not being
adapted to the uses for which the symphony is designed, but it reappears
again in the quartets to the extent of dominating them.

The one in B Flat, opus 130, completes the three for Prince Galitzin. Of
the Cavatina of this quartet, Holz is authority for saying that
Beethoven composed it with tears, and confessed that never before had
his own music made such an impression on him; that even the repetition
of it always cost him tears. In this movement Beethoven used the word
_Beklemmt_ (_Beklommen_) (oppressed, anxious) at a point where it
modulates into another key. His loneliness, superinduced by his life of
celibacy, by his deafness, his disappointment in his nephew, all had the
effect of separating him from the world. The spiritual side of his
nature, always active, had been brought into new life during his work on
the Mass, as we have seen. It was never thenceforth allowed to fall into
abeyance, but was developed in direct ratio with his withdrawal from
the world. An atavism from some remote Aryan ancestry inclined him, as
in the case of so many Germans, to mysticism and the occult. It was a
condition which had its compensations. That there were periods when he
saw visions may be conjectured by the character of the last quartets.
When they were written, Beethoven was in the shadow of death, on the
border-land of the other world, and from that proximity he relates his
experience. These works receive the reverence of all musicians for their
spirituality, their mysticism, their psychological qualities. They are
the revelations of the seer, awe-inspiring mementos of states and
conditions of mind which transcend the experiences of ordinary life. In
these last impassioned utterances of the master, we find a strain
holier, more profound, different from anything which the art of music
has yet produced.

The Cavatina on its first performance, on March 21, 1826, was received
with indifference, and the finale, which was an exceedingly long and
difficult fugue, fared even worse. Self-sufficient as Beethoven was on
all matters connected with the working out of his musical thoughts, he
coincided for once with his friends and the publisher on the matter of
the fugue. He wrote a new finale for the quartet, and published the
fugue separately as opus 133. Joseph Boehm, the noted violinist, then in
his twenty-eighth year, rehearsed this fugue under Beethoven's
direction, and often played the violin part subsequently.

The great C sharp minor Quartet opus 131, is the next one to claim our
attention. Beethoven characterized it as a piece of work worthy of him.
This colossal work was one which Wagner continually held up for the
commendation of mankind. It occupies among quartets a position
analogous to that of the Ninth Symphony in its own class. The summer of
1826 in which it was composed, was a period fraught with momentous
occurrences to the master, chief of which was the attempted suicide of
his nephew. The circumstances which led up to this catastrophe can be
briefly narrated. Beethoven had been disappointed in any and every plan
formed for the future of the young man. He at first looked for great
things from him; by gradual stages his expectations were so modified
that at last he began to fear that he would never be able to provide for
his own maintenance.

The musical education of the young man had first engaged the master's
attention, in the hope that some of the family talent might have been
transmitted to him. When it became plain that nothing could be achieved
by him in a musical career, he was entered at the university of Vienna
with a view of making a scholar of him. Here he was unable to keep up
with his studies, owing to inattention. He failed to pass his
examination and left the school in consequence. Literature being closed
to him, he entered the Polytechnic school, intending to fit himself for
business life, but failed here also. That Karl's conduct caused the
master much anxiety appears in his letters to him. In some of them he
entreats him to do better, in others he upbraids him. Both lines of
reasoning seem to have been equally obnoxious to this careless,
indifferent young man, who objected to being taken to task for his
misdeeds, and hated "rows" and "scenes" with his uncle. When he failed
the second time he was at his wits' end in dread of his uncle's
reproaches. Many a stormy scene had occurred between them during the
two preceding years. So violent had these become, that the master was on
one occasion requested to find another apartment on account of the
complaints that came from other occupants of the house. It may very well
be that Beethoven expected too much from this carelessly reared youth,
whose mother lost no opportunity of embittering him against the master.
The young man probably never seriously contemplated suicide, but wanted
to give his uncle a scare. By working on his fears he reasoned that he
would be able to have his own way for a long while to come. He
threatened suicide, and the day following this threat actually went so
far as to shoot himself. He was not severely injured, but the attempt on
his life rendered him amenable to the laws of his country, and a short
confinement in the government hospital followed.

Beethoven was greatly agitated on learning of the rash act. He had some
difficulty in finding him, as the young man had left his quarters and
went to another part of the city before carrying out his threat. With
the aid of friends he was finally located and an affecting scene
followed in which the master loaded him with kindness, treating him very
much as that other prodigal son was treated by his father.

Beethoven's personal intervention with the magistrate eased the
situation for the nephew. Two very interesting letters from the master
in this connection were published some years ago in the Neuen Freien
Presse of Vienna, and are included in Herr Kalischer's Beethovenbriefe
published in Berlin in 1902. The following one shows Beethoven's ethical
character in strong light:

To the Magistrate Czapka:

     DEAR SIR:

     Hofrath von Breuning and I have carefully considered what is best
     to be done. We think for the time being no other course is
     practicable than that Karl should remain with me a few days (during
     the interval until he can enter the military service). His language
     is still excitable under the impression that I would reprimand him
     since he was capable of making an attempt on his life. He has,
     however, shown himself quite affectionate toward me. Be assured
     that to me fallen humanity is still holy. A warning from you would
     probably have good results. It would do no harm to let him know
     that unobserved he will be watched while with me. Accept my highest
     esteem for yourself, and consider me as one who loves his kind, who
     desires only good wherever possible.
                                         Yours respectfully,
                                                          BEETHOVEN.

In accordance with the English custom of putting the fool of the family
into the army, Stephen von Breuning had hit upon the plan of a military
career for Karl since all others seemed closed to him. Von Breuning, who
always had a faculty of being of service to Beethoven, was a counsellor
in the war-office. He urged on Beethoven the feasibility of procuring an
appointment for Karl in the army, and interested his superior,
Field-marshal Lieutenant von Stutterheim, in the matter. Beethoven was
not greatly in favor of a military career for the young man. "Übrigens
bin ich gar nicht für den Militärstandt," he says in a letter to Holz of
September 9, when the subject was first broached. He opposed it for a
while, but finally bowed to the inevitable.

Toward the end of October, and before the negotiations in regard to the
army appointment were concluded, the young man was released from the
hospital, and placed under the control of the master, with the
injunction that he be removed from Vienna at once. At this juncture
brother Johann placed his country house at Gneixendorf at the disposal
of the master and nephew, and thither the two repaired, the elder,
stricken, bowed with grief; the youth, sullen and indifferent. The
master had never entered Johann's house since the summer of 1812, when
he had tried so ineffectually, as noted in a previous chapter, to break
up the relations existing between the pair while the lady was as yet
only the housekeeper. It must have been with great reluctance that he
considered visiting him at all. The sacrifice, if such there was, was
made in the interest of Karl; where this young scapegrace was concerned,
the master was generally willing to sink his own preferences. The
situation must have been embarrassing for all concerned, less so in
reality for the master than for the others. Absorbed in the composition
of the new finale, and also in the finishing up of the great C sharp
minor Quartet, he was for the most part oblivious to anything unusual in
his surroundings. Johann's wife, with the policy of her class, bore no
resentment, or at least showed none outwardly. A pleasant room on the
ground floor was fitted up for him, but the welcome must have been a
cold one at best.

No doubt the Gutsbesitzer took much pleasure in showing off his
possessions to the brother whom he knew had little esteem for him at
heart. He paraded his own importance in the neighborhood, taking the
composer on business visits to prominent people. On these occasions he
would not usually introduce his brother, treating him as a kind of
appendage. The master, deep in the thought of creative work, was, no
doubt, to a great extent unconscious of this sordidness. At all events
he gave no sign. But he contributed very little to the social well-being
of the family. Two aims only seem to have occupied his mind at this
time: the welfare of his nephew, and the carrying to completion of a few
great works already sketched or begun. These included a Tenth Symphony,
(for the Philharmonic Society of London), the Oratorio, The Victory of
the Cross, for the Vienna Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde, music to
Goethe's Faust, which latter he must have been in good mood for,--as
well as an overture on Bach. "I hope yet," he writes from Johann's home,
"to bring some great works into the world, and then like an old child,
to close my earthly career somewhere among good people." He worked with
feverish haste in the latter years of his life, whenever his health
permitted, even abandoning his books in favor of his work. Failing
health prevented him from forcing it ahead as in former years, but he
worked up to the limit of his powers.

His habits while composing have been referred to in a previous chapter,
namely, that he was in the habit of singing, stamping, gesticulating,
while under the spell of his inspiration. This kind of thing was new to
the maid who looked after his room, and she managed to extract amusement
from it. Beethoven finally discovered her laughing at him, and forthwith
bundled her out of the room, giving orders that no female would be
admitted again. One of the men about the place, Michael Kren, was then
engaged, who performed his duties faithfully, and helped materially to
establish a more comfortable existence for the sick, helpless man. He
has narrated circumstantially the master's mode of life while at
Gneixendorf. He was up and at work at half-past five, beating time with
hands and feet, singing, humming. This went on until breakfast time,
half-past seven. This meal over he would hurry out of doors, (the
weather was fine that particular autumn) spending the morning going
about the fields, note-book in hand, his mind intent on his musical
thoughts, occasionally singing or calling out, going now slowly, then
very fast, at times stopping still to write out his ideas. This would go
on until noon, when he would return to the house for dinner. This was
served at half-past twelve, after which he would go to his room for
about two hours, then again to the fields until sunset. He was never out
in the evening as night air was considered bad for him. Supper was
served at half-past seven. His evenings were spent in his room, and at
ten o'clock he went to bed.

This simple, regular life, with the healthful country air, should have
restored Beethoven's health in some measure could it have been continued
longer. His letters from here indicate that he expected some improvement
in this respect. Had not some untoward circumstances intervened, the
master's life might have been spared long enough to enable him to carry
to completion the list of works outlined above.

That Johann had an ulterior object in asking his brother to visit him is
quite probable. The growing fame of the composer and the ever-increasing
value of his copyrights was well known to him. He had made money in his
dealings between composer and publisher in the past, and could have
made still more had he possessed his brother's confidence in a greater
degree. His cupidity however, prevented him from keeping up for long
even the semblance of kindness or hospitality. Fuel was so scantily
provided the sick guest that he suffered from cold, and he was told that
a charge would be made for the room. Other circumstances may have
contributed to bring about a climax. At all events the situation became
so unpleasant that he suddenly decided to return to Vienna.




CHAPTER XVIII

IN THE SHADOWS

     As a day well spent gives joyful sleep,
     So does a life well spent give joyful death.
                                                    --LEONARDO DA VINCI.


The C sharp minor Quartet and the one in F, opus 135, which rounds out
this wonderful series, were all but completed before leaving Vienna on
the visit to Johann. That there was some polishing still to be done on
the latter is apparent from the fact that it has the superscription in
the master's handwriting, "Gneixendorf am 30 Oktober 1826." The finale
has these curious sentences: "Der schwergefasste Entschluss. Muss es
sein? Es muss sein." Question and answer turn on the subject of paying
his room rent according to Schindler, the dialogue being a reminiscence
of previous times. Beethoven often made some discussion when his rent
was demanded, either from the desire to extract some sport from the
situation, or from fear of being cheated. It often had to be
demonstrated to him by the aid of an almanac that the time was up and
the money really due.

The only work begun and completed by the master while at Gneixendorf was
the new finale, which replaced the long fugue of the B flat Quartet. It
proved to be his last work. The series of unpleasant events referred to
in the last chapter ensued, and, without considering consequences, he
returned to Vienna.

It is not likely that Johann or his wife exerted themselves much to keep
him longer. They intended spending the winter in Vienna themselves, and
were probably relieved to have the visit ended so that they could make
their preparations for the journey. With his usual impatience, he must
needs take the first conveyance which was to be had. Johann had a closed
carriage, but would not let him have it, and the journey was made in a
light open wagon. December had arrived and the weather, which had been
fine all the fall, was now bad. He was insufficiently clothed for the
two days' drive in such weather. He contracted inflammation of the lungs
on the way, and reached his quarters in the house of the Black
Spaniards, a very sick man.

This house, his last earthly abiding-place, had been his home for the
past year. It was a disused monastery, which had been established in
1633 by the daughter of Philip III of Spain on taking up her residence
in Vienna after her marriage. The original building was destroyed in one
of the wars of that turbulent time, but was rebuilt at the end of the
seventeenth century. The building was demolished in 1904. It was
situated on the glacis, in a part of the city where Beethoven had lived
much of the time since coming to Vienna.

The fates seem to have been against him from the beginning of his
journey. His sleeping-room was an enormous one on the second floor,
which, with two small anterooms, composed the apartment. The facilities
for heating a room of that size, in those times must have been wholly
inadequate. Several days elapsed before a physician could be found to
attend him. He had quarrelled with two of his former physicians and each
refused his aid. Finally, a professor from the medical college, a Dr.
Wawruch, was summoned, who took the case in hand. Schindler states that
it was several days before he or any of the master's friends knew of his
arrival in Vienna, and leaves the inference that he was unattended
during this interval except by his nephew. When they learned of his
return, Schindler and Stephen von Breuning were unremitting in their
attentions.

As Beethoven had taken a violent prejudice against Dr. Wawruch, another
physician, Dr. Malfatti, was engaged, who acted in conjunction with the
former. The treatment was now changed, large quantities of iced punch
being administered, probably with the view of relieving the congestion
of the stomach. This mode of treatment exactly suited the sick man, a
result which was probably foreseen by the astute Dr. Malfatti, who had
prescribed for Beethoven during previous illnesses and knew his
patient's idiosyncrasies. Beethoven's childlike simplicity is
illustrated in the difference of his demeanor toward his two physicians.
He always had a warm welcome for the one who had administered the iced
punch, remembering no doubt its immediately alleviating and beneficial
results, but Dr. Wawruch fared poorly at his hands, especially when he
was in a bad humor. On more than one occasion when the latter appeared
the patient turned his face to the wall with the remark, "Ach der Esel."

Everything possible was now done to add to his comfort. Two servants
were engaged to attend him. His friends cheered him by their visits.
Hümmel called, bringing his young pupil Ferdinand Hiller. Some of
Schubert's songs were brought him, probably by Hüttenbrenner. They
consisted of Die Junge Nonne, Der Taucher, the Ossian songs, Die
Bürgschaft. Schindler states they awakened the master's surprise and
delight, eliciting from him the remark, "Truly, Schubert has the divine
fire."

Beethoven was so eager for work that he attempted composition again in
the intervals of his illness, but his strength was not sufficient to
enable him to go on with it. Hitherto his one resource in every
difficulty had been his work. The injunction of Saint-Simon, to lead
during the whole of the vigorous portion of manhood the most original
and active life possible, had been perforce carried out by him. Now that
his one resource, work, failed him, he was bereft. He sought to pass the
time by reading, and began with Kenilworth in a German translation, but
soon threw it down saying: "The man writes only for money."

The volatile Holz did not fail him in his need, but manifested his
friendship by many kind acts. His former publishers the Haslingers,
Tobias and Karl, as well as Diabelli, called occasionally. The Archduke
at Olmütz could hardly have been expected to come, especially as a fatal
termination was not for some time considered probable. We hear nothing
of Czerny, of Schuppanzich, of Linke, or of Zmeskall, which to say the
least, is singular. Schindler's omission of these names, however, has no
particular significance; he wrote many years after the event, and forgot
or omitted the mention of circumstances of greater importance than
this. It is not like what we know of the character of Czerny, or
Zmeskall, to neglect Beethoven in his extremity. The master's old
friend, Stumpf, of London, sent him a splendid edition of Händel's works
in forty volumes, with which he occupied himself a good deal. They
afforded him much enjoyment.

Anxiety on account of money, so prevalent all through these latter
years, was increased by his enforced abstinence from work. What he
chiefly desired now was sufficient ready money to carry him through, so
that he would not have to break into the little hoard put by for Karl
many years before. At this juncture the Philharmonic Society of London
sent him one hundred pounds, being an advance payment on account of a
concert they intended giving for his benefit. The initiative in this
matter was taken by Beethoven himself, and it is safe to say that
nothing that was done for him during this period was so appreciated, or
gave him so much pleasure, as this act of kindness from the Society. The
money reached him about ten days after an operation had been performed
on him for the relief of the dropsical accumulations incidental to his
liver trouble. Four such operations had been found necessary during this
illness. They were at best only palliative. His joy on receiving the
letter and money from London was such that the wound, not yet healed,
opened, and a great discharge followed. A letter of thanks was sent to
the Society, dictated by the master, but he was too weak even to sign
it.

Schindler relates that Beethoven on nearing middle-age, was wont to
indulge himself in day-dreams of a prosperous future, in which he could
have sufficient means to enable him to live in comfort, keep his
carriage like brother Johann, and have leisure for the refinements of
life. This illusion, maintained by most workers, no doubt brightened his
prosaic, solitary life. Pity that he could not have realized it in some
measure: after the heat and burden of the day, in which he had so well
acquitted himself, it would seem fitting, had he had an evening of life
such as was vouchsafed Wagner, with opportunity for completing his
life-work in peace and contentment.

One result achieved by the master as a consequence of his visit to
Gneixendorf would have afforded him great satisfaction could he have
known it. The matter of making suitable provision for Karl in event of
his own death had lain on his conscience for some time before this
visit, as already stated. While there, he begged his brother Johann to
make a will in Karl's favor, which eventually came to pass.

The army appointment, of which mention has been made, became an
established fact early in December, and the young man soon after left
Vienna to join his regiment. Beethoven never saw him again. He by this
time concurred with his friends in the opinion that the discipline of
military life might be beneficial to him, and was resigned to the
separation.

The great C sharp minor Quartet is indelibly associated with Karl,
through its dedication to Baron von Stutterheim, through whom the
appointment came. The decision to dedicate this work to the Baron, was
arrived at only two weeks before the master's death. The work had been
for some time in the hands of the publishers, Messrs. Schott of Mayence.
Beethoven, finally becoming aware that no more works could be produced
by him, and wishing to reward the Baron in the only way possible,
dictated an urgent letter to Messrs. Schott on the subject. "The
Quartet," he said, "must be dedicated to Field-marshal von Stutterheim,
to whom I am under great obligations. Should the first dedication by any
possibility be already engraved, I beg of you, on every account, to make
this alteration. I will gladly pay any extra expense connected with it."

The last Quartet, opus 135, is dedicated to Johann Wolfmayer, a merchant
of Vienna with whom he had much friendly intercourse. Wolfmayer showed
his interest in the master's work in many ways. It may be mentioned that
he offered him a sum equal to several hundreds of dollars to carry out
his project of writing a Requiem Mass. "Write to Stumpf and Smart," he
said to Schindler a few days before his death, when already too weak to
speak above a whisper. His consideration for others was paramount even
in the face of approaching death.

Notwithstanding the hopeful tone which characterized the letters written
during his last illness, there were times when he knew that he was
making a losing fight. Already on January 3, a month after his return
from Gneixendorf, he wrote a letter to his attorney, Dr. Bach, in the
form of a will, in which as may be supposed, his nephew is his sole
heir. No conditions were imposed on the young man, who, had the will
remained in this form, might have squandered the entire amount. (The
estate netted $5000). This was pointed out to Beethoven by his
counsellor, Dr. Bach, and also Von Breuning, who urged on him the
necessity of adding a codicil to the will, in which the principal would
be tied up for life, leaving only the income available. This he resisted
to within a few days before the end, but finally gave in, and, not
without great difficulty, wrote with his own hand a codicil, consisting
of but three lines, in which the income only was to be enjoyed by the
nephew, the principal to revert to his natural or testamentary heirs,
after Karl's death. Breuning, true to his sense of duty, not satisfied
with having gained his point, endeavored, at the risk of antagonizing
the master, to change the words "natural or testamentary heirs," to
"legitimate heirs." Beethoven was obdurate on the point, however,
saying, "the one term is as good as the other." Von Breuning, good
faithful friend that he was, survived Beethoven but one year.

Schindler dwells on the perfect tranquillity of Beethoven in the face of
approaching death. "Plaudite amici, comoedia finita est," he said on
the day when the codicil was written. On the following day at noon, he
received the last rites of the church. The event was no doubt a solemn
one. Soon after, the death-struggle began, and continued without
interruption for two days. Hüttenbrenner was a faithful attendant during
these last days. His friend Schubert also called, at least once, and, it
is said, was recognized by Beethoven, although he was unable to speak to
him.

The nervous strain on his friends in witnessing this struggle between
life and death, in which but the one issue was possible, must have been
great. It was, no doubt, a relief to Schindler and Von Breuning to leave
the master in Hüttenbrenner's charge on the afternoon of the 26th of
March, and go to Wahring in order to secure a burial-place. While on
this necessary errand, a terrific storm arose, which prevented their
return until night. Meanwhile, Hüttenbrenner, left alone with the
master, endeavored to ease his position by sustaining his head, holding
it up with his right arm. His breathing had been growing perceptibly
weaker, carrying the conviction that the end was near. The storm was of
unusual severity, covering the glacis with snow and sleet. The situation
of the building was such that it was exposed to the full fury of the
tempest. No sign was given by the master that he was conscious of this
commotion of the elements. With the subsidence of the storm at dusk, the
watcher was startled by a flash of lightning, which illumined
everything. This was succeeded by a terrific peal of thunder which
penetrated even Beethoven's ears. Startled into consciousness by the
unusual event, the dying man suddenly raised his head from
Hüttenbrenner's embrace, threw out his right arm with the fist doubled,
remained in this position a moment as if in defiance, and fell back
dead.

The two friends returned some hours after all was over. The master died
at a quarter before six o'clock on the evening of March 26, 1826. He was
in his fifty-seventh year.

The funeral took place on March 29 at 3 P.M. from the church of the
Minorites and was attended by many of the most prominent people of the
city. Eight musicians bore the coffin from the house to the church,
while thirty-two torch-bearers followed it, among the number being
Czerny and Schubert. This was followed by a choir of sixteen male
singers, and four trombones, which alternated in singing and playing.
The music consisted of two equali composed by Beethoven many years
before, arranged for this occasion by Seyfried, to the words of the
_Miserere_ and _Amplius_.

Notwithstanding the immense concourse of people assembled at the
obsequies, estimated at twenty thousand, there was but one relative to
occupy the position of mourner, and that was Johann.

On April 3, Mozart's Requiem was sung at the church of the Augustines,
and shortly thereafter, Cherubini's Requiem was sung for him at the
Karlskirche.

The magnificence of his funeral, when compared with his simple mode of
life, calls to mind the great contrasts which he was always producing in
his music. Equally great contrasts had always come up in his life.
Living in the proudest most exclusive and bigoted monarchy in Europe, at
a time when feudal authority had not yet been entirely abolished, he
held himself to be as good or better than Emperor or Cardinal. On
receiving a request one morning from the Empress of Austria to call on
her, he sent back word that he would be busy all that day, but would
endeavor to call on the following day. There is no record of his having
gone at all. His unjustifiable conduct toward the Imperial family, while
at Töplitz with Goethe, has been touched on in a previous chapter.
Frimmel states that something similar occurred at Baden, but does not
give his authority. Beethoven arraigned the Judiciary, even when writing
conciliatory letters to the judges. In his letters to the different
magistrates during the litigation over his nephew, he is often satirical
and sarcastic in spite of himself. His criticisms of other judges, his
references to the manner in which justice is administered in Austria,
illustrate his temerity and independence. His scorn of the King of
Saxony, on account of being dilatory in paying the subscription for the
Grand Mass, was pronounced. He alludes to him as "the poor Dresdener" in
his letters, and he even went so far as to talk about suing him when the
payment was still longer withheld.[F] All this from a man who at times
did not have a decent coat to wear, or a second pair of shoes; who
sometimes accepted advances from his housekeeper for the necessaries of
life. His life was so simple and circumscribed that he never saw the
ocean, or a snow-covered mountain, although living within sight of the
foothills of the Alps. He never returned to his native city though
living not a great distance from it.

[F] Kalischer. _Neue Beethovenbriefe_. Berlin, 1902.

The immediate cause of death, as demonstrated by the post-mortem held
the day after his decease, was cirrhosis of the liver, the dropsy, of
which Schindler makes such frequent mention, being an outcome of, and
connected with, the liver trouble. The organ showed every indication of
chronic disease. It was greatly shrunken, its very texture being changed
into a hard substance. That alcoholism is the commonest cause of
cirrhosis is well known, but in Beethoven's case some other cause for
the disease must be found. He was in the habit of taking wine with his
meals, a practice so common in Vienna at that time that not to have done
so would have been regarded as an eccentricity, but he never indulged in
it to excess, except possibly on a few occasions when in the company of
Holz. It can hardly be brought about by the use of wines, but is
produced by the inordinate use of spirituous liquors, something for
which Beethoven did not care. Cirrhosis was probably the cause of his
father's death, as he was a confirmed inebriate; but this cannot be
connected with the cirrhosis of the son; the disease is not
transmissible.

Beethoven's deafness probably began with a "cold in the head" which was
neglected. The inflammatory process then extended to the Eustachian
tubes. When it reached this point it was considered out of the reach of
treatment in his time, and for long after. Even in our own time, in the
light of advanced medical science, such a condition is serious and is
not always amenable to treatment, some impairment of the hearing
frequently occurring even with the best of care and under conditions
precluding the thought of a congenital tendency. The difficulty as
revealed by the post-mortem, lay in a thickening of the membrane of the
Eustachian tubes. The office of these tubes is to supply air to the
cavity on the inner side of the drum-membrane, known as the middle ear.
As is well known, a passage exists from the outer ear to the drum. The
Eustachian tubes connect the middle ear with the upper portion of the
throat from whence the air supply to the middle ear is obtained. We
cannot imagine a drum to be such unless there is air on both sides of
the membrane. Exhaust the air of an ordinary drum, and its resonance
would be gone. A similar condition obtained with Beethoven. With the
closure of the Eustachian tubes the air supply to the middle ear was cut
off; the air in the cavity finally became absorbed, and a retraction and
thickening of the drum-membrane with consequent inability to transmit
sound vibrations followed.

The hypothesis of heredity, sometimes brought forward to account for
his deafness, would have more weight had the lesion shown itself in the
case of either of his other brothers. As it is, there is no hint to be
found of even a tendency to deafness in any other of the Beethovens,
whether Johann, Karl, or the nephew. In any event a congenital tendency
of this kind would have been more likely to develop itself in Karl, the
weakling, than in the sturdy Ludwig.

The master's known impulsiveness and carelessness in matters connected
with the preservation of his health, lead to the conclusion that he
himself contributed much to his deafness. He was fond of pure air
outside, but sometimes had for a sleeping room an alcove wholly without
ventilation, so dark that he had to dress in another room. We hear much
of his practice of taking brisk walks on the ramparts or in the suburbs,
in the intervals of his work. There is at least one instance on
record,--there were probably many such cases,--of his coming in after a
walk, overheated, perspiring, and seating himself before an open window
in a draught. Another hygienic measure which he abused was his custom of
frequently bathing his head in cold water while at work, probably to
counteract the excessive circulation of the blood in the head brought
about by his brain-work. A chilling of the body, particularly in the
neck and the back of the head when overheated is a frequent cause of
inflammation of the middle ear. Von Frimmel calls attention to the
dust-storms which are a feature of Vienna. They were probably worse in
Beethoven's time than now, as but little attention was paid to hygienic
measures in those days. This no doubt aggravated the trouble.




CHAPTER XIX

LIFE'S PURPORT

     Das Grenzenlose braust um mich. Weit hinaus glänzt mir Raum und
     Zeit. Wohlan! Wohlauf! altes Herz.
                                                 --FRIEDERICH NIETZSCHE.


Beethoven's life in its devotion to the attainment of a single end, the
perfection of his art, affords an object lesson, which cannot fail to
encourage and stimulate every one engaged in creative work of any kind.
His earnestness and industry is the key-note to his achievement. He
worked harder than any composer we have any record of, with the possible
exception of Wagner. If we consider how the compositions improved in his
hands, while being worked over, as is shown by the sketch-books, a
simple process of reasoning will convince the reader that any man's
work, in any line, can be improved by adopting the same methods.
Beethoven's own words in this connection are, "the boundary does not yet
exist, of which it can be said to talent cooperating with industry,
'Thus far shalt thou go and no farther.'" The more he worked over his
compositions the better they became. When he required a theme for a
particular purpose, if the right thought did not at once come to mind,
his practice was to write as near it as possible. By the time this was
done an improvement would suggest itself. He would then write it again,
and before the ink was dry, would start at it yet again, each effort
bringing him nearer the goal, and this progress was the incentive that
led him to continue until the idea he was reaching for became a reality.
His intuitive faculties were highly developed, and he had Goethe's
"heavenly gift" of imagination, but this would have been as nothing
without his power of concentration. All his abilities were focused on
his art. He made everything else subservient to the one idea of
attaining perfection in it. He succeeded too, by giving his genius free
play, by allowing his individuality to shape itself in accordance with
its own laws. The circumstances of his life favored this action.
Responsible to no one for years before reaching maturity, he was nowhere
hampered or repressed as might have been the case had he had a home
life. Strong characters are best left alone to work out their own
development. It is only the weak ones that have to be supported. He met
every demand that his art made on him. It was only by a complete
surrender, by a concentration of all his forces into one channel, that
he attained his results. By losing the world, he gained it. The great
ones in every age, in every art or calling,--those who attained to
saintship,--seers,--prophets,--all went this road.

He had absolute confidence in his judgment. He seldom considered what
his audience would like. The best that was in him was what he gave to
the world. He knew its value, and if others could not understand it, he
knew the time would come when it would be appreciated. In art as in
religion, faith is a necessary preliminary to all great achievements.

In going so far beyond us, in pushing the art to the limit of its
possibilities, Beethoven has made portions of his work inaccessible to
the large body of people who look upon music as an art for enjoyment
only. The same kind of problem that is presented to this generation in
the works of his last years, confronted his contemporaries in those of
his middle life, which were as far beyond the comprehension of his own
generation as the more abstruse works of his last years are beyond the
ability of the present. To a future age, seemingly, has been relegated,
as an heritage of the past, the best fruit of Beethoven's genius. When
the Mass in D and the last Quartets can be heard frequently, a new era
in the art will have been inaugurated.

It would be a mistake to suppose that Beethoven was a pessimist, or a
misanthrope. Placed here to live and suffer, not knowing why it should
be so, he yet teaches that relentless fate cannot prevail against those
who make a good fight. "I did not wish to find when I came to die that I
had not lived," said Thoreau, paraphrasing from Voltaire, (most men die
without having lived). "I did not wish to live what was not life, living
is so dear." Beethoven's idea of the purport of life was similar. He
believed, and put his theory into practice, that each man has within
himself the potentialities with which he shapes his own destiny. Fate
and Destiny are verities that have to be faced, but they do not have all
their own way with us. Each of us has the power to control his destiny
to some extent. By willing it so the tendency is toward betterment.
Always the highest powers are on our side. Life, after all, is worth
while. This was the gist of his philosophy. He sought to establish an
optimistic view of life, with the object of making the problem easier to
solve.

Fichte, in his work "Über das Wesen des Gelehrten", gives the literary
man the place of priest in the world, continually unfolding the Godlike
to man. This was also Beethoven's aim. Haydn charged him with being an
atheist, but his works as well as his life refute this charge. The Kyrie
and the Agnus Dei of the Mass in D, could never have been produced had
he been other than a devout, religious man. In his journals he
continually addresses the Godhead. Outwardly, however, he gave no sign.
"Religion and general-bass," he said once, with a touch of humor, "are
in themselves two inscrutable things (_abgeschlossene Dinge_) about
which one should not argue."

He was solicitous that his nephew should receive proper religious
instruction, and made this a point in his letters to the magistrates
while the lawsuit over him was in progress. After giving his ideas as to
the proper education of the young man, in which French, Greek, music and
drawing take a prominent place, he adds, "I have found a holy father who
has undertaken to instruct him in his duties as a Christian, as well as
a man, for only on this foundation can we bring up genuine people."
Again, "It is for his soul's welfare that I am concerned. Wealth can be
achieved, but morality must early in life be inoculated" (_eingeimpft_).
He saw the necessity of religion; that it has been called forth through
the consciousness of utter helplessness in the individual. Man is
encompassed on all sides by inexorable laws, produced and perpetuated by
a power beyond and outside the comprehension. The expression of the
religious sentiment is his effort at propitiation, and is his one
resource. This is the point of view on which Beethoven projected the
grand mass. It is what governed his life.

An inner pressure led him to choose a life of self-abnegation and
rectitude. He saw through and over and beyond the illusions and
allurements of the senses, and so was enabled to live entirely in
harmony with the moral order of the world, in an age, and among a
people, largely given over to the pursuit of pleasure.

A long life is generally considered the best gift which the Fates have
to bestow. In the summary of a man's life it is usually treated of as
implying special virtues in the subject. But a long life in itself is as
nothing in comparison to the quality of the life that is lived. It is by
achievement only that its value can be determined.




WAGNER'S INDEBTEDNESS TO BEETHOVEN


FOREWORD

Beethoven, in Wagner's estimation, is a landmark in music, just as
Shakespeare is in literature, as Jesus or Buddha in religion. He is the
central figure; all others are but radii emanating from him. To
Beethoven was it given to express clearly what the others could but
dimly perceive. The relation of men like Bach or Händel toward
Beethoven, Wagner held to be analogous to that of the prophets toward
Jesus, namely, one of expectancy. The art reached its culmination in
Beethoven. This is Wagner's summary of the significance of Beethoven's
work, and he proclaimed it continually, from the housetops. It was in
some sort a religious exercise to him to make propaganda for the master
to whom he felt himself so deeply indebted. The burden of his utterances
on the subject of the musician's art is, "A greater than I exists. It is
Beethoven."




     Chiefly, perhaps, of the philosopher and the poet must we needs
     feel that if any genius reaches out into an interpenetrating
     spiritual world, _theirs_ must do so.--F.W.H. MYERS,
                               Human Personality, Chapter on Genius.

     In art the best of all is too spiritual to be given directly to the
     senses; it must be born in the imagination of the beholder,
     although begotten by the work of art.--SCHOPENHAUER.

Wagner's achievement can be attributed, in part, to a certain quality of
intellectual receptivity, by virtue of which he was enabled to
appropriate to himself the genius of two of his predecessors for whom he
had a special affinity. His epoch-making work was rendered possible
through Shakespeare and Beethoven, who served him as models all his
life.

Every great achievement is referable to some preceding one often quite
as great but more obscure. No man stands alone in his deed. The doer of
every great work has been helped thereto by his predecessors working the
same soil. The greater the performance, the more prominently this comes
out sometimes, as in the case of Shakespeare whose indebtedness to
Christopher Marlowe and others will at once come to mind.

To Beethoven and to Shakespeare, Wagner paid tribute on all occasions.
Especially is this true in his relation to Beethoven, to whom he readily
yields the palm in the realm of music. In the eight volumes of his
_Gesammelte Schriften_, no single fact stands out more clearly than his
recognition of Beethoven as his chief, his master, from whom proceeds
all wisdom and knowledge and truth. One can hardly read any of Wagner's
prose writings without seeing how readily he falls into the place of
disciple of Beethoven. "I knew no other pleasure," he says in A
Pilgrimage to Beethoven, "than to plunge so deeply into his genius that
at last I fancied myself become a portion thereof." The Pilgrimage,
though an imaginative work, is the medium he employed to give utterance
to his regard for Beethoven. His letters to musical friends, to Liszt,
to Fischer, especially those to Ulig, are filled with praise of the
older master. In a letter to Meyerbeer, in 1887, he states how he came
to be a musician. "A passionate admiration of Beethoven impelled me to
this step." The only one who was good enough in Wagner's eyes to be
compared with Beethoven, was Shakespeare. These two names are frequently
brought into juxtaposition in his works. No musician is worthy of
comparison with his demigod. "Mozart died when he was just piercing into
the mystery. Beethoven was the first to enter in," he says in his
Sketches. As if even this praise were too great, he severely criticises
Mozart's operas and symphonies elsewhere.

The deferential attitude which Wagner assumes toward Beethoven is not
accorded any other musician. Consciously or not, when he talks about
other musicians (except Bach) he, for the most part, assumes the rôle of
censor. But Beethoven comes in for unstinted praise. "It is impossible,"
he says, "to discuss the essential nature of Beethoven's music without
at once falling into the tone of rhapsody."

Wagner seems hardly to have been able, when writing about music, to
refrain from mention of Beethoven, he is so full of the subject. It has
a bearing on every important event in his life. At the ceremonies
attending the laying of the foundation-stone of the Festival Play House
at Bayreuth, the Ninth Symphony was performed, and in a little speech he
says: "I wish to see the Ninth Symphony regarded as the foundation-stone
of my own artistic structure." In "Religion and Art" we find these
words: "to whom the unspeakable bliss has been vouchsafed of taking one
of the last four symphonies of Beethoven into his heart and soul."

Many enthusiasts have worked in Wagner's cause from Liszt down, but none
have equalled Wagner in this respect--in enthusiasm for _his_ master. He
pays tribute to Beethoven in all conceivable places. He first heard of
him when told of his death. His first acquaintance with Beethoven's
music was a year after the master's death, on his arrival at Leipzig at
the Gewandhaus concerts. Wagner was then in his sixteenth year. "Its
impression on me was overpowering," he says. "The music to his Egmont so
inspired me that I determined not to allow my own completed tragedy to
be launched until provided with such like music. Without the slightest
diffidence I believed that I could write this needful music." He had up
to this time no special leaning toward music. He had not previously
entertained a thought of it as a career, but his first hearing of
Beethoven's music decided him to adopt it, such was the kinship between
these two minds. Through Beethoven he discovered that "music," to use
his own words, "is a new language in which that which is boundless can
express itself with a certainty impossible to be misunderstood."[G]

[G] Thoreau, in 1840, expressed himself similarly. We quote from the
recently published Service. "Music is a language, a mother tongue, a
more mellifluous and articulate language than words, in comparison with
which speech is recent and temporary. There is as much music in the
world as virtue. In a world of peace and love music would be the
universal language and men greet each other in the fields in such
accents as a Beethoven now utters at rare intervals at a distance."

The episode made a turning-point in his life. Hitherto his whole mind
and thought had been placed on literature, the drama in particular, as a
career. Through Beethoven he first learned what a power music possesses
in the portrayal of the emotions and passions. He had, as he says, an
intimate love and knowledge of Mozart without apparently being much
influenced thereby. Up to this time Shakespeare had been his archetype.
Now, with a fine discriminating intelligence, marvellous in a youth of
sixteen, Beethoven is to be included in this hero-worship, and is
eventually to supplant his former ideal. "It was Beethoven who opened up
the boundless faculty of instrumental music for expressing elemental
storm and stress," he says in the "Art-Work of the Future," and
elsewhere in the same article, "the deed of the one and only
Shakespeare, which made of him a universal man, a very god, is yet but
the kindred deed of the solitary Beethoven, who found the language of
the artist-manhood of the future."

Wagner's criticisms on music are admirable. Here he expresses his
thoughts as plainly as in his compositions. His disquisitions on music
as an art and on Beethoven in particular, are always lucid and forcible.
He may be misty in his philosophical speculations, but when he speaks
on music it is in the authoritative tone of the master, familiar with
every phase of his subject. He always contributes something of value,
and his thoughts are an illumination.

Had Wagner never written a line of music, had he elected to be a
literary man, a poet, a dramatist, philosopher, his fame to-day would
still be world-wide. Had he confined his genius into this one channel of
literary expression, as was his original intention, with his mental
equipment, and a Napoleonic ambition that balked at nothing, the product
would have been as original and extraordinary, we may be sure, as is his
art-product in music. Wagner, the musician, is so commanding a figure
that the literary man is obscured; but when we consider the magnitude of
his literary achievement, the dramas Tannhäuser, Lohengrin, Flying
Dutchman, Tristan, Parsifal, the stupendous Ring of the Nibelung, the
essays on music, philosophy, criticism and sociology, and reflect that
it is, so to speak, a by-product, it becomes apparent that, had he made
literature his chief aim in life, the result would have been notable in
the annals of the century.

Wagner seriously contemplated writing a biography of Beethoven at one
time, and devoted several months to collecting materials for it. But his
finances were still in bad shape, and he was unable to undertake it
without an order from some publisher, who would have been required to
advance money. He was unable to find such a party, and the project was
abandoned, most unfortunately, as he would have made a valuable
contribution to the subject. The short biographical sketch he wrote on
Beethoven on the centenary anniversary of the master's birth, shows
marvellous insight, especially in relation to the critical and
analytical parts of it. This work, instinct with worship of the master,
is a product of Wagner's mature years. Here, as in his earliest
utterances on Beethoven, he is the disciple glad to do homage to his
master.

"A century may pass," said Schopenhauer in a letter to the publishers of
the (English) Foreign Review and Continental Miscellany, offering to
translate Kant for them, in response to a wish he had seen expressed in
their journal that England might ere long have a translation of Kant, "a
century may pass ere there shall again meet in the same head so much
Kantian Philosophy, with so much English, as happen to dwell together in
mine." Likewise centuries may elapse before another such musician will
appear possessing the literary ability, critical faculty, ardor and
enthusiasm that Wagner had for this work.

There is an affinity between them in which mind speaks to mind. When
writing on Bach's influence on Beethoven, he says:[H] "If Haydn passed
as teacher of the youth, for the mightily unfolding art-life of the man,
our great Sebastian Bach became his leader. Bach's wonder-work became
his Bible; in it he read, and clean forgot that world of clangor heard
no longer." This describes Wagner's own spiritual relationship to
Beethoven, and the exaltation that must have been his on reading the
symphonies, the Mass in D, the overtures. He exhausts himself in praise
of each. He makes the Third Leonore Overture of as much account as the
entire opera; he continually refers to the Egmont and the Coriolanus
Overtures, and says that in the latter and in the Third Leonore,
Beethoven stands alone and beyond all imitation.

[H] Mr. Ellis's translation.

An evidence of Wagner's overpowering genius exists in the originality
and unique character of his work, while giving himself up so
unreservedly to this spiritual guidance. The two, however, were quite
unlike in many respects. Neither could have done the work of the other.
Beethoven, almost a failure in operatic composition, undertook it no
more after one trial, while Wagner was irresistibly drawn to this style
from the beginning. He felt that with Beethoven the last word had been
said in pure instrumental music, while his literary talents also served
to draw him into this field of operatic composition where they could
find their proper outlet. With that unerring poetic sense which guided
him in the selection of his subjects, he always has the romantic element
to the fore. The atmosphere of romanticism which invests all his works,
is what gives them much of their value. Through the force and purity of
his literary instinct, he was enabled to select topics of supreme
interest, so that his imagination was kept at white heat while
composing. His originality and absolute confidence in himself prevented
him from following Beethoven to any marked extent. He was forced to hew
out a new path for himself. He was, however, not averse to occasionally
taking a hint from him when it would serve his purpose. It is the
prerogative of genius to take its material wherever it can be found.
"Plato," said Emerson, "plays sad havoc with our originalities."
Beethoven's influence is plainly discernible in the preludes and
overtures of the Wagner dramas, which are symphonic throughout. The
frequent use Wagner makes of the trombones, when he wishes to be
particularly impressive, recalls Beethoven. Each had a high opinion of
the trombone where solemnity was required, and made constant use of it.
Beethoven applied it with peculiar effect in the Benedictus of the Mass
in D, and in the Ninth Symphony, which is paralleled by Wagner's use of
it in Parsifal, and in the Funeral march in Siegfried. The extraordinary
uses to which he puts the pedal-point, as well as the variation form,
are instances which show the influence of the older master.

When, however, he takes an idea from Beethoven, he improves on it,
broadening and amplifying it, in general putting it to a better use than
it was where he found it. A great dramatic work admits of fuller and
longer treatment of an idea than is possible in the other forms in which
music can be embodied. The instances just quoted are minor ones of
general application. Of the conceptions in which he is specially
indebted to Beethoven, the most important come from the Mass in D. Here
the older master, by the very form in which the ideas are cast, had to
hold himself in. He was not able to give them the significance in the
Mass, which is perfectly proper in great music dramas; and this
enlarging and widening of the poetic conception,--this splendor in which
it is portrayed,--not only justifies the course of his follower in
adopting it, but also calls attention anew to the commanding genius to
whom such things are possible.

Some of Wagner's most entrancing effects have their origin in Beethoven.
His method of using the violins and flutes in the highest register in
prolonged notes, as in the Lohengrin Prelude, and in general when
portraying celestial music, are obtained from this source. The Mass in D
gives several instances where this idea is presented, not by harp (the
customary way), but as Wagner has done in Lohengrin, by the violins and
wood-winds in the highest register, beginning pianissimo, gradually
descending and augmenting in volume and sonority as the picturing merges
from spiritual to worldly concerns. Beethoven's work abounds in
intellectual subtleties of this kind. Wagner is sometimes credited with
having originated this method for the portrayal of celestial music. Mr.
Louis C. Elson says: "Wagner, alone, of all the great masters, does not
use the harp for celestial tone coloring, but violins and wood-winds, in
prolonged notes in the highest positions. Schumann, Berlioz,
Saint-Saens, in fact all the modern tone colorists who have given
celestial pictures, use the harp in them, purely because of the
association of ideas which come to us from the Scriptures, and this
association of the harp with heaven and the angels, only came about
because the instrument was the most developed possessed by man at the
time the sacred book was written. Wagner's tone coloring is
intrinsically the more ecstatic.... Wagner is the first who has broken
through this harp conventionality."

In the Wagner-Liszt correspondence, Wagner states that the Lohengrin
Prelude typifies choirs of angels bearing the Holy Grail to earth. This
idea and the method of its development can be found in the symphonic
thought which follows the Preludium to the Benedictus of the Beethoven
Mass.

It will be necessary to make a short digression and explain a portion of
the canon of the Mass to enable the reader to understand what follows.
During the office of the Eucharist the celebrant repeats certain prayers
inaudible to the congregation. These begin during the latter part of the
Sanctus, which immediately precedes the Benedictus, and are connected
with the ceremony of the consecration of the Host. A part of them are
conducted in absolute silence. The choir is not required to be silent
during all the prayers said by the celebrant, and the occasion is
frequently utilized, particularly at high festivals, by the introduction
of orchestral music or a brilliant chorus. The choir is silent during
the elevation of the Host and chalice, which takes place immediately
after the consecration. It is a period of peculiar solemnity, the
congregation kneeling in silent prayer at the signal of a gong. After
the consecration the priest elevates the Host and chalice, and with the
people still kneeling, offers up a prayer silently, the conclusion of
which is as follows: "We most humbly beseech Thee, Almighty God, command
these things to be carried by the hands of Thy holy angels to Thy altar
on high, in the sight of Thy Divine Majesty, that as many as shall
partake of the most sacred body and blood of Thy Son at this altar may
be filled with every heavenly grace and blessing." The central thought
of this prayer is that the sacred elements are borne to heaven by
invisible hands.

In the Beethoven Mass a Preludium for orchestra is introduced, to fill
in the interval while the celebrant is occupied with these silent
prayers. It is an innovation, showing how thoroughly alive Beethoven was
to the development of every phase of his subject. Ordinarily, no
provision is made for this by the composer, the organist being permitted
the privilege of interpolating hymns like the O Salutaris or the Tantum
ergo. The Preludium is so timed that it ends at the conclusion of the
prayer we have quoted, when the sacred elements are in heaven and are
about being returned to earth. It is at this point that the symphonic
thought begins, which at the first bar calls to mind celestial
harmonies. Here we have the tone-figure, as in the Lohengrin Prelude,
given by the violins and flutes in the highest register, beginning in
faintest pianissimo. At the second bar the melody begins to descend,
being augmented in force by the gradual addition of the more powerful
instruments as well as voices when the elements are again on earth. The
Lohengrin Prelude has the same idea, but it is developed to a greater
extent, with a richer orchestration, the idea being carried to greater
length, and rendered more significant in every way, as befits its
dramatic character. In both cases, however, the orchestral figure is
introduced by the same instruments, and in much the same manner.

The Mass in D furnishes another instance where the celestial harmonies
are introduced to still better purpose than in the Benedictus. It is in
that portion of the Credo, beginning with the Et incarnatus. The
delicate ethereal nature of this music, as indicated by the violins and
flutes in the highest positions, is so transcendental, so imbued with
spirituality, as almost to evade analysis. By the magic of Beethoven's
art the impression is conveyed that the listener overhears far-off angel
voices from other spheres, when the heavens were opened for the descent
of the Son of God to earth. The instruments give out the merest
intimations of sound, scintillations that suggest it rather. In the
opening bars of the movement, just before the introduction of this
tone-figure, he uses an ancient ecclesiastical style, the Plagal, a mode
that obtained centuries before Palestrina. Harsh and strident,
inharmonious, are the tones, which in the opening Adagio typify the
dread, the foreboding and dismay, that can be supposed to have been felt
by the Son of God when the time came to give up a beatific state and
enter on the actualities of earthly existence. The sin of the world is
already being borne in anticipation. Suddenly we are in the midst of
celestial harmonies, delicate gradations and mergings of tones,
subtleties of expression, ethereal, evanescent, that come faintly at
first on the senses, giving us revelations of spiritual heights, of
transcendent states and conditions of the soul. Mankind is here afforded
a glimpse beyond the veil. These strains continue until the words _et
homo factus est_ (and was made man) are reached. At this point the
melodies are suddenly cut off, the doors are closed, and we are excluded
from further participation in things not meant for mortal ears. A change
of tonality and time further accentuates the changed conditions that
prevail as the story goes through the events of the crucifixion, death
and burial of Christ.[I]

[I] Beethoven's love of strongly defined contrasts is nowhere better
illustrated than here. The sharp discordant tones, which characterize
the opening bars of the movement, are simply pushed aside by the new. It
is the subjugation of the worldly by the spiritual, of suffering by
happiness.

The Mass in D can be said to be the parent of some of the Parsifal
music. Wagner had the discernment to seize on the intellectual
subtleties he found there, and to put them to happiest uses. If we
compare the instrumental effects just noted with the exquisitely
delicate music that opens the Parsifal Prelude after the introductory
_leit motif_, we find a solution to each, as well as an affinity, in the
religious mysticism in which each is enveloped. There is a central
theme, but so shadowy and unreal as to be hardly apparent. Like a nimbus
these shimmerings of sound from the violins surround and permeate it, so
that one is not aware of any particular melody, but rather it is
perceived that the atmosphere is full of a divine melody, as if by
spiritual insight the listener had attained to a state of mind akin to
that of the seer, and had, for the time being, become one with the
composer. The effect is produced of being in the presence of something
holy.

The _Naturlangsamkeit_ necessary to the birth of any great art-work
sometimes extends to its recognition and appreciation by the public.
Beethoven considered the Mass in D his greatest achievement, but it
gains ground very slowly. It is rarely mentioned, and seldom performed.
Similarly Bach's greatest works slumbered nearly a century until brought
to light by Mendelssohn.

It is significant that Wagner was as world-weary from middle-age on as
was Beethoven. Like him he took refuge in creative work. Both were
pioneers, always in advance of their time, cheerfully making the
sacrifices which this position entails, diverging ever more and more
with advancing years from beaten paths and the ideas of others on the
subject of their art. Resignation and asceticism, the goal of mankind,
was Wagner's solution of the problem of existence, a conclusion arrived
at after reading Schopenhauer. Beethoven had also come to it long before
reaching middle-age. Wagner was, in his later years, a mystic, as was
Beethoven; and like Beethoven his most congenial work in those years was
of a religious character.




INDEX

Adagio, the, 62.
Adversity, school of, 6.
Altruism, 43, 164.
American Revolution, 3, 4.
Andante, the, 123.
Antwerp, 4.
Appassionata Sonata, 14, 44, 63, 66, 70, 71.
Archduke Rudolph, 80 et seq., 84, 93, 107, 108, 129, 188, 206,
  Appointed Archbishop, 145-146,
  Disciple of Beethoven, 81,
  Installation of, 148, 154,
  as performer, 81,
  regard for Beethoven, 146.
Aristocracy, of Vienna, 41.
Art, office of, 4.
Art-history (this country), 181.
Artist-manhood, of Beethoven, 227.
Artistic temperament, 87.
Art-work, 236.
Art-workers, 39.
Aryan ancestry, 195.
Aspern, battle of, 83.
Atterbohm, 121.
Attrition, of mind on mind, 15.
Augustines, church of, 212.
Austria, Emperor of, 42, 81, 172.
Austria, Empress of, 5.
Austrians in Italy, 42.

Bach, Dr., Beethoven's attorney, 209.
Bach, J.S., 8, 20, 27, 28, 32, 73, 75, 147, 173, 220, 225,
  Beethoven's regard for, 20,
  and humor, 133,
  Leader of Beethoven, 236,
  Life-work of, 143,
  Mathematician of music, 1,
  Mass in B minor, 51, 74,
  Overture on name of, 172,
  Protestant, 52,
  and old ecclesiastical modes, 147,
  and Variation form, 158,
  Well-tempered clavichord, 139,
  "Wonder-work," 229.
Baden, 116, 158, 173, 193.
Battle Symphony, 103 et seq.
Bautzen, battle of, 102.
Bavarian soldiers, 104.
Bayreuth, 226.
Beautiful in music, 4.
Beethoven: Altruism of, 40, 164,
  Adagios, 123,
  Aim, 219,
  Age of, 211,
  Absorption in his work, 18, 121,
  Art-life of, 229,
  Artist-life, 191,
  Artistic instinct, 34,
  Approachable, 177,
  Asceticism, 111, 116, 161,
  Adopts nephew, 110,
  Awkwardness, 134,
  Bach's influence on, 229,
  Brevier, 141,
  Catholic, in religion, 161,
  Creative talent, 27,
  Conduct of life, 39,
  Court suit, buys a, 38,
  Concert for Philharmonic Society of London, 182,
  Copyrights, 201,
  Consideration for others, 209,
  Copyists, his, 187, 188,
  Church music, predilection for, 147,
  Concept of life, 7,
  Drama, and the, 14,
  Dancing, and, 39,
  Destiny, accepts his, 100,
  Deafness, progress of, 96,
  Ethical character of, 126, 197,
  Every-day life, 96,
  Father, his, 4,
  Favorite authors, 13,
  Failing health, 200,
  Forecasts his future, 37,
  Friendship, need of, 177,
  and Goethe, 90-92,
  Gastro-intestinal disturbances, 88,
  Grandfather, 4, 5,
  Grammar, lapses from in letters, 138,
  Habits, at Johann's, 201,
  and Happiness, 38,
  Helplessness, his, 137,
  Humor, 126, 133, 135,
  History, insatiable reader of, 140,
  Intellectual bias, 14, 28, 141,
  Infinitude, 124,
  Introspection, 37, 97,
  Illnesses of, 88, 204, 207,
  Individuality, 27,
  Intuitive faculties, 41, 217,
  Improvising: in Allegro movements, 29.
  Improvising: in Variations, 29,
  Improvising at a charity concert, 93,
  Journal, his, 101, 116, 147, 161, 182, 184, 219 (note-book), 71,
     123, 165,
  Kindliness and humility, 88,
  Lawsuits, 145,
  Line extinct on male side, 118,
  Laughter, virtuoso in, 135,
  Last words of, 210,
  Library, 140,
  Life-work of, 71, 160,
  Life-drama, 162,
  Letters to publishers, 193,
  Litigation over nephew, 111,
  Life, a difficult problem, 101,
  Love affairs of, 60, 87-88,
  "Last five symphonies," 226,
  Landmark in music, 223,
  Ménage, the, 111, 116,
  Mother, his, 6; death of, 9,
  Muse, his, 145,
  Musical library, 139,
  Mental processes of, 15,
  Mysticism, his, 96, 195,
  Nature, love of, 122,
  Naïveté of, 135,
  Optimism, his, 98,
  Opera, early familiarity with, 14,
  Orchestra, and the, 3, 14, 75,
  Organist, as, 7,
  the Philosopher, 52,
  as Patriot, 104-105,
  Philosophy, gist of, 218,
  and Persian literature, 140,
  Quartets, his, 98,
  Republicanism, his, 41, 81, 146,
  Repartee, ready in, 136,
  Religion, his, 219,
  Rhenish ancestry, 121,
  Servants, difficulties with, 184, 186, 188,
  Seer, the, 163, 195, 217, 236,
  Scherzo, and the, 33, 34,
  Sarcastic moods, his, 187,
  Spiritual insight, 97, 194,
  Strenuousness, his, 121,
  Sonatas, 98, 145,
  Social successes, 27,
  Symphonies of, language of buoyant mood, 98,
  Sociological questions, 165,
  Solitary life, 86, 208,
  Subtleties, in works of, 232,
  Sketch-books, 18, 27, 32, 49, 85, 97, 122, 123, 147,
  the Symphonist, 49, 75,
  Two masses, 124,
  Teaching, dislike of, 80,
  Tone-poet, 191,
  Unique work of, 38,
  Virtuosity of, 63-64,
  Works, happy ending to, 164,
  Work, his one resource, 206,
  Work, significance of his, 220,
  Will, codicil added, 209,
  World, a difficult problem to, 184,
  World-weary, 236,
  World, at odds with the, 24,
  World, withdrawing from, 97,
  World, "the play with it," 97.
Beethoven, Johann van, 93, 94, 199, 204, 208, 215,
  marries his housekeeper, 95,
  as Landed proprietor, 136,
  Sordidness of, 200,
  his cupidity, 202,
  his wife, 199, 204.
Beethoven, Karl van, brother of composer, 86,
  marriage of, 65,
  dies, 110,
  his widow, 110, 186.
Beethoven, Karl van, nephew of composer, 110, et seq., 116, 180, 182,
     198, 199, 207-208, 210, 215, 219,
  after career of, 117,
  Posterity of, 117,
  Waywardness of, 196-197.
Beklemmt, cavatina B quartet, 194.
Bergman, C., 166.
Berlioz, 232.
Bernadotte, Gen., 43, 45; king of Sweden, 43.
Bigot, Marie, virtuosity of, 63.
Black Spaniards, house of, 204.
Boehm, J., violinist, 195.
Boehme, Madame, 13.
Bohemia, Baths of, 88.
Bonn, 13, 16, 17, 18, 23, 31, 37, 80, 82, 88,
  University, 10,
  Old Roman city, 4.
Boswell, 130.
Bouilly, 49.
Brahma, 97.
Brentano, Bettina, 87.
Breuning, Stephen von, 11, 13, 56, 174 et seq., 198, 205, 209, 210,
  Madame von, 11-13,
  family, 17.
British Museum, 27.
Broadwood piano, Beethoven's, 135-136.
Brotherhood of man, 40.
Browne, Count, 26, 62.
Bruno, Giordano, 73, 132.
Brunswick, Count, 27, 44, 68, 71,
  Therese, 60, 66, 67, 86-87,
  engaged to Beethoven, 71-72,
  founds home for children, 72.
Buddha, 164, 223.
Bundeslied, 142.

C minor Symphony (see Fifth Symphony).
Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage, 141.
Carlsbad, 92, 93.
Carlyle on Goethe, 90,
  on Jean Paul, 101.
Castle Garden, 165.
Celestial music, 232, 235.
Chamberlain, H.S., 120.
Chamber-music, 46, 63, 65, 85, 192,
  Variations in, 157.
Character, and environment, 116.
Cherubini, 57, 66, 123; Requiem, 140, 212.
Chopin, Improvising, 28.
Choral Fantasia, 29.
Christianity, 4, 143.
Cirrhosis, 213,
  Dropsical accumulations in, 207,
  Cause of, 213,
  not transmissible, 214.
Clementi, Sonatas, 139.
Cologne, 17.
Concert, Spirituel, of Vienna, 178, 179,
  of Paris, 14.
Congress of Vienna, 107 et seq.
Coriolanus overture, 14, 75, 124, 229.
Corsican, the young, 41.
Critics on Second Symphony, 36,
  Seventh Symphony, 159.
Czerny, 29, 66, 80, 96, 127, 128, 130, 131, 140, 159, 167, 207, 211,
  Teacher of young Karl, 110.

Dance, the, 99,
  the, favorite musical form, 157.
Dante, 77.
Damrosch, Dr. Leopold, 166.
De Profundus, 151.
Diabelli, 157, 167, 187.
Dietrichstein, Count, 172.
Dignity, of the artist, 2.
Don Giovanni, 9, 48, 139, 140.
Dönhoff, Graf von, 94.

Egmont music, 92, 106, 142, 156, 226, 229.
Eighth Symphony, 95, 98, 100, 106, 145,
  Dance element in, 99.
Eisfeld, Theo, 166.
Elector of Cologne, 4, 5, 13, 24,
  his Orchestra, 15, 16, 18, 82.
Eliot, George, 134.
Elysian Fields, 193.
Emerson, 77, 145, 147, 148, 228.
England, 103, 106, 107.
Erdödy, Countess, 60, 61.
Erlkönig, Beethoven's setting of, 142.
Eroica Symphony (see Third Symphony).
Ertmann, Baroness, 60, 61, 80, 128.
Esterhazy, Prince, 75-76,
  Princess Marie, 76,
  the Princes, 51.
Eucharist, 232.
Euryanthe, 159, 160.
Eustachian tubes, office of, 214.

Fate, struggle with, 163,
  Relentless, 218,
  Propitiated, 184,
  and Destiny, 218.
Fates, the, 204, 220.
Fatherland, Poets of, 14.
Faust, 38, 156, 157, 162, 200.
Fichte (quoted), 219.
Fidelio, 11, 48, 98, 155,
  libretto of, 49-50,
  First production of, 54, 55,
  revision of, 56, 74, 75, 98, 106, 123, 155, 159,
  dedication of piano score, 107,
  its Spanish background, 49.
Fielding and humor, 134.
Fifth Symphony (C minor), 14, 68, 73, 76, 77, 152.
First Symphony, 33, 34, 37.
Fischer, 225.
Förster, teacher of Beethoven, 63.
Fourth Symphony, 66-68,
  Serenity of, 67,
  Philosophic import of, 68.
France, 42, 43, 107.
France, King of (Louis XVIII), 45, 154, 155.
Freemasonry, among musicians, 10.
Freischütz, 139.
French Revolution, 3, 4, 41, 133.
Friends of music, Society of, 129.
Friendship, 176.
Frimmel von, 180, 215.
Fugue, the, 124, 125, 129,
  of the C# minor quartet, 121,
  Credo of Mass in D, 153.
Fuller, Margaret (footnote), 181.

Gayety, 100.
Galaxy of virtuosi, 17.
Galitzin, Prince, and last quartets, 192-194,
  and Mass in D, 192.
Genius, prerogative of, 230.
Germanic Order, 10.
Germans, the, 104.
Gewandhaus Concerts, 226.
Glacis, the, 204, 210.
Glück, 79.
Goethe, 13, 38, 80, 88, 90, 101, 111, 125, 129, 141, 191, 212, 217,
  Worldly wisdom of, 90,
  as Courtier, 91,
  Councillor, 92,
  Spiritual mentor, 162.
Gothic architecture, 143.
Greece, 143.
Greek Classics, 140-141.
Grillparzer, 160.

Hafiz (quoted), 102.
Hanau, battle of, 104.
Händel, 27, 79, 139, 143, 223,
  Beethoven's opinion of, 20,
  Oratorios of, 143, 144,
  works of, 207.
Händel and Haydn Society of Boston, 181.
Happiness, and Beethoven, 38.
Hatzfeld, Prince von, 154.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 18.
Haydn, 4, 17, 18, 19, 29, 30, 33, 43, 46, 73, 76, 79, 100, 101, 123,
     140, 219, 229,
  Important work of, 143,
  Distinguishing trait, 123,
  Kyrie of Imperial Mass, 74,
  and the Minuet, 34,
  Humor in music, 34, 133,
  Sonatas, 34,
  Teacher of Beethoven, 19-20,
  Visits Bonn, 17.
Haydn and Mozart, 4, 20.
Haydn and Beethoven, life-work of, 20.
Heiligenstadt, 73.
Herder, 141,
  quoted, 80, 93.
Higher law, the, 38.
Hiller, Ferdinand, 205.
Hirsch, Beethoven's last pupil, 180.
Holy Grail, 232.
Holz, 178, 185, 194, 198, 206, 213.
Homer, 13.
Host, the, elevation of, 233,
  Consecration of, 233.
Humanity, 43,
  at bay, 163,
  Golden age for, 164.
Humor, in music, evolution of, 133,
  a test of genius, 134.
Hümmel, 22, 29, 31, 63, 76, 105, 206.
Hüttenbrenner, 8, 177, 210, 211.

Imperial family (of Austria), 5, 41, 81, 91, 170, 171, 212.
Impedimenta, 39.
Improvising, 28, 125,
  Bach, excelled in it, 28,
  Chopin, last to exercise it in public, 28,
  Beethoven, genius in, 28-29,
  by Karl, 117.
Instrumental music, 227, 230.
Intellect of mankind, 2.
Intuition, 2.
Italian vocalism, 4.

Jeitteles, 121.
Jesus, teaching of, 164.
Johnson, Dr., 130.
Joy, language of, 68.
Joyousness (quoted), 101.
Judiciary, the, of Austria, 212.

Kalischer, 186, 197.
Kantian Philosophy, 229.
Karlskirche, 212.
Kenilworth, 209.
Keyboard, of piano, 3.
Kiel University, 16.
Kinsky, Prince, 26, 83, 84,
  death of, 145, 160.
Klober, 148.
Klopstock, 92.
Kren, Michael, 200.
Kreutzer, R., 45,
  Sonata, 44, 45.
Krumpholz, 38,
  death of, 130-131.

Leipzig, 92,
  battle of, 102, 105.
Leonore overtures, 49, 56,
  the Third, 56, 57, 229.
Lessing, 13.
Letter to a young girl, 141,
  Holz, appointing him his biographer, 179,
  Breuning, Stephen von, 175,
  Czapka, a magistrate, 198,
  Rampel, his copyist, 190,
  Lichnowsky, Prince, 70,
  Messrs. Schott, 193,
  Zmeskall, 137-138.
Lichnowsky, Prince von, 23, 25, 26, 35, 55, 56, 59, 127,
  Settles annuity on Beethoven, 24,
  Beethoven visits him, in Silesia, 68,
  quarrels with him, 69,
  death of, 130.
Lichnowsky, Princess von, 62, 65,
  as peacemaker, 25, 56.
Lichnowsky, Count Moritz von, 26, 43, 129, 168, 176.
Life, a precious gift, 98.
Life's problem, 4, 218.
Life's tragedy, 36.
Liszt, 5, 29, 52, 127, 136, 225, 226,
  advent of, in concert, 159,
  pupil of Czerny, 29.
Liszt's father, 159.
Lobkowitz, Prince von, 26, 44, 45, 59, 84,
  bankruptcy of, 145,
  death of, 130.
Loder, George, 165.
Lohengrin, Prelude, 231, 232, 234.
London, 117.
Louis, Ferdinand of Prussia, 44.
Love, 165,
  Magic power of, 164.
Lützen, battle of, 102.

Man of genius, elation of, 98.
Mantua, Mozart at, 28.
Maria Louisa, of Spain, 81.
Marie Antoinette, 45.
Marengo, battle of, 42.
Marlowe, Christopher, 224.
Mass, the, a great art-form, 73,
  Stateliness of, 144,
  Canon of, 232,
  Sanctus of, 232,
  Benedictus of, 232.
Mass in C, Beethoven's, 73 et seq., 160,
  German version of, 147.
Mass in D, Beethoven's (or Grand Mass), 39, 47, 51, 96, 100, 123, 144,
     147, 150, 160, 161, 162, 163-164, 166, 172, 183, 234, 236,
  Agnus Dei, 169, 219,
  Apotheosis of friendship, 146,
  Benedictus, trombones in, 231,
  Credo, 153, 169, 234,
  Soli of, 153,
  Celestial harmonies in, 235,
  Congenial work to Beethoven, 146,
  and the copyist, 188,
  Beethoven's absorption in, 147, 160,
  Christe eleison, 151,
  Et incarnatus of, 234,
  Interpretation by the orchestra, 150,
  Lydian and Dorian modes in, 147,
  Marvels of, 154,
  Mysticism of, 96,
  a Symphony to Wagner's view, 150,
  Subscription price of, 154,
  Sale of score, 182,
  proceeds from, 183,
  First production by Prince Galitzin, 192,
  Preludium in, 232, 233,
  Kyrie of, 101, 124, 151, 153, 163, 169, 171, 186, 219,
  Splendor of conception of, 151,
  its symphonic style, 151,
  German direction in, 153,
  Loss of manuscript of, 186,
  its rhythm, 151.
Melusina, 160.
Mendelssohn, 232, 236.
Messiah, The, 139.
Metaphysical, 2.
Metronome, inventor of, 104.
Metternich, Prince, 102.
Meyerbeer, 105, 225.
Minorites, church of, 7, 211.
Minuet, the, 133.
Mödling, 147.
Monasteries, old chorales of, 147.
"Moonlight" Sonata, 35-36.
Moscheles, 103, 105,
  and piano arrangement of Fidelio, 106.
Mount of Olives, 35.
Mozart, 9, 20, 22, 28, 33, 46, 48, 50-51, 79, 100, 134, 139, 225, 227,
  Early death of, 191,
  Genius of, 140,
  his precocity, 8,
  praised by Beethoven, 140,
  Requiem, 51, 212,
  Sonatas, 34, 139,
  his widow, 31,
  his operas at Bonn, 14.
Mozart's Mass in Bb, 51, 73,
  Agnus Dei of, 73,
  Et incarnatus of, 73,
  Kyrie of, 75.
Mozart and Haydn, 11, 20, 33, 73, 74, 75, 131.
Music, its function, 4,
  outward expression of, 39,
  dramas, great, 231,
  a language, 226, 227,
  Religious, 144,
  Origin in the dance, 99.
Musician, the, social obligations of, 39.
Mystery in life, 153, 225.
Mysticism, and the artistic nature, 144.

Napoleon, 41, 44, 54, 83, 103, 191,
  Arch-enemy of Austria, 42,
  Campaign against Austria, 41, 42,
  escapes from Elba, 109,
  declared emperor, 44,
  Greatest military achievement, 42,
  In the toils, 107,
  Marriage to Archduchess Maria Louisa, 102,
  Marriage to Josephine, 43,
  overruns Germany, 69,
  takes Vienna, 54.
National opera at Bonn, 13.
Neate, Charles, 182.
Neefe, Beethoven's teacher, 6, 7, 17.
New Testament, 161.
Nietzsche, Friederich, 40, 216.
Ninth Symphony (choral), 29, 96, 100, 166, 167, 172, 181, 196, 226,
  Choral finale, 170,
  an outburst of joy at deliverance, 164,
  First movement of, 163,
  First performance in this country, 165,
  Psychological problems in, 162,
  Sontag, and soprano part of, 160,
  Trombones in, 230,
  Variations in, 157.
Nohl, 186.
North America, 166, 180.

Ode to Joy, revolutionary spirit of, 165.
Odeschalchi, Princess, 61.
Opera, the, an alien soil to Beethoven, 49,
  as a work of art, 50,
  a combination of arts, 51.
Operatic composition, 52.
Orchestra, range and mobility of, 150,
  More important than voices, 150,
  its resources increased through Beethoven, 3.
Orchestral forms, development of, 99.
Ossian-like dæmonism, 149.
Ossian Songs (Schubert), 206.

Pain of existence, 132.
Palestrina, 234,
  Masses of, 143.
Paris Conservatoire, 16.
Parsifal, 164 (footnote), 231, 235,
  mysticism of, Prelude to, 235.
Passion music, 35, 144.
Pastoral Sonata, 35.
Pastoral Symphony (see Sixth Symphony).
Patriotism and altruism, 43.
Paur, Emil, 166.
Pedal-point, 231.
Pennsylvania, Founding of, libretto, 156.
Persian literature, 140.
Pessimism, 132.
Pinnacle of greatness, 40.
Pity, and the divine in man, 164.
Plagal mode, 234.
Plato, 230,
  Republic, 140.
Playing from manuscript, 10.
Philharmonic Society of New York, 166.
Philharmonic Society of London 200, 207.
Philip III, of Spain, daughter of, 204.
Prague, 9, 109.
Problem of life, 77, 164.
Prometheus, Ballet, 33, 34, 35.
Prussia, King of, 154.
Psychological element, the, 27.

Quartet, the, 98, 191, 194,
  Last quartets, 96, 100, 158, 191-192, 194, 195,
  Mysticism of, 96, 195,
  Psychological qualities of, 195, 218,
  Spirituality of, 195,
  Variations in, 157,
  Written in great mental trouble, 194.
Quartet, in A minor, 187,
  in C# minor, 195, 199, 203,
  its dedication, 208,
  in Bb, cavatina of, 194,
  new finale of, 203,
  see chamber-music, also Rasoumowsky quartets.

Rasoumowsky, Count, 59, 63, 65, 108, 192,
  Entertains Empress of Russia, 108.
Rasoumowsky quartets, 65-66, 192,
  Adagio of the second, 65.
Religion and General-bass, 219.
Religious sentiment, the, 219.
Renunciation, 163.
Requiem Mass, 140, 160, 161, 209.
Ries, Ferdinand, 44, 62, 82, 83, 84, 135, 180,
  Pupil of Beethoven, 80,
  Prolific composer, 85,
  efforts for Beethoven while in London, 181-182.
Ries, Franz, 12, 17, 82.
Rochlitz, 92, 153, 156.
Romberg, 16, 105.
Rossini, 79, 153, 166,
  calls on Beethoven, 139.
Ruins of Athens, 155.
Russia, Emperor of, 36, 107, 108, 154,
  Empress of, 107, 108.

Saint-Saens, 232.
Saint-Simon, and the strenuous life, 206.
Salieri, 105.
Satanas in the kitchen, 185.
Saxony, King of, 154, 213.
Second period, works of, 40,
  characterized by gayety, 100.
Second Symphony, 26, 36, 37,
  Larghetto of, 36.
Seebald, Amalie, 87, 88,
  facsimile of letter to her, opp. page 88.
Sehnsucht (Goethe's), 142.
Seidl, Anton, 166.
Sensenman, the, 116.
Seventh Symphony, 95, 96, 109,
  Dance element in, 99,
  First performance of, 105,
  Coda of Vivace of, 97,
  Hungarian peasant dance in, 96,
  Weber's strictures on, 159.
Scherzo, 33, 34, 132, 133,
  Peculiar to Beethoven, 133,
  developed by Beethoven, 132,
  makes sport of humanity in, 133-134.
Schiller, 16, 131, 141, 148, 165.
Schindler, 59, 88, 127, 136, 152, 154, 156-158, 168, 169, 171, 176,
     186, 188, 203, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210, 213,
  Beethoven's biographer, 179.
Schroeder-Devrient, 155, 159.
Schopenhauer, 22, 77, 143, 174, 229, 236,
  and humor, 134.
Schubert, 8, 127, 177, 206, 210, 211,
  Reverence of, for Beethoven, 178,
  Calls on Beethoven, 178,
  Songs of, 206.
Schuman, 136, 232.
Schuppanzich, 168, 176, 206.
Schott, music publishers, 208, 209.
Scott, Walter, 134,
  Kenilworth, 209.
Seyfried, 22, 64, 135, 212.
Shakespeare, 13, 68, 134, 139, 141, 223, 225,
  Comedies of, 68,
  the Tempest, 152,
  a Universal man, 227,
  Wagner's archetype in youth, 227.
Siegfried, 231.
Sight playing, from Ms., 63, 64.
Sixth Symphony (Pastoral), 14, 73, 78-79, 95, 122,
  Dance tunes in, 78,
  Dramatization of, 79,
  Nature-poem, a, 78, 79,
  Storm in, 78, 79.
Socrates, 161.
Solitary, Beethoven, the (quoted), 227.
Sonata in Ab, 35,
  Fantasia, language of Resignation, 61,
  Kreutzer, 44,
  "Moonlight," 35,
  opus 111, 187,
  Pathetique, 26,
  Pastorale, 35,
  Waldstein, 11, 18, 44,
  opus, 102, 129.
Sonata, the (form), 100.
Sonatas, 33, 36, 39,
  Last (opus 109, 110, 111), 155,
  Lofty imaginings of, 155,
  Wondrous second movement of op. 111, 158,
  F minor and D minor, 152.
Sonnleithner, 49, 56.
Sontag, 160, 170.
Spohr, 105.
Stadler, Abbe, 139, 167.
St. Just, 133.
St. Stephen's, Vienna, 22.
Streicher, Madame, 185, 186.
Stumpf, 139, 207, 209.
Stutterheim, Field-marshal von, 198, 208, 209.
Suite, the, earliest orchestral form, 99.
Süsmayer, 31.
Swieten, Baron von, 27, 59.

Tacitus, 4, 46.
Tact, woman's, 12.
Tenth Symphony (proposed), 170, 200,
  Adagio of, 173,
  Allegro of, a Bacchic festival, 173,
  Religious in character, 172.
Tetralogy, variations in, 157.
Thackeray, 134.
Thayer, A.W., 59, 90.
Third Leonore overture, 56, 229.
Third Mass (proposed), Kyrie of, 172
Third period, mysticism of, 100.
Third Symphony (Eroica), 11, 40 et seq., 68, 71, 73, 100, 104, 123,
  Composed in spirit of altruism, 43,
  First dedicated to Napoleon, 43-44,
  Last movement of, 158,
  Unique as a Symphony, 43.
Thomas, Theodore, 166.
Thoreau, 3, 113, 123, 161, 176, 218, 227.
Thun, Countess, 62.
Tolstoy, 45.
Tone-figure, 234.
Tone-pictures, 148.
Transposing, 31.
Treitschke, 106.
Trombones, 211,
  for Solemnity, 230.
Turin, 93.

Unger, Fräulein, 170.
Unrest, 4.

Vander Stucken, 166.
Variation form, 231,
  in the Diabelli Waltzes, 157,
  in Beethoven's Symphonies, 157,
  in Beethoven's Sonatas, 157.
Vienna, bombarded by French, 85,
  Conservatory of, 118,
  Italian element in, 58,
  Population in Beethoven's time, 58,
  Musical atmosphere of, 9, 10, 65,
  Society, attitude toward Beethoven, 60,
  its student element, 104.
Viennese, virtuosity of, 62-63,
  aristocracy, 149.
Vittoria, battle of, 102, 103.
Voltaire, 218.

Wagner, 4, 30, 50, 51, 56-57, 64, 66, 77, 79, 96, 120, 123, 125, 126,
     127, 141, 150, 156, 157, 223,
  Art-product of, 228,
  biographical sketch of Beethoven, his, 228,
  C# minor quartet, 195,
  Criticisms on music, his, 227,
  Disciple of Beethoven, 225, 229,
  Early recognition of, in this country, 181,
  Evening of life, 208,
  Flying Dutchman, 79,
  Industry of, 216,
  Is influenced by Beethoven, 230, 231,
  Literary achievement, his, 228,
  Life's Problem, solution of, 236,
  Life-work of, 208,
  Mystic, a, 236,
  Napoleonic ambition, 228,
  Ninth Symphony, 163, 165,
  Originality of, 230,
  Poetic temperament, 52, 53,
  Romanticism, his, 53, 230,
  Seventh Symphony, and the, 96,
  Tribute to Beethoven, 224,
  Tribute to Shakespeare, 224,
  Unerring poetic sense, 230,
  Variation form, and the, 157, 158.
Wagner and Beethoven, Affinity between, 229,
  Pioneers, 236,
  their Spiritual relationship, 229,
  World-weary, 236.
Wagner-Liszt correspondence, 232.
Waldstein, Count, 10, 11, 12, 28, 44.
Waterloo, battle of, 102, 110.
Weber, 139, 159, 160.
Wegeler, Dr., 12, 37.
Weihe des Hauses, 155, 169.
Weimar, 91.
Wellington, Duke of, 102, 106.
Weltschmertz, 126, 164.
Westphalia, King of, 83.
Wolfmayer, 29.
World's stage, 3.
World, torment of, 164,
  and Beethoven's influence on it, 15,
  ideal of, 15,
  in transition, 3.

Zauberflöte, 137, 185, 206.
Zehrgarten, at Bonn, 10.
Zeitgeist, the, 4.
Zelter, 91, 152.
Zmeskall, 137, 185, 206.
Zukunftsmusik, 150.